The chemical composition of eastern North China Craton (NCC)'s alkaline basaltes likely influenced by subducting Pacific Plate. Nonetheless, the influence of these processes on the western craton remains uncertain due to the lack of geochemical evidence. The recent discovery of Ulanqab maar volcanic cluster (UMVC) in the western NCC has become significant research windows. However, their petrogenesis and magmatic processes remain poorly understood. In the present study, 40Ar/39Ar, whole rock and mineral geochemistry, and Sr–Nd–Mg isotope data for the UMVC in the western NCC are reported. These data reveal that the UMVC was formed during the Neogene (7.60 ± 0.04 Ma), diverging from Quaternary basalts or as part of the Hannuoba basalts (eastern Ulanqab). The UMVC rocks, featuring typical oceanic island basalts traits with moderate (87Sr/86Sr)i values (0.70487–0.70524) and εNd(t) values from -4.95 to +0.82, likely originated from an enriched EMI-type mantle source during the mid-Proterozoic. This involved mixing melts from 30–50% partial melting of garnet lherzolite and 5–15% partial melting of garnet pyroxenite in a deep magma chamber. Crystallization of clinopyroxene and garnet in this chamber created high-Ti alkaline lavas, with limited presence in erupted lavas due to sluggish magma ascent in the profound lithospheric mantle. In shallower lithospheric mantle regions, interactions between alkaline magma and orthopyroxenite improved transport kinetics, enabling clinopyroxene and olivine crystallization under lower pressure. These magmas integrated mafic crystal mushes from accumulation chambers. The study also identified a low Mg isotope composition (δ26Mg = −0.56‰ to −0.42‰) in samples, suggesting a hybrid source influenced by early decarbonation in Precambrian subduction zones. This finding indicates the incorporation of Mg-rich carbonate minerals from marine sediments into the magma source, contributing to the observed variations in eastern China's alkaline basalts.