Iron (Fe)–manganese (Mn) minerals formed in situ can be used for the natural remediation of the primary poor-quality groundwater with coexistence of arsenite [As(III)], Mn(II), and Fe(II) (PGAMF). However, the underlying mechanisms of immobilization and coupling of As, Mn, and Fe during in-situ formation of Fe–Mn minerals in PGAMF remains unclear. The simultaneous immobilization and coupling of arsenic (As), Mn, and Fe in PGAMF during in-situ formation of biogenic Fe–Mn minerals induced by O2 perturbations and indigenous bacteria (Comamonas sp. RM6) were investigated at the different molar ratios of Fe(II):Mn(II) (1:1, 2:1, and 3:1). Compared with systems without Fe(II) in the presence of Mn(II), the coexisted Fe(II) significantly enhanced Mn(II) bio-oxidation and mineral precipitation, resulting in As immobilization increased by 5, 7, and 7 times at initial Fe(II) concentration of 0.3, 0.6, and 0.9 mM, respectively. Moreover, the As(III) immobilization efficiencies in Mn(II) and Fe(II) mixed system at initial Fe(II) concentration of 0.3, 0.6, and 0.9 mM were 73%, 91%, and 92%, respectively, that were significantly higher than those of single Fe(II) system (30%, 59%, and 74%) and those of single Mn(II) system (12%), indicating that Fe(II) and Mn(II) oxidation synergically enhanced As(III) immobilization. This was mainly attributed to the formation and As adsorption capacity of biogenic Fe–Mn minerals (BFMM). The formed BFMM significantly facilitated simultaneous immobilization of Fe, Mn, and As in PGAMF by oxidation, adsorption, and precipitation/coprecipitation, a coupling of biological, physical, and chemical processes. Fe component was mainly responsible for As fixation, and Mn component dominated As(III) oxidation. Based on the results from this work, biostimulation and bioaugmentation techniques can be developed for in-situ purification and remediation of PGAMF. This work provides insights into the simultaneous immobilization of pollutants in PGAMF, as well as promising strategies for in-situ purification and remediation of PGAMF.