Plant residue inputs play a crucial role in regulating soil carbon (C) stock and nitrogen (N) availability in cropland. However, little is known regarding how plant inputs mediate the relationships between soil C and net N mineralization, causing additional uncertainty in predicting ecosystem C and N dynamics. This study investigated the influences of long-term deprivation of plant inputs, short-term addition of maize straw and experimental warming on soil C and net N mineralization and their relationships. We conducted an 815-day laboratory incubation experiment under 10 and 20 °C using soils from a long-term bare fallow plot (without plant inputs for 23 years) and its adjacent old field plot (with continuous plant inputs). Our results showed that long-term deprivation of plant inputs decreased soil net N mineralization (per unit total N or TN) by 56% on average, but had minor effect on soil C mineralization (per unit soil organic C). Soil C and net N mineralization rates were positively correlated in the old field soil under 20 °C. However, soil C and net N mineralization rates were not correlated in the bare fallow soil, mainly due to the low level of net N mineralization. Moreover, soil C and net N mineralization rates were significantly increased by the addition of maize straw in both land-use types. When net N mineralization was <162 (or 159) μg N g−1 TN d−1, soil C and net N mineralization rates were negatively correlated due to an increase of microbial N demand during plant litter mineralization. When net N mineralization was >162 (or 159) μg N g−1 TN d−1, soil C and net N mineralization rates were positively correlated owing to a greater microbial mining of N from soil organic matter (SOM). Further, elevated temperature increased soil C and net N mineralization rates, and changed the relationships between soil C and net N mineralization. Taken together, this study provides evidence that plant inputs mediate the relationships between soil C and net N mineralization, and is thus critical in controlling ecosystem C and N cycling.