Investigating the impacts of soil conversion on soil organic carbon (SOC) content and its fractions within soil aggregates is essential to define better strategies for improving soil structure and SOC sequestration in terrestrial ecosystem. However, the consequences of soil conversion from paddy to upland soil for soil aggregates and intra-aggregate organic carbon (OC) pools are poorly understood. Therefore, the objective of this study was to quantify the effects of ten-year soil conversion on soil aggregates and intra-aggregate OC pools distributions. Four typical rice-producing areas were chosen in north and south of China, one paired soil samples (paddy field vs. adjacent upland soil) were collected (0–20 cm) with three replicates at each area (total 24 soil samples). A set of core parameters (OC preservation capacity, aggregate C turnover, biological activity index) were calculated to assess the responses of intra-aggregate OC turnover to soil conversion. Results showed that soil conversion from paddy to upland soil significantly improved the formation of macro-aggregates, and increased aggregates stability. It also notably decreased soil intra-aggregate OC pools (easily oxidized OC, EOC, particulate OC, POC; mineral bound OC, MOC), and the sensitivity of aggregate-associated OC pools to soil conversion followed the order of: EOC (average reduction of 21.1%) > MOC (average reduction of 15.4%) > POC (average reduction of 14.8%). The potentially mineralizable carbon (C0) in upland soil was significantly higher than in paddy soil, but the decay constant (k) in upland soil was lower than in paddy soil. Random forest model and partial correlation analysis showed that EOC originated from aggregate fractions (EOCa) and pH were the important nutrient and physicochemical factors impacting decay rate (k) of C mineralization in paddy soil, while MOC originated from aggregate fractions (MOCa) and C enzyme (CBH) were identified as the key factors in upland soil. In conclusion, this study evidenced that soil conversion from paddy to upland soil improved the percentage of macro-aggregates and aggregate stability, while declined soil aggregate-associated C stock and decreased decay rate (k) of soil mineralization on ten-year scale. Our findings provided some new insights into the alterations of soil aggregates and potential C sequestration under soil conversion system in rice-producing areas.