The capacity of soil to sequester carbon (C) is a key process that promotes the reduction of CO2 in the atmosphere. Soils can absorb as much as 20% of anthropogenic carbon emissions, which can contribute to mitigate climate change. This capacity relies on the organo-mineral association, which includes different minerals, Fe and Al oxides, which have a critical soil organic carbon (SOC) sorption surface. Based on an equation of the potential C saturation deficit of fine soil particles (<20 μm/silt and clay fractions) for tropical regions, this study investigated the SOC sequestration potential of the clay fraction for soils in Piracicaba region, São Paulo State, Brazil as influenced by the clay minerals. This potential was fitted to a spatial regression model for soil depths 0–20 cm and 80 to 100 cm. In the surface layer, the sequestration potential was mostly explained by the relative abundance of soil minerals (Kaolinite, Hematite, Goethite and Gibbsite) determined using vis-NIR-SWIR spectroscopy. A direct relationship was observed with Goethite and Gibbsite, indicating that low concentrations would reduce the sequestration potential. At 80 to 100 cm depth, Kaolinite and Hematite explained most variation in SOC sequestration potential. Additionally, the C associated with the mineral fraction and the C saturation potential as a function of minerals were modeled and a strong importance of hematite in the C sequestration and stabilization cycle was identified at both depths. The individual mineral contribution to SOC sequestration potential was also mapped, which identified high contributions of goethite and gibbsite for deep soil layers. The influence of land use on the carbon sequestration potential of minerals was observed, with the greatest potential being found in areas with pasture and cropping mosaics and grassland and forest mosaics, with a high presence of kaolinite and hematite. These minerals have a greater potential for carbon sequestration at greater depths and, therefore, could be critical in climate change mitigation strategies.