Mineralogical and geochemical compositions of mudstones were used for untangling provenance and climatic signals preserved in the upper Ediacaran - lower Cambrian strata from the western part of the East European Craton (ECC). Quantitative mineralogy and geochemistry data were obtained for 735 argillaceous rock samples from 71 wells and outcrops and compared with the analyses of Proterozoic palaeosols from the same area. Additionally, sedimentological analyses of well-preserved cores were performed to reconstruct predominant Ediacaran and early Cambrian environments. Seven major facies associations were distinguished and interpreted as both continental and basinal in nature. Terrestrial environments include weathering crust, alluvial fans, and associated interlobe areas, fluvial channels, floodplains, and lakes. Transitional environments are represented by tidal lithofacies, whereas central bay and upper offshore facies associations are typical of distal deposits. The central basin area is interpreted as an estuary opening toward the east, while a separate basin developed in Podillya. Provenance heavily influenced the mineralogical and geochemical characteristics of the sediments and affected derived weathering indices. The change from mafic to felsic sources in the western ECC is evident towards the Cambrian. All geochemical and newly introduced mineralogical weathering indices show advanced kaolinite-type weathering, evidence of a hot and humid climate during this interval. Based on these indices, mudstones are weathered to a greater extent than palaeosols. This observation is interpreted as resulting from the redeposition of highly weathered topsoils, combined with additional weathering on-route to the basin. Mineral authigenesis (berthierine, pyrite, goethite, fluorapatite, and carbonates) was particularly intensive in the terrestrial interlobe areas. Berthierine is common in most environments, which reflects the reaction of kaolinite with iron oxides, mediated by microorganisms, in shallow dysoxic tropical waters, with high lateritic sediment input. Marine, more oxic conditions in the Cambrian are indicated by a pervasive appearance of glauconite.