Accurate assessments of the ecological security of mineral resource-based cities in China (MRBCCs) are one of the most important elements of improving comprehensive national security policies in the country and promoting high-quality development therein. To this end, an integrated method is proposed herein based on rough set-entropy weight method-spatial data analysis, and an ecological security assessment indicator system is constructed based on a pressure sensitivity–stability–external regulation nexus. The ecological security status of 108 MRBCCs was evaluated in multiple dimensions and based on their spatiotemporal evolution. The results show that the comprehensive ecological security of MRBCCs improved from 2010 to 2018, but it was still low. There exists strong heterogeneity in the comprehensive ecological security of different cities, and the gap will only increase over time. Additionally, the comprehensive ecological security of MRBCCs dependent on coal, petroleum, non-ferrous metal, and ferrous metal showed an upward trend from 2010 to 2018. Petroleum-dependent cities were the most stable and had the best external regulation, while comprehensive ecological security was the worst in coal-based cities. Recently, cities dependent on non-ferrous metals faced the highest ecological pressure, and both they and non-cities dependent on ferrous metals had relatively weak external regulations. Finally, the MRBCC had high levels of agglomerated ecological security, there was a strong spatial autocorrelation and promotion effect, and the agglomeration had clear spatial characteristics. The high- and low-value areas were in the eastern mineral resources and northeastern mineral resources cities, respectively. The temporal and spatial evolution characteristics of the ecological security of MRBCC are revealed in detail, providing scientific data and a quantitative reference to assist the Chinese government in accurate management of the green development of mineral resource cities.