Magnetotelluric (MT), Electrical Resistivity Tomography (ERT), Time-Domain Induced Polarization (TDIP), Geochemical and Geological studies followed by drilling and down-hole logging were undertaken with in the Betul Fold Belt (BFB) in Central India, to demarcate zones of magmatic Ni-Cu-PGE sulfide mineralization. The BFB is predominantly composed of circular to elongate gabbro bodies of the Padhar Mafic-Ultramafic Complex, intruded into a sequence of bimodal volcanic rocks and quartzites. Near-surface samples of ultramafic rocks were subjected to precise geochemical analysis and scanned by an electron microscopy with an energy dispersive spectrometer (SEM-EDS). This work indicated the presence of pyrite, pyrrhotite, chalcopyrite, pentlandite, and minor amounts of W-Cd bearing boweiite and palladenite assemblage. These minerals are regarded as favorable to the occurrence of Ni-Cu-PGE sulfide mineralization. MT data derived from two profiles were analyzed and modeled using 2D and 3D inversion algorithms. The robust conductivity anomalies obtained from the MT model have been interpreted coupled with electrical tomography, geology, and geochemistry data. The near-surface shallow depth conductors observed in the ERT sections are interpreted as the sulfide mineralized zones. They corroborate the MT results. These conductive zones reflect the occurrence of the magmatic Ni-Cu-PGE bearing sulfide mineralization associated with rocks of the mantle-derived Padhar Mafic Ultramafic Complex. This geophysical data, in conjunction with petrological and geochemical analysis of drill core samples have allowed the identification of the origin and paragenesis of sulphide mineralization in the study area. Geochemical studies suggest that the parental magma was generated from a subduction modified, metasomatized and an enriched mantle source that was subsequently emplaced in a magmatic continental arc setting. The interpreted conductors, observed at shallow depths (∼200-300 m), have been generated by secondary hydrothermal fluid circulation leading to vein formation in the host Padhar Mafic-Ultramafic Complex. The MT and electrical tomography models delineate the geological boundaries of the sulfide-bearing mineralized deposits in the BFB.