The Han-Xing region is located in the south Taihang Mountains (TM) in the central part of the North China Craton, and is an important iron producing area. The iron deposits in this region are of skarn type, related to an Early Cretaceous high-Mg diorite complex, including gabbro diorite, hornblende diorite, diorite, diorite porphyrite, and monzonite. In this study we report the detailed mineral chemistry of the high-Mg diorites and skarn rocks. The olivine in the gabbro diorite shows chemical composition similar to that in mantle peridotite xenoliths. Clinopyroxene in the gabbro diorite is dominantly augite, with only minor diopside, whereas the clinopyroxenes in the diorite and monzonite are diopside. Amphiboles in the high-Mg diorites show compositional range from magnesiohornblende to magnesiohastingsite, with minor pargasite and tschermakite. Most plagioclase in the high-Mg diorite is andesine and oligoclase. The magnesio-biotite in gabbro diorites shows chemical characteristics of re-equilibrated primary biotites and those in calc-alkaline rocks. In the diorite and diorite porphyrite, plagioclase shows complex chemical zoning. Clinopyroxene and garnet in skarn rocks show varying FeO contents, the former containing low FeO (<9wt.%) and occurring as the major skarn mineral in large-scale iron deposits, and the latter within small-scale iron deposits with high FeO (mostly >25wt.%) content. We computed the pressure, temperature, oxygen fugacity and water contents based on the mineral chemistry of amphibole and biotite. Based on the results, the magma crystallization can be divided into two stages, one within the deep magma chamber, forming clinopyroxene, amphibole and plagioclase phenocrysts; the other after emplacement, forming the rim of phenocrysts and matrix minerals. The magma during the early stage shows high temperature (~900°C–950°C), pressure (~300MPa–500MPa), relatively high logfO2 (NNO–NNO +2), and H2O content in melt (4%–8%). During the late stage, the magma temperature dropped to about 750°C, and pressure came down to less than 100MPa, with the logfO2 rising to NNO +1–NNO +2.
                  The zoning of amphibole and plagioclase records the process of magma mixing and crystallization, with injection of mafic magma into the felsic magma chamber. The relatively high logfO2 and H2O content inhibited partitioning of iron into mafic minerals and favored concentration of Fe in the melt. Iron ore precipitation occurred when the magma was emplaced at shallow level, and was principally controlled by the chemical composition of carbonate wall rocks. The high logfO2, Fe3+ rich ore-forming fluid generated andradite and clinopyroxene when it reacted with limestone and dolomitic limestone respectively.