Lithium isotopes have great potential to fractionate at subaerial environment, so they are promising proxies for tracing chemical weathering history. However, it remains uncertain how to relate lithium isotopic compositions (δ7Li) in sediments to silicate weathering and past climate in terrestrial setting. To tackle this question, we choose the warm and wet middle Miocene climate optimum (MMCO, 17–14 Ma) with large climate variation amplitude and the following cold and dry middle Miocene climate cooling period (MMCC, 14–11 Ma) with damped climatic variation amplitude, as two climate contrasting intervals to study lithium isotopes and content ([Li]) variations of terrestrial mudrocks. Our study site is located at the eastern Qaidam Basin of the northeastern Tibetan Plateau and the precipitation pattern of this part of the basin is similar to the Chinese Loess Plateau over the two studied intervals. The study site is suitable for clarifying link between climate and δ7Li variations because previous studies have demonstrated no provenance shift over the studied interval and short transport distance from source to the study site suggests little chemical weathering over the transportation process. Both δ7Li and [Li] values show larger amplitude over the MMCO (spanning from −1.2 to 3.2 ‰ and from 32.8 to 93.9 ug/g, respectively) than the MMCC interval (−1.8 to 1.2 ‰ and 41.7–80.8 ug/g, respectively), consistent with general feature of global and Chinese Loess Plateau climate. However, δ7Li data are higher over the MMCO in comparison with the MMCC, contrary to expectation of more lithium isotope fractionation at warm interval. We interpret the more positive δ7Li values over the MMCO using increased ratio of primary mineral dissolution over secondary mineral precipitation. Qaidam mudrock and benthic Li records show complementary changes, suggesting their possible link. Furthermore, past research reveals lack of focused uplift of the northeastern Tibetan Plateau over the studied 18–11 Ma. So we conclude that global climate, rather than Tibetan uplift, played an important role in modulating inland Qaidam Basin climate variations over the middle Miocene and that increased chemical weathering over warm climate can lead to a small magnitude of lithium isotope fractionation. Therefore, interpreting chemical weathering history, and hence climate, using lithium isotope data in terrestrial setting requires considering relative importance of primary mineral dissolution versus secondary mineral precipitation.