The Yanbian mining district is located at the eastern end of the Central Asian orogenic belt and northeast of the western Pacific continental margin metallogenic belt. It is a porphyry-epithermal Cu-Au mining district related to Mesozoic continental volcanic eruptions and hypabyssal magmatism. To explore the genesis and mineralization process of epithermal gold deposits, we conducted a systematic study of the geology, fluid inclusions and H-O-S-Pb isotopes of the Ganhegou gold deposit, which is expected to be revealed as a medium-sized deposit in the latest exploration. We found the following: (1) The deposit occurs in Early Cretaceous continental andesites of the Jingouling Formation and granodiorite porphyry. The ore belts are controlled by NW-trending volcanic faults. The mineralization process can be divided into the quartz-hematite-arsenopyrite-pyrite stage (I), grey-white quartz-pyrite stage (II), smoky quartz-polymetallic sulfide stage (III), milky quartz-adularia stage (IV) and carbonate stage (V). Gold precipitated in stage III. (2) Vapour-rich-, liquid-rich-, pure-liquid- and pure-vapour-type FIs developed in quartz in stages II, III and IV, and the average homogenization temperatures in these stages are 325℃, 273℃ and 229℃, respectively. The ore-forming fluids belonged to the H2O-NaCl ± CO2 system. (3) The δ18OH2O and δDH2O values of stage II-IV range from −9.9 to −5.2‰ and −121.9 to −119.8‰, respectively, indicating that the ore-forming fluids were driven by intermediate-felsic magmatic water and mixed with meteoric water during mineralization. (4) The δ34S values of pyrite in stages II and III range from −5.8 to −3.4‰, whereas the values of 206Pb/204Pb, 207Pb/204Pb and 208Pb/204Pb are 15.529–15.551, 18.239–18.257 and 38.075–38.153, respectively, implying that the ore-forming materials were derived from Neoproterozoic lower crust. These characteristics indicate that Ganhegou is a low-sulfidation epithermal gold deposit. Mineralization occurred via several main processes: (i) The ore-forming fluids migrated along volcanic faults to suitable positions driven by intermediate-felsic magmatic water. (ii) In stage I, the quartz-arsenopyrite-hematite assemblage formed under relatively high oxidation conditions. (iii) In stage II, the pyrite-hessite-galena-quartz veins formed in the near-neutral environment, which was slightly reduced relative to that of stage I due to the fluid boiling. (iv) In stage III, the gold-bearing quartz veins formed due to the fluid boiling and mixing. (v) In stage IV, the precipitation of quartz-adularia-pyrite veins occurred under near-neutral conditions (pH≈5). (iv) Small-scale carbonate veinlets formed in stage V, signalling the end of mineralization.