The Pengyang uranium deposit, located in the Tianhuan Depression in the southwestern Ordos Basin, is a large-scale sandstone-type uranium deposit in aeolian sediments. The uranium-bearing rock series in the deposit is mainly sandstone and conglomerate from the Lower Cretaceous Luohe Formation, which is dominated by desert facies. Based on our investigation of the geological characteristics of this deposit, a systematic study of the type, characteristics of the ore-forming fluid and ore genesis was conducted. Through the petrographic study of inclusions, three stages of inclusions have been identified in the quartz overgrowth, carbonate cements, and secondary microfractures in the ore-bearing sandstone of the Luohe Formation, and the third-stage inclusions in the secondary microfractures or late calcite cements represent the ore-forming fluids. There are three types of inclusions captured from ore-forming fluids: liquid-dominated aqueous inclusions, liquid-dominated hydrocarbon inclusions, and natural gas inclusions. Their gaseous components are mainly CH4 and H2O, with a small amount of N2. The homogenization temperatures of liquid-dominated aqueous inclusions range from 58 to 147 ℃, and the salinity ranges from 0.35 to 6.88 wt%. The homogenization temperature of liquid-dominated hydrocarbon inclusions mainly exhibits two peaks (at 60–140 ℃ and 160–190 ℃). Our studies of carbon-hydrogen–oxygen isotopes indicate that the formation of uranium-bearing sandstone is closely related to the participation of organic matter such as oil and gas. Based on the comprehensive researches of fluid inclusions and isotope analysis, it is concluded that the ore-forming fluid of the Pengyang uranium deposit is a mixture of meteoric water and hydrocarbon fluid. The deep hydrocarbon fluid traveled upward along the structural fractures, acting as a reductive agent and participating in the oxidation–reduction reaction of the Pengyang uranium deposit. Although hydrocarbon fluid can bring some uranium from deep area, the uranium from the provenance area of the basin may be the main source of mineralization in the Pengyang uranium deposit. The Pengyang uranium deposit is a sandstone-type uranium deposit related to the reduction of oil and gas. Uranium mineralization is mainly caused by the coupling between the uranium-bearing oxygen-rich fluid infiltrated from the surface and the deep hydrocarbon fluid.