The Shiweidong W-Cu deposit, located within the giant Dahutang W-Cu ore field, contains quartz vein type W-Cu and veinlet-disseminated type W mineralization. These ore veins are mainly hosted in the Jinningian biotite granodiorite. Two distinct mineralization stages were identified in association with quartz, namely wolframite-quartz veins and chalcopyrite-scheelite-quartz association. The deposit represents an example of a complex of economically valuable W and Cu, with resources of 0.3 Mt WO3 and 0.24 Mt Cu. The characteristic and origin of the W and Cu mineralizing fluids remain debated. In our study, homogenization temperature (Th) and salinity were determined for fluid inclusions (FIs) in ore or associated gangue minerals. Additionally, we use the trace element compositions of fluid inclusions obtained by laser ablation inductively coupled plasma mass spectrometry (LA-ICP-MS) to clarify fluid characteristics responsible for W and Cu mineralization. Primary fluid inclusions (FIs) trapped in wolframite display high Th ranging from 305 to 352 °C and have moderate salinity from 3.2 to 5.0 wt% NaCl equiv., quartz associated with chalcopyrite exhibit a close syngenetic relationship, and a significant low-temperature (248 ∼ 271 °C) fluid was recorded by FIs in quartz. Wolframite-hosted FIs were characterized by high concentrations of incompatible lithophile element Cs and volatile elements including Li and B, indicating that W mineralization fluid was derived from highly fractionated granitic systems. All FIs in wolframite display the absence of Cu. In contrast, FIs hosted in quartz coexisting with chalcopyrite have the high Cu concentrations with average value of 1033 ppm. Giving the lower Cs content in FIs from quartz coexisting with chalcopyrite, we suggest that the Cu-rich ore-forming fluid released from a less fractionated magma. These results indicate that W and Cu mineralization at Shiweidong was introduced by distinct fluids. Fluid simple cooling is likely a major driving factor in wolframite formation, while fluid boiling accompanied chalcopyrite deposition. Our new findings illuminate that the existence of independent Cu mineralization events in the W deposit in northern Jiangxi.