Productivity in conifer plantations can be increased by hardwood mixture. However, the underlying mechanisms that govern the relationship between hardwood mixture and productivity remain poorly understood, particularly with respect to nutrient cycling. We investigated how and to what extent hardwood mixtures alter nitrogen amounts in leaf litterfall, leaf litter decomposition rates, and soil nitrogen mineralization rates in an experiment that used different thinning intensities (i.e., a non-thinned “control” group with few hardwoods, a 33%-thinned “weak” group with a small amount of hardwoods, and a 67%-thinned “intensive” group with abundant hardwoods) in a conifer Cryptomeria japonica plantation (38-year old). Most of the hardwoods were 15-year old trees that have been regenerated after the first thinning. The annual leaf litterfall amount for the conifer was highest in the control group and lowest in the intensive group, whereas the reverse was true for hardwoods, although the hardwoods’ annual leaf litterfall amount was approximately half that of conifers, even in the intensive group. Consequently, the annual amount of leaf litterfall of hardwoods and conifers combined was lowest in the intensive group. However, the total amount of nitrogen in the annual leaf litterfall of hardwoods and conifers combined did not differ according to thinning intensity, because the mass-based nitrogen concentration in the leaf litterfall of hardwoods was twice that of conifers. The leaf litter decomposition rate in hardwoods was approximately three times faster than that in conifers irrespective of thinning intensity, mainly due to the lower carbon-to-nitrogen (C:N) ratio. Thus, the total amount of nitrogen in the decomposed leaves of hardwoods and conifers combined, calculated by multiplying the total amount of nitrogen in the annual leaf litterfall of hardwoods and conifers by the decomposition rate and summing the results, was highest in the intensive group. In soil from shallow depths (0–10 cm), the nitrogen mineralization rate increased in the order of control, weak, and intensive, attributable primarily to the C:N ratio, which decreased in the same order. The results indicated that increasing the hardwood content by intensive thinning significantly enhances the availability of soil inorganic nitrogen in conifer plantations, by facilitating leaf litter decomposition and soil nitrogen mineralization. These findings indicate that hardwood mixtures can increase forest productivity by enhancing nitrogen cycling.