Graphene-based three-dimensional (3D) porous scaffolds have been extensively investigated in the photothermal treatment of tumor-induced bone defects due to their photothermal and osteogenic capacity. However, scaffold processing destroys conjugated graphene structure and reduces its photothermal conversion efficiency. In this study, a graphene-based 3D scaffold (GS) with intact conjugated structure was prepared by chemical vapor deposition (CVD). GS was rapidly mineralized biomimetically by a newly developed semi-dry electrochemical deposition method to form a hydroxyapatite (HA) incorporated graphene scaffold (HA-GS). The simulation of the charged particle dynamics provides a better understanding of the mechanism of semi-dry electrodeposition. This scaffold exhibits high photothermal sensitivity that generates sufficient thermal energy for photothermal therapy even under near-infrared irradiation (980 nm) with extremely low power density (0.2 W/cm2). Moreover, osteogenic activity was improved by HA-GS compared with GS. Compared with the blank GS, the HA-GS scaffold deposited with HA also showed regulation of macrophage-derived chemokine (MDC) and remodeled the immune microenvironment of the wound after photothermal therapy. In vivo experiments further verified that HA-GS can ablate osteosarcoma through a photothermal effect. These results suggest that the as-prepared HA-GS may be adopted as a promising multifunctional bone scaffold against tumor-induced bone defect.
               
                  Statement of significance
                  The hydroxyapatite (HA) incorporated graphene scaffold (HA-GS) scaffold was prepared by semi-dry electrodeposition first time. The prepared HA-GS has a high photothermal conversion efficiency (it can rise to 48 °C under the 5 min irradiation of 980 nm near-infrared laser at 0.2 W/cm2). The mineralized layer prepared by semi-dry electrodeposition is not only osteoinductive, but also reduces the inflammatory response after photothermal therapy. This modulates the immune microenvironment at the bone tumor invasion site, thereby promoting defect repair.