The sandstone-hosted uranium mineralization areas in the Sanzhao Sag of the northern Songliao Basin have been newly identified. The target stratum is the Upper Cretaceous Sifangtai Formation and the uranium mineralization mainly occurs in the bottom of Sifangtai Formation, corresponding to channel sand bodies in meandering river system, characterized by medium to fine-grained sandstone. This study proposes the uranium metallogenic model through petrographic observation, whole rock geochemistry, mineralogical study of uranium occurrence form (SEM), organic matter rock–eval pyrolysis analysis (REP) and in-situ sulfur isotope determination of different generations of pyrite by LA-MC-ICP-MS. Compared with the sandstones collected in barren reduction and oxidization zones, the mineralized sandstones show obvious increase in the contents of TOC, total sulfur, Y and U. Petrographic observations indicate that organic matters are mainly inherited from land plants. REP data display that the organic matter (OM) disseminated in the sandstone has very low hydrogen index (HI) from around 0 to 21 mg HC/g TOC and varied oxygen index (OI) from 44 to 115 mg CO2/g TOC, corresponding to Type Ⅳ kerogen (degraded kerogen). There are two types of coffinite with different grain size, micro-particles (μm-sized) and large aggregates (generally up to 100 μm) respectively. The coffinite micro spherules exhibit short rod-like or worm-like morphology occurring in clay matrix and cell cavities in degradofusinite or around subidiomorphic-idiomorphic pyrite. The coarse-grained coffinite contains other mineral facies (e.g. pyrite, quartz) and some of large coffinite aggregates display thrombolite-type microbial structures. The irregular pyrite relict particles in coarse-grained colloidal coffinite have light sulfur isotope compositions characterized by δ34S values from –39.96‰ to –49.89‰. The δ34S values of colloidal pyrite in replacement of OM or of the sub-idiomorphic FeS2 cement filling in the cavities of OM range from –52.77‰ to –13.88‰. Some of sub-idiomorphic pyrite cement and idiomorphic crystal have the heavier signature from – 27.06‰ to + 14.23‰. The light sulfur isotope signature suggests that the sulfur originates from bacterial sulfate reduction (BSR). The OM replacement by pyrite and the highest OI values recorded by REP in uranium mineralized samples are lines of evidence of biodegradation. Bacteria use the organic matter as food source and produce isotopically light reduced sulfur species. Oxygenated uranium-bearing waters infiltrated through the denudated windows at Daqing placanticline into the porous reduced sandstones deposited in the Sanzhao Sag. Uranium was indirectly reduced by BSR-derived iron disulfides or directly reduced by sulfate-reducing bacteria.