Revegetation is an effective measure to combat desertification worldwide, which parallelly facilitates the colonization and development of biological soil crusts (BSCs), and thereby affecting C cycles of BSCs in desert regions. However, knowledge about soil organic carbon (SOC) mineralization of BSCs and the involved mechanisms during long-term revegetation process in desert is rather limited. In this study, SOC mineralization rates of the mobile sand dune (MSD) and the BSCs in revegetated sites along chronosequence in the Tengger Desert were investigated, and the relationships between the SOC mineralization and the characteristics of vegetation and BSCs, soil properties and incubation temperature (T) and soil water content (SWC) were analyzed. The results showed that SOC mineralization rate of the BSCs and the corresponding subsoils was significantly greater than those of the MSD, and it increased considerably with increasing site age, regardless of the T, SWC, soil layer and sampling time (p < 0.001). The maximum instantaneous mineralization rates (MIR), cumulative CO2-C release (CCR) and the potentially mineralizable SOC (C0) of BSCs and subsoils were 1.29–12.63, 3.67–23.16 and 3.78–23.41 times, and 0.16–2.26, 0.12–1.84 and 0.17–1.26 times greater than those of the MSD, respectively; while the proportion of C0 to total SOC (C0/SOC) decreased by 31–88 % and 24–72 % in comparison with MSD, respectively. The mineralization rate increased with T and SWC, and the temperature sensitivity of BSCs increased with site age, indicating that the loss of SOC would be accelerated with the succession of BSCs upon the future global change. The variation magnitude of SOC mineralization was largely dependent on revegetation-induced changes in the properties of BSCs and the incubation T and SWC, and their interactions. The C:N, pH, and the activities of POD and PPO and DOC, and the coverage of moss-dominated crusts, SOC, C:N, the content of clay and silt and AYL activity were the main factors affecting SOC mineralization of BSCs and the subsoils, respectively. These results indicated that multiple factors that co-varied with the succession of BSCs led to variable SOC mineralization. Our findings suggested that planting xerophytic shrubs in desert drives the development and the SOC mineralization of BSCs, but decreased SOC loss due to mineralization, leading to SOC sequestration.