The Zhaojinggou rare-metal deposit is located in the Wulashan-Daqingshan region, central north margin of the North China Craton. Nb-Ta mineralizations are mainly hosted in the biotite alkali-feldspar granite (BAG) and albite granite (AG), with subordinate mineralization in the alkali-feldspar aplite dyke (AFA), the amazonite granitic pegmatite dyke (AGP), and the greisen (black + white colored greisen). In this paper, we present a systematic work of geochronology (CGM U-Pb combined with cassiterite U-Pb, monazite U-Th-Pb, and muscovite 40Ar-39Ar dating), whole-rock geochemistry, and Sr-Nd isotopes to understanding the timing of mineralization, petrogenesis, geodynamic setting, and ore-forming processes. Our geochronological data reveal two episodic Nb-Ta mineralization events in the Zhaojinggou deposit during the Early Cretaceous. The first and major ore-forming episode occurred at ~130 Ma, forming a sequence of ore-bearing rocks of the BAG-AG-greisen-AFA. The second but subordinate ore-forming episode occurred at ~114 Ma, forming the ore-bearing AGP. The whole-rock geochemistry indicates the granitic rocks (the BAG-AG-AFA and AGP) from the two episodes are highly evolved with analogous trace element and REE patterns, and have A-type affinity. The whole-rock εNd(t) values of these granitic rocks are relative similar, ranging from −9.6 to −7.6, with corresponding T2DM ages of 1490–1713 Ma. These features suggest that these A-type granites from the two discrete episodes are derived from the same magma reservoir by high-temperature partial melting of the Middle Proterozoic basement in an infracrustal extensional environment. These A-type granites experienced extremely fractional crystallization during emplacement. The whole-rock REE tetrad effects, element ratios (Nb/Ta, Zr/Hf and K/Rb), and Nb-Ta fractionation modeling indicate that both magmatic and hydrothermal processes are involved to form the two episodic Nb-Ta mineralizations. High degree of factional crystallization and magmatic-hydrothermal processes after high-temperature anataxis are crucial to form the Zhaojinggou rare-metal deposit. Moreover, these highly-evolved A-type granites (the BAG-AG-AFA and AGP) formed during the Early Cretaceous (at ~ 130 Ma and ~ 114 Ma respectively) are the important targets for rare-metals prospecting in the central north margin of the NCC.