The controlling effect of tectonic uplift and denudation on uranium mineralization has been much studied previously, and its important contribution to uranium mineralization has been fully recognized. However, no systematic theory and methodological criteria for uranium prospecting has been summarized. Here we present the results of an in-depth study of the characteristics and formation process of typical sandstone-type uranium deposits in the northern basin of China, and conclude with a uranium metallogenic theory: tectonic uplift and denudation events are the driving force for the formation of sandstone-type uranium deposits (or even mudstone-type uranium deposits). The stage of tectonic uplift and subsequent denudation events since the formation of the target layer determines the mineralization stages: the greater the intensity and duration of uplifting and denudation events, the larger the scale of uranium mineralization. The formation of large and mega-scale sandstone-type uranium deposits requires multiple stages of tectonic uplift and denudation events superimposed in the same direction. Single or polydirectional tectonic uplift and denudation events often do not form industrial uranium deposits. In this paper, a three-step method to predict the occurrence of sandstone-type uranium deposits is established, which includes (1) determining the tectonic framework division of the sedimentary basin being investigated, (2) a burial and denudation history study, and (3) apatite fission-track simulation of the erosion source area. Focusing on the tectonic evolution and the rapid uplift and denudation events of the basin and the erosion source area is critical (the tectonic evolution of the two areas usually is closely coupled). The desired result can be achieved only by combining the aforementioned theory with basic principles of sandstone-type uranium mineralization, and treating uranium mineralization as a result of a special tectonic event. The theory deepens the understanding of sandstone-type uranium mineralization, and the method plays a role in the rapid evaluation of sandstone-type uranium deposits in sedimentary basins, and it can be extended to research and prediction in other basins.