Molybdenite is usually associated with chalcopyrite and other sulfide minerals, which troubles the efficient utilization of Mo resources. Flotation using various surfactants is a key technology to solve the problem. In this work, acetoacetamide (CSD2) is used as a novel depressant to realize the selective separation of molybdenite from chalcopyrite, galena and pyrite. Any collector is unwanted for the flotation system using CSD2, which not only reduces the cost, but also simplifies the flotation process. Under the optimum and green flotation scheme ([CSD2] = 5 × 10−4 mol/L; the pulp pH = 7), CSD2 can expand the recovery gap between molybdenite and chalcopyrite (or galena or pyrite) to 60% ∼ 80%. The excellent and selective depression of CSD2 has been continued in the flotation systems of mixed minerals and grinding products of quaternary mineral mixtures (GPQMM), confirming the potential industrial application prospect. The selective depression of CSD2 is confirmed by Zeta potential and contact angle measurements. After being treated with CSD2, the Zeta potential and hydrophilicity of the surfaces of chalcopyrite, galena and pyrite have more obvious changes than those of molybdenite surface, meaning a stronger adsorption of CSD2. In addition, the selective depression mechanism of CSD2 is further investigated through Fourier Transform Infrared (FTIR) analysis, X-ray Photoelectron Spectroscopy (XPS) analysis and electrostatic potential surface (EPS). The stable adsorption of CSD2 onto the surfaces of chalcopyrite, galena and pyrite is realized through forming six-membered chelation rings by the bi-carbonyl groups (–C=O) in CSD2 molecules and the metal ions on the mineral surfaces. At the same time, the amino group (–NH2) in CSD2 molecule also play an auxiliary role in the adsorption process through weak interaction. However, it is difficult to achieve an effective adsorption of CSD2 onto the surface of molybdenite, due to a lack of exposed metal ions. CSD2, as a high-performance depressant, has an industrial application potential in the collectorless/collector-free flotation separation of Mo-containing sulfide minerals.