Rare-element pegmatites are the crystallization product of melts strongly enriched in incompatible elements. Some of these elements, e.g., Li, B, P, F, and H2O, function as melt structure modifiers, allowing such melts to reach unusually low crystallization temperatures and regulating the saturation of aqueous-carbonic fluids from the melt. However, the timing of fluid saturation is highly debated, and the processes that mark the magmatic-hydrothermal transition in rare-element pegmatites are still elusive. The crystallization sequence of phosphate minerals can be used to assess the timing and nature of fluid-related processes in pegmatitic systems. In the Buranga pegmatite, western Rwanda, magmatic phosphates are replaced by (hydrous) alkali-rich phosphates and later by strongly hydrated phosphates as the dike cools. This reaction series indicates a disequilibrium in the crystal-melt-fluid system and records complex fluid-rock interactions during dike consolidation. This contribution compares these interactions with the fluid record preserved in fluid inclusions in the main phosphates of the crystallization sequence. Three major fluid inclusion types are observed, aqueous-carbonic (mostly-two-phase, L-V), carbonic-aqueous (two-phase, V-L, or three-phase, L-L-V), and crystal-rich inclusions (multiphase, L-V-Solids). Crystal-rich fluid inclusions in trolleite [Al4(PO4)3(OH)3], the last primary phosphate to precipitate from the melt, show a paragenesis of solid phases similar to the secondary phosphates observed in the dike. LA-ICPMS analyses of individual fluid inclusions show high concentrations of Na and K, with some content of Li, Rb, Cs, B, Fe, and Mn in the fluid. A similar composition is present in all inclusion types within the same mineral. Crystal-rich fluid inclusions demonstrate that during the magmatic-hydrothermal transition, primary phosphates react with the fluid in the presence of melt to generate secondary phosphates. No evidence of external fluid sources has been observed during the magmatic-hydrothermal transition. The fluid inclusion record shows that the fluid salinity is kept constant due to fluid-mineral interactions and corroborates the hypothesis that fluid-soluble elements are internally remobilized in the melt-crystal-fluid system during the magmatic-hydrothermal stage. These interpretations have implications for the general evolution of P-rich pegmatitic melts and the mineralization of Nb and Ta in these systems.