Mineral nutrition plays a critical role in growth and bone mineralization in meat ducks as well as reproductive performance in duck layers and duck breeders. In addition to improving production performance parameters, minerals are also essential to support several enzymatic systems to enhancing antioxidant ability and immune function. This review explores the biological function and metabolism of minerals in the body, as well as mineral feeding strategy of various species of ducks. Topics range from mineral requirement to the physiological role of macroelements such as calcium and phosphorus and microelements such as zinc and selenium, etc. As with the improvement of genetic evolution and upgrade of rearing system in duck production, mineral requirements and electrolyte balance are urgent to be re-evaluated using sensitive biomarkers for the modern duck breed characterized by the rapid growth rate and inadequate bone development and mineralization. For duck breeders, mineral nutrition is not only required for maximal egg production performance but also for maintaining normal embryonic development and offspring's performance. Therefore, the proper amounts of bioavailable minerals need to be supplemented to maintain the mineral nutritional state of duck species during all phases of life. In addition, more positive effects of high doses microelements supplementations have been revealed for modern meat ducks subjected to various stresses in commercial production. The nutritional factors of mineral sources, supplemental enzymes, and antinutritional factors from unconventional ingredients should be emphasized to improve the effectiveness of mineral nutrition in duck feed formulation. Organic mineral sources and phytase enzymes have been adopted to reduce the antagonistic action between mineral and antinutritional factors. Therefore, special and accurate database of mineral requirements should be established for special genotypes of ducks under different rearing conditions, including rearing factors, environmental stresses and diets supplemented with organic sources, phytase and VD3.