In the Karst region of Southwest China, the content of soil heavy metals is generally high because of the geological background. Moreover, Southwest China is rich in mineral resources. A large number of mining and smelting activities discharge heavy metals into surrounding soil and cause superimposed pollution, which has drawn widespread concern. Due to the large variation coefficients of soil heavy metals in the Karst region, it is particularly essential to select appropriate analysis methods. In this paper, Jichangpo in Puding County, a Karst area with multi-mineral mining and smelting, is selected as the research object. A total of 368 pieces of agricultural topsoil in the study area are collected. The pollution level of heavy metals in agricultural soil is evaluated by the geological accumulation index (Igeo) and enrichment factor (EF). Absolute Factor Score/Multiple Linear Regression (APCS/MLR), geographic information system (GIS), self-organizing mapping (SOM), and random forest (RF) are used for the source allocation of soil heavy metals. Finally, the combination of APCS/MLR and health risk assessment model is adopted to evaluate the risks of heavy metal sources and determine the priority-control source. The results show that the average values of soil heavy metals in the study area (Cd, Hg, As, Pb, Cr, Cu, Zn, and Ni) exceed the background values of corresponding elements in Guizhou Province. Three sources of heavy metals are identified by combining APCS/MLR, GIS, SOM, and RF. Zn (63.47%), Pb (55.77%), Cd (58.98%), Hg (32.17%), Cu (14.41%), and As (5.99%) are related to lead-zinc mining and smelting; Cr (98.14%), Ni (90.64%), Cu (76.93%), Pb (43.02%), Zn (35.22%), Cd (28.97%), Hg (22.44%), and As (5.84%) are mixed sources (natural and agricultural sources); As (88.17%), Hg (45.39%), Cd (12.04%), Cu (8.66%), and Ni (6.72%) are related to the mining and smelting of coal and iron. The results of health risk assessment show that only As poses a non-carcinogenic risk to human health. 3.31% of the sampling points of As have non-carcinogenic risks to adults and 10.22% to children. In terms of carcinogenic risks, As, Pb, and Cr pose carcinogenic risks to adults and children. Combined with APCS/MLR and the health risk assessment model, the mining and smelting of coal and iron is the priority-control pollution source. This paper provides a comprehensive method for studying the distribution of heavy metal sources in areas with large variation coefficients of soil heavy metals in the Karst region. Furthermore, it offers a theoretical basis for the management and assessment of heavy metal pollution in agricultural land in the study area, which is helpful for researchers to make strategic decisions on food security when selecting agricultural land.