The Huanglongpu deposit is one of the most representative igneous carbonatite-type molybdenum-rare earth element (Mo-REE) deposits in the eastern Qinling metallogenic region. The molybdenum resources exceed 180 kt, whilst the total rare earth resources are about 37.8 kt. However, the age of REE mineralization, sources of ore-forming minerals, and tectonic setting are not well characterized. Therefore, this study carried out detailed mineralogical, geochronological, and geochemical analyses to provide new insights. Monazite, bastnäsite, parisite, and xenotime were found to be the dominant REE-bearing minerals in the Huanglongpu deposit. LA-ICP-MS U-Pb dating of the REE minerals revealed a two-stage REE mineralization: monazite formed at 219.4 Ma, whereas bastnäsite and xenotime formed at 145.9 Ma and 142.6 Ma, respectively. The carbonatites, as the main ore host, were characterized by a strong enrichment of light rare earth element (LREE) and moderately high heavy rare earth element (HREE) contents. Monazite showed different Nd isotopic compositions, with lower εNd(t) values ranging between −7.12 and −4.18, while the εNd(t) values of bastnäsite and xenotime ranged from −9.57 to −6.49 and from −11.13 to −6.28, respectively. These contrasting geochemical and isotopic signatures suggest that the Huanglongpu REE mineralization occurred over multiple magmatic-hydrothermal events and that the ore-forming material was unlikely to have stemmed from a single enriched mantle (EMI) source. The early REE mineralization stage (219.4 Ma) was closely associated with carbonatite-related Mo mineralization, both of which were products of magmatic mineralization during the crystallization of the host carbonatite emplaced in an extensional environment after the Late Triassic collision. The ore-related magmas may have originated from a hybrid source composed of EMI and partial melting of the lower crust. In contrast, due to the extensive Yanshanian magmatism which could provide massive heat, the later REE mineralization stage (145.9–142.6 Ma) in the Huanglongpu deposit was likely driven by the reactivation and recrystallization of early-formed REE minerals within the host carbonatites, hence representing a hydrothermal redistribution of the primary magmatic ore.