Background & aims
                  Infertility has been increasing among Iranian couples. Some epidemiological studies have reported a relationship between infertility and lifestyle patterns, including dietary habits. Our objective was to evaluate the relationship between sperm parameters and the intake of dietary fatty acids and minerals among Iranian infertile men.
               
                  Methods
                  This cross-sectional was performed on 400 newly diagnosed infertile men at Yazd Reproductive Sciences Institute from July to December 2019. Men whose infertility was confirmed by an andrologist based on the World Health Organization (WHO) criteria were selected. They delivered a semen sample and answered a 168-item semi-quantitative food frequency questionnaire. All data were analyzed using SPSS and STATA software. A p-value of less than 0.5 was considered significant.
               
                  Results
                  In the adjusted model, a significant negative association between sperm motility and the 3rd quartile (Q) of poly-unsaturated fatty acids compared to the 1st quartile) P = 0.02). Also, in the adjusted model, total mobility was significantly increased in the second, third and last quartiles of omega-3 fatty acids compared to the first quartile (P < 0.001, P = 0.02, P < 0.001, respectively). Furthermore, omega-6 fatty acid intake in the last quartile were positively associated with sperm motility (P = 0.01). Moreover, there was a significant association between omega-3 fatty acid intake in the second, third, and last quartiles and sperm normal morphology (P = 0.003, P = 0.018, and P = 0.005, respectively) compared with the first quartile. Further, we observed a significant association between omega-6 fatty acid intake and sperm normal morphology in the last quartile compared with the reference quartile (P = 0.04). Also, the findings showed a significant negative association between the second quartile of sodium and calcium intake and sperm volume compared with the first quartile (P = 0.04, for both) in the adjusted model.
               
                  Conclusions
                  We concluded that dietary polyunsaturated fatty acid, sodium, and calcium intake are related to sperm morphology, volume, and total motility in Iranian infertile men. However, more research is needed to confirm these relationships and provide evidence to exert these findings into clinical practice.