The Zhu’nuo ore-cluster district in the western Gangdese belt, southern Tibet, is characterized by a significant Cu geochemical anomaly, where the Zhu’nuo super-large porphyry Cu deposit (PCD) was discovered by stream sediment geochemical method. However, due to the extended coverage of volcanic rocks of the Linzizong group and the large area of ore-forming element anomalies, it is quite difficult to locate the concealed PCDs only by geochemical method. Therefore, the application of new technical methods is urgently needed to guide the exploration breakthroughs in the Zhu’nuo district. Recently, our studies have shown that the wavelength variation of diagnostic absorption peaks of alteration minerals measured by shortwave infrared (SWIR) spectrometry is closely related to the mineralization temperature in the Zhu’nuo PCD, which can be footprints to trace the hydrothermal and/or mineralization (H/M) centers of porphyry ore systems. Hence, we carried out SWIR studies in the Luobuzhen-Cimabanshuo areas with high Cu geochemical anomaly. In this study, sixteen alteration minerals were identified by SWIR, consisting mainly of white mica, chlorite, epidote, and kaolinite. Among them, the white mica and chlorite were widely distributed in the study area, and the Al-OH wavelength position of white mica (∼2200 nm; Pos2200) and Fe-OH wavelength position of chlorite (∼2250 nm; Pos2250) varied between 2191–2219 nm and 2239–2260 nm, respectively. Moreover, there is an increasing trend of Pos2200 from porphyry center to periphery, whereas Pos2250 shows the opposite tendency. When combined with geochemical anomalies of stream sediments and geological characteristics and SWIR features in the Zhu’nuo PCD in study area, three potential H/M centers, namely Cimabanshuo, South Luobuzhen and Ya’nuri, were determined, which are dominated by short wave anomalies (Pos2200, 2191–2206 nm; Pos2350, 2243–2250 nm). Significantly, we showed that the Dongshibu-Hongshan-Luobuzhen may belong to the same porphyry system by SWIR. And SWIR implies that the true center is located in South Luobuzhen (H/M II), which has great prospecting potential in its depth, rather than the previously recognized Dongshibu Cu prospect delineated by stream sediment data. We found that the Dongshibu Cu prospect does not show any alteration information associated with porphyry mineralization as reflected by SWIR, consistent with the barren Cu results from the late drilling validation. This decoupling may be caused by the long-term migration and weathering of stream sediment samples, during which the obtained geochemical anomaly do not represent their in-situ information. Therefore, caution must be taken when using stream sediment data to delineate prospecting targets. Instead, SWIR is a potentially powerful vectoring tool to aid exploration for porphyry systems, especially in the western regions where the level of prospecting work is extremely low.