Mineralization in the Earth's crust can be regarded as a singular process resulting in large amounts of mass accumulation and element enrichment over short time or space scales. The elemental concentrations modeled by fractals and multifractals show self-similarity and scale-invariant properties. We take the view that fluid-pressure variations in response to earthquakes or fault rupture are primarily responsible for changes in solubility and trigger transient physical and chemical variations in ore-forming fluids that enhance the mineralization process. Based on this general concept, we investigated mineral precipitation processes driven by rapid fluid pressure reductions by coupling mineralization to a cellular automaton model to reveal the nonlinear mechanism of the orogenic gold mineralization process using simulation. In the model, fluid pressure can increase to the rock failure condition, which was set as lithostatic pressure at a depth of 10 km (270 MPa), due to either porosity reduction or dehydration reactions. Rapid drops in pressure resulting from fault rupture or local hydrofracture may induce repeated gold precipitation. The geochemical patterns generated by the model evolve from depletion to enrichment patterns, and from spatially random to spatially clustered structures quantified by multifractal models and geostatistics. Results show how metal elements self-organize to form high metal concentration patterns displaying self-similarity and scale-invariance. These transitions are attributed to the growth and coalescence of sub-networks with different fluid pressures up to the percolation threshold, resulting in a wide range of fluid pressure reductions and gold precipitation in the form of clusters. The results suggest that cyclic evolution of fluid pressure and its effects on gold precipitation systems can effectively mimic the repeated mineralization superposition process, and generate complex geochemical patterns characterized by a multifractal model. The nonlinear behavior exhibits scale-invariance and self-organized critical threshold, where mineral phase separations result from fluid pressure reductions associated with fault failure.