Silicate minerals extracted by dried herbs are broadly used for the determination of food products that are sterilized by means of radiation. At the same time, it is necessary to calculate the applied sterilization dose for these products, since there are certain pre-defined dose limits for the variant food categories.
                  In addition, researchers seek for materials that can be used in retrospective/accidental dosimetry, in the cases that there is no available data from personal dosimeters. In this perspective, dried oregano is used worldwide and is a popular herb for most households.
                  The purpose of this study is twofold; the evaluation of the extracted minerals for the assessment of the post-sterilization dose and the estimation of the accidental dose that certain population might have been exposed to. In order to succeed this purpose, a thorough characterization of the thermoluminescence (TL) properties of the silicate minerals was conducted. Two dose ranges were studied, for the two different applications mentioned above, namely a range between 0.050 and 4 kGy and a range between 1 and 20 Gy.
               
                  Results
                  Data reveal that the glow curve of the silicate minerals has at least three overlapping peaks in the dosimetric spectrum. The material exhibits strong sensitization effects, which can be suppressed by including a sensitization correction within the applied protocols. All three peaks demonstrate linear dose response for doses up to 20 Gy, while for the range of 0.050 Gy–4 kGy a saturation curve is used for the fitting.
                  An unknown delivered dose is successfully estimated by a dose recovery test, when the applied dose belongs to the lower dose range. The stability of the signal with respect to the storage time differs for the three peaks and the remaining signal is appreciable for 1 month post irradiation.
                  Finally, a Computerized Curve Deconvolution Analysis (CCDA) was conducted, based on the equations of the general order kinetics. The TL glow curves of all doses were successfully deconvoluted using eight discrete-energy curves and the corresponding kinetic parameters were also calculated.
                  The findings of the present study support the potential use of the silicate minerals, extracted by dried oregano for accidental/retrospective dosimetric applications.