Objective
                  The aim of this work was to report the prevalence of computed tomography (CT)-detected intra-articular mineralization.
               
                  Design
                  We included participants from the Multicenter Osteoarthritis (MOST) Study. At the 12th year visit of the MOST study, bilateral knee CTs were first obtained. All participants also had posteroanterior and lateral radiographs of bilateral knees and completed standard questionnaires. Knee radiographs were assessed for Kellgren & Lawrence grade (KLG) and radiographic evidence of intra-articular mineralization. CT images were scored using the Boston University Calcium Knee Score (BUCKS) for cartilage, menisci, ligaments, capsule, and vasculature. Prevalence of intra-articular mineralization was computed for the total sample, and stratified by age, sex, race, Body Mass Index (BMI), presence of frequent knee pain, and KLG. We also determined distribution of mineralization in the cartilage and meniscus, and co-localization.
               
                  Results
                  4140 bilateral knees from 2070 participants were included (56.7% female, mean age 61.1 years, mean BMI: 28.8 kg/m2). On radiographs 240 knees (5.8%) had intraarticular mineralization, while CT-detected mineralization was present in 9.8% of knees. Prevalence of hyaline articular and meniscus mineralization increased with age and KL grade, and was similar by sex, BMI categories, and comparable in subjects with and without frequent knee pain. Mineralization tended to be ubiquitous in the joint, most commonly involving all three (medial/lateral tibiofemoral and patellofemoral) compartments (3.1%), while the patellofemoral compartment was the most involved compartment in isolation (1.4%).
               
                  Conclusions
                  CT of the knee provides greater visualization of intra-articular mineralization than radiographs and allows better localization of the crystal deposition within the joint. Further studies should focus on the co-localization of intra-articular crystal deposition and corresponding magnetic resonance imaging (MRI)-features of knee osteoarthritis (OA).