The Alubaogeshan intrusion, consisting of porphyritic monzogranite in the central part and syenogranite porphyry in the edge, is genetically related to the Maodeng–Xiaogushan Sn–polymetallic deposit. This paper aims to investigate the genetic link between these two granite phases and the relationship between magma evolution and Sn mineralization. LA-ICP-MS zircon U–Pb dating of the porphyritic monzogranite and syenogranite porphyry yielded ages of 134 ± 1.0 Ma and 133 ± 0.5 Ma, respectively. The Alubaogeshan intrusion has high SiO2 and total alkali (Na2O + K2O) contents, with low Al2O3, Fe2O3, FeO, and MgO contents, belonging to high-K calc-alkaline metaluminous–weakly peraluminous granites. Chondrite-normalized rare earth element (REE) patterns are characterized by light REE enrichment and heavy REE depletion, with extremely negative Eu anomalies. In addition, the intrusion was also enriched in Rb, Th, U, K, Zr, Hf, and light REE and strongly depleted in Ba, Sr, P, and Ti. Mineralogical and geochemical characteristics, together with high zircon saturation temperature, indicate that the Alubaogeshan intrusion belongs to transitional I–A2-type granites. Compared with the porphyritic monzogranite, the syenogranite porphyry reveals higher SiO2 content and lower TiO2, Al2O3, Fe2O3, FeO, CaO, MgO, and P2O5 contents, with more obvious negative anomalies of Eu, Ba, Sr, P, and Ti. The temporal and spatial relationship and geochemical characteristics of the two rocks indicate that the syenogranite porphyry evolved from the porphyritic monzogranite. The modeling results show that the fractional crystallization of amphibole, plagioclase, K-feldspar, biotite, apatite, monazite, and allanite occurred during the magma evolution. The granitic magma differentiation plays a key role in the formation of the Maodeng–Xiaogushan Sn–polymetallic deposit. The ε
                     Hf(t) values of zircon range from 2.58 to 7.08, and the two-stage Hf model ages range from 619 Ma to 850 Ma, implying that the Alubaogeshan intrusion was predominantly derived from partial melting of a Neoproterozoic juvenile crust. The TE1,3 values of the ore-related granites from W–(Sn) deposits are generally higher than 1.1, suggesting that fluid–melt interaction is crucial for W mineralization. The degree of magmatic evolution is one of the controlling factors for the size of Sn–polymetallic deposits in the southern Great Xing′an Range.