We document the newly discovered Shuvuutai Molybdenum (Mo) porphyry deposit located in the central-east Mongolian volcanic/-plutonic belt of the southern Altaids. The deposit is characterized by quartz vein- and veinlet-disseminated-type Mo ore bodies mainly hosted in a Late Permian-Early Triassic granitic intrusion. In this study, we provide a detailed study that integrates detailed geology with petrographic, mineralogic, geochemical, and geochronologic date to determine the tectonic setting of the deposit. Fluid inclusion analysis is used to reconstruct the fluid evolution history of the Shuvuutai Mo mineralization system and to understand the origin of the deposit. The ore bodies occur mainly as veins, lenses, and pods in positions from inner intrusions through contact zones to the host rocks distal to causative intrusions. The host rocks are variable in lithology, including granites, porphyries, volcanic breccias and tuffs, and sedimentary rocks. Outward from ore bodies to host rocks, the wall rock alteration is zoned from potassic (K-feldspar-quartz-mica), through phyllic (quartz-sericite-chlorite-epidote), to propylitic or argillic alterations. Two samples from porphyry stock intrusions at Shuvuutai were selected for U–Pb zircon geochronology and trace element composition studies, including the ore-hosting monzodiorite porphyry and quartz syenite porphyry. Our new ages are consistent with, or slightly postdate published zircon U-Pb ages of early phase of monzodiorite porphyry (268–232 Ma) and the main phase of quartz syenite porphyry (251.6 ± 1.7 Ma). Hydrothermal mineralization generally includes four stages, from early to late, represented by (1) potassic feldspar-quartz veins or veinlets, (2) quartz-molybdenite stockworks, (3) quartz-sulfide stockworks, and (4) quartz ± carbonate veins or veinlets. The ore-forming fluids were initially magmatic in origin and show high-temperature and high-salinity, containing daughter mineral and CO2-bearing fluid inclusions; and eventually evolved to low-temperature, low-pressure, low-salinity and CO2-poor meteoric water. S isotopic compositions of sulfides from the Shuvuutai Mo porphyry deposit indicate that the source of the ore-forming material was derived from the felsic magma. The Central-Eastern Mongolian volcanic-plutonic belt continues from Mongolia into northeast China, where similar Mo deposits are not yet recognized, suggesting that a new exploration strategy, based on the characteristics and history of the Shuvuutai discovery, is needed for the Chinese segment of the Altaids.