Mechanical loading contributes to bone development, growth, and metabolism. However, the mechanisms underlying long bone mineralization via changes in loading during the growth period are unclear. The aim of the present study was to investigate the regulatory mechanisms underlying endochondral ossification and endosteal mineralization by developing an ex vivo organ culture model with cyclic axial mechanical loads. The metacarpal bones of 3-week-old C57BL/6 mice were exposed to mechanical loading (0, 7.8, and 78 mN) for 1 h/day for 4 days. Histomorphometry revealed that axial mechanical loading regulated the thickness of the calcified zone in the growth plate and endosteal mineralization in the diaphysis in a load-dependent manner. Mechanical loading also resulted in load-dependent upregulation of endochondral ossification and bone mineralization-related genes, including bone morphogenetic protein 2 (Bmp2). Recombinant human BMP-2 administration caused similar changes in tissue structures. Conversely, inhibition of the BMP-Smad pathway diminished the stimulatory effects of mechanical loading and BMP-2 administration, suggesting that the effects of mechanical loading may be exerted through activation of the BMP-Smad pathway with the results of gene ontology and pathway analyses. Mechanical loading increased alkaline phosphatase activity and decreased carbonic anhydrase IX (Car9) mRNA expression, resulting in a significant pH increase in the culture supernatant. We hypothesize that, through activation of the BMP-Smad pathway, mechanical loading downregulates Car9, which may alkalize the local milieu, thereby inducing bone formation and long bone mineralization. Our results showed that cyclic axial mechanical loading increased endochondral ossification and endosteal mineralization in developing mouse long bones, which may have resulted from changes in the pH, ALP activity, and Pi/PPi of the extracellular environment. These findings advance our understanding of the regulation of mineralization mechanisms by mechanical loading mediated through activation of the BMP-Smad pathway.