Tamusu uranium deposit is located in Yingejing sag in the Bayingobi basin. A rift type structural slope zone developed northwest of the sag. Based on the study of the lithology, lithofacies, whole rock geochemistry, and fluid inclusion characteristics of the deposit, a paragenetic association sequence of altered minerals in the deposit was established, and the characteristics of the source, temperature, salinity, and evolution of the ore-forming fluid in the deposit were discussed. The stratigraphic assemblage structure of the lower member of the Bayingobi Formation (falling-stage system tract, lowstand system tract, and transgressive system tract) laid the foundation for uranium mineralization. The uranium mineralization period of ore deposit can be divided into three stages. The altered mineral assemblages of Stage 1 are mainly composed of hematite, dolomite, iron-bearing dolomite, ankerite, fluorite, euhedral pyrite, and metal sulfide. Stage 2 altered mineral assemblages are dominated by limonite, euhedral-subhedral pyrite, and gypsum. The altered mineral assemblages of Stage 3 are mainly composed of layered gypsum, celestite, and barite. The early uranium ore-forming fluid mainly originated from the deep basin and percolated along the fault and sand body of the lowstand system tract to form uranium orebodies. The fluid inclusion temperature of ore-forming fluid was 211–140 ℃, and the salinity was 4.49%–16.24%. The temperature gradually decreased as the ore-forming fluid evolved, and CO2 was released, causing dolomite, calcite, fluorite, and other minerals to precipitate in the sandstone pores. The late ore-forming fluid mainly originated from supergene oxygen water, which migrated into the basin along the erosion window at the edge of the sag. The fluid inclusion temperature of ore-forming fluid was 100–130 ℃, the salinity was 2.24%–7.02%, and the average was 4.49%. In the late stage of the supergene fluid, the fluid inclusion temperature was 55–79 ℃, and the salinity was 4.96%–5.11%. The ore-forming fluid of the deposit gradually decreased in temperature from the early stage to the late stage of mineralization. In addition, the salinity gradually evolved from high in the early stage to low and evolved to high in the late stage. Sulfophile, lithophile, and rare earth elements precipitated first in the process of fluid action, followed by U, and Sc increased with the U content. A uranium metallogenic model of the deposit was established based on the relationship between the structural, lithology, mineralization alteration, fluid evolution, and uranium mineralization of the basin.