Biomineralization, a bio-organism controlled mineral formation process, plays an important role in linking biological organisms and mineral materials in nature. Inspired by biomineralization, biomimetic mineralization is used as a bridge tool to integrate biological organisms and functional materials together, which can be beneficial for the development of diversified functional organism-material hybrids. In this review, recent progresses on the techniques of biomimetic mineralization for organism-material combinations are summarized and discussed. Based upon these techniques, the preparations and applications of virus-, prokaryotes-, and eukaryotes-material hybrids have been presented and they demonstrate the great potentials in the fields of vaccine improvement, cell protection, energy production, environmental and biomedical treatments, etc. We suggest that more researches about functional organism and material combination with more biocompatible techniques should be developed to improve the design and applications of specific organism-material hybrids. These rationally designed organism-material hybrids will shed light on the production of “live materials” with more advanced functions in future.
               
                  Statement of Significance
                  This review summaries the recent attempts on improving biological organisms by their integrations with functional materials, which can be achieved by biomimetic mineralization as the combination tool. The integrated materials, as the artificial shells or organelles, confer diversified functions on the enclosed organisms. The successful constructions of various virus-, prokaryotes-, and eukaryotes-material hybrids have demonstrated the great potentials of the material incorporation strategy in vaccine development, cancer treatment, biological photosynthesis and environment protection etc. The suggested challenges and perspectives indicate more inspirations for the future development of organism-material hybrids.