Fluorocarbonates and monazite are common economic REE minerals in carbonatite-related REE deposits, such as the largest known REE deposit at Bayan Obo, China. The geochemical evolution of REE minerals is a sensitive and effective indicator of delicate REE mineralization processes. In this study, the fluorocarbonates and monazites were classified into three generations, corresponding to three REE mineralizing stages. The first generation (Gen-1) of bastnäsite and monazite are generally characterized by elevated La/Ce, La/Nd and La/Lu ratios, with right-declining chondrite normalized REE distribution patterns. They have low Th and radiogenic Sr content, with forming age of about 1.3 Ga and εNd(t) around 0, indicating a primary origin and orthomagmatic crystallization from carbonatite melts. The second generation (Gen-2) of REE minerals, formed at 1.25–1.2 Ga, normally constitute banded aggregates with associated hydrothermal gangue minerals (fluorite, aegirine, sodium amphibole etc.). The Gen-2 REE minerals are featured by moderate-low La/Ce, La/Nd, La/Lu ratios but slightly elevated 87Sr/86Sr0 ratios, indicating a Mesoproterozoic hydrothermal origin related to carbonatitic fluids. Gen-2 bastnäsite and monazite precipitated earlier in low-fluid/rock-ratio environment with right-declining LREE distribution patterns, while the subsequent Gen-2 parisite and huanghoite display convex LREE patterns and higher OH/F ratios, indicative of relative La-depletion and increased ambient fluid/rock ratios during progressive hydrothermal REE mineralization. The third generation (Gen-3) of REE minerals are generally megacrysts in the vein-type ores formed in the early Paleozoic REE mineralization stage (470–420 Ma). The Gen-3 REE minerals are typified by significantly variable REE, Sr and Nd isotopic components, indicating extensive hydrothermal metasomatism and intense contamination of crustal material. Induced by activities of early Paleozoic subduction-related fluids, Gen-3 REE minerals were formed through local REE re-enrichment within the ore-hosting dolomite, rather than by introduction of REE from external sources. In this case study, a comprehensive model of the delicate REE mineralization processes of the giant Bayan Obo REE-Nb-Fe deposit has been established. This study highlights the great potential of fluorocarbonates and monazites widely distributed in carbonatite-related REE deposits as universal geochemical indicators of late-stage evolution of carbonatite and delicate magmatic-hydrothermal REE mineralization processes.