Collagen membranes crosslinked with high molecular weight polyacrylic acid (HPAA) are capable of self-mineralization via in situ intrafibrillar mineralization. These HPAA-crosslinked collagen membranes (HCM) have been shown to promote osteogenic differentiation of mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs) and enhance bone regeneration in vivo. Nevertheless, the biological triggers involved in those processes and the associated mechanisms are not known. Here, we identified the contribution of mitochondrial dynamics in HCM-mediated osteogenic differentiation of MSCs. Mitochondriogenesis markers were significantly upregulated when MSCs were cultured on HCM, committing the MSCs to osteogenic differentiation. The mitochondria fused to form an interconnected mitochondrial network in response to the high energy requirements. Mitochondrial fission in MSCs was also triggered by HCM; fission slightly declined at 14 days to restore the equilibrium in mitochondrial dynamics. Mitophagy, another event that regulates mitochondrial dynamics, occurred actively to remove dysfunctioned mitochondria and isolate damaged mitochondria from the rest of network. The mitophagy level of MSCs was significantly elevated in the presence of HCM. Taken together, the present findings indicate that upregulation of mitochondrial dynamics via mitochondriogenesis, fusion, fission and mitophagy is responsible for HCM-mediated osteogenic differentiation of MSCs.
               
                  Statement of significance
                  High molecular weight polyacrylic acid (HPAA)-crosslinked collagen membrane (HCM) was found to promote in-situ bone regeneration because of it can stimulate osteogenic differentiation of mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs). Nevertheless, the biological triggers involved in those processes and associated mechanisms are not known. This study identifies that activation of mitochondrial dynamics is centrally involved in HCM-mediated osteogenic differentiation of MSCs. The HCM accelerates mitochondriogenesis and regulates homeostasis of the mitochondrial network in response to the increased energy demand for osteogenic differentiation. Concomitantly, mitophagy actively occurs to remove dysfunctioned mitochondria from the rest of the mitochondrial network. Identification of the involvement of mitophagy in HCM-mediated osteogenic differentiation of MSCs opens new vistas in the application of biomimetic mineralization in bone tissue regeneration.