Background
                  Micronutrients have a well-established role in the productive and reproductive health of animals, and there are many proven benefits of supplementing them in the diet of bulls or semen extender per se. Trace minerals have a key role in regulating male fertility and sperm function.
               
                  Methodology
                  Twelve crossbred bulls were divided into two groups (n = 6): T1 
                     (control) and T2, (BullTraMin) and given diets with or without supranutritional supplementation of the novel trace mineral (BullTraMin), respectively. The experiment was conducted for 120 days and the effects on nutrient utilization, immuno-endocrine status, sexual behaviour and semen characteristics were investigated.
               
                  Results and conclusion
                  Results showed that body weight, dry matter intake, and nutrient digestibility were not affected by dietary supplementation with BullTraMin. Testosterone levels were increased (p < 0.05), while thyroxine hormone concentrations were unaffected (p < 0.05) in control (T1) and supplemented (T2) groups. Levels of trace minerals (Zn, Cu, and I) were improved in the blood and seminal plasma (p < 0.05) of the T2 group, while levels of Cr and Mn were increased only in the blood plasma. Sperm functions viz., viability, membrane integrity, acrosome integrity, motility, and mitochondrial membrane potential were improved (p < 0.05) due to BullTraMin supplementation. Furthermore, lipid peroxidation and membrane scrambling which impair the cryopreservilibity of spermatozoa, were reduced (p < 0.05) in T2 group. Blood antioxidant status (total antioxidant activity, superoxide dismutase and glutathione peroxidase levels) was improved (p < 0.05) in T2 group. Sexual behaviour was also improved (p < 0.05) in BullTraMin-supplemented group. Hence, it can be concluded that BullTraMin supplementation at a dose rate of 889 mg/kg diet (dry matter intake) is beneficial in improving hormonal status, antioxidant status, sexual behaviour and semen quality.