In the Proterozoic tungsten belts of Balda and Motiya in western India, tungsten mineralization is hosted in tourmaline-bearing quartz veins intrusive into pelitic schists and granites. Tourmaline is a ubiquitous phase in all rock types, and in this study, we use its major, trace element and B-isotope composition to constrain the nature of the tungsten (W)-bearing hydrothermal fluid and the processes involved in the precipitation of wolframite. We have also reconstructed the compositions of the W-precipitating fluids from mineral-fluid trace element partition coefficients that were extrapolated using the Lattice Strain Model. The tourmalines from both belts are of schorl composition and have high alkali, low Ca content, and moderate X-site vacancies. High Li, Mn, Zn, and Sn in the fluid in Motiya is suggestive of relatively saline fluid possibly derived from a granitic source. The high V/Sc ratios of tourmalines in the mineralized veins and wall-rock tourmalinites indicate an important role of biotite dissolution and fluid-rock interaction that contributed Fe–Mn for the precipitation of tourmaline and wolframite. The tourmalines in the mineralized veins at Balda (δ11Btur = −10.9 ± 0.7‰, 2σ; n = 10) and those in the associated granites (δ11Btur = −11.5 ± 0.7‰, 2σ; n = 6) have similar B-isotope composition, while those of the associated topaz granites and pegmatites (−13.9 ± 0.7‰, 2σ; n = 19) are isotopically lighter than the granites. The B-isotopic variation in the granite-pegmatite-vein system can be explained by fluid exsolution with the mineralized vein forming from exsolved fluid and the topaz-bearing granites and the pegmatites crystallizing from the residual melts. The δ11B of the mineralizing fluid is estimated to be ca. −7.4‰ at Balda and ca. −7.6‰ at Motiya, and were possibly derived from granites, consistent with extensive tourmalinization and muscovitization of the adjacent wall rocks, and high concentration of elements such as F, Li, B, Sn, Mn in the tourmalines and the reconstructed fluid. The chemistry and B-isotope composition of tourmalines in both the belts support the hypothesis that W-bearing hydrothermal fluid was primarily derived from a fractionated granitic source, and that precipitation of wolframite and tourmaline involved interaction of the granitic fluid with surrounding pelitic rocks.