Animals widely use minerals and organic components to construct biomaterials with excellent properties, such as teeth, bones, molluscan shells and eggshells. The larvae of the oriental moth, Monema (Cnidocampa) flavescens Walker, secrete silk proteins that combine closely with calcareous minerals to construct a hard cocoon, which is completely different from the mineral-free Bombyx mori cocoon. The cocoons of oriental moths are likely to be the hardest among the cocoons constructed by insect species. The cocoons of oriental moths were found to be mainly composed of calcium oxalates and Asx/Ser/Gly-rich cocoon proteins, but the types of calcium oxalates and cocoon proteins remain to be elucidated. In this study, we provide an in-depth explanation of the inorganic and organic components in the oriental moth cocoon. Microscopy and imaging technologies revealed that the cocoon is composed of mineral crystals, silk fibers and other organic matter. X-ray diffraction and infrared spectral analyses showed that the mineral crystals in the oriental moth cocoon were mainly CaC2H2O4·H2O. ICP-OES analysis suggested that the mineral crystals in the cocoons were mainly CaC2H2O4·H2O. LC-MS/MS-based proteomics allowed us to identify 467 proteins from the oriental moth cocoon, including 252 uncharacterized proteins, 87 enzymes, 36 small molecule binding proteins, and 5 silk proteins. Among the uncharacterized proteins, 25 of which were Asn-rich proteins because they contained a high proportion of Asn residues (19.1%–41.4%). Among the top 20 cocoon proteins with the highest abundance, 9 of which were Asn-rich proteins. The qPCR was used to investigate the expression patterns of the major cocoon protein-coding genes. Three fibroins and three Asn-rich proteins were expressed only in the silk gland but not in other tissues. The expression of Asn-rich proteins in the silk gland gradually increased from the anterior silk gland to the posterior silk gland. These findings provide important references for understanding the formation mechanism and mechanical properties of mineralized hard cocoons constructed by oriental moths.