The Middle Jurassic coal seams located in the southern Ordos Basin display notably high concentrations of barium (Ba) and strontium (Sr). To acquire a comprehensive understanding of the source and occurrence of the elevated contents of Ba- and Sr-bearing minerals and their formation mechanism in the coal, a suite of petrological, mineralogical, and geochemical analyses was conducted on the Middle Jurassic coals of the Gaojiapu mine (No. 4 Coal) from the Binchang mining area, using optical microscopy, field emission-scanning electron microscopy, X-ray diffraction, X-ray fluorescence, and inductively coupled plasma mass spectrometry. The results indicate that the No. 4 Coal is a high volatile B bituminous coal, which is characterized by low ash, medium sulfur, and high inertinite contents. The modes of occurrence of minerals identified in the coal, including calcite, dolomite, pyrite, quartz, kaolinite, anatase, barite, and celestine, indicate that the No. 4 Coal may have been subjected to multiple stages of solutions injection. Barium and Sr in the investigated coals are significantly enriched, exhibiting maximum values of 19738 μg/g and 9932 μg/g, respectively, while concentrations of other trace elements are generally depleted. Barite and celestine, generally coexisting with carbonate minerals, commonly occur as cell- and fracture-fillings. Furthermore, the strong correlation coefficients (r) for Ba vs. Ca + Mg and Sr vs. Ca + Mg (0.78 and 0.61, respectively) indicate that most barite and celestine have a close association with carbonate minerals of epigenetic origin. The highly elevated concentrations of Ba and Sr are thought to be primarily derived from solutions leaching barite deposits developed in the Qinling Orogenic Belt, which is located in the south of the Ordos Basin. When mapped spatially, the distributions of Ba and Sr concentrations are fan-shaped, decreasing from the NW to the SE of the mining area. Meteoric water containing dissolved CO2 induced partial dissolution of carbonate rocks, and during this process, selected metal ions (e.g., Ca2+, Mg2+, Al3+, Si2+, Fe2+, Ba2+, and Sr2+) were redistributed and subsequently migrated along fracture zones to the coal seam. The fracture systems and abundant cavities within inertinite in the coal provided sufficient space and conduits for solutions migration.