Contrasting mineral assemblages have been frequently found in Neoproterozoic-lower Paleozoic carbonate reservoirs along high-angle faults in the Tarim Basin. However, the reason for the change in mineral types over time is poorly constrained. Field and petrographic observations, fluid inclusion microthermometry, rare earth element (REE) and C, O and Sr isotope analyses are used to constrain the changes in water chemistry and fluid flow during the development of the mineral assemblages. During the Middle Devonian-early Carboniferous, the flux of hydrothermal fluids from Neoproterozoic sandstone layers, linked to the activity of NE–SW-trending strike-slip faults, resulted in extensive silicification. The silica-bearing fluids were hot (128.1–209.4 °C), saline (17.1–21 wt% NaCl eq.) and enriched in radiogenic strontium and showed no link to large-scale petroleum migration. During the Permian, a regional thermal anomaly induced the expulsion of hydrocarbon-bearing hydrothermal fluids from lower Cambrian shales, where Mg2+, 87Sr and F− were derived via the transformation and leaching of clay minerals. A more significant in situ source of Mg2+ was the dolostone interval, as the migrating fluids contributed to the precipitation of saddle dolomite with high T
                     h values (82–176.4 °C) and salinities (15–21.4 wt% NaCl eq.), negative δ18O values and radiogenic Sr compositions. The succession of saddle dolomite followed by fluorite with similar T
                     h values, salinities and 87Sr/86Sr ratios indicates a Mg2+ deficit and increased dissolved calcium activity in the same parent fluid system, which facilitated the breakdown of MgF− and combination of Ca2+ and F−. Subsequently, cooling and desalination of the hydrothermal fluids occurred, which was induced by the infiltration and mixing of meteoric water related to the compression and uplift of the north-western flank of the Tarim block. These processes resulted in the precipitation of milky white calcite (Cal 1) with similar oxygen and strontium isotope compositions but wider ranges of T
                     h (82.1–154 °C) and salinity (3.4–16.9 wt% NaCl eq.) than those of the saddle dolomite and fluorite. The lateral flow of hydrothermal fluids through suitable layers, such as bed interfaces, permeable aquifers and karstic units, facilitated the formation of stratabound mineral deposits away from the feeding faults. The termination of hydrothermal mineralization was marked by the precipitation of brown calcite (Cal 2), whose meteoric origin has been proven by the combination of its reddish staining, oscillatory luminescent zonation and low δ18O values. This integrated study approach improves the understanding of the diversity of exotic mineral assemblages in carbonate hosts and the evolution and migration of hydrothermal fluids connected to late Paleozoic tectonism.