Objective
                  Human umbilical cord perivascular cells (HUCPVCs) are derived from the human umbilical cord perivascular tissue and are expected to replace mesenchymal stromal cells in the future. We investigated the synergistic effects of fibroblast growth factor 2 (FGF-2) and transforming growth factor-beta 1 (TGF-β1) on HUCPVC mineralization.
               
                  Design
                  We prepared HUCPVCs with (FGF(+)HUCPVCs) or without FGF-2 (FGF(-)HUCPVCs) in the presence of activated vitamin D3, a bone morphogenic protein inhibitor, and TGF-β1. We examined the cell proliferative capacity, expression of various hard tissue-forming cell gene markers, and mineralization induction ability and identified the crystalline phases of the mineralized nodules.
               
                  Results
                  FGF(+)HUCPVCs exhibited higher intracellular alkaline phosphatase (ALP) gene expression and ALP activity, and their cell proliferation rate was higher than that of FGF(-)HUCPVCs. The expression levels of osteoblast marker genes increased in FGF(+)HUCPVCs, whereas those of elastic fiber and muscle cell markers increased in FGF(-)HUCPVCs. The expression of genes related to matrix vesicle-mediated mineralization was increased in FGF(+)HUCPVCs. While FGF(-)HUCPVCs displayed myofibroblast-like properties and could not induce mineralization, FGF(+)HUCPVCs demonstrated the ability to produce mineralized nodules. The resulting mineralized nodules consisted of hydroxyapatite as the major phase and minor amounts of octacalcium phosphate. The mineralized nodules exhibited the morphological characteristics of bone hydroxyapatite, composed of fibrous hydroxyapatite nanorods and polycrystalline sheets.
               
                  Conclusion
                  We found that FGF-2 synergizes with TGF-β1 and is a key factor in the differentiation of HUCPVCs into osteoblast-like cells. Thus, HUCPVCs can potentially serve as a new stem cell source for future bone regeneration and dental treatments.