A deeper understanding of the mechanisms by which geological factors (depositional environment and tectonic evolution) control the occurrence of coalbed methane (CBM) is important for the utilization of CBM resources via surface-drilled wells and the elimination of coal-methane outbursts, the latter of which is a key issue for coal mine safety. Based on drill core data, high-pressure isothermal adsorption experiments, scanning electron microscopy experiments, mercury intrusion porosimetry, and X-ray diffraction experiments, the impact of the depositional environment and tectonic evolution on CBM occurrence of the II-1 coal seam of the Shanxi Formation in West Henan was analyzed. Results showed that the depositional environment led to the epigenetic erosion of tidal flat coal-accumulating structures by shallow-delta distributary channel strata. This resulted in the replacement of the original mudstone-sandy mudstone coal seam immediate roof with fine-to-medium grained sandstones, reducing methane storage capacity. Epigenetic erosion by the depositional environment also increased coal body ash content (from 6.9% to 21.4%) and mineral content, filling the cleat system and reducing porosity, reducing methane storage capacity. The maximum methane adsorption capacity of the coal body reduced from 35.7 cm3/g to 30.30 cm3/g, and Langmuir pressure decreased from 1.39 MPa to 0.909 MPa. Hence, the methane adsorption capacity of the coal body decreased while its capacity for methane desorption increased. Owing to the tectonic evolution of West Henan, tectonically deformed coal is common; as it evolves from primary cataclastic coal to granulitic coal, the angle of the diffraction peak increases, d002
                      decreases, and La, Lc, and Nc increase; these traits are generally consistent with dynamic metamorphism. This is accompanied by increases in the total pore volume and specific surface area of the coal body, further increasing the capacity for methane storage. Increases in micropore volume and specific surface area also increase the ability of the coal body to adsorb methane.