Rare Earth Element (REE) mineralization at Debert Lake (Nova Scotia, Canada) is hosted by the anorogenic Hart Lake-Byers Lake granites which are associated with the Late Devonian to Early Carboniferous Wentworth plutonic complex in the Cobequid Highlands. Mineralized zones contain up to 1.2 wt% REE2O3, 3.4 wt% ZrO2, and 0.4 wt% Nb2O5 produced by multiple, separate mineralizing events. We use a multi-faceted approach combining whole-rock and mineral geochemistry, together with U-Pb radiometric dates to uncover complex formative processes and resolve the timing for REE mineralization.
                  Episodic mineralization yielded distinct REE assemblages including Nb-oxide (pyrochlore and fergusonite) phases, chevkinite, zircon, thorite, monazite, and titanite, formed during multiple magmatic-to-hydrothermal stages in the rare-metal bearing granites. Zircon, as a persistent phase of the REE assemblages, occurs with variable texture, morphology, and composition in all granites. Zircon grains, displaying intergranular to interstitial textures in REE rich granite, have spongy cores in which Y, Th, and Zr were redistributed by magmatic fluids. U-Pb dating of these zircons yields an age of 355 to 360 Ma, approximately coeval with igneous monazite crystallization, dated at 366 ± 5 Ma. These findings document a late-magmatic REE mineralization event. A subsequent pulse of post-magmatic hydrothermal mineralization associated with Zr-F-rich fluid complexes produced two other zircon populations, dated at ca. 309 and 318 Ma, with unusual habits and REE patterns that are interpreted to be of hydrothermal origin. Principal Component Analysis (PCA) separates zircon populations based on element concentrations and element associations. The LREE-rich hydrothermal zircon types with their distinct geochemical patterns revealed by PCA are characterized by the relative enrichment of either Na or Ca, reflecting differences in the composition of hydrothermal fluids driving sodic and calcic alteration processes, respectively