Heterogeneous photocatalysis represents a promising low-cost solution to the extensively spread problem of contaminated wastestreams. Photocatalytic (PC) reactions take place at a slow rate nonetheless. Efforts have focused on the improvement of PC reactors design and on the enhancement of the photocatalyst activity through various doping techniques. There have been some important contributions on the latter approach. The doping procedures often involve lengthy procedures that call for expensive dopants and high calcination temperatures and thus, hamper their use for large-scale application. Inexpensive techniques are needed to keep heterogeneous photocatalysis as a cost-effective alternative. Addition of iron (Fe), an environmentally friendly and highly abundant metal, can enhance the rates of PC mineralization of phenol and similar hydroxylated aromatics.
                  Phenol and its aromatic intermediates are first considered in this research in the absence of Fe cations (unpromoted PC reaction) to elucidate the overall phenol kinetic reaction network. Based on experimental observations, the unpromoted PC reaction of phenol is represented with a series–parallel reaction network incorporating all intermediate species and their interactions. Intermediate compounds include aromatics [ortho-dihydroxybenzene (o-DHB), para-dihydroxybenzene, and 1,4-benzoquinone (1,4-BQ)] and carboxylic acids (fumaric acid, maleic acid, oxalic acid, and formic acid).
                  An important research is reported in this chapter to analyze the influence of Fe cations on the oxidation and mineralization rates of phenol and other hydroxylated aromatics is reported. It is shown that at reaction conditions, 5ppm of Fe cations is the optimum iron concentration to maximize the oxidation and mineralization rates of phenol and its aromatic intermediates.
                  Furthermore, it is demonstrated that an overall series–parallel kinetic reaction network also describes the PC oxidation in the presence of 5ppm of Fe cations (Fe-assisted PC reaction). The proposed reaction network incorporates the same intermediate species as the unpromoted PC system with the model pollutant and intermediates concentration profiles varying significantly.
                  Additionally, two kinetic models (KM#1 and KM#2) that can be applied to both unpromoted PC and Fe-assisted PC systems are considered. Both models are validated and the parameters are estimated using the experimental data. The models fit the experimental data very well.