The biochar/persulfate (BC/PS) has been extensively applied in the degradation of organic contaminants in the aqueous solutions. However, much less work has been done on the degradation of organic contaminants in soil by BC/PS, especially on the unclear roles of soil active constituents in the degradation. This study was conducted to investigate the degradation of sulfamethoxazole (SMX) in two soils through PS oxidation activated by biochar. Biochar was produced via the pyrolysis of peanut shell at 400 °C and 700 °C, which was denoted as BC400 and BC700, respectively. Two soils used were red soil and paddy soil, mainly differing in iron minerals and organic matter. Both biochar promoted SMX degradation (42.6 %–90.7 %) in two soils, compared to PS alone (20.9 %–41.7 %). In BC400/PS system, the free radicals were the dominant reactive species for SMX degradation, while the electron transfer pathway played a vital role in the SMX degradation by BC700/PS. Higher SMX degradation was observed in red soil (41.7 %–97.8 %) than that in paddy soil (20.3 %–94.8 %), which was ascribed to the promotion of iron minerals in red soil yet the inhibition of organic matter in paddy soil. Specifically, the reaction between ≡Fe(III)/≡Fe(II) and PS on the surface of iron minerals in red soil generated more SO4
                     •− and •OH, resulting in the enhanced SMX degradation. However, the consumption of free radicals and suppression of electron transfer pathway by organic matter in paddy soil inhibited SMX degradation. As the comparative carbonaceous materials to biochar, graphite exerted no obvious degradation effect, whereas activated carbon exhibited the comparable promoting efficacy to BC700. Both biochar, especially BC700, significantly (p < 0.05) alleviated the adverse effects of PS treatment on wheat (Triticum aestivum L.) growth. Overall, this study demonstrates that biochar/persulfate was effective in SMX degradation in soil and the degradation was affected by soil iron minerals and organic matter, which should be paid more attention in the persulfate remediation of organic contaminated soils at a specific site.