Geochemical exploration data usually consists of a small number of labeled data (cells containing known deposits) and a large number of unlabeled data (cells containing none of known deposits). How to make full use of a small number of labeled data and a large number of unlabeled data to build a high-performance anomaly detection model for identifying mineralization anomalies from geochemical exploration data is a challenge faced by geochemical exploration practitioners. The graph inference algorithms including label propagation and label spreading can efficiently build high-performance semi-supervised classification models by learning from sparse labeled and abundant unlabeled data in machine learning. For this reason, the two graph inference algorithms were used to build the semi-supervised classification models to detect Fe-mineralization anomalies from stream sediment survey data of 1: 50,000 scale in the Chengde area (Hebei Province, China). The label propagation model and label spreading model were compared with the Gaussian mixture model and logistic regression model in detecting Fe-mineralization anomalies. The data processing time of the label propagation algorithm and label spreading algorithm is 64.26 s and 28.21 s, respectively; and the data processing time of the Gaussian mixture model and logistic regression algorithm is 37.79 s and 18.98 s, respectively. The area under the receiver operating characteristic curves (AUCs) of the label propagation model and label spreading model are 0.979 and 0.999, respectively; and the AUCs of the Gaussian mixture model and logistic regression model are 0.800 and 0.817, respectively. Therefore, the data modeling efficiency of the label propagation model and label spreading model is comparable to that of the Gaussian mixture model and logistic regression model in detecting Fe-mineralization anomalies. However, the performance of the label propagation model and label spreading model are significantly better than that of the Gaussian mixture model and logistic regression model. It can be concluded that the two graph inference algorithms are potentially useful high-performance tools for detecting mineralization anomalies from geochemical exploration data.