Natural CO2 reservoirs provide an opportunity to study long-term fluid-rock interactions, which are essential to reassure the safety of mineral storage of carbon-dioxide. The Mihályi-Répcelak field (Pannonian Basin, Central Europe) is one of the largest natural CO2-bearing reservoirs in Europe (25 Mt). The CO2 was trapped in Neogene sandstones, which contain various carbonate minerals (dolomite, ankerite, siderite, dawsonite). To reveal the origin of the parent fluid, from which these minerals precipitated, dawsonite and siderite were separated by a new physical method to minimise the uncertainties in the analysis of their stable isotope composition. The δ13CDaw values range from +1.3‰ to +1.6‰ and the calculated δ13CCO2 values in equilibrium with dawsonite (−4.8‰ - –2.0‰) overlap with the carbon isotope compositions of the local CO2 and the European Subcontinental Lithospheric Mantle (−3.9‰ - –2.1‰). This indicates that the dawsonite-forming CO2 had a magmatic origin. The siderite data indicates that some formed from the magmatic CO2, possibly simultaneously with dawsonite (−6.0‰ - –3.9‰), whereas the rest (−8.4‰ - –6.1‰) formed either from a fractionated CO2 with magmatic origin or before the CO2 invasion. The hydrogen isotope composition of structural OH− of dawsonite (−57‰ to −74‰) was determined and was used to estimate the origin of the interacting porewater. The calculated porewater data (δD: −69‰ - –103‰ and δ18O: −1.4‰ - +4.7‰) indicate that the parent fluid was meteoric water modified by water-rock interaction. Our data allows estimation of the total amount of CO2 stored in the dawsonite-bearing sandstone reservoir to be 25 kg/m3, well in line with previous modelling works, which gives a total of 2.01 × 106 t of CO2, higher than previous estimates.
                  We suggest that individual mineral analysis complemented by hydrogen isotope analysis is to be employed to effectively trace in-reservoir fluid-rock interactions in CO2 reservoirs and provide valuable input data for geochemical modelling for better predicting conditions for mineral storage of CO2.