The Tara Deep Zn-Pb deposit, at Navan, Ireland, includes sub-economic pyrite-rich mineralization extending laterally for about 2 × 2 km within the overlying Lower Viséan calc-turbidites, known as the ‘New-Thin Bedded Unit’. Here, we investigate the genesis of this pyritic mineralization and its links to the limestone-hosted Zn-Pb deposit lying 100 m below it.
                  Four mineral assemblages have been identified: 1) in black shales, laminated pyrite comprises thin framboid-rich layers with minor interstitial sphalerite, both showing variable but low δ34S values ranging from −37.4 to 3.3‰; 2) in calcarenite and calcsiltite layers, pyritized fossils are widely distributed and occur chiefly as biodebris replaced by low δ34S pyrite (mean values of −13.2‰); 3) a replacive assemblage occurs as late remobilizations exhibiting both crosscutting and bedding-parallel styles, overprinting the early laminated pyrite. It comprises mostly of marcasite, with minor pyrite, sphalerite, chalcopyrite, galena, stibnite and Co-pentlandite, with high δ34S values up to 24.5‰; and 4) in black shales, bedded sulfide-rich cherts comprising microcrystalline quartz lenses exhibit δ18O mean values of 25.3‰. Cherts are rimmed by dolomite, associated with marcasite, pyrite, sphalerite, chalcopyrite, galena, siegenite and stibnite also with high δ34S values up to 44.2‰. In general terms, pyrite shows a relatively high Co/Ni ratio > 1 and sphalerite Zn/Cd ratios vary from 268 to 364.
                  Textural analysis indicates overlapping of early-diagenetic and multi-phase hydrothermal sulfide mineralization. Development of laminated pyrite and pyritized calcarenites suggests that this mineralization was generated during early diagenesis, close to the seawater-sediment interface in oxygen-poor conditions under the influence of low-temperature hydrothermal fluid circulation. Later hydrothermal cherts and replacive sulfides suggest discharge of relatively warm hydrothermal fluids during early to mid-diagenesis, presumed to be linked to movements of nearby normal faults. Similarities in mineralogy and S isotope compositions suggest genetic links between the sub-economic pyritic mineralization and the underlying Tara Deep deposit, and consequently, that the former represents a geochemical halo with direct applicability in exploration for Zn-Pb deposits.