The Astarghan area in northwest Iran (~50 km north of Tabriz) represents an excellent example of coexisting and associated skarn, porphyry and epithermal mineralizations of copper and gold. This contribution aims to study the geology, alteration and mineralization in these deposits, as well as the occurrence of gold and its host minerals, and present the physico-chemical characteristics of ore-forming fluids and the sulfur origin, in order to get a better understanding of development and evolution of these mineralizations. The Astarghan porphyry stock (Oligo–Miocene) intruded the upper Cretaceous flysch-type sedimentary sequence (calcareous sandstone and limestone with intercalations of siltstone, shale and marl) and brought about metamorphism and metasomatism along the contact. The Cu–Au mineralization in the Astarghan area occurred mainly in three forms: (1) skarn patches along the contact (Zone A), (2) stockwork-type and disseminated porphyry mineralization within the potassic (at Kaghdara and Boiokwari areas) and phyllic (at Sildirimdara area) alteration zones (Zone B), and (3) native gold-bearing low-sulfidation epithermal veins within the argillic alteration zone at Nowrozkala area (Zone C). The micro-thermometric studies on the porphyry-type Kaghdara potassic alteration zone showed that homogenization temperatures for liquid-rich and vapor-rich 2-phase, as well as halite-bearing multiphase inclusions range about 160–420 °C, 220–460 °C, and 320–580 °C, respectively. Salinities of the 2-phase and multiphase inclusions have ranges of 5–25 and 40–70 wt% NaCleq., respectively. However, fluid inclusions present in the epithermal veins of Nowrozkala are mainly liquid-rich 2-phase, and their homogenization temperature and salinity values lie within the ranges of 118–325 °C and 0.6–7.4 wt% NaCleq., respectively. The approximate estimated depth of the sulfide and gold mineralization in the porphyry system ranges from 1.6 to 2.5 km, and in the epithermal system is < 0.9 km. The sulfur isotopic analysis of pyrite from the porphyry and epithermal mineralizations in the potassic alteration zone at Kaghdara and argillic alteration zone at Nowrozkala indicate that the δ34S values (–0.1 to –0.3 and –0.5 to –1.1‰, respectively) are close to the range of magmatic sources. Finally, electron probe micro-analyses indicate that besides independent particles of 50–200 μm in the epithermal veins, gold is mainly hosted by tetrahedrite within the porphyry-related phyllic alteration zone, but especially stibnite within the epithermal veins; these minerals, as well as epithermal polyhedral pyrites contain native gold inclusions.