The North Qinling Terrane is located between China’s second largest, Early Cretaceous gold province (southern North China Craton) to the northeast and the third largest, Triassic gold province (western South Qinling Terrane) to the southwest. However, only several small- to medium-sized Au deposits and occurrences have been found so far in the North Qinling Terrane, and their genesis and possible links with the gold mineralization in the above two large gold provinces remain unclear. In this study, we present a comprehensive geochronology, stable and radiogenic isotope geochemistry study of the Yangxie gold deposit in the North Qinling Terrane to provide new insights into gold genesis in the North Qinling Terrane and its genetic relations to the neighboring gold provinces. The Yangxie gold deposit consists of quartz-sulfides veins that are hosted by NW- and NE-striking brittle faults cutting amphibolite- to granulite-facies metamorphic rocks of the Paleoproterozoic to Neoproterozoic Qinling Group. Gold mineralization is represented by four paragenetic stages consisting of milky quartz-K-feldspar (I), light grey quartz-pyrite (II), light grey quartz-polymetallic sulfides (III), and quartz-calcite (IV). Gold was deposited mainly in stages II and III, forming abundant native gold grains that occur as inclusions in pyrite, microfracture infillings in sulfide minerals, or interstitial growths to other ore and gangue minerals. Ore-related alteration assemblages comprise mainly quartz, sericite, muscovite, K-feldspar, and calcite. Hydrothermal rutile is widely recognized in gold ores and texturally intergrown with gold-bearing pyrite and other alteration minerals, indicating synchronous precipitation of rutile and gold. Laser ablation ICP-MS U-Pb dating on two rutile samples yield reproducible dates of 214.6 ± 5.5 Ma (MSWD = 0.82, 2σ) and 210.1 ± 6.9 Ma (MSWD = 1.3, 2σ), which are interpreted as the time of gold deposition. 40Ar/39Ar dating of sericite, muscovite, and K-feldspar from the alteration assemblages yield more scattered and younger dates ranging from 199.8 ± 1.1 to 119.3 ± 0.6 Ma, which are considered as the cooling ages of the deposit related to later tectonothermal events. Oxygen and hydrogen isotopes of ore-related quartz and extracted fluid inclusion waters are 10.4 ∼ 15.0 and −87.7 ∼ -67.2 per mil, respectively. Pyrite and galena have variable δ34S values ranging from −9.4 to 0.5 per mil. These sulfides have lead isotopic compositions of 17.956–18.067 for 206Pb/204Pb, 15.565–15.621 for 207Pb/204Pb, and 38.045–38.301 for 208Pb/204Pb. The isotope data collectively suggest that the ore-forming fluids and metals were derived from the devolatilization of the early Paleozoic sedimentary rocks distributed in the North Qinling Terrane. The results presented here, combined with independent studies, show that the Yangxie deposit was a product of the Late Triassic orogenic gold mineralization event that formed the western South Qinling gold province. Recognition of the Late Triassic Yangxie gold deposit suggests that faults within and around the metamorphosed Paleozoic sedimentary rocks and subsidiary faults affiliated to the Shangdan Suture in the North Qinling Terrane could be favorable targets for further Triassic orogenic gold exploration.