Bone marrow adipocytes (BMAds) accrue in various states of osteoporosis and interfere with bone remodeling through the secretion of various factors. However, involvement of the extracellular matrix (ECM) produced by BMAds in the impairment of bone marrow mesenchymal stromal cell (BM-MSC) osteoblastogenesis has received little attention. In type 2 diabetes (T2D), skeletal fragility is associated with several changes in bone quality that are incompletely understood, and BMAd quantity increases in relationship to poor glycemic control. Considering their altered phenotype in this pathophysiological context, we aimed to determine the contribution of the ECM of mature BMAds to osteoblastogenesis and mineralization quality in the context of chronic hyperglycemia.
                  Human BM-MSCs were differentiated for 21 days in adipogenic medium containing either a normoglycemic (LG, 5.5 mM) or a high glucose concentration (HG, 25 mM). The ECM laid down by BMAds were devitalized through cell removal to examine their impact on the proliferation and differentiation of BM-MSCs toward osteoblastogenesis in LG and HG conditions. Compared to control plates, both adipocyte ECMs promoted cell adhesion and proliferation. As shown by the unmodified RUNX2 and osteocalcin mRNA levels, BM-MSC commitment in osteoblastogenesis was hampered by neither the hyperglycemic condition nor the adipocyte matrices. However, adipocyte ECMs or HG condition altered the mineralization phase with perturbed expression levels of type 1 collagen, MGP and osteopontin. Despite higher ALP activity, mineralization levels per cell were decreased for osteoblasts grown on adipocyte ECMs compared to controls. Raman spectrometry revealed that culturing on adipocyte matrices specifically prevents type-B carbonate substitution and favors collagen crosslinking, in contrast to exposure to HG concentration alone. Moreover, the mineral to organic ratio was disrupted according to the presence of adipocyte ECM and the glucose concentration used for adipocyte or osteoblast culture. HG concentration and adipocyte ECM lead to different defects in mineralization quality, recapitulating contradictory changes reported in T2D osteoporosis.
                  Our study shows that ECMs from BMAds do not impair osteoblastogenesis but alter both the quantity and quality of mineralization partly in a glucose concentration-dependent manner. This finding sheds light on the involvement of BMAds, which should be considered in the compromised bone quality of T2D and osteoporosis patients more generally.