Indosinian W-Sn metallogeny associated with granites in South China has been reported in recent years by many researchers. However, the refined genetic relations between these deposits and the related granites remain unclear in most areas, and the tectonic setting of Indosinian magmatism and W-Sn mineralization are still widely controversial. The Banjiaoyuan tin deposit is located in the east vicinity of Yangmingshan pluton in the middle Nanling Range, South China. The granitic stocks in this deposit comprise two intrusive episodes, i.e., the first episode of medium-coarse-grained porphyritic tourmaline-biotite monzogranite (G1), and the second episode of micron-fine-grained tourmaline-muscovite monzogranite (G2). LA-ICP-MS zircon U-Pb dating gives weighted ages of 226.9 ± 1.6 Ma to 223.8 ± 1.9 Ma for G1, and 224.3 ± 2.0 Ma for G2, respectively. LA-MC-ICP-MS cassiterite U-Pb dating yields Tera-Wasserburg concordia age of 216.7 ± 2.4 Ma for tin mineralization. These ages indicate that both the granitic magmatism and related mineralization were initiated in the late Indosinian period. All the granites have high SiO2, Al2O3, P2O5 contents, and low TFeO, CaO, MgO, TiO2 contents, indicating that the granites are highly differentiated S-type granites, and furthermore, the high DI and Rb, K, U, Hf, Sm, low SI and Ba, Sr, Ti, TREE further show that the granites have undergone high extent of differentiation and evolution. High Rb/Nb and K/Nb ratios, low Nb/Ta and Zr/Hf ratios, widely varying CaO/Na2O ratios, low and uniform εNd(t) values, and dominantly negative and relatively dispersed εHf(t) values jointly indicate that the granites were derived from a heterogeneous mixture of calcium-poor mudstone and calcium-rich psammite (or metamorphic igneous rocks) in the crust. The known Indosinian W-Sn deposits in South China are more closely related to S-type granites than to I-type granites, suggesting that their ore-forming materials are mainly derived from the crust. In addition, individual positive εHf(t) values indicate that a small amount of newborn crustal components were involved in the formation of granitic magma. Compared with G1, G2 differs distinctly in petrological, chemical and isotopic characteristics, especially it is more richer in F content and contains magmatic cassiterite and wolframite crystals, suggesting that G2 have undergone higher extent of differentiation and evolution, and are much more closely related to the Sn-W mineralization than G1. The late Indosinian granites in this deposit were formed in post-collisional extensional tectonic environment, while the early Indosinian granites intruded in the Yangmingshan area were formed in syn-collision compression environment. Based on the statistics, the metallogenic ages of Indosinian W-Sn deposits in South China are between 212 and 230 Ma, and the petrogenetic ages of related granites are between 211 and 230 Ma, both age groups belong to the late Indosinian period, representing a regional large-scale granitic magma intrusion and mineralization event that initiated in post-collisional extensional tectonic environment.