The large-scale Yaogangxian W deposit, located in central of the Nanling metallogenic belt, South China, comprises independent quartz vein-type and skarn-type W mineralization. Wolframite-bearing quartz veins occur invariably in metasandstone and slate to the northwest of the Yaogangxian granitic intrusion, whereas scheelite-skarn are mainly hosted by the limestone to the east. The vertical extension of single wolframite-bearing quartz vein can reach up to 1000 m and we focused on the vein samples collected from the deepest level (26 level) which likely recorded early magmatic fluids. For skarn mineralization, two scheelite precipitation stages were recognized, namely scheelite-1 in retrograde stage and scheelite-2 from sulfide-stage. To reveal the fluid sources and characteristics of two mineralizing systems, detailed petrography and microthermometry analyses were carried out on fluid inclusion assemblages (FIA) in scheelite, wolframite and their coexisting quartz. Fluid compositions were obtained from individual fluid inclusion (FI) in ore and gangue minerals via laser ablation inductively coupled plasma mass spectrometry (LA-ICP-MS) analysis. These data aid elucidation on the source and nature of fluids in the two distinct W mineralization styles. The chemical compositions of FIs hosted in wolframite and scheelite points to a common magmatic source. The fluid in the scheelite ore section exhibits lower As and B than the wolframite ore section, indicating that boiling may have occurred at early skarn stage. Fluid evolution in the two mineralizing systems suggest that formation of diverse W mineralization styles is mainly controlled by different host lithology and fluid processes. In the wolframite ore section, ore-forming fluid recorded in the deepest level of vein show elevated As, B, K and Rb contents than previously reported ore-forming fluid obtained from the tip of the vein. This likely indicate absence of intensive fluid immiscibility in the deep during wolframite formation, which may rather be accompanied by fluid-rock interaction. In the scheelite ore section, constant injection of meteoric water is revealed. FI hosted in scheelite-1 and 2 exhibit similar compositions, and the lower K content in scheelite-2 fluid is thought to be caused by sericitization in the retrograde stage skarn. The Mo content of scheelite decreased from the retrograde stage to sulfide-stage, indicating a decrease in oxygen fugacity. Based on these conclusion and previous geological and geochronological studies, we propose a metallogenic model of the coupled wolframite-quartz vein and scheelite-skarn mineralization.