Gold mineralization types were rarely exposed in the Neoproterozoic accretionary-to-collisional orogen, particularly in China, throughout Earth’s history. The Huangling region in South China contains more than 70 gold deposits/occurrences hosted in Archean-Paleoproterozoic metamorphic rocks and Neoproterozoic granitic complexes. However, the absolute age of hydrothermal mineralization, genesis, and their relationship with regional-scale processes, such as tectonism, magmatism, and metamorphism, remains unclear. Therefore, in this study, we investigated three gold deposits (Shuiyuesi, Hongwucun, and Guaizigou) hosted in different lithological units from the northern, central, and southern regions of Huangling, respectively. We conducted detailed fieldwork and analyzed the hydrothermal apatite and monazite geochronology and Sr-Nd isotopic composition of these deposits. The gold mineralization is mainly hosted within sulfide-quartz veinlets, and it is structurally controlled by second-order NW- or NNW-striking faults of the first-order NW trending main fault zone. Gold is present in various forms, such as native gold, electrum, and petzite or in fine-grained pyrite as invisible gold co-precipitated with alteration mineral assemblages that include sericite, quartz, and hydrothermal apatite, and monazite. LA-ICP-MS U-Pb dating of the hydrothermal monazite and apatite for the Shuiyuesi deposit yielded two ages: 831 ± 2 Ma and 830 ± 23 Ma. These ages are consistent with the weighted mean 206Pb/238U age of 834 ± 3 Ma for apatite, obtained from the southern Guaizigou deposit within margin of error. Monazite and apatite dating of the Hongwucun gold deposit yielded younger ages of 810 ± 3 Ma and 800 ± 10 Ma, respectively. The new dates suggest that the gold deposits in the Huangling region underwent two distinct metallogenic episodes of gold mineralization during the Neoproterozoic, coeval with the temporal post-collisional mafic dykes, which postdated the regional metamorphism by ∼100 m.y, as indicated in the Huangling region after the peak period of collisional orogeny and in response to an extensional setting, possibly due to asthenosphere wedging. The Sr-Nd isotope of apatite and monazite (87Sr/86Sr: 0.69555–0.76244, εNd(t): −22.1–−2.9) and collective geochemical data indicate that ore-forming fluids are mainly consistent with magmatic sources with significant contribution from mantle materials. The results of the study suggest that the Huangling gold mineralization province is genetically related to Neoproterozoic post-collisional magmatism. Additionally, the region shares many characteristics of large orogenic gold provinces around the world, including alteration types, element associations, occurrence states of gold, and the evolution of orogenic belts, offering valuable new insights into the gold metallogeny of the early Neoproterozoic period, which is generally not known for its abundance of Au deposits.