The Cu-Sb-Pb polymetallic vein deposit is hosted by metavolcanics rocks of the Gawuch Formation at the Kaldom Gol area of the northwest Kohistan arc terrain in northern Pakistan. The mineralization is closely associated with the dioritic to granodioritic rocks of the Lowari pluton, which was intruded into the Gawuch metavolcanics. Details of ore characterization and processes of ore genesis of this evidently hydrothermal mineralization are not well documented. Integrating petrographic, mineral-chemical and isotopic investigations, this study aims to comprehend the source of hydrothermal fluids, geochemical evolution, mineral inclusions and physicochemical conditions of the Cu-Sb-Pb polymetallic vein deposit in Gawuch metavolcanics in the Kohistan arc terrain in northern Pakistan. The mineralization is distinguished into three types of ore-gangue associations: Type Ia, Type Ib, and Type II. The textural study revealed two pyrite generations: (i) Py1 displaying euhedral to subhedral habits and containing scarce inclusions, and (ii) Py2 occurring as anhedral grains hosting abundant inclusions. Type Ia is characterized by Py1 associated with abundant quartz (Qz) showing comb texture, sericite (Ser), and minor chlorite (Chl). Type Ib comprises Qz + Ser + Chl and Py2, chalcopyrite (Ccp), and magnetite (Mag). Type II is represented by mosaic quartz, rhombic adularia, and bladed calcite, and the ore minerals fahlore and galena. Alteration zones composed of Qz-Ser ± Chl and Qz-Ser-Chl, surround Type I (a, b) and Type II veins, respectively. Fahlore and galena mostly replace pyrite of Type Ia and chalcopyrite of Type Ib. In addition, malachite, azurite, hematite and covellite occur as secondary (supergene) minerals. The Co/Ni ratios (>1) of Kaldom Gol pyrites suggest that the ore-forming fluids were hydrothermal in origin and Py1 and Py2 solidified at 221–304 °C and 225–261 °C, respectively. The LA-ICP-MS time-resolved depth profiles confirm the existence of sphalerite, and chalcopyrite inclusions in pyrite (Py1 and Py2) and millerite, bravoite, vaesite, Au-tellurides, native Au and galena inclusions in chalcopyrite and fahlore. Sulfur isotope compositions of pyrites (δ34S = Py1, −0.58 to +2 ‰; δ34S = Py2, −0.24 to +2.04 ‰) indicate that the ore-forming fluids were derived from magmatic source (s). The mineral assemblage, hydrothermal alterations, textures, temperature and δ34S of pyrites suggest that the Cu-Sb-Pb polymetallic mineralization at Kaldom Gol represents an intermediate-sulfidation type of epithermal deposit.