In the past two decades, significant research efforts have been devoted to porphyry copper indicator mineral (PCIM) identification and mineral chemistry to assist exploration. Such studies are important in the Yukon-Tanana upland region of eastern Alaska because well-established geochemical exploration techniques, such as the geochemistry of stream-sediment samples, are less effective in the search for mineral resources owing to cover materials that subdue geochemical signatures. The unglaciated Yukon-Tanana upland region is well-endowed with mineral resources, including porphyry Cu-Mo-Au deposits at Taurus, Bluff, Dennison, and Oreo. Using automated scanning electron microscope (SEM) techniques, numerous PCIMs have been identified in rocks and stream-sediment samples that would likely not have been observed using visual binocular microscope methods. Sulfide minerals such as chalcopyrite, chalcocite, covellite, bornite, molybdenite, and pyrrhotite were identified in rock samples, and more than half of the stream-sediment samples from drainages containing known porphyry mineral occurrences contain chalcopyrite with or without bornite. Many drainages without known occurrences also contain these minerals, which suggests potential for additional occurrences. Svanbergite, an aluminum phosphate sulfate (APS) mineral [SrAl3(PO4)(SO4)(OH)6], was identified in some of the altered or mineralized rock samples from Taurus, and in stream drainages containing porphyry occurrences and may represent the best indicator mineral for Taurus-like porphyry deposits. Apatite chemistry has great potential as a tool for assessing the presence of porphyry mineralization. Grains from rock and stream-sediment samples that contain high Cl (>∼0.4 wt%), Fe (>0.4 wt%), and Mn (>2000 ppm) clearly distinguish apatite from other sources (metamorphic, unmineralized igneous rocks). This study is one of the first to document new streamlined indicator mineral sample collection and processing methods and to combine automated SEM techniques and chemistry of minerals derived from both bedrock and surficial (stream) sediments as they apply to porphyry exploration.