The present study describes results obtained from the chemistry of detrital heavy minerals i.e. pyroxene, amphibole, biotite, garnet, epidote and Fe-Ti oxides in fluvial sediments of the northern Brahmaputra River (Bangladesh) with an aim to determine conditions of their petrogenesis and provenance. The primary and secondary genera of ferromagnesian minerals occurred in calc-alkaline and peraluminous subduction zone. In which, the garnets are Fe-rich, indicating mostly almandine component (Alm65–Pyp16–Grs8–Sps6 averagely), occurred in medium to high grade metasedimentary rocks in the Lesser Himalaya (LH), along the Main Central Thrust (MCT) and the eastern Himalayan syntaxis. Besides, the fingerprint of omphacite and actinolite owe to ascertain the co-existence of garnet developed in ultrahigh-pressure (UHP) eclogites that may also be drained from the Tso Morari massif. Augite to aegirine-augite pyroxenes emphasizes Fe enrichment in basaltic systems and high to ultrahigh grade metamorphic rocks, which are exposed in the LH, Shillong Plateau, Mikir Hills, South Tibetan Detachment System (STDS), eastern Himalayan syntaxis and Tso Morari massif. Geochemistry and thermobarometry of the primary magmatic amphiboles and biotites manifest the source of granitoid and granodiorite like bodies, and their windows are exposed in the Bomi–Chayu, Gangdese arcs and the western Arunachal Himalaya. Again, metamorphosed Fe-Ti oxide minerals are well-exposed along the NE Lesser Himalaya, where magmatic derivative of Fe-Ti oxide minerals were modified through the diffusional processes in low-grade metamorphism (534–562 °C with 10–22.1–10−21.5 
                     fo2). Integrating the aforementioned discussion with the thermochronology, it is evident that the eastern Himalayan syntaxis is the major source of sediment flux, which is carried mostly by the upper Himalayan tributaries i.e. Yigong, Parlung, Dibang and Lohit. Also, the lower Himalayan tributaries i.e. Subansiri and Manas drain the sequestered derivatives dominantly from the Arunachal Himalayan. Tso Morari eclogites (NW Himalaya) have also contribution somewhat of dense minerals to the Tsangpo-Brahmaputra River system. Thus, scrutinizing the fingerprint of single-grain detrital minerals provides key information regarding the source terrains and tectonics of the Himalayan sequences.