Plant residue input alters native soil organic carbon (SOC) mineralization through the priming effect, which strongly controls C sequestration during vegetation restoration. However, the effects of different vegetation types on SOC priming and the underlying microbial mechanisms due to global warming are poorly understood. To elucidate these unknowns, the current study quantified soil priming effects using 13C-labeled maize residue amendments and analyzed the community structure and abundances in the soils of a vegetation succession gradient (maize field (MF), grassland (GL), and secondary forest (SF)) from a karst region under two incubation temperatures (15 °C and 25 °C). Results revealed that after 120 d of incubation, vegetation restoration increased the soil priming effects. Compared to MF, the priming effects of SF at 15 °C and 25 °C increased by 142.36 % and 161.09 %, respectively. This may be attributed to a high C/N ratio and low-N availability (NO3
                     −), which supports the “microbial nitrogen mining” theory. Variations in soil priming were linked to changes in microbial properties. Moreover, with vegetation restoration, the relative abundance of Actinobacteria (copiotrophs) increased, while Ascomycota (oligotrophs) decreased, which accelerated native SOC decomposition. Co-occurrence network analysis indicated that the cooperative interactions of co-existing keystone taxa may facilitate SOC priming. Furthermore, structural equation modeling (SEM) indicated that changes in the priming effects were directly related to the fungal Shannon index and microbial biomass C (MBC), which were affected by soil C/N and NO3
                     −. Warming significantly decreased soil priming, which may be attributed to the increase in microbial respiration (qCO2) and decreased MBC. The temperature sensitivity (Q10) of SOC mineralization was higher after residue amendment, but significant differences were not detected among the vegetation types. Collectively, our results indicated that the intensity of priming effects was dependent on vegetation type and temperature. Microbial community alterations and physicochemical interactions played important roles in SOC decomposition and sequestration.