There is an intense interest in developing materials for safe and effective delivery of polynucleotides using non-viral vectors. Mineralization of organic templates has long been used to produce complex materials with outstanding biocompatibility. However, a lack of control over mineral growth has limited the applicability of mineralized materials to a few in vitro applications. With better control over mineral growth and surface functionalization, mineralized vectors have advanced significantly in recent years. Here, we review the recent progress in chemical synthesis, physicochemical properties, and applications of mineralized materials in gene therapy, focusing on structure-function relationships. We contrast the classical understanding of the mineralization mechanism with recent ideas of mineralization. A brief introduction to gene delivery is summarized, followed by a detailed survey of current mineralized vectors. The vectors derived from calcium phosphate are articulated and compared to other minerals with unique features. Advanced mineral vectors derived from templated mineralization and specialty coatings are critically analyzed. Mineral systems beyond the co-precipitation are explored as more complex multicomponent systems. Finally, we conclude with a perspective on the future of mineralized vectors by carefully demarcating the boundaries of our knowledge and highlighting ambiguous areas in mineralized vectors.
               
                  Statement of Significance
                  Therapy by gene-based medicines is increasingly utilized to cure diseases that are not alleviated by conventional drug therapy. Gene medicines, however, rely on macromolecular nucleic acids that are too large and too hydrophilic for cellular uptake. Without tailored materials, they are not functional for therapy. One emerging class of nucleic acid delivery system is mineral-based materials. The fact that they can undergo controlled dissolution with minimal footprint in biological systems are making them attractive for clinical use, where safety is utmost importance. In this submission, we will review the emerging synthesis technology and the range of new generation minerals for use in gene medicines.