Background
                  Biomedical application is based on the use of LIBS-derived data on chemical contents of tissues in diagnosis of diseases, forensic investigation, as well as a mechanism for providing online feedback for laser surgery. Although LIBS has certain advantages, the issue of correlation of LIBS-derived data on chemical element content in different human and animal tissues with other methods, and especially ICP-MS, remains pertinent. The objective of the present review was to discuss the application of laser-induced breakdown spectroscopy (LIBS) for elemental analysis of human biosamples or tissues from experimental models of human diseases. Methods. A systematic search in the PubMed-Medline, Scopus, and Google Scholar databases using the terms laser-induced breakdown spectroscopy, LIBS, metals, trace elements, minerals, and names of particular chemical elements was performed up through 25 February, 2023. Of all extracted studies only those dealing with human subjects, human tissues, in vivo animal and in vitro cell line models of human diseases were reviewed in detail. Results. The majority of studies revealed a wide number of metals and metalloids in solid tissues including teeth (As, Ag, Ca, Cd, Cr, Cu, Fe, Hg, Mg, Ni, P, Pb, Sn, Sr, Ti, and Zn), bones (Al, Ba, Ca, Cd, Cr, K, Mg, Na, Pb, Sr), and nails (Al, As, Ca, Fe, K, Mg, Na, P, Pb, Si, Sr, Ti, Zn). At the same time, LIBS was also used for estimation of trace element and mineral content in hair (Ca, Cu, Fe, K, Mg, Na, Zn), blood (Al, Ca, Co, Cd, Cu, Fe, Mg, Mn, Ni, Pb, Si, Sn, Zn), cancer tissues (Ca, Cu, Fe, Mg, K, Na, Zn) and other tissues. Single studies revealed satisfactory correspondence between quantitative LIBS and ICP-OES/MS data on the level of As (81–93 %), Pb (94–98 %), Cd (50–94 %) in teeth, Cu (97–105 %), Fe (117 %), Zn (88–117 %) in hair, Ca (97–99 %), Zn (90–95 %), and Pb (61–82 %) in kidney stones. LIBS also estimated specific patterns of trace element and mineral content associated with multiple pathologies, including caries, cancer, skin disorders, and other systemic diseases including diabetes mellitus type 2, osteoporosis, hypothyroidism, etc. Data obtained from in situ tissue LIBS analysis were profitably used for discrimination between tissue types. Conclusions. Taken together, the existing data demonstrate the applicability of LIBS for medical studies, although further increase in its sensitivity, calibration range, cross-validation, and quality control is required.