High-grade gold-quartz-sulphide lodes of the Sheba-Fairview Complex (SFC) of gold mines in the Barberton Greenstone Belt of South Africa describe a wide range of geometries, orientations, controls, and a number of different and often contradicting models have been postulated to account for their formation. This paper aims to present a holistic model that describes the focussing of a regional-scale fluid flow into narrower, mineralized structures during the late-stage refolding and tightening of the first-order folds that host the mineralization.
                  The auriferous reefs of the SFC are hosted by well-bedded, low-grade metamorphic, clastic sedimentary rocks of the Paleoarchaean Fig Tree and Moodies groups that are preserved in two regional-scale, strongly curved and refolded synclinal structures along the northern margin of the belt. The majority (85 %) of presently and historically mined orebodies occur in the broad hinge zone of the refolded synclines. This suggests the regional-scale fluid redistribution from fold limbs into the first-order fold hinge following regional hydraulic gradients during refolding. Ubiquitous bedding-parallel quartz (-carbonate-sulphide) veins and associated alteration underline the significance of bedding anisotropies and bedding-parallel flexural slip for regional-scale fluid flow during refolding. The focussing of these fluids and economic-grade gold mineralization occurs preferentially along contacts between lithologies with pronounced rheological contrasts. Lithological contacts combine the effects of strain localization in weaker units and the formation of fracture permeabilities in competent units across these contacts. Examples include kilometer-scale hinge-parallel ore shoots that are controlled by undulations (jogs) along low-displacement slip horizons between retrogressed ultramafic rocks and competent metasediments. In contrast, low-angle thrusts or steep reverse faults form accommodation structures related to the late-stage tightening of the first-order folds. These structures transect bedding at high angles and are, thus, ideally orientated to collect fluid from the regional system of bedding-parallel fluid flow.
                  Mineralization in the SFC may be explained by the spatial and temporal coincidence of (1) late-stage NW-SE shortening and refolding, of (2) a well-bedded, anisotropic wall-rock sequence, associated with (3) regional-scale fluid redistribution along bedding planes during flexural slip, leading to (4) fluid focussing into either jog geometries or bedding discordant structures. The combination of these factors is unique to the SFC and accounts for the location of the main Barberton gold mines along the northwestern margin of the greenstone belt.