Toxic metal-contaminated farmland from Cadmium (Cd) can enhance the accumulation of Cd and impair the absorption of mineral elements in brown rice. Although several studies have been conducted on Cd exposure on rice, little has been reported on the relationship between Cd and mineral elements in brown rice and the regulatory mechanism of rhizosphere microorganisms during element uptake. Thus, a field study was undertaken to screen japonica rice cultivars with low Cd and high mineral elements levels, analyze the quantitative relationship between Cd and seven mineral elements, and investigate the cultivar-specific response of rice rhizosphere bacterial communities to differences in Cd and mineral uptake in japonica rice. Results showed that Huaidao-9 and Xudao-7 had low Cd absorption and high amounts of mineral nutrient elements (Fe, Zn, Mg, and Ca, LCHM group), whereas Zhongdao-1 and Xinkedao-31 showed opposite accumulation characteristics (HCLM group). Stepwise regression analysis showed that zinc, iron, and potassium are the key minerals that affect Cd accumulation in japonica rice and zinc was the most important factor, accounting for 68.99 %. The accumulation of Cd and mineral elements is potentially associated with rhizosphere soil bacteria. Taxa enriched in the LCHM rhizosphere (phyla Acidobacteriota and MBNT15) indicated the high nutrient characteristics of the soil and reduced activity of Cd in soil. The HCLM rhizosphere was highly colonized by metal-activating bacteria (Actinobacteria), lignin-degrading bacteria (Actinobacteria and Chlorofexi), and bacteria scavenging nutrients and trace elements (Anaerolinea and Ketobacter). Moreover, the differences in the uptake of Cd and mineral elements affected predicted functions of microbial communities, including sulfur oxidation and sulfur derivative formation, human or plant pathogen, and functions related to the iron oxidation and nitrate reduction. The results indicate a potential association of Cd and mineral elements uptake and accumulation with rhizosphere bacteria in rice, thus providing theoretical basis and a new perspective on the maintenance of rice security and high quality simultaneously.