Highly efficient, separable, and stable magnetic iron-based-photocatalysts produced from ultra-stable Y (USY) zeolite were applied, for the first time, to the photo-Fenton removal of phenol under solar light. USY Zeolite with a Si/Al molar ratio of 385 was impregnated under vacuum with an aqueous solution of Fe2+ ions and thermally treated (500–750 °C) in a reducing atmosphere. Three catalysts, Fe-USY500°C-2h, Fe-USY600°C-2h and Fe-USY750°C-2h, containing different amounts of reduced iron species entrapped in the zeolitic matrix, were obtained. The catalysts were thoroughly characterized by absorption spectrometry, X-ray powder diffraction with synchrotron source, followed by Rietveld analysis, X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy, N2 adsorption/desorption at −196 °C, high-resolution transmission electron microscopy and magnetic measurements at room temperature.
                  The catalytic activity was evaluated in a recirculating batch photoreactor irradiated by solar light with online analysis of evolved CO2. Photo-Fenton results showed that the catalyst obtained by thermal treatment at 500 °C for 2 h under a reducing atmosphere (FeUSY-500°C-2h) was able to completely mineralize phenol in 120 min of irradiation time at pH = 4 owing to the presence of a higher content of entrapped nano-sized magnetite particles. The latter promotes the generation of hydroxyl radicals in a more efficient way than the Fe-USY catalysts prepared at 600 and 750 °C because of the higher Fe3O4 content in ultra-stable Y zeolite treated at 500 °C. The FeUSY-500°C-2h catalyst was recovered from the treated water through magnetic separation and reused five times without any significant worsening of phenol mineralization performances. The characterization of the FeUSY-500°C-2h after the photo-Fenton process demonstrated that it was perfectly stable during the reaction. The optimized catalyst was also effective in the mineralization of phenol in tap water. Finally, a possible photo-Fenton mechanism for phenol mineralization was assessed based on experimental tests carried out in the presence of scavenger molecules, demonstrating that hydroxyl radicals play a major role.