This paper aims to review the main mechanisms identified in the lab scale that impact CO2 injectivity during CCS projects in saline aquifers and evaluate their relevance in field scale through numerical models. They may include water vaporization, salt precipitation in the dry-out zone, mineral dissolution, which can result in fines migration in porous media, CO2 hydrate formation, and effects of non-Darcy flow. All those mechanisms are observed from lab experiments and significantly impact reservoir petrophysical properties such as porosity and permeability and consequently on injectivity in field operations. This study includes these mechanisms in numerical models to quantify their impacts on the CO2 injectivity well index in synthetic and real field cases. In addition, a sensitivity analysis was performed for a range of brine compositions of seawater and higher salinities. This analysis shows an additional injectivity reduction as the salinity increases due to the halite scale, in agreement with the lab data from the literature. Another dependence evaluated in this study is when the ratio between capillary and viscous forces is decreased, reducing the injectivity. Additionally, when mineral reaction dissolution is considered in our modeling, it is possible to observe two occurring competitive phenomena, where the mineral dissolution can compensate for part of the injectivity loss due to salt deposition in the dry-out zone. That is especially relevant when the reservoir rock matrix is rich in reactive minerals, such as calcite and dolomite. However, mineral dissolution may lead to fines, and the risk of fines migration can lower the injectivity by at least 10% within five years of CO2 injection, according to our results. The mineral dissolution is also considered in these calculations, and the loss in injectivity is the net result of dissolution and fines migration. The gain in porosity–permeability as the results of mineral dissolution was modeled using the Kozeny-Carman equation. The results show the importance of considering the uncertainty of injectivity loss in CCS projects, where the amount of CO2 captured for storage must be injected often with no other alternatives, highlighting the need to provide flexibility in project planning to deal with such risks.