During chicken embryonic development, skeleton calcification mainly relies on the eggshell, whose minerals are progressively solubilized and transported to the embryo via the chorioallantoic membrane (CAM). However, the molecular components involved in this process remain undefined. We assessed eggshell demineralization and calcification of the embryo skeleton after 12 and 16 d of incubation, and analyzed the expression of several candidate genes in the CAM: carbonic anhydrases that are likely involved in secretion of protons for eggshell dissolution (CA2, CA4, CA9), ions transporters and regulators (CALB1, SLC4A1, ATP6V1B2, SGK1, SCGN, PKD2) and vitamin-D binding protein (GC).
                  Our results confirmed that eggshell weight, thickness, and strength decreased during incubation, with a concomitant increase in calcification of embryonic skeletal system. In the CAM, the expression of CA2 increased during incubation while CA4 and CA9 were expressed at similar levels at both stages. SCL4A1 and SCGN were expressed, but not differentially, between the two stages, while the expression of ATP6V1B2 and PKD2 genes decreased. The expression of SGK1 and TRPV6 increased over time, although the expression of the latter gene was barely detectable. In parallel, we analyzed the expression of these candidate genes in the yolk sac (YS), which mediates the transfer of yolk minerals to the embryo during the first half of incubation. In YS, CA2 expression increases during incubation, similar to the CAM, while the expression of the other candidate genes decreases. Moreover, CALB1 and GC genes were found to be expressed during incubation in the YS, in contrast to the CAM where no expression of either was detected.
                  This study demonstrates that the regulation of genes involved in the mobilization of egg minerals during embryonic development is different between the YS and CAM extraembryonic structures. Identification of the full suite of molecular components involved in the transfer of eggshell calcium to the embryo via the CAM should help to better understand the role of this structure in bone mineralization.