The Ikhabu Pegmatite Field (IPF) in the Nepal Himalaya is a newly discovered rare-element (REL) pegmatite field that hosts the Yamrang pegmatite, the primary source of the famous Nepalese aquamarines. In this contribution, we provide a comprehensive description of the geology of both the IPF and the Yamrang pegmatite, offering insights into the evolutionary stages of the Yamrang pegmatite based on its internal texture and the mineral chemistry of beryl, garnet, and tourmaline. The Yamrang pegmatite is classified as a beryl-columbite subtype of REL pegmatite, exhibiting axial symmetric zonation and is differentiated into five mineralogical-textural zones during magmatic and hydrothermal stages. The magmatic stage involves undercooling, disequilibrium crystallization, and fractional crystallization whereas the hydrothermal stage comprises alkali-enriched fluid exsolution, the formation of miarolitic cavities, and the crystallization of aquamarine. Yamrang aquamarines are enriched in FeO, up to 1.1 wt%, with Fe2+ as the primary chromophore, resulting in their blue color. Two types of beryl have been identified: magmatic beryl in zones 3 and 4 and hydrothermal beryl in miarolitic cavities (zone 5). Magmatic beryls are characterized by their alkali-poor to sodic composition, prismatic to columnar habit, homogeneous texture, and the presence of Fe-Al octahedral substitution. In contrast, hydrothermal beryls belong to the sodic to Li-Cs beryl group, with tabular to acicular habit, weak compositional zoning, and channel-tetrahedral substitution. Yamrang garnet belongs to the almandine-spessartine series, while the tourmalines are Mg-Ca rich dravite-schorl to Fe-Mn rich schorl variety. Alkali-poor to Li-Cs beryl with low REE contents, spessartine garnet (spessartine component, Xsps ∼ 52) with high HREE, and schorl with high Ti but low Li, Pb, and REE contents suggests that the Yamrang Pegmatite is an intermediate-fractionated REL pegmatite. Potential pegmatite evolution indicators for IPF include high alkali, Fe, Mn, and Rb contents in beryl, high Xsps in garnet, and an increase in Li, Fe, Mn, Zn, Ga, and Nb, alongside depletion of Mg, Ca, Ti, and Ta in schorl. The identification of a rare metal pegmatite field in the Nepalese Himalaya reinforces the general rare metal mineralization potential of the entire Himalaya region.