The formation of authigenic phosphorus (P) minerals near the sulfate-methane transition (SMT) represents an important pathway of P burial in marine sediments. However, our current understanding of the coupling between the formation of authigenic phosphate and carbon and iron (Fe) cycling is insufficient. In this study, a piston core recovered from the Haima cold seeps of the Qiongdongnan basin, northern South China Sea, was used to analyze pore-water parameters and solid-phase Fe and P speciation. Results from a previous study indicate that the current SMT is located at approximately 1 m below the seafloor (mbsf) and a fossil SMT located at approximately 6.5 mbsf. Dissolved phosphate concentrations and solid-phase iron oxide (FeOx) contents are found to decrease with depth, while Fe-bound P (PFe) and authigenic phosphate (PAuth) contents increase with depth in the zone between the current and fossil SMTs where gas hydrate is present, suggesting that vivianite and authigenic apatite formed in this zone. Gas hydrate below the current SMT will dissociate once methane is undersaturated, which could persistently provide dissolved methane to prevent the downward shift of the current SMT where methane is continually consumed. Such a methane-rich environment maintained by gas hydrate may favor the persistent reduction of FeOx and the formation of vivianite. Dissolved phosphate concentrations are high, but decrease rapidly with depth at the fossil SMT. Combined with higher FeOx and PAuth contents and lower PFe contents and lower POrg/total organic carbon (TOC) ratios, these results suggest the formation of authigenic apatite at the fossil SMT. The high dissolved phosphate concentration and low POrg/TOC ratios at the fossil SMT are interpreted to reflect preferential release of P during the degradation of organic matter generated by methanotrophic microorganisms. Overall, our study shows that P speciation in methane-rich sediments provides insight into the formation processes of authigenic P minerals near the SMT and associated carbon and Fe cycling processes.