Green spaces in urban parks are an essential part of urban planning, not only meeting the environmental demands of urban dwellers but also absorbing greenhouse gases generated in urban regions. Mineralization of soil organic carbon (SOC) is one of the most important processes of C cycling, and links C sequestration and emission. However, few studies have been focused on SOC mineralization in urban parks, especially in scenarios involving rising temperature. Here, soils from different ages of deciduous forest (DT), evergreen forest (ET) and lawn (LN) were collected from the urban parks of Chengdu megacity. A soil incubation study (35 days) was conducted to examine SOC mineralization in three temperature regimes (15, 25, and 35 ℃), three vegetation types (DT, ET, and LN) and three vegetation ages (5, 10, and 15yr), making 27 treatments in total. Results demonstrate that increases in temperature stimulated the daily SOC mineralization rate, cumulative SOC mineralization, and mineralization intensity in the soils from urban green spaces, especially in soils under the 5-year-old plantings. Furthermore, results from principal component analysis (PCA) showed that the soil labile organic carbon (LOC) fraction, especially readily oxidizable carbon (ROC), soil enzyme activity and soil pH are the major factors influencing SOC mineralization. During the incubation, the average temperature sensitivity (Q10
                     ) of the SOC mineralization rate at 25−35 °C was higher than at 15−25 °C (P < 0.05), indicating that more C would release from urban green spaces under a warmer climate. However, over all planting ages, the average Q10
                      of SOC mineralization rate in lawn soils reduced by 1.87 %–4.04 % and 4.16 %–5.84 % relative to deciduous and evergreen forest soils, respectively. Overall, the SOC mineralization rate was ranked LN > ET > DT, while the Q10
                      of the SOC mineralization rate was ranked DT > ET > LN with increasing temperatures. Moreover, the older vegetation showed lower SOC mineralization rates and higher Q10
                      values. These findings imply that SOC stored in the soils under grass and young plantations are less susceptible to climate warming, although the mineralization rates are higher. By contrast, SOC in soils under trees is more susceptible to climate warming, but the mineralization rates are lower. Overall, the temperature change is more important for the SOC mineralization in forest soils and older plantation soils in urban green spaces.