The Zhesang gold deposit is a Carlin-type gold deposit located in the “Golden Triangle” structural belt of Yunnan-Guizhou-Guangxi. Pyrite and arsenopyrite are important gold-bearing minerals of the deposit. In order to understand the typomorphic characteristics of pyrite and arsenopyrite and the enrichment mechanism of gold, morphological and structural features of these sulphides and the occurrence state of gold were investigated by using reflected light microscope and electron probes (EPMA). The results show that pyrites are characterized mainly by medium-fine broken pentagonal-dodecahedron crystal forms. Most of the arsenopyrites display needle and columnar crystal forms. Compositionally, pyrite is depleted in both Fe and S, whereas arsenopyrite is As-depleted but S-enriched. The w(Co)/w(Ni) of pyrite is between 1.731 and 3.215 (i.e., within the range of ratio of the hydrothermal pyrite, which is between 1 and 5). The crystal forms and compositional features of pyrite and arsenopyrite indicate that the Zhesang gold deposit is typical of medium-low temperature hydrothermal origin. The positive correlation between As and Au and the Au/As (mol%) ratio are lower than the solubility limit of Au in arsenic pyrite. Combined with previous studies, our data suggest that gold is likely to exist in the form of Au+ complex. Arsenic pyrite and arsenopyrite condensed Au in unsaturated ore-forming hydrothermal fluids relative to Au0 through surface voids and/or defects and the As content, forming a Zhesang Carlin-type gold deposit. Based on the age data of the Mesozoic polymetallic deposits in South China, it can be concluded that the age of the Zhesang gold deposit (215.3 ± 1.9 Ma), is consistent with the age of the main body of the Mesozoic polymetallic deposits (230-200 Ma) in South China Plate and the age of the granites (230-200 Ma) related to tungsten-tin mineralization in the Cathaysian Block. Therefore, we believe that the Zhesang gold deposit is the product of the subduction regime of the Paleo-Tethys Ocean in the Middle-Late Triassic.