Focal Adhesion Kinase (FAK) is an important regulator of tumor cell proliferation, survival and metastasis. As such it has become a therapeutic target of interest in cancer. Previous studies suggested that use of FAK tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs) blocks osteolysis in in vivo models of bone metastasis. However, from these studies it was not clear whether FAK TKIs blocked bone degradation by osteoclasts or also promoted bone formation by osteoblasts. In this study we evaluated whether use of the FAK TKI PF-562,271 affected the differentiation of pre-osteoblasts, or activity of mature differentiated osteoblasts. MC3T3-E1 pre-osteoblastic cells were treated with various doses of PF-562,271 following 3 or 10 days of differentiation which led to the inhibition of alkaline phosphatase (ALP) expression and reduced viable cell numbers in a dose-dependent manner. MC3T3-E1 cells which had been differentiated for 21 days prior to treatment with PF-562,271 showed a dose dependent decrease in mineralization as assessed by Alizarin Red staining, with concomitant decreased expression of ALP which is known to facilitate the bone mineralization activity of osteoblasts, however mRNA levels of the transcription factors RUNX2 and osterix which are important for osteoblast maturation and mineralization appeared unaffected at this time point. We speculated that this may be due to altered function of RUNX2 protein due to inhibitory phosphorylation by GSK3β. We found treatment with PF-562,271 resulted in increased GSK3β activity as measured by reduced levels of phospho-Ser9-GSK3β which would result in phosphorylation and inhibition of RUNX2. Treatment of 21 day differentiated MC3T3-E1 cells with PF-562,271 in combination with GSK3β inhibitors partially restored mineralization however this was not statistically significant. As we observed that FAK TKI also resulted in suppression of Akt, which is known to alter osterix protein stability downstream of RUNX2, we examined protein levels by western blot and found a dose-dependent decrease in osterix in FAK TKI treated differentiated MC3T3-E1 cells which is likely responsible for the reduced mineralization observed. Taken together our results suggest that use of FAK TKIs as therapeutics in the bone metastatic setting may block new bone formation as an off-target effect and thereby exacerbate the defective bone regulation that is characteristic of the bone metastatic environment.