Despite the fact that cadmium has been reported to be present in crustacean exoskeletons, no study has previously been done to determine when cadmium is deposited to the exoskeleton and what effects cadmium has on the shell-hardening process. This project sought to address these scientific questions using the blue crab, Callinectes sapidus, as the model crustacean. It was hypothesized that cadmium would be incorporated into the exoskeleton during post-ecdysial mineralization through ionic mimicry because of the resemblance between cadmium and calcium ions. To test this, soft shell blue crabs were injected with cadmium chloride, and cadmium content in the exoskeleton was subsequently quantified using ICP-OES. Carbonic anhydrase catalyzes the carbon dioxide hydration reaction, which generates bicarbonate ions essential for calcium carbonate formation in the shell. The effect of cadmium injection on epidermal carbonic anhydrase activity as well as exoskeletal calcification was also investigated. It was found that cadmium injection into post-ecdysial Callinectes sapidus significantly increased cadmium content in the exoskeleton, suggesting that cadmium is deposited to the new exoskeleton during post-ecdysial mineralization. Cadmium administration had no effect on epidermal carbonic anhydrase activity or exoskeletal calcification. Interestingly, magnesium content in the exoskeleton was significantly elevated following cadmium treatment. This is most likely a “pseudo” effect stemming from the cadmium-induced reduction in exoskeleton weight. The fact that cadmium had no effect on exoskeletal calcium and that cadmium decreased the weight of the exoskeleton suggests that cadmium has a detrimental effect on the formation of the organic matrix of the exoskeleton. The presence of cadmium in control crabs and exuviae and the amplification of cadmium content in cadmium-treated crabs clearly show that crab shell is a cadmium repository and can be used as a biomarker for aquatic cadmium pollution.