The Bayan Obo REE-Nb-Fe deposit with giant rare earth reserves, still has no unified understanding of the REE and Nb-bearing mineral evolution and the division of mineralization stages, due to the complicated metallogenic process and the huge controversy on the important issues such as the origin of ore-hosting dolomite. In this work, the whole process of carbonatite magma solidification and mineralization is divided into six stages: coarse dolomitic facies, fine dolomitic facies, disseminated mineralization, banded mineralization, massive mineralization and vein mineralization. The mineralogical composition and paragenesis of various types of rocks and ores have been systematically studied using the automatic mineral analysis technology-Advanced Mineral Identification and Characterization System (AMICS), supplemented by optical microscopy and cathodoluminescence. In order to establish the internal relationship between different stages, trace elements of six kinds of rocks and ores were analyzed. The mineralogical studies show that the rare earth minerals appear in the order of transition from the phosphate minerals in the brine-melt stage (fine dolomitic facies), through the fluorcarbonate minerals in the hydrothermal stage (disseminated, banded and massive mineralization), to the Ba-fluorcarbonate minerals in the Paleozoic vein mineralization, and all of these are generally associated with apatite, baryte, fluorite, aegirine and quartz. The distribution of niobium minerals in all kinds of ores is in the form of disseminated grains, and there is no obvious paragenetic relationship with other minerals, which indicate that niobium mineralization may only be related to the content of niobium in hydrothermal solution. The geochemical data show that all types of rocks and ores have positive anomalies of Ba and Nb, negative anomalies of U, Ta, Sr, Zr and Y. From coarse dolomitic facies to massive mineralization, the content of REE, Nb and Th increases, the content of Sr decreases, and the ratio of (La/Yb)N and (La/Nd)N increases, all of which change continuously. Vein mineralization has similar (La/Nd)N and (La + Ce + Pr)N/REE ratios compared with coarse dolomitic facies and has a wide range of Sr, Th, Nb and REE compositions, and elemental ratio and content of vein mineralization are within the distribution range of ore-hosting dolomite and different types of mineralization. Based on the above, it is considered that the main mineralization body at Bayan Obo was formed in the process of auto-metasomatism of Mesoproterozoic igneous carbonatite, while vein mineralization was the product of homogenization and re-precipitation of early ore-forming material by the Paleozoic fluids, without the addition of exogenous metallogenic materials.