Chronic Kidney Disease Stage 5 (CKD-5) imparts a 4-fold increase in minimal trauma fracture with a substantial increase in mortality following hip fracture. Bone disease in CKD is complex, characterised by abnormal levels of PTH, calcium, phosphate, ALP, and vitamin D, manifesting as a condition known as CKD-Mineral and Bone Disorder (CKD-MBD). While bisphosphonates (BPs) are widely used in the management of osteoporosis, their therapeutic role when end-stage renal function and bone disease co-exist remains unclear. This 15-year retrospective cohort study examines the long-term use of BPs in CKD-4 and -5 patients receiving no renal replacement therapy, haemodialysis and renal transplant in a tertiary centre in Sydney, Australia. In multivariate regression adjusting for age, baseline bone mineral density (BMD) and history of fracture, BP use was associated with net gain in lumbar spine bone density in renal transplant recipients over a mean treatment period of 3.5 years (net annual BMD gain of 0.039 g/cm2, p = 0.005). No such benefit was seen in hip BMD in CKD subjects. Regardless of transplant status, CKD patients treated with BPs had no improvement in hip BMD with a general decline in hip BMD across both groups during the study period (hip BMD: transplant recipients decline 0.024 ± 0.81 g/cm2, non-transplant CKD patients decline 0.055 ± 0.84 g/cm2). BP therapy did not result in significant changes in biochemical parameters (ALP, PTH, and phosphate) and no serious adverse effects were detected in association with BP use. In particular, kidney function was not affected by BPs post-transplant (eGFR = 43 ± 29 ml/min/1.73 m2, p = 0.80). BPs preserved lumbar spine bone density in kidney transplant recipients but did not prevent declines in hip bone mineral density in either transplant patients or those with CKD-4 and -5.
               
                  Summary
                  There remains a lack of clarity of the risks vs. benefits of bone-sparing pharmacotherapy in chronic kidney disease Stages 4 and 5. This single-centre 15-year retrospective data analysis showed that bisphosphonates are not associated with any detectable serious adverse effects in CKD-4 and -5 and effective at mitigating lumbar spine bone loss in kidney transplant patients.