We report new geochemical data (major-elements, trace-elements, and Nd-Pb isotopes) for the Spor Mountain Formation (SMF), a volcanic sequence that hosts the largest deposit of beryllium in the world. Understanding the genesis of the deposit is critical for improved recognition of regional exploration targets containing additional volcanic-hosted beryllium resources. The deposit occurs in an area of extensive alkalic rhyolitic ash flow tuffs and calderas underlain by Paleozoic and older limestone, dolomite, shale, and quartzite. The lower fluorite and bertrandite-rich tuff and upper topaz-rich rhyolite of the SMF have overlapping zircon crystallization ages (25.59 + 0.29/−0.45 Ma). Enrichment of Be, U, and F is a key attribute of the SMF inherited from melting heterogeneous source materials and magma hybridization in the continental lithosphere. Two mineralization stages are implicated: magmatic, and hydrothermal/metasomatic. The magmatic stage occurred early, as indicated by the high beryllium content in early-crystallizing zircon. The post-magmatic/hydrothermal stage involved F-rich fluids that reacted with glass and carbonate nodules in the tuff to form bertrandite (and U-rich fluorite and opal) and high-grade mineralization. The rhyolite best displays the magmatic stage of enrichment. The SMF is alkaline. Chondrite-normalized REE patterns for tuff and rhyolite are regular, stacked subparallel, and imply a shared source derivation and evolution. The tuff and rhyolite plot along a sub-vertical array for Pb isotopes and suggest they are cogenetic; both have negative values of εNd. Pb isotopic ratios for SMF do not match the slopes, initial isotopic values, or estimated basement ages of precious and base metal mining districts in Utah; thus, they do not share a source region or evolution. Crustal ages from Nd isotopes (average TDM ~ 2.29 Ga) are older than basement ages obtained by Pb isotopes. The deposit occurs in a transitional area of thinned crust near the boundary between two basement domains, the eastern Great Basin and Colorado Plateau, which have contrasting ages. Many geochemical attributes are shared between SMF and the Ermakovka deposit in Russia: they represent the world's major commercial Be deposits. Rare-metal indices of granite-related mineralization show that SMF resembles other global beryllium-bearing granitic deposits. Despite this coincidence, none of these examples matches the mineralogy, geologic setting, or type of rare metal mineralization at Spor Mountain.