Calcite carbonatites from the Kamthai alkaline complex in western India are highly enriched in Sr and the rare earth elements (REE) owing to their formation from highly differentiated carbonatitic magma. Pegmatitic calcite carbonatites preserve rare magmatic intergrowth of rod/pod-like carbocernaite [(Ca, Na)(Sr, REE, Ba)(CO3)2] and REE + Sr-rich calcite. This intergrowth is interpreted to be the result of rapid simultaneous crystallization of the phases from a brine-rich carbonatitic magma. Primary carbocernaite, calcite, and britholite [(LREE, Ca)5(SiO4, PO4)3(OH, F)] sequestered Sr and REE from the brine-rich melt and constitute the major sources of these elements during hydrothermal redistribution. Replacement textures suggest fluid-assisted, post-magmatic hydrothermal REE redistribution through dissolution-reprecipitation process that concentrated the REE into secondary REE-(fluor/hydroxyl)carbonates, cerianite (ideally Ce4+O2), ancylite [(Sr, Ca)LREE(CO3)2(OH)∙(H2O)], and monazite. Hydrothermal alteration of magmatic calcite leached out the LREE, whereas in case of carbocernaite and britholite, an increase in their REE contents is noticed, followed by pseudomorphic replacement by REE-(fluor/hydroxyl)carbonate minerals.
                  The carbonatite-derived hydrothermal fluids initially transported the REE as sulfate and later as hydroxyl‑carbonate complexes. The ligand transition was a consequence of the precipitation of baryte, celestine, and pyrite, which led to a reduction in fluid sulfur content and increase in its pH due to interaction with carbonates. Precipitation of secondary REE minerals was triggered by decrease in ore fluid temperature due to interaction with relatively cooler, oxidized fluid and interaction with carbonates. Carbocernaite, ancylite, cerianite, and Ce-bearing REE-(fluor)carbonates constitute early precipitated secondary REE minerals along with baryte, celestine, and pyrite as by-product phases, whereas both Ce- and La-rich, hydroxyl-dominated members of bastnäsite, parisite, and synchysite, along with monazite were the dominant REE minerals which precipitated during the advanced hydrothermal stage, with siderite as a by-product.