Phosphorous (P) resources are finite. Sewage sludge recyclates (SSR) are not only of interest as plant fertilizer but also as potential source of minerals in animal nutrition. However, besides P and calcium (Ca), SSR contain heavy metals. Under EU legislation, the use of SSR derivatives in animal feed is not permitted, but given the need to improve nutrient recycling, it could be an environmentally sound future mineral source. Black soldier fly larvae (BSFL) convert low-grade biomass into valuable proteins and lipids, and accumulate minerals in their body. It was hypothesized that BSFL modify and increase their mineral content in response to feeding on SSR containing substrates. The objective was to evaluate the upcycling of minerals from SSR into agri-food nutrient cycles through BSFL. Growth, nutrient and mineral composition were compared in BSFL reared either on a modified Gainesville fly diet (FD) or on FD supplemented with either 4% of biochar (FD + BCH) or 3.6% of single-superphosphate (FD + SSP) recyclate (n = 6 BSFL rearing units/group). Larval mass, mineral and nutrient concentrations and yields were determined, and the bioaccumulation factor (BAF) was calculated. The FD + SSP substrate decreased specific growth rate and crude fat of BSFL (P < 0.05) compared to FD. The FD + SSP larvae had higher Ca and P contents and yields but the BAF for Ca was lowest. The FD + BCH larvae increased Ca, iron, cadmium and lead contents compared to FD. Larvae produced on FD + SSP showed lower lead and higher arsenic concentration than on FD + BCH. Frass of FD + BCH had higher heavy metal concentration than FD + SSP and FD (P < 0.05). Except for cadmium and manganese, the larval heavy metal concentration was below the legally permitted upper concentrations for feed. In conclusion, the SSR used could enrich BSFL with Ca and P but at the expense of growth. Due to the accumulation of Cd and Mn, BSFL or products thereof can only be a component of farmed animal feed whereas in BSFL frass heavy metal concentrations remained below the upper limit authorized by EU.