Auriferous quartz veins in the Namicupo gold prospect occur parallel to the foliation of metasedimentary host rocks of the Xixano Complex in northeastern Mozambique. The geochemistry and ore-forming mechanism of the Namicupo prospect have never been scientifically investigated. This study discusses the ore mineralogy, fluid inclusion, and stable isotope (S-O) characteristics of the prospect. The mineralization in the Namicupo prospect is divided into two stages. The Stage I, primary mineralization, is represented by electrum with Ag contents of 15–26 at.%, associated with pyrite and chalcopyrite. The Stage II is supergene mineralization, characterized by electrum with Ag contents of 39–46 at.%, intergrown with goethite, barite, and minium, which replaced primary sulfides. Quartz from the mineralized veins hosts three types of primary fluid inclusions coexisting in the same fluid inclusion assemblage. Type A inclusions are three-phase aqueous‑carbonic inclusions (aqueous liquid, CO2 liquid and vapor), with final homogenization temperature and salinity varying from 140 to 241 °C, and 1.0 to 7.8 wt% NaCl eq., respectively. Type B inclusions occur either as mono-phase (vapor or liquid) or two-phase (vapor and liquid) CO2-rich, N2-H2O-bearing inclusions, with homogenization temperature varying from +12.9 to +29.3 °C. The Type C inclusions are two-phase (liquid and vapor) aqueous inclusions, which homogenize to liquid phase at temperatures between 209 and 337 °C. The salinity of the Type C inclusions varies from 4.0 to 10.8 wt% NaCl eq. The sulfur isotopic ratios (δ34SCDT) of sulfides associated with Stage I mineralization and the oxygen isotopic ratios (δ18OSMOW) of water calculated from those of quartz from the quartz veins vary from −3.5 to +0.9 ‰ and −1.0 to +2.5 ‰, respectively.
                  The primary mineralization at the prospect is classified as an orogenic-type gold mineralization, formed by aqueous‑carbonic metamorphic fluids. The precipitation of primary gold mineralization in the Namicupo prospect resulted dominantly from fluid immiscibility. The considerable amount of S up to 0.1 wt% and the high Ag contents of electrum intergrown with goethite, minium and barite suggest that the supergene mineralization in the Stage II was caused by oxidation of primary gold-bearing sulfides and Au-rich electrum under moderately acidic and oxidizing conditions, which resulted in Au and Ag liberation, likely by thiosulfate. Dissolution of primary mineralization and supergene gold enrichment in the Namicupo prospect appear to have occurred largely in situ, with little evidence of distant mobilization.