Benthic fluxes of biogenic compounds play a major role in the biogeochemistry of shallow aquatic environments. Quantifying these fluxes at the scale of a lagoon is a challenge, especially when sediments are heterogeneous and fluxes at the sediment-water interface combine diffusive and advective transport processes. Diagenetic processes and associated benthic fluxes were quantified across different seasons in a lagoon of the French Mediterranean coast (La Palme lagoon) from vertical profiles of pore water and sedimentary solid fraction carried out at many representative stations of the lagoon. The northwestern part of the lagoon is covered with fine-grained sediment with low permeability and the rest of the lagoon contains permeable sandy sediment. We obtained vertical profiles with centimetre-scale resolution of water content, salinity, and major particulate and dissolved biogenic compounds of C, N, P, Si, S, Fe and Mn. This study allowed us to refine the sedimentary mapping of the lagoon, to specify the spatio-temporal evolution of biogeochemical processes, and to determine more precisely the part of the diffusive fluxes of nutrient compared to advective fluxes. Comparison of the vertical profiles with a molecular diffusion transport model shows that molecular diffusion is the dominant process in fine-grained sediments, while sandy sediments are dominated by advection due to circulation of lagoon water in shallow sediments. Benthic respiration renders fine-grained and sandy sediments anoxic from the first few mm below the sediment-water interface, particularly due to the availability of labile organic matter. Benthic dissolved inorganic nitrogen fluxes are of the same order of magnitude in both sediment types, despite the different flux mechanisms. This suggests that the intensity of organic matter mineralization processes is the same in fine and sandy sediments. Benthic phosphate fluxes are greater in sandy than in fine sediments because phosphorus is more efficiently retained in the solid fraction of fine sediments. Thus, sandy sediments play a dominant role in the pelagic-benthic coupling of the lagoon.