Context
                  Based on a decade-long exploration, dimensions of elongate mineral particles are implicated as a pivotal component of their carcinogenic potency. This paper summarizes current understanding of the discovered relationships and their importance to the protection of public health.
               
                  Objectives
                  To demonstrate the relationships between cancer risk and dimensions (length, width, and other derivative characteristics) of mineral fibers by comparing the results and conclusions of previously published studies with newly published information.
               
                  Methods
                  A database including 59 datasets comprising 341,949 records were utilized to characterize dimensions of elongate particles. The descriptive statistics, correlation and regression analysis, combined with Monte Carlo simulation, were used to select dimensional characteristics most relevant for mesothelioma and lung cancer risk prediction.
               
                  Results
                  The highest correlation between mesothelioma potency factor and weight fraction of size categories is achieved for fibers with lengths >5.6 μm and widths ≤0.26 μm (R = 0.94, P < 0.02); no statistically significant potency was found for lengths <5 μm. These results are consistent with early published estimations, though are derived from a different approach. For combinations of amphiboles and chrysotile (with a consideration of a correction factor between mineral classes), the potency factors correlated most highly with a fraction of fibers longer than 5 μm and thinner than 0.2 μm for mesothelioma, and longer than 5 μm and thinner than 0.3 μm for lung cancer. Because the proportion of long, thin particles in asbestiform vs. non-asbestiform dusts is higher, the cancer potencies of the former are predicted at a significantly higher level. The analysis of particle dimensionality in human lung burden demonstrates positive selection for thinner fibers (especially for amosite and crocidolite) and prevailing fraction of asbestiform habit.
               
                  Conclusion
                  Dimensions of mineral fibers can be confirmed as one of the main drivers of their carcinogenicity. The width of fibers emerges as a primary potency predictor, and fibers of all widths with lengths shorter than 5 μm seem to be non-impactful for cancer risk. The mineral dust with a fibrous component is primarily carcinogenic if it contains amphibole fibers longer than 5 μm and thinner than 0.25 μm.