The involvement of modified seawater and/or basinal brine in IOCG mineralization was documented by numerous geologic studies. Still, this process remains poorly understood. In this study, we reacted seawater with andesite and basalt, the most common arc volcanic rocks, at 150 and 240 °C and water vapor-saturated pressure to assess the Cu leaching capacity and fluid evolution due to the seawater-volcanic rock interactions. The experimental results show that Mg, Fe, Al, and SO4
                     2− in the modified seawater decreased significantly, accompanied by an increased Ca concentration. The fluid pH also decreased from 8.3 of the initial seawater to ∼7.5 and ∼7.0 after 150 and 240 °C experiments, respectively. The incongruent calcsilicate (e.g., plagioclase) dissolution and anhydrite precipitation were observed in the reacted rock samples. Thermodynamic modeling confirmed the trends of those concentration changes but predicted several alteration minerals that were not observed in the experiments. Our experiments show that Cu-leaching efficiency is much higher from the andesite than from the basalt, also higher at 240 °C than at 150 °C. The andesite contains more Cu than the basalt samples, and abundant Cu-rich (average 106 ppm) plagioclase-hosted silicate melt inclusions and Cu-bearing (average 59 ppm) groundmass are identified in the original andesite sample but not in the original basalt sample, which is considered to be the cause of the Cu-leaching differences between the two rock samples. The δ34S value of resultant fluids is dominated by seawater sulfate with a minor contribution of magmatic sulfur from the rock. Thermodynamic modeling combined with recent experimental studies show that deposition of Cu sulfides is the most effective when Cu-bearing fluids react with early-stage pyrite. Our results suggest that the seawater/(brine)-volcanic rock reactions at 150–250 °C can produce Cu-bearing fluids, which in turn can form IOCG deposits, and that Cu mineralization with sulfides zonation can result from replacement reactions between the Cu-bearing fluids and Fe-rich minerals in precursor iron ore bodies.