Serenu porphyry copper prospect is situated 22 km northwest of the Meiduk copper mine, Kerman Cenozoic magmatic arc in southeastern Iran. The study area is characterized by a simple lithology including Eocene volcanic and volcaniclastics, Neogene sediments, and sub-volcanic rocks (Hezar complex) which is intruded by a late Miocene porphyry diorite to quartz-diorite stock that has developed alteration and mineralization in the area. Phyllic, argillic, and propylitic alteration types are well-distributed in the Serenu prospect; potassic alteration is only locally observed. Hypogene mineralization occurs in the Serenu porphyry and the host Eocene volcanic rocks as scattered vein-veinlets, stockworks, and disseminated mineralization related to potassic and phyllic alteration types.
                  The mineralogy and cross-cutting relationships, allow the vein-veinlets to be classified into five groups including (I) magnetite ± quartz, (II) quartz ± magnetite ± chalcopyrite ± pyrite ± chlorite ± anhydrite (III) quartz ± pyrite ± chalcopyrite ± anhydrite, (IV) pyrite, and (V) quartz ± calcite veinlets. Oxide and supergene enriched ores are poorly developed in the area. Zircon U-Pb dating on two samples from the Serenu porphyry provided consistent ages at 9.83 ± 0.4 Ma and 10.2 ± 0.17 Ma (±2σ) indicative of late Miocene emplacement of the intrusion. The zircons are characterized by positive εHf (t) values of 8.52 to 12.27 and TDM of 200–370 Ma and a TC
                     DM of 310–590 Ma indicating that they originated from a juvenile mafic and thickened lower crust and depleted mantle-derived magma.
                  The late Miocene age determined for the Serenu porphyry copper prospect is consistent with the ages reported for many other shallow intrusions related to porphyry-type mineralization in the Kerman belt and further emphasizes the Miocene metallogenic epoch as the preferred time for porphyry Cu-Mo-Au mineralization in this belt, coinciding with a significant stage of continental collision between the Arabian and Iranian plates. The results of this study reveal that the juvenile mafic lower crust together with input from a depleted mantle and older subduction-related magma has a very significant impact on the formation of the Serenu porphyry host magma.