Hydrothermal alteration and mineralization types of orogenic gold deposits display many variations depending on formation depths, types of host rock, compositions of ore fluids, spatial positions, fluid/rock ratios, and repetitive modifications during multiple fluid infiltrations in the complicated processes of fluid-rock interaction. Therefore, establishing holistic reference patterns of hydrothermal alteration with associated mineralization for the orogenic gold system is necessary. Based on the observation of typical orogenic gold deposits and thermodynamic simulation of fluid-rock reaction, the general features of proposed patterns include:
                        
                           (1)
                           Orogenic ore fluids are capable of transporting sufficient gold from deep (5 kbar and 600째C) to shallow (1 kbar and 200째C) crustal levels, resulting in alteration and mineralization occurred in a much-varied depth. Only considering the effects of fluid-rock reaction and sulfidation, the formation of pyrrhotite and pyrite at relatively high and low P-T conditions, respectively, is the most important mechanism driving gold precipitation. In addition, the changes of fluid fO2 and pH can also trigger a decrease in the gold solubility in fluids.
                        
                        
                           (2)
                           Multiple waves of fluid infiltration are capable of dissolving the early-formedulfides and gold, and reprecipitate them in the distal alteration zones, which can explain the irregular gold concentration distribution patterns in wide alteration zones. The fluids under higher P-T conditions (5 kbar and 600째C and 3 kbar and 400째C) are more capable of dissolving early-formed sulfides and gold. Additionally, the later infiltrated fluids can transform early-formed pyrrhotite into pyrite.
                        
                        
                           (3)
                           The model of interactions between ore fluids and aluminosilicate rocks at varied P-T conditions indicates that the alteration mineral assemblages in hypozonal deposits (>12 km) mainly include biotite, amphibole, anorthite, K-feldspar, quartz, and pyrrhotite assemblages; that those in mesozonal deposits (6 to 12 km) are characterized by chlorite, calcite, quartz, muscovite, pyrite or pyrrhotite. The epizonal deposits (<6 km) commonly develop more abundant Fe-Mg bearing carbonates (e.g., dolomite, ankerite, and siderite), quartz, muscovite, and pyrite. The compositional variations of ore fluids and host rocks have important controls on the development of iron-oxides and carbonaceous material.
                        
                     
                  
                  (4) The alteration halo is relatively restricted under hypozonal to lower mesozonal conditions. However, broad carbonation develops under upper mesozonal to epizonal conditions, with Fe-Mg bearing carbonates and calcite distributed in proximal and distal zones, respectively.