A demanding task of the musculoskeletal system is the attachment of tendon to bone at entheses. This region often presents a thin layer of fibrocartilage (FC), mineralized close to the bone and unmineralized close to the tendon. Mineralized FC deserves increased attention, owing to its crucial anchoring task and involvement in enthesis pathologies. Here, we analyzed mineralized FC and subchondral bone at the Achilles tendon-bone insertion of rats. This location features enthesis FC anchoring tendon to bone and sustaining tensile loads, and periosteal FC facilitating bone-tendon sliding with accompanying compressive and shear forces. Using a correlative multimodal investigation, we evaluated potential specificities in mineral content, fiber organization and mechanical properties of enthesis and periosteal FC. Both tissues had a lower degree of mineralization than subchondral bone, yet used the available mineral very efficiently: for the same local mineral content, they had higher stiffness and hardness than bone. We found that enthesis FC was characterized by highly aligned mineralized collagen fibers even far away from the attachment region, whereas periosteal FC had a rich variety of fiber arrangements. Except for an initial steep spatial gradient between unmineralized and mineralized FC, local mechanical properties were surprisingly uniform inside enthesis FC while a modulation in stiffness, independent from mineral content, was observed in periosteal FC. We interpreted these different structure-property relationships as a demonstration of the high versatility of FC, providing high strength at the insertion (to resist tensile loading) and a gradual compliance at the periosteal surface (to resist contact stresses).
               
                  Statement of significance
                  Mineralized fibrocartilage (FC) at entheses facilitates the integration of tendon in bone, two strongly dissimilar tissues. We focus on the structure-function relationships of two types of mineralized FC, enthesis and periosteal, which have clearly distinct mechanical demands. By investigating them with multiple high-resolution methods in a correlative manner, we demonstrate differences in fiber architecture and mechanical properties between the two tissues, indicative of their mechanical roles. Our results are relevant both from a medical viewpoint, targeting a clinically relevant location, as well as from a material science perspective, identifying FC as high-performance versatile composite.