High-U hydrothermal apatite with complex UPb systematics is closely spatially associated with mineralization at the Coles Hill deposit, the largest unmined uranium deposit known in the United States. The deposit is hosted in metasomatized rocks of the 450- to 430-Ma-old Martinsville Intrusive Complex in south-central Virginia. Direct dating of metamict uranium-ore minerals, mostly coffinite, is not possible due to open-system radon loss. Instead, UPb isotopes in cogenetic apatite were investigated as a means of evaluating the age of mineralization. Here we report in situ electron probe microanalyses (EPMA) of coffinite, isotope-dilution thermal-ionization mass spectrometry (ID-TIMS) UPb data for mineralized whole rock samples, and laser ablation inductively coupled plasma mass spectrometry (LA-ICPMS) UPb isotope data for apatite in both unmineralized and U-mineralized host rocks.
                  Massive deficits in radiogenic Pb preclude reliable UPb “chemical ages” calculated from EPMA data obtained from coffinite. In contrast, LA-ICPMS data for secondary apatite in unmineralized rocks indicate low-U concentrations (100–102 ppm), “normal” (consistent with models of terrestrial Pb isotopic evolution) initial Pb isotope compositions, and UPb age estimates of ~330 Ma, which is consistent with dates previously proposed for the regional Paleozoic shear zone that hosts the deposit. Ore-stage apatite associated with coffinite has high-U concentrations (typically 102–103 ppm but up to 2.4 wt% U) and large excesses of 206Pb (207Pb/206Pb < 0.01) unsupported by in situ U decay. Data show that initial Pb had variable isotopic compositions including both “normal” Pb derived from host rocks and 206Pb-enriched Pb introduced by secondary metasomatic fluids. Evaluation of the complex evolution and mixing of Pb sources has broader implications for UPb dating of hydrothermal apatite.
                  Excess 206Pb in apatite is derived from decay products of 222Rn lost from coffinite and mobilized by Na-, P-, and U-enriched metasomatic fluids during the main mineralizing event at ~230 Ma. Ore-stage alteration did not uniformly reset the UPb systematics in host rocks precluding a well-constrained whole-rock isochron age. However, whole-rock isotope data imply U mobility at ~200–220 Ma and support a Triassic age for the final stages of mineralization. Results also indicate that apatite with up to several weight percent uranium is able to retain U and its decay products for hundreds of millions of years; an important consideration when assessing this mineral as a potential matrix for long-term storage of radioactive waste.