In an area where mineral deposits have been discovered, both anomaly detection algorithms and supervised classification algorithms can be adopted to detect mineralization-related geochemical anomalies for mineral exploration targeting. However, anomaly detection algorithms themselves cannot use known mineral deposits as the supervisors to improve the performance of geochemical anomaly detection models. Supervised classification algorithms can not properly deal with the extreme class-imbalance of geochemical exploration data in the establishment of classification models. Therefore, neither anomaly detection models nor supervised classification models perform well in the detection of mineralization-related geochemical anomalies. In order to obtain a high-performance mineral exploration targeting model, the self-training algorithm was adopted to construct a self-training model based on support vector classifiers to detect gold mineralization-related geochemical anomalies in the Chengde area in Hebei Province (China). The self-training model was compared with the support vector classification model, logistic regression model and five dictionary learning models in terms of area under the curve (AUC) and lift index. The AUC value of the self-training model (0.89) is much higher than those of the two supervised classification models (0.81–0.82) and five anomaly detection models (0.79–0.81). The lift index of the self-training model (11.87) is also much higher than those of the two supervised classification models (2.77–4.04) and five anomaly detection models (2.64–3.48). Therefore, the self-training model performs much better than the two supervised classification models and five anomaly detection models in the detection of gold mineralization-related geochemical anomalies. The gold mineralization-related geochemical anomalies detected by the self-training model highly conform to the metallogenic and geological features in the study area. Therefore, it is a prospective method to establish a self-training model to detect mineralization-related geochemical anomalies in an area where mineral deposits have been discovered.