Background
                  Prostate cancer (PCa) patients treated with androgen deprivation therapy (ADT) have an increased fracture risk. Exploring biomarkers for early bone loss detection is of great interest.
               
                  Methods
                  Pre-planned substudy of the ARNEO-trial (NCT03080116): a double blind, randomised, placebo-controlled phase 2 trial performed in high-risk PCa patients without bone metastases between March 2019 and April 2021. Patients were 1:1 randomised to treatment with gonadotropin-releasing hormone antagonist (degarelix) + androgen receptor signalling inhibitor (ARSI; apalutamide) versus degarelix + matching placebo for 12 weeks prior to prostatectomy. Before and following ADT, serum and 24-h urinary samples were collected. Primary endpoints were changes in calcium-phosphate homeostasis and bone biomarkers.
               
                  Findings
                  Of the 89 randomised patients, 43 in the degarelix + apalutamide and 44 patients in the degarelix + placebo group were included in this substudy. Serum corrected calcium levels increased similarly in both treatment arms (mean difference +0.04 mmol/L, 95% confidence interval, 0.02; 0.06), and parathyroid hormone and 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D3 levels decreased. Bone resorption markers increased, and stable calcium isotope ratios reflecting net bone mineral balance decreased in serum and urine similarly in both groups.
               
                  Interpretation
                  This exploratory substudy suggests that 12 weeks of ADT in non-metastatic PCa patients results in early bone loss. Additional treatment with ARSI does not seem to more negatively influence bone loss in the early phase. Future studies should address if these early biomarkers are able to predict fracture risk, and can be implemented in clinical practice for follow-up of bone health in PCa patients under ADT.
               
                  Funding
                  
                     Research Foundation Flanders; KU Leuven; University-Hospitals-Leuven.