Carbonatite represents a major host rock for niobium (Nb) resources worldwide. Both magmatic and post-magmatic metasomatic processes are crucial for Nb mineralization in carbonatites. However, the roles of these metasomatic processes are difficult to be evaluated due to their multiple origins and complexity of the physico-chemical conditions. In this study, we present detailed mineralogical investigations of pyrochlore group minerals and chemical U-Th-Pb geochronology of uraninite within the Miaoya carbonatite complex, aiming to better characterize the role of post-magmatic metasomatic events.
                  The Miaoya complex (ca. 420–440 Ma) hosts the second largest carbonatite-related Nb deposit in China, mainly in the form of pyrochlore group minerals, ferrocolumbite and Nb-bearing rutile. Primary pyrochlore group minerals evolved from pyrochlore to uranpyrochlore, and ultimately reaching the betafite end-member during the magmatic stage. They have then experienced an episode of metasomatic events at 235.4 ± 4.1 Ma, as determined by U-Th-Pb chemical ages of secondary uraninite. Fluids activity for uranpyrochlore alteration was concomitant with the hydrothermal reworking of REE mineralization, which was probably related to tectono-thermal events that occurred during the Triassic closure of the ancient Mianlue Ocean. During this process, hydration and decomposition of uranpyrochlore were characterized by the leaching of Na, Ca and F from its structure, the incorporation of Fe, Si, Sr and Ba from the fluids, and the final in situ replacement by secondary ferrocolumbite, uraninite and Nb-bearing rutile. In addition, parts of Nb and U liberated from uranpyrochlore by metamictization were then transported over distances of several hundreds of microns in relatively reducing (Fe, Si, S, CO2)-bearing fluids under high temperature, and were ultimately re-precipitated in amorphous Fe-Si-U-Nb-bearing oxide veins and poorly crystallized Nb-Ti-Ca-Fe-rich oxides. The relatively weak fluids activity failed to efficiently promote the Nb re-enrichment.