The physical and chemical attributes of soils are strongly influenced by the nature of the minerals they contain and their concentration. Thus, soil texture is directly dependent on the content in clayey minerals, which influences a number of characteristics such as water dynamics. Although the mineralogical composition of soil is usually determined by X-ray diffraction spectroscopy, this technique is expensive and time-consuming, and uses toxic materials, all of which makes it impractical for obtaining large data sets. Also, available methods for acquiring, interpreting and examining visible–near infrared–shortwave infrared (VIS–NIR–SWIR) spectra are largely ineffective with tropical soils. The aim of this work was to ascertain whether VIS–NIR–SWIR reflectance spectroscopy (350–2500 nm) is useful for identifying minerals in subtropical soils as classified by textural class. For this purpose, soil samples were collected at 66 points at three different soil depths (0–20, 20–40 and 40–60 cm) over a study area located in the State of Rio Grande do Sul (Brazil). The soil texture were determined with the pipette method, and soil spectra were recorded on a FieldSpec Pro VIS-NIR-SWIR laboratory spectrophotometer. Soil minerals were identified, and their proportions determined, from the second-derivative of the Kubelka–Munk (KM) function for the spectra. Five main minerals were thus identified from their spectral signatures, namely: hematite, goethite, kaolinite, chlorite and illite. Identification of the minerals was facilitated by classifying the samples according to texture. The higher the clay content was, the higher was the spectral amplitude of the minerals identified. Those textural classes with the highest clay contents exhibited the greatest proportions of iron oxides and of clay minerals such as kaolinite. These relationships allowed more comprehensive analysis of the soils and expeditious characterization of the study area in terms of texture and mineralogy with a view to facilitating decision-making agricultural support policies.