Copper, gold and molybdenum mineralization of the Kalmakyr porphyry deposit in Uzbek Tien Shan occurs as stockworks, veinlets and disseminations in the phyllic and K-silicate alteration zones developed predominantly in a middle to late Carboniferous intrusive complex composed of monzonite and granodiorite porphyry. Zircon U–Pb dating yielded an age of 327.2±5.6Ma for the ore-hosting monzonite and an age of 313.6±2.8Ma for the ore-bearing granodiorite porphyry. Re–Os dating of seven molybdenite samples from stockwork and veinlet ores yielded model ages from 313.2 to 306.3Ma, with two well-constrained isochron ages of 307.6±2.5Ma (five stockwork ores) and 309.1±2.2Ma (five stockwork ores and two veinlet ores), respectively. These results indicate that Cu–Au mineralization post-dated the emplacement of the monzonite, started right after the emplacement of the granodiorite porphyry, and lasted for ca. 7Ma afterward. The geochronological and geochemical data suggest that the Kalmakyr deposit was formed in a late Carboniferous mature magmatic arc setting, probably related to the latest subduction process of the Turkestan Ocean beneath the Middle Tien Shan. The εHf(t) values of zircon grains from the monzonite vary from +11 to +1.7, with an average of +5.1, and those of zircon grains from the granodiorite porphyry range from +5.7 to −1.8, with an average of +2.4. These data indicate that the magma of both monzonite and granodiorite porphyry was derived from partial melting of a thickened lower crust with input of mantle components and variable crustal contamination, and that there was more mantle contribution to the formation of the monzonite than the granodiorite porphyry. The high rhenium concentrations of molybdenite (98–899ppm) also indicate major mantle contribution of rhenium and by inference ore metals. The relatively high EuN/EuN
                     ∗ values (average 0.68), Ce4+/Ce3 values (average 890) and Ce/Nd values (average 36.8) for zircon grains from the granodiorite porphyry than those from the monzonite (average EuN/EuN
                     ∗
                     =0.33, average Ce4+/Ce3
                     =624, average Ce/Nd=3.9) suggest that the magma for the syn-mineralization granodiorite porphyry has higher oxygen fugacity than that for the pre-mineralization monzonite. Based on these data, it is proposed that while the monzonite was emplaced, the oxygen fugacity and volatile contents in the magma were relatively low, and ore metals might disperse in the intrusive rock, whereas when the granodiorite porphyry was emplaced, the oxygen fugacity and volatile contents in the magma were increased, favoring copper and gold enrichment in the magmatic fluids. The Kalmakyr deposit formed from a long-lived magmatic-hydrothermal system connected with fertile magmatic sources in relation to the subduction of the Turkestan Ocean beneath the Middle Tien Shan.