Fire-extinguishing powders (FEPs) are constituted by an inner mineral core of (NH4)H2PO4 and (NH4)2SO4 salts (>95 %, by weight) externally coated with Si-based additives, which make problematic reuse after their service life has expired (36 months). This study aimed to assess the feasibility of using the composting process as an environmentally friendly strategy to lyse the external coating and recycle this nutrient-rich solid waste for replacement of inorganic fertilization in soilless cultivation of horticultural crops. A microcosm-scale experiment with lettuce plants grown into a soil/quartz sand mixture under controlled conditions for 28 days was used to investigate plant responses (fresh and dry biomass, chlorophyll fluorescence parameters, root morphology, ash and nutrients content) to amendment with increasing dosages (equivalent at 0, 10, 20 and 30 t ha−1) of an exhausted FEPs-enriched compost. Chemical properties (pH, EC, TOC, TN) and content of soluble nutrients (Na+, K+, Mg2+, Ca2+, NH4
                     +, H2PO4
                     −, SO4
                     2−, NO3
                     −, Cl−) released into the growing substrate were also monitored. Non-amended microcosms and non-enriched compost treatments were taken as controls. Results showed, beside the expected rise of phosphate, sulphate and ammonium ions, exhausted FEPs contributed Ca2+, Mg2+ and Na+ content. Whereas compost determined a dose-dependent release of K+, which was particularly useful in maintaining the K/Na ratio in a range not harmful to plant physiology. It was also found that the compost enriched with 5 % (w/w) exhausted FEPs was no phytotoxic to lettuce. On the contrary, it stimulated the plant growth, increased the photosynthetic efficiency and the shoot biomass accumulation, thus incrementing the shoot/root ratio. Moreover, it oriented the root morphology development and promoted the plant uptake of both water and solutes. To sum up, composting represents a suitable alternative to chemical treatment to recover readily available nutrients contained in exhausted FEPs and produce an enriched compost for use in soilless cultivation.