The giant Dajishan W-polymetallic deposit, located in the Nanling metallogenic belt, is a typical steeply dipping wolframite-quartz vein-type deposit. From top to bottom, the W ore grade is highest in the middle and decreases towards both ends. In No. 23 wolframite-quartz vein of the north group, the thickness of the veins increases from 0.1 ∼ 0.2 m thick in the 517 m level to a maximum of 0.6 ∼ 2.0 m in the 267 m level. According to the “Five Floor” prospecting model, the No. 23 vein corresponds to veinlet (517 m), moderate vein (467 ∼ 417 m), and thick vein zones (367 m ∼ 267 m). Primary wolframite-hosted fluid inclusions show homogenization temperatures display a slight but explicit decrease by about 20 °C in average from bottom to top, recording the essential fluid cooling process. The phase ratios (20 to 30 vol% vapor proportions) and salinities (6.3 to 10.0 wt% NaCl equiv.) are constant at all levels, indicating that neither meteoric water mixing nor fluid boiling/immiscibility is obvious during wolframite formation. The fluids contain NaCl and KCl as major salts, B as the subordinate component, with trace elements including Li, Rb, Cs, Zn, Pb, etc. The significant narrow ranges of K/Na (0.296 to 0.664), Rb/Na (0.008 to 0.018), and Cs/Na ratios (0.032 to 0.076) illustrate that wolframite ore-forming fluids come from the initial fluids derived from a highly-evolved granitic magma. In major host metasandstone, muscovitization and tourmalinization lead to the release of Na, B, and Al from the fluid into the wall rock, and liberation of Fe from the wall rock into the fluid. Wall rock composition data show that muscovitization is the main mechanism of changes in Fe contents. Preliminary calculations indicate that fluid-rock interaction may contributes minor iron to the ore-forming fluids. Combining these results, we support that “Five Floor” style W mineralization in Dajishan is formed by a single-pulsed magmatic fluid. The vertical zonation of vein thickness and ore grade in the “Five Floor” model is predominately controlled by temperature, pressure, and local tectonic regime, but it is less dependent on the fluid chemical composition.