The small but high-grade (average 1.29% to 2.04% Cu and 0.09–0.12% Mo for different orebodies, with also significant Au contents) Julia skarn Cu-Au-Mo deposit is situated some 30 km northeast from the Sorskoe porphyry Mo-Cu deposit in the Kuznetsk Alatau, a Paleozoic terrane in the northernmost part of the Altai-Sayan orogenic system, part of the Central Asian Orogenic Belt. The deposit comprises prograde calcic skarns and later retrograde skarn characterized by abundant andradite-rich garnet defining their oxidized type. These alteration assemblages bear abundant Cu sulfides (chalcopyrite and bornite), which are associated with magnetite and are partially overprinted by weak propylitic and stronger phyllic (carbonate-phyllic) alteration assemblages. Molybdenite is present in these assemblages, and various sulfides and sulfosalts, tellurides, and Bi minerals, as well as native Au are associated with phyllic alteration.
                  The deposit is related to a magnetite-series, I-type, multiphase monzonite-syenite(-quartz syenite)-quartz monzonite-monzogranite igneous complex. Isotopic U-Pb zircon data indicate a Late Cambrian age (∼505 to 485 Ma) of the igneous rocks, whereas their geochemical signatures correspond to high-K calc-alkaline to shoshonitic intrusions emplaced in a post-collisional environment, with possible relationships to a subducted slab break-off. Magmatic evolution included a generation of shoshonitic magma by a low-degree partial melting of the metasomatically-enriched upper mantle, followed by amphibole fractionation in a deep (lower crustal?) magma chamber and then by magma fractionation and emplacement at shallower crustal levels. Although the overall magmatic evolution of the parental intrusions was long-lasting (ca. 20 m.y.), the mineralization is associated with a relatively rapid (ca. 5 m.y.) emplacement of more differentiated granitoid intrusions as well as late mafic dikes.
                  The deposit represents an early Paleozoic (Late Cambrian) Cu-Au(-Mo) mineralization in the Altai-Sayan orogenic system and the broader Central Asian Orogenic Belt, thus confirming the Late Cambrian (to Early Ordovician) Cu-Au-Mo metallogenic event in the region. This, together with the broad regional occurrence of the Cambrian-Early Ordovician igneous complexes and related porphyry/skarn Cu-Au(-Mo) mineralization, emphasizes the early Paleozoic porphyries/skarns as a major regional event prior to much better known late Paleozoic porphyries/skarns in the Central Asian Orogenic Belt. There is a potential of the early Paleozoic terranes to host much more significant Cu-Au(-Mo) mineralization including that of skarn, porphyry and associated types.