How to effectively identify mineralization anomalies from geochemical survey data is one of the key problems that must be properly solved in geochemical exploration. Although supervised machine learning and deep learning techniques have been adopted to solve this problem, the performance of the established mineralization anomaly identification models is not satisfactory because the mutual relationship between neighborhood data points is not taken into account in the modeling of geochemical exploration data. The graph convolutional extreme learning machines (GCELMs) provide a new technique for modeling the graph data transformed from geochemical exploration data. To improve the performance of mineralization anomaly identification algorithms, the GCELM techniques were adopted to establish the supervised classification models for identifying mineralization anomalies from geochemical exploration data. To improve the robustness of the GCELM models in mineralization anomaly identification, an ensemble classification model called voting-based GCELM (V-GCELM) model was established by voting the outputs of multiple GCELM models. The Baishan area of Jilin Province (China) was taken as the study area for carrying out an experiment of mineralization anomaly identification from geochemical exploration data. The synthetic minority over-sampling technique (SMOTE) was used to alleviate the class-imbalance of the training data. The GCELM model, V-GCELM model and extreme learning machine (ELM) model were established for identifying mineralization anomalies, and their performances were compared in terms of the receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curves, area under the curves (AUCs) and lift indices. The results show that the V-GCELM model has the best performance, and its AUC and lift index are 0.9989 and 28.6, respectively. The GCELM model has the second-best performance, and its AUC and lift index are 0.9977 and 20.1, respectively. The ELM model has the worst but still high performance, its AUC and lift index are 0.9402 and 9.2, respectively. The mineralization anomalies identified by the three models have close spatial correlation with the polymetallic deposits found in the study area, and spatially controlled by the main controlling factors in the study area. Therefore, GCELM and V-GCELM are promising techniques for building the high-performance classification models for identifying mineralization anomalies from geochemical exploration data.