Numerous W-Sn deposits are developed in South China. While the majority of these deposits are related to the Yanshanian granites, a few of them are associated with the Early Paleozoic granites, and their geological significance is poorly understood. The Debao deposit is a typical skarn Sn-Cu polymetallic deposit that is spatially related to the Early Paleozoic Qinjia granites. Zircon U-Pb dating of three lithofacies (coarse-grained biotite granite, medium-grained porphyritic biotite granite and fine-grained porphyritic biotite granite) of the Qinjia granites yielded emplacement ages of 437.8 ± 3.0 Ma, 440.2 ± 2.0 Ma and 441.0 ± 3.0 Ma, respectively, consistent with cassiterite U-Pb ages of skarn ore (439.6 ± 2.7 Ma), indicating a close genetic relationship between the granitic magmatism and Sn mineralization. Biotite from the Qinjia granites belong to the ferro-biotite series with relatively high F contents (up to 0.70 wt. %). The Biotite compositions plot near the Ni-NiO (NNO) buffer on a Fe3+-Fe2+-Mg2+ diagram, suggesting formation under relatively low oxygen fugacity. The Qinjia granites are characterized by highly silicious (70.37–72.88 wt. %), high alkali (Na2O + K2O = 6.98–8.88 wt. %) and metaluminous to strongly peraluminous with the A/CNK ratios of 0.92–1.21, belonging to the I-S transform-type granites. They are enriched in U, Th, Zr, Nd and Hf, and depleted in Ba, Sr, Nb, Ta and Ti. They display right-declining chondrite-normalized REE patterns with significant negative Eu anomalies (EuN/Eu* = 0.33–0.66), and have low Nb/Ta and K/Rb ratios, indicating that the Qinjia granites experienced a high degree of fractional crystallization. The zircon εHf(t) values (−2.7 to +1.4), together with TDM
                     C of 1.59 to 1.33 Ga, indicate that the granites formed via partial melting of Mesoproterozoic crustal with minor addition of mantle materials. The reduced (fO2 near NNO and Ce4+/Ce3+ ratios of zircon < 100), fractionated and volatile-rich magma facilitated the enrichment of Sn in the residual melt and hydrothermal fluids. Combined with previous studies on the Early Paleozoic magmatic rocks and tectonic activities in South China, we suggest that the Qinjia granites and associated Sn-Cu mineralization were likely formed in the post-collisional extensional environment during the Wuyi-Yunkai orogeny.