As the largest low-sulfidation (LS) epithermal deposit in the Tulasu basin, western Tianshan, NW China, the Axi gold deposit has a poorly understood geologic history. It is not clear whether hydrothermal mineralization occurred during a single event or multiple events. In this paper, new data consist of whole rock geochemistry and mass-change calculations for hydrothermal alteration. LA-ICP-MS trace element analysis of pyrite was conducted in order to develop a comprehensive metallogenic model. The pyrite-sericite-quartz alteration at the Axi deposit is characterized by replacement of plagioclase and mafic phenocrysts by sericite, quartz, pyrite (py1), smectite, and illite, indicating slightly acidic and reducing conditions during the early ore stage. Medium subhedral pyrite crystals (py1) with porous texture are typically sited adjacent to iron-rich minerals (e.g., hornblende) and are characterized by Co-Ni-Mn enrichment with high ratios of Co/Ni (avg. 1.114) and Cu/As (avg. 0.655), implying preferential sulfidation reactions in magmatic hydrothermal systems. The quartz ± calcite ± pyrite ± adularia assemblages in silicified rocks and the strong mobility of LREE both reflect a slightly acidic chloride-rich solution phase during the later ore stage. Coarse anhedral pyrites with cataclastic texture (py2) and medium euhedral pyrites (py3) have a mixed hydrothermal origin and were deposited with quartz during Au-pyrite-quartz and Au-polysulfide-quartz stages, respectively. Py2 and py3 both have significantly lower Cu/As ratios (avg. 0.103 and avg. 0.088, respectively) than py1, indicating the input of meteoric fluid during the later ore stage. The three generations of pyrite, especially py3, have significant lattice-bound gold contents (py1: 0.01–38.86 ppm, median 1.51 ppm; py2: 0.03–234.37 ppm, median 1.21 ppm; py3: 3.31–231.56 ppm, median 42.72 ppm). Gold precipitation is associated with the destabilization of Au-bearing chlorine (Au(Cl)2
                     −) and bisulfide complexes (Au(HS)2
                     −) via sulfidation and fluid boiling. All of these characteristics indicate the Axi epithermal deposit is the result of two stages of mineralization.