Patchy distribution of herbaceous species is common in degraded grasslands on the Qinghai-Tibetan Plateau, but the effects of such a mosaic pattern on soil biochemical properties have rarely been studied. We compared soil organic carbon (SOC) mineralization, nitrogen (N) availability, ammonia oxidation and plant N uptake between the following vegetation patch types (plant communities) in an alpine meadow: grass (dominated by Elymus nutans, Poa crymophila and Leymus secalinus), sedge (Kobresia capillifolia and Kobresia humilis), Polygonum viviparum (P. viviparum only), Artemisia smithii (A. smithii only) and Oxytropis kansuensis (O. kansuensis only). All patches had a diameter ranging from about tens of centimeters to several meters. SOC mineralization was faster in patches beneath grass or A. smithii than in those beneath sedge or O. kansuensis, but the faster SOC mineralization beneath grass and A. smithii patches did not result in a difference in SOC storage in the top 30 cm of soil compared with that in other patches. Greater litter production beneath grasses or belowground carbon input (largest root/shoot ratio) beneath A. smithii may have offset the negative effect of rapid SOC mineralization on SOC storage under grass and A. smithii patches. Productive grasses were associated with the highest level of N availability in the soil, consistent with their greater demands for N uptake. Sedge species and A. smithii inhibited nitrification by decreasing the abundance of ammonia oxidation bacteria in soil, in contrast to grasses. The inhibition of biological nitrification under A. smithii explained the finding that the soil beneath this vegetation patch type had the lowest nitrate content as a percentage of total inorganic N. However, the inhibition of nitrification beneath sedges did not induce a decrease in the nitrate content as a percentage of total inorganic N under sedge patches compared with that under grass patches. This suggests that sedges preferentially use ammonium instead of nitrate as their N source. It is concluded that patchy distribution of herbaceous species in alpine meadows created significant spatial heterogeneity in soil biological and biochemical properties at the field scale. Sampling in ecosystem studies clearly needs to take into account such heterogeneity of soil properties and processes in grasslands with patchily distributed vegetation.