The uplift of the Tibetan Plateau has led to the formation of the world’s largest sediment “source–sink” system in the northeastern Indian Ocean, and seafloor sediments record rich environmental and climatic information during the accumulation process, making it an ideal area to reconstruct past sedimentary processes. To reveal fine sediment provenance and climatic implications, we present a sedimentary reconstruction during the past 42 kyr based on clay mineral analyses of sediments from core ADM-159 retrieved from the central Andaman Sea. The clay minerals mainly consist of illite (I, 27%–47%) and kaolinite (K, 8%–37%) with minor smectite (S, 11%–37%) and chlorite (C, 11%–37%). Provenance analyses show that the illite-dominated clay minerals are mainly derived from terrestrial sources of detrital material input from the Irrawaddy River, indicating a primary supply of fine sediment from Myanmar terrestrial material. Considering the stable sediment provenance, S/K, S/(I+C), and the illite chemical index were chosen to reconstruct the transport pattern of the fine fraction sediment over the last 42 kyr. S/K and S/(I+C) showed relatively consistent trends over time with relatively high values at 32–25 and 15–6 ka BP, indicating a strong supply and transport capacity of fine particulate matter. In contrast, relatively low values of S/K and S/(I+C) occurred at 25–15 ka BP, indicating a relatively weak deposition process of fine sediments in the study area. The trends in S/K and S/(I+C) are roughly consistent with the variations in solar radiation. Together with the illite chemical index, these trends indicate that solar activity controlled the weathering and sedimentation of fine-grained sediments. We also found significant periodicities in our clay mineral records at 25.05 and 0.473–0.477 kyr, suggesting that the parameters of the Earth’s orbit and solar radiation were potential driving mechanisms of the changes in regional climate. Moreover, monsoon precipitation triggered by the movement of the intertropical convergence zone was another important factor controlling the supply and transport of fine particulate matter in the study area, especially the weak precipitation during the last deglacial period and the relatively strong precipitation during the Holocene, so we could draw a conclusion that precipitation during these periods had significant effects on the weathering, erosion, and transport of fine particulate terrestrial materials over the last 42 kyr.