The consumption of the Palaeo-Tethyan ocean from Permian to Triassic formed the Changning-Menglian suture zone (CMSZ) in southwest China, where abundant eclogites with diverse geochemical signatures have been discovered in recent years. Eclogites are known as specific products during the orogenic evolution from subduction to collision, which play an important role in reconstruction of the orogenic process and bear implications for rutile mineralization. Here we use the phengites Ar-Ar isotopes, rock-forming mineral and whole-rock compositions, and Nd isotopes of Mengku eclogites, together with previous data of eclogites and relevant basalts from the CMSZ to address these issues. The phengites Ar-Ar dating of the Mengku eclogites yields a metamorphic age of 244 ± 2.0 Ma. Garnets in the eclogites show evident compositional zonation, corresponding to a prograde process from core to rim as evidenced by the variation of minerals enclosed in garnets. Four types of rutile are recognized in eclogites: mineral inclusion (ru1), granular (ru2), beaded (ru3) and wispy (ru4). Granular and beaded rutile that formed in the peak metamorphic stage contributes the most to the rutile mineralization. The Mengku eclogites show enriched LREEs with high (La/Yb)N ratios of 8.89–10.88, positive Nb-Ta anomalies and negative εNd(t) values from −0.63 to −0.07, similar to the average compositions of the OIB-type volcanic rocks exposed in the CMSZ. Modeling results indicate that the protoliths of OIB-type eclogites were derived from an enriched garnet lherzolite source while those of MORB-type were either from a primitive or from a depleted spinel lherzolite source. The OIB-type eclogites have much higher TiO2 contents (2.49–4.25 wt%) than the MORB-type eclogites (1.05–2.75 wt%), which reflects different modes of rutile in the two types of eclogites. This observation is highly consistent with the higher TiO2 contents in OIB-type than in MORB-type volcanic rocks from the CMSZ, indicating that the Ti enrichment in protoliths are first-order control on the formation of high-Ti rutile ores. Our results and the integrated previous studies of paleomagnetism, biogeography, magmatism and metamorphism suggested that the Palaeo-Tethyan subduction lasted from Late Carboniferous to Late Triassic (ca. 313–230 Ma) and the eclogite-type rutile exhumed back to the surface after ca. 230 Ma. Identification of OIB-type eclogites and the high-Ti eclogites with weakly retrograde metamorphism can be key evaluative factors for Ti exploration in the CMSZ.