Nickel is an important component of stainless steel and a wide range of applications which are critical for the transition to clean energies including electric vehicle batteries. Awaruite is a native nickel–iron alloy that has gained interest as a possible new economic source of nickel. In the last decades, there have been discoveries of awaruite, mostly with more significant amounts of nickel sulphides, that have demonstrated the potential for awaruite to contribute to the economics of a deposit. This study is focused on the very large Baptiste deposit in central British Columbia, Canada where awaruite is the primary nickel mineral. Most of published data on awaruite are focused on geology, and important fundamental physiochemical properties have still not been determined. These properties are fundamental for the set-up of a flowsheet that will enable its large-scale processing. The limited information available of this nickel–iron alloy can be complemented with the available information of a synthetic alloy with the same elemental composition. The synthetic awaruite alloy has demonstrated remarkable magnetic properties, and based on those properties, it was named permalloy. In this study, physicochemical properties of native and synthetic awaruite were measured including chemical composition, crystallographic structure, and magnetic properties. The native awaruite composition from the Baptiste deposit averages 77.3 % nickel, 21.0 % iron, 1.1 % cobalt and 0.6 % copper. Natural and synthetic awaruite have the same crystallographic characteristics and similar ferromagnetic behaviour. The measured initial volumetric magnetic susceptibility for native awaruite was 14.4 and the saturation magnetization was 750kA/m. Awaruite has the potential to be concentrated in a unique and valuable nickel concentrate of distinctive characteristics including its very high nickel content, which lowers both the downstream costs and the carbon intensity. Furthermore, the negligible content of sulphur and penalty trace elements, such as mercury, antimony, and arsenic in a potential awaruite concentrate, minimizes the costs of refining it. The physicochemical data in this study provides information to reliably set up a mineral processing flowsheet, which is discussed in this work.