The McKenzie Gulch (MG) copper–silver skarn occurrences are associated with the Middle Devonian intermediate to felsic dyke swarms. Mineralization occurs as veins and stockwork of veinlets, disseminations, patchy, and locally as replacement of calc-silicate skarns in argillaceous limestone. This skarn is interpreted to have developed in three stages: the earliest contact metamorphic stage resulting in hornfels developed from calcareous mudstone and very fine-grained clastic sedimentary rocks (Stage I); this was followed by metasomatic replacement resulting in prograde anhydrous skarn containing grossular-andradite (grandite), diopsidic pyroxene, and wollastonite (Stage II); increasing fluid/rock interaction results in retrograde skarn dominated by epidote, calcite, green amphibole, chlorite, sulfide minerals, titanite, andradite and hedenbergite commonly along veins and veinlets (Stage III). Subordinate sphalerite and pyrite occur in late veins cross-cutting both porphyry dykes, skarns and hornfels zone.
                  Prograde garnets in the study area belong to the grossular-andradite solid solution that ranges from Adr16Gr82 to almost pure andradite - Adr99Gr1, whereas other garnet end-members constitute less than 5% collectively. Pyroxenes form a diopside-hedenbergite solid solution with composition between Di31Hd60 and Di93Hd7, while other pyroxenes constitute less than 10% collectively. These garnets and pyroxenes exhibit chemical zonation patterns generally characterized by a rim of Fe enrichment relative to cores of grains, which may suggest possible change in salinity (or other factor that promotes Fe transport). This means grossular and diopsidic cores are rimmed by more andradite and hedenbergitic compositions for garnet and pyroxene, respectively. In general, there is a tendency for increasing Fe component in both garnet and pyroxene from the prograde to retrograde stages.
                  Epidote formed during the retrograde stage exhibits oscillatory zoning similar to retrograde andradite and indicates Fe enrichment increasing from core to rim. Based on the major element composition, textural and optical characteristics of garnets, we conclude that grandites (Al-rich) formed under low water/rock ratios, in equilibrium with metasomatic fluids whose composition was locally buffered by the host rocks, whereas andradite (Fe-rich) resulted from relatively high water/rock ratios that were in equilibrium with a magmatic-derived fluid. The results of this study indicate that there is a relationship between the composition of pyroxenes and garnets of the skarn alteration facies and the dominant metal of the mineralized skarns. These facies plot in the compositional field of Cu-dominated skarns. As a result, this relationship may be applied in exploration for skarn and porphyry copper mineralization.