The influence of treatment with alendronate (ALN), teriparatide (TPTD) or concurrent treatment with both on the human bone matrix mineralization has not yet been fully elucidated. For this purpose we analyzed quadruple fluorochrome labelled transiliac bone biopsy samples (n = 66) from postmenopausal osteoporotic women with prior and ongoing ALN (ALN-Rx arm) or without ALN (Rx-Naïve arm) after 7 months treatment with cyclic or daily TPTD or without TPTD using quantitative backscattered electron imaging and confocal scanning laser microscopy. Additionally to the bone mineralization density distribution (BMDD) of entire cancellous and cortical compartments, we measured the mineralization kinetics, i.e. the calcium concentration between the younger (Ca_DL2) and older double labels (Ca_DL1), and in interstitial bone (Ca_int) in a subset of the biopsy cohort.
                  We found the BMDD from the patients with prior and ongoing ALN generally shifted to higher calcium concentrations compared to those without ALN (average degree of mineralization in cancellous bone Cn.CaMean + 3.1%, p<0.001). The typical BMDD changes expected by cyclic or daily TPTD treatment due to the increased bone turnover/formation, e.g. an increase in low mineralized bone area were not observed. Additionally, we found no influence of treatment with ALN or TPTD or combination thereof on Ca_DL2, Ca_DL1, or Ca_int. Pooling the information from all groups, Ca_DL1 was +5.9% (p<0.001) higher compared to Ca_DL2, corresponding to a mineralization rate of 0.18 wt% Ca per week during the early secondary mineralization process.
                  Our data suggest that the patients in the ALN-Rx arm had more highly mineralized bone matrix than those without ALN due to their lower bone turnover. The reason for the unexpected BMDD findings in the TPTD treated remain unknown and cannot be attributed to altered mineralization kinetics as no differences in the time course of early secondary mineralization were observed between the treatment groups.