Extraction from many mineral deposits in Poland is restrained by the actual or planned land use, land property ownership, environmental requirements, social opposition and the NIMBY syndrome (Not In My Back Yard). Legal regulations can help to solve the conflicts which limit the accessibility of mineral deposits for exploration and exploitation. Legal protection of the areas of known and expected mineral deposits occurrence is necessary.
                  The main goal of the article was to develop a universal methodology that would allow for an objective selection of these mineral deposits the protection of which is necessary to ensure access to high-quality minerals. Indicating such deposits is an essential element in the national raw material policies.
                  A decision support methodology was developed for valorization and protection of mineral deposits using the Analytic Hierarchy Process (AHP) method which takes into account the positive and negative impacts of individual useful minerals deposits by applying a BOCR–benefits (B), opportunities (O), costs (C), and risks (R)–analysis. To this end, four independent hierarchical models were designed.
                  The practical application of the developed methodology was used to valorize lignite deposits in Poland. It allowed to indicate deposits and areas the protection of which would be very highly recommended to ensure access to this high quality mineral not only now but also in the more distant future.
                  The analysis comprised all lignite deposits with resources exceeding 20 Mt. Due to the high capital expenditure that should be incurred before extraction begins as well as to their remote locations with respect to the existing lignite-fired power plants, the management of smaller deposits is irrational under the current conditions.
                  An additive-negative formula b·B + o·O–c·C–r·R was used when individual deposits were assessed. The calculated values were used to create a ranking of lignite deposits and indicate the deposits the protection of which would be very highly recommended. This ranking was linked with the SWOT analysis that allowed for a better selection of deposits for the needs of their valorization. As a result of this procedure, the position of individual deposits was determined, and hence the level of their protection distinguishing four groups: greatest protection deposits, great protection deposits, normal protection deposits, and other deposits. Such a division was intended to introduce appropriate legal provisions which would guarantee deposits availability for economic use.
                  The article introduces a methodology that can be very helpful in creating national raw material policy, in particular when selecting strategic deposits of useful minerals. Such a selection will allow for their protection in the local development plans so that the areas where mineral deposits are known or likely to be present are not used in a way which could prevent future deposit extraction.