Background
                  The objective of this study was to measure bone mineral density (BMD) of the cancellous bone in both femoral condyles and to compare the results according to the hip-knee-ankle (HKA) angle in patients with knee osteoarthritis.
               
                  Hypothesis
                  BMD of cancellous bone in the medial condyle is markedly lower in valgus knees compared to that in the lateral condyle in varus knees.
               
                  Methods
                  Consecutive patients with computed tomography (CT) of the knee and long-leg radiographs obtained in preparation for total knee arthroplasty were included. The 189 knees were divided into five groups based on whether the hip-knee-ankle angle was<170° (major varus deformity), 171°–177° (varus deformity), 178°–182° (normal alignment), 183°–189° (valgus deformity), and>190° (major valgus deformity). A protocol for CT measurement of BMD values at the femoral condyles was developed. Correlations between the HKA angle and BMD were assessed using the ratio of medial-to-lateral condyle BMD values (M/L).
               
                  Results
                  M/L was lower for knees with valgus deformity than for normally aligned knees (0.7 vs. 1, p
                     <0.001). This difference was larger in the group with major valgus deformity, with a mean M/L value of 0.5 (p
                     <0.001). M/L was higher for knees with major varus (mean, 1.2; p
                     =0.035). The correlation coefficients showed excellent intra-observer and inter-observer agreement for the BMD measurements.
               
                  Conclusion
                  The BMD values of the femoral condyles correlate with the HKA angle. BMD is lower at the medial femoral condyle of valgus knees, particularly when the deformity exceeds 10°. This finding may deserve consideration when planning total knee arthroplasty.
               
                  Level of evidence
                  IV; retrospective study.