Fe(III) may be reasonably considered as one of the most important electron acceptors in petroleum reservoir ecosystems. The microbial mineralization of clay minerals, especially montmorillonite, is also of great significance to the exploration of petroleum and gas reservoirs. The bioreduction mechanisms of iron-poor minerals in petroleum reservoirs have been poorly investigated. This study investigated the bioreduction of montmorillonite by dissimilatory iron-reducing bacteria (DIRB) in petroleum reservoirs based on culture-independent and culture-dependent methods. Microbial diversity analysis revealed that Halolactibacillus, Bacillus, Alkaliphilus, Shewanella, Clostridium, and Pseudomonas were the key genera involved in the bioreduction of Fe(III). Through the traditional culture-dependent method, most of the key genera were isolated from the samples collected from petroleum reservoirs. Traditional culture-dependent methods can be used to reveal the metabolic characteristics of microorganisms (such as iron-reduction efficiency) to further elucidate the roles of different species (B. subtilis and B. alkalitelluris) in the environment. Moreover, many species with high iron-reduction efficiencies and relatively low abundances in the samples, such as Tessaracoccus and Flaviflexus, were isolated from petroleum reservoirs for the first time. The combination of culture-dependent and culture-independent methods can be used to further the understanding of the microbial communities and the metabolic characteristics of DIRB in petroleum reservoirs. Structural alterations that occurred during the interactions of microorganisms and montmorillonite were revealed through scanning electron microscopy (SEM), Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy (FTIR), and X-ray powder diffraction (XRD). The physical and chemical analysis results demonstrated that microorganisms from petroleum reservoirs can dissolve iron-poor montmorillonite and promote the release of interlayer water. The secondary minerals illite and clinoptilolite were observed in bioreduced smectite. The formation of secondary minerals was closely related to the dissolution degrees of minerals based on iron reduction.