Various types of plutonic and volcanic rocks and their alteration products from Greece (serpentinite, magnesite and andesite), have been used for sustainable removal of Uranium (U) from the acidic drainage of Kirki mine, as well as for the pH increase of the polluted solutions. In this light, this study aims at the further understanding and improvement of the ecofriendly reuse of sterile, natural raw materials (including those remaining through industrial processing and engineering testing of aggregate rocks), for remediation of acid mine drainage. The selected rocks constitute such residues of sterile materials were used as filters in experimental continuous flow devices in the form of batch-type columns, in order to investigate acidic remediation properties with special focus on U removal. The initial pH of the wastewater was 2.90 and increased after seven (7) days of experimental application and more specifically from the fourth day onwards. Uranium removal became quantitatively significant once pH reached the value of 5.09. The volcanic rocks appeared to be more effective for U removal than the plutonic ones because of microtextural differences. However, optimum U removal was mainly achieved by serpentinite: while the raw materials rich in Mg strongly reacted and remediated the pH of the drainage water waste. Furthermore, the increase of pH values due to the presence of mineral raw materials, provided increased oxidation potential which deactivated the toxic load of metals, particularly U. Consequently, batch-type serpentinite reaction with the tailing fluid caused a drop in U concentration from an initial value of 254 ppb to the one of 8 ppb, which corresponds to 97% of removal. Andesite presented the second best reactant for experimental remediation, especially when it was mixed with magnetically separated mineral fractions. Despite the fact that the proposed methodology is currently at a relatively low Technology Readiness Level (TRL), it carries the potential to become an extremely effective and low-cost alternative to conventional environmental restoration technologies.