The 391.2 ± 3.2 Ma (U-Pb on zircon) Evandale Granodiorite of southwestern New Brunswick is quite a unique intrusive rock in the southern part of the northeastern Appalachians. This research examines the relationship between the porphyry Cu-Mo-(Au) and epithermal systems with Evandale Granodiorite and environs. This Middle Devonian multi-phase I-type granite intrudes along the northern boundary of the deformed Silurian sedimentary and mafic volcanic rocks of the Mascarene Basin. This granitoid is identified as an oxidized I-type system with adakitic geochemical signatures and associated porphyry Cu-Mo-(Au) mineralization, possibly linked to slab failure sourced from decompression melting of the lower crust caused by post-collisional uplift, similar to the Magaguadavic Granite to the southwest. The Evandale adakitic intrusion is divided into two phases that consist of (1) a calc-alkalic coarser phase ranging from medium- to coarse-grained, seriate to porphyritic granodiorite to monzogranite with metaluminous to peraluminous features, and (2) the later stage alkali-calcic fine-grained (to aplitic) locally porphyritic phase ranging from a monzogranite to syeno-granite with peraluminous characteristics. The primary mineralogy of the intrusive rocks consists of K-feldspar + albite + plagioclase + quartz + biotite + hornblende + apatite ± muscovite ± zircon, along with several alteration phases, such as biotite, chlorite, sericite, and calcite. Geochemical analyses (using INAA, ICP-MS, and XRF) indicate that both phases of the Evandale granodiorite show a high concentration of Cu (108 ppm) and Au (33 ppb) associated with the presence of pyrite, chalcopyrite, and arsenopyrite in the fine-grained dyke samples. Up to 6 ppm Mo was contained within the granitic phase, whereas lesser amounts of Mo were confined to the fine grained to aplite phases. Microprobe analyses of primary biotite as both phenocrysts and groundmass shows 0.55 avg. wt.% Cl and 0.21 avg. wt.% F, which are relatively concentrated compared to other high-grade porphyry deposits. Hydrothermally altered rocks, veins, and sulfides associated with the porphyritic suite result from buoyant magmatic-hydrothermal fluids from a deeper intrusion exsolving fluids (quenched porphyry related), depressurizing, and reacting with the host coarser grained granodiorite and even some of the dykes locally. Based on the geothermometry and geobarometry of amphibole (actinolite-magnesiohornblende), the crystallization temperature and pressure of the Evandale coarse-grained granite and aplite are 674–755 °C, 0.2–0.7 kbar (20–70 MPa) and 838 °C, 0.42–1.4 kbar (42–140 MPa), respectively. This is consistent with biotite formation at temperatures ranging from 670° to 760 °C, based on Ti-in-biotite thermometry. Also, zircon saturation temperatures of the earlier coarse-grained porphyritic granites and later fine-grained porphyry to aplitic dykes are 736 °C and 787 °C, respectively. Spatially and temporally associated gold deposits beside Evandale and within this region of southwestern New Brunswick suggests that these oxidized I-type intrusions are a potential source for distal, low sulfidation epithermal gold deposits in the region.