The soil micro-food web is an important network of belowground trophic relationships and it participates directly and indirectly in soil ecological processes. In recent decades, the roles of the soil micro-food web in regulating ecosystem functions in grasslands and agroecosystems have received much attention. However, the variations in the soil micro-food web structure and its relationship with ecosystem functions during forest secondary succession remain unclear. In this study, we investigated how forest secondary succession affected the soil micro-food web (including soil microbes and nematodes) and soil carbon and nitrogen mineralization across a successional sequence of “grasslands – shrublands – broadleaf forests – coniferous forests” in a subalpine region of southwestern China. With forest successional development, the total soil microbial biomass and the biomass of each microbial group generally increased. The significant influences of forest succession on soil nematodes were mainly reflected in several trophic groups with high colonizer-persister values (particularly bacterivore3, herbivore5 and omnivore-predator5) that are sensitive to environmental disturbance. The increases in the connectance and nematode genus richness, diversity, and maturity index indicated an increasingly stable and complex soil micro-food web with forest succession, which was closely related to soil nutrients, particularly the soil carbon contents. Additionally, we found that the soil carbon and nitrogen mineralization rates also exhibited generally increasing trends during forest succession, which had significant positive correlations with the soil micro-food web composition and structure. The path analysis results indicated that the variances in ecosystem functions induced by forest succession were significantly determined by soil nutrients and soil microbial and nematode communities. Overall, these results suggested that forest succession enriched and stabilized the soil micro-food web and promoted ecosystem functions via the increase in soil nutrients, and the soil micro-food web played an important role in regulating ecosystem functions during forest succession.