The carbonatite-related Bayan Obo deposit, China is the largest REE resource in the world. This deposit has long been a major light REE (LREE) producer, with heavy REE (HREE) rarely exploited. In order to better understand the occurrence of HREE in the deposit, this paper conducts a study of HREE-rich minerals at Bayan Obo. Overall, four types of HREE-rich minerals are identified, including fergusonite-group mineral [(Y, REE)(Nb, Ta, Ti)O4], samarskite-group mineral [(Y, REE, Fe)2(Nb, Ta, Ti)2O8], aeschynite-group mineral [(Y, REE, Ca, Th, U)(Nb, Ta, Ti)2O6], and a type of unknown Pb-rich mineral. These minerals have HREE contents varying from 3.4 wt% to 46.4 wt%, mostly between 19.7 wt% and 34.3 wt%. Yttrium, Dy and Gd are the major REE constitute. Textual relations indicate that the HREE-rich minerals were mainly precipitated from carbonatite-related fluids, with small amounts of grains crystallized from the carbonatitic magma or deposited from post-ore modification fluids. The HREE-rich minerals occur in close temporal and/or spatial association with LREE minerals (e.g., monazite and bastnäsite), so formation of these HREE-minerals does not mean strong LREE-HREE fractionation during the ore-formation or post-ore modification process. Given that certain niobium oxides strongly prefer HREE relative to LREE in the mineral structure, a local physiochemical environment that allowed for the deposition of niobium oxides may be significant for efficient HREE deposition. Although HREE-rich minerals are not widely present in the deposit, they tend to occur as clusters in places. To determine what proportions of HREE can be hosted in the HREE-rich minerals, the weight proportions and REE contents of major REE-bearing minerals were measured in three representative ore samples. The results show that ∼ 25–57 % HREE can be hosted in fergusonite, samarskite, and/or aeschynite. Therefore, the newly identified HREE-rich minerals are non-negligible targets for future exploitation of HREE in the Bayan Obo deposit.