Internal nutrient loading in shallow lakes has long been known as a key driver of eutrophication, especially after external loading reductions. Earlier efforts have been made to quantity the size and potential release of internal nutrient pools in lakes. Yet, links among substrates, microbial processes, and the size and actual release of internal nutrient pools remain largely unclear. To assess the links, sediment organic matter in Lake Taihu, China, was characterized by combining optical measurements, and lake-wide sediment gross nitrogen (N) transformations were measured using the stable isotope (15N) dilution technique. Meanwhile, respirations and nutrient fluxes across the sediment-water interface (SWI) were measured by conducting intact core continuous-flow incubations. The cause-effect relationships among sediment physicochemical parameters (especially organic matter properties), gross N transformations, extractable nutrient concentrations, and nutrient fluxes across the SWI were revealed by partial least square path models. Results showed that environmental controls on the N transformation rates at different seasons varied, with sediment-derived dissolved organic matter abundance being more important than other variables in driving the rates during summer blooms. This study put a step toward revealing the significant positive effects of sediment organic matter mineralization on porewater nutrient concentrations and then on nutrient fluxes across the SWI at late season. The significant positive correlation between the gross N mineralization rates and ammonium fluxes across the SWI and the estimated considerable volume of net N mineralization in summer further suggested that algal blooms can get substantial inorganic N from sediment N mineralization during the lake N limitation period. Overall, this paper presents new insights into the substrates- and microbial process-driven internal nutrient loading of shallow lakes, which is the fundamental driving force of internal nutrient loading formation.