In shale plays, the in-situ effective stress is continuously being perturbed because of the production which impacts field operations. Therefore, mechanical properties of the formation and its response to stress field changes, with respect to mineral variations, is of great significance for the proper design of horizontal drilling and hydraulic fracturing. In this paper, clay-rich, calcareous and siliceous black shales are classified based on their XRD analysis, from the Wufeng and Longmaxi Formations in the Sichuan Basin of the Upper Yangtze Plate. Uniaxial quasi-static and cyclic loading tests, acoustic emissions, and CT scanning are combined to study mechanical behavior and fracturing mechanisms of the shale layer samples that own different mineral components. The results show that the strength and deformation response of the samples is a function of their mineral composition. The damage from cyclic loading is gradually accumulated in the samples which ultimately leads to fatigue and sample failure. The compressive strength of the samples under cyclic loading is lower than in the uniaxial quasi-static conditions. Furthermore, the fracturing of rock under uniaxial quasi-static loading mainly occurs after the peak strength is achieved while in cyclic loading, when a certain stress level is reached, fracturing begins, the damage accumulates up to the peak stress and the rock suddenly fails. Based on CT images from the samples after rupture, failure modes of the clay-rich, calcareous and siliceous black shales mainly constitute extensional and shear fractures, with some conjugate shearing. In comparison with uniaxial quasi-static loading, the fracture volume of the clay-rich, calcareous and siliceous black shales after cyclic loading increases by 12.2%, 25.9% and 32.9%, respectively. Overall, this study explains how cyclic loading that can be applied in the field via changing the injection pressure and other stimulation parameters, can effectively improve the complexity of the shale fracture network and lead to higher productivity of the formation.