Ethnopharmacological relevance
                  The skeletal complications associated with chronic kidney diseases from stages 3–5 in individuals are called Chronic Kidney Disease-Mineral Bone Disorder (CKD-MBD), which increases the incidence of cardiovascular diseases drastically and affects the quality of life of patients seriously. Eucommiae cortex has the effect of tonifying kidneys and strengthening bones, and salt Eucommiae cortex is one of the most commonly used traditional Chinese medicines in the clinical treatment of CKD-MBD instead of Eucommiae cortex. However, its mechanism still remains unexplored.
               
                  Aim of the study
                  The aim of this study was to investigate the effects and mechanisms of salt Eucommiae cortex on CKD-MBD by integrating network pharmacology, transcriptomics, and metabolomics.
               
                  Materials and methods
                  The CKD-MBD mice induced by 5/6 nephrectomy and low calcium/high phosphorus diet were treated with salt Eucommiae cortex. The renal functions and bone injuries were evaluated by serum biochemical detection, histopathological analyses, and femur Micro-CT examinations. Differentially expressed genes (DEGs) between the control group and model group, model group and high-dose Eucommiae cortex group, model group and high-dose salt Eucommiae cortex group were analyzed by transcriptomic analysis. The differentially expressed metabolites (DEMs) between the control group and model group, model group and high-dose Eucommiae cortex group, model group and high-dose salt Eucommiae cortex group were analyzed by metabolomics analysis. The common targets and pathways were obtained by integrating transcriptomics, metabolomics, and network pharmacology, which were identified and verified by in vivo experiments.
               
                  Results
                  The negative impacts on the renal functions and bone injuries were alleviated with salt Eucommiae cortex treatment effectively. Compared with CKD-MBD model mice, the levels of serum BUN, Ca, and urine Upr were significantly decreased in the salt Eucommiae cortex group. And the Integrated network pharmacology, transcriptomics, and metabolomics analysis revealed that Peroxisome Proliferative Activated Receptor, Gamma (PPARG) was the only common target, mainly involved by AMP-activated Protein Kinase (AMPK) signaling pathways. The activation of PPARG in the kidney tissue was significantly decreased in CKD-MBD mice but increased in the salt Eucommiae cortex treatment. The AMPK signaling pathway was verified and the AMPK expression levels were found to decrease in CKD-MBD mice but increase given salt Eucommiae cortex treatment.
               
                  Conclusions
                  Our study presented that salt Eucommiae cortex alleviated the negative impact of CKD-MBD on the renal injury and bone injury of mice induced by 5/6 nephrectomy with the low calcium/high phosphorus diet effectively, which is highly likely achieved through the PPARG/AMPK signaling pathway.