Bubble surface area flux (Sb
                     ) is one of the main design parameter in flotation column that typically employed to describe the gas dispersion properties, and it has a strong correlation with the flotation rate constant. There is a limited information available in the literature regarding the effect of particle type, density, wettability and concentration on Sb
                     . In this paper, computational fluid dynamics (CFD) simulations are performed to study the gas–liquid–solid three-phase flow dynamics in flotation column by employing the Eulerian–Eulerian formulation with k-ε turbulence model. The model is developed by writing Fortran subroutine and incorporating then into the commercial CFD code AVL FIRE, v.2014. This paper studies the effects of superficial gas velocities and particle type, density, wettability and concentration on Sb
                      and bubble concentration in the flotation column. The model has been validated against published experimental data. It was found that the CFD model was able to predict, where the response variable as indicated by R-Square value of 0.98. These results suggest that the developed CFD model is reasonable to describe the flotation column reactor. From the CFD results, it is also found that Sb
                      decreased with increasing solid concentration and hydrophobicity, but increased with increasing superficial gas velocity. For example, approximately 28% reduction in the surface area flux is observed when coal concentration is increased from 0 to 10%, by volume. While for the same solid concentration and gas flow rate, the bubble surface area flux is approximately increased by 7% in the presences of sphalerite. A possible explanation for this might be that increasing solid concentration and hydrophobicity promotes the bubble coalescence rate leading to the increase in bubble size. Also, it was found that the bubble concentration would decrease with addition of hydrophobic particle (i.e., coal). For instance, under the same operating conditions, approximately 23% reduction in the bubble concentration is predicted when the system was working with hydrophobic particles. The results presented are useful for understanding flow dynamics of three-phase system and provide a basis for further development of CFD model for flotation column.