Iron oxide minerals are widely present in soil and known to be closely associated with soil-forming environments. In this study, a detailed quantitative analysis of the iron oxide minerals in the Late Pleistocene hard clay of the Yangtze River Delta (YRD) was conducted using new integrated methods of magnetism, selective chemical-dissolution, and diffuse reflectance spectroscopy. A variety of established chemical weathering indexes and optically stimulated luminescence (OSL) chronology were also applied in the investigations of the hard clay in the study area. These methods allowed for detailed examinations of the chemical weathering, sedimentary environmental conditions, and the post-depositional processes of the hard clay deposits in the YRD. This study’s A-CN-K diagram revealed that the hard clay had entered an intermediate weathering stage. In addition, various chemical weathering indexes demonstrated that the hard clay had undergone three stages of chemical weathering from bottom to top as follows: 1) A relatively high stage of chemical weathering; 2) A low chemical weathering stage with a slightly increasing trend; and 3) A relatively high chemical weathering stage with a weakly decreasing trend. It was found that when χ, χfd, Fed/Fet, Gt, and Hm/Gt were not reliable indicators of chemical weathering for the hard clay, Fed could be a useful proxy. In the current study, based on the OSL ages and several paleoclimatic proxies, it was suggested that the climate conditions in the YRD had transitioned from a relatively weak to a strong East Asian summer monsoon phase during the periods between the marine oxygen isotope stages (MIS) 4 and MIS 3. Furthermore, the low values of χ and χfd in the hard clay indicated an intense dissolution of fine-grained strong magnetic minerals. Meanwhile, the relatively high Feo/Fed ratios in the superficial horizon displayed the predominance of poorly crystalline forms of iron oxides. In summary, the analysis results implied that the hard clay had undergone post-burial processes of ferrolysis, as well as dissolved organic matter translocation from the overlying Holocene sediment. The aforementioned post-burial processes for the hard clay had occurred under reduction–oxidation cycles, which were mainly driven by the rise of the groundwater levels with the Holocene transgression.