Scheelite is a widespread accessory tungstate mineral that contains a variety of trace elements. Scheelites from the major types of magmatic-hydrothermal mineral deposits (86 deposits, including quartz-vein and greisen, porphyry, skarn and orogenic Au deposits) have been collected and analyzed using laser ablation-inductively coupled plasma mass spectrometry (3270 data, including 584 analyses). Discriminant analysis using Mo, Sr, Nb, La, Ce, Eu, Dy, Yb, Y, Ta, Pb, (Ce/Yb)N, (La/Sm)N, (Gd/Yb)N, Eu anomaly, Ce anomaly, (La/Yb)N, LREE/HREE, Y/Ho and Mo + Sr + Nd + rare-earth elements (REE) + Y + Ta + Pb reveals that scheelites from different mineral deposits can be distinguished. Scheelites from quartz-vein and greisen deposits have high total contents of trace elements that partition onto the Ca sites (Mo, Sr, Nd, REE, Y, Ta, Pb). Scheelites from the porphyry W ± Cu ± Mo deposits, which have been studied in this work, are characterized by low Mo and positive Eu than scheelites from porphyry Cu ± Mo deposits. This indicates that large scale tungsten deposits are related to reduced hydrothermal fluids, in contrast to the oxidized fluids associated with porphyry Cu ± Mo deposits. Scheelites from skarn W ± Sn ± Mo deposits typically exhibit a wide range of Y/Ho ratio and a higher sum of the elements Mo, Sr, Nd, REE, Y, Ta, and Pb compared to that from the skarn Cu ± Mo ± W deposits, indicating that increased amount of fluorine probably leads to large-scale W, Mo, and Sn mineralization during magmatic-hydrothermal processes. Scheelites from the greisen W-Sn polymetallic deposits tend to have more restricted Sr compositions and Eu anomalies than those from the quartz vein W-Sn deposits, as well as relatively high Gd, Tb, Dy and Ho contents, which coincide with extensive hydrothermal alteration, indicating intense fluid-rock interaction during mineralization. Using Discriminant projection analysis (DPA), scheelites from many ore deposits can be readily separated from each other. This study demonstrates that heavy-mineral scheelite grains collected during regional geochemical surveys are effective in identifying specific types of buried mineral deposits in potential mineralization area. Scheelite geochemistry with DPA provides an effective guidance for mineral exploration.