Redox potential (Eh) control plays a significant role during sulfide mineral flotation by influencing the reactions on the surface of the minerals and accordingly the flotation behaviour. In this study, the metallurgical performance of typical copper sulfide minerals, molybdenite as well as gangue minerals (e.g., pyrite, tennantite, and enargite) under different pH and Eh conditions of the flotation cell were investigated. The copper and molybdenum processing plant at the Sungun complex-Iran were selected as a case study. For this purpose, Eh of flotation cells of phases 1 and 2 of copper and molybdenum processing circuits – Sungun complex – were measured by off-line method. After performing chemical analysis, the mineralogical study of the input load and products of each of the aforementioned flotation circuits in the rougher, cleaner, re-cleaner, and scavenger stages was performed. Based on the results, the potential in cells of phases 1 and 2 of copper concentration plants is in the range of −60 to −100 mV; and for the molybdenum plant, is in the range of −500 to −700 mV. The potentials of more than −100 mV in the phases of copper concentration plants have created suitable conditions for the separation of copper sulfide and molybdenite minerals from gangue minerals, especially pyrite. Adjustment of Eh in the range of −500 to −700 mV in the molybdenum processing plant has also led to the depression of copper minerals and the flotation of molybdenite, resulting in the effective separation of these minerals. However, grade analysis and mineralogical studies indicate the misplaced copper minerals into tailings, the passage of chalcopyrite and pyrite to molybdenum concentrate, the misplaced molybdenite to copper concentrate, and also the presence of minerals containing harmful elements such as arsenic in copper concentrate. Eh fluctuations in phase 1 and 2 of copper plants, the interaction of copper sulfide minerals, especially chalcopyrite with pyrite (and the depression of pyrite in Eh more than −100 mV), are reasons for the misplaced copper minerals into tailings. The interaction of chalcopyrite and pyrite with molybdenite and the high flotation tendency of molybdenite at the potential of +600 mV is the main factor in increasing the Cu and Fe grade in molybdenite concentrate. The interaction of copper minerals with arsenic-bearing minerals and the similar flotation behavior of these minerals in the potential of the rougher cells of the molybdenum processing plant has increased the arsenic grade in the copper concentrate or molybdenum tailings.