Soil carbon pool stability plays an important role in reaching carbon neutrality and mitigating global warming. Applying soil amendments is a practical strategy in agricultural production to improve soil environment. Weathered coal (WC) is an organic amendment that can be used to improve soil quality. However, the effects of WC application on soil organic carbon pool stability, and its differences from the effects of biochar (BC, a common amendment) application remains unclear. In this study, BC was selected as a comparison to further evaluate the potential of WC based on a 3-year field experiment, in which WC and BC were individually applied into a loamy clay soil at 0%, 1%, and 3% (w/w) rates. Soil organic carbon and its fractions (including particulate organic carbon and mineral-bound organic carbon), soil aggregate fractions and its stability, and the organic carbon content in aggregates were examined. The results showed that both WC and BC significantly increased soil total organic carbon, particulate and mineral-bound organic carbon (P < 0.05). The mineral-bound organic carbon content in WC treatment was significantly higher than that in BC treatment (by 32% under the 3% rate) (P < 0.05), whereas, there were no significant differences in soil total organic carbon content. Both WC and BC increased the soil organic carbon content in all aggregate fractions. While only the WC improved the soil aggregate stability, and which was 15% (under 1% rate) and 28% (under 3% rate) higher in WC treatments than in BC treatments (P < 0.05). The proportion of mineral-bound organic carbon to soil total organic carbon content and the soil aggregate stability were obviously related the soil C/N, and the WC treatments had a higher proportion of mineral-bound organic carbon and soil aggregate stability than BC treatments under the same soil C/N. The results indicated that the application of WC may be more effective than BC in increasing mineral and aggregate protection for soil organic carbon and thus improving soil carbon pool stability. Additionally, the purchase cost of WC was clearly lower than that of BC. Combined with the low cost and the benefits in soil structure and carbon pool stability, the application of WC appeared to have advantages over BC. Our findings provide robust evidence that WC is more effective than BC in improving soil carbon pool stability.