Erosion leads to a decline in carbon (C) stocks in arable soils and negatively impacts soil functions worldwide. For soil restoration, it is critical to identify the factors that link crop residue quality to effective C sequestration in the soil, primarily through the formation of mineral-associated organic matter (MAOM) and through incorporation into aggregates (oPOM). The widely accepted concept links effective C stabilization with input of high-quality substrates, but studies of C-deficient soils do not support this assumption. Therefore, we aimed to determine the potential of eroded arable soils to stabilize C from barley shoot and root residues, which represent high- and low-quality inputs, respectively. In a year-long laboratory experiment, we added the residues to two soil pairs (eroded and non-eroded) with different soil textures, observed the formation of oPOM and MAOM and identified microbial groups important for substrate transformation. We found that eroded soils retained added residues very efficiently (35–65% bound residue C), making them a high-priority target for C sequestration. Root residues caused more efficient MAOM formation than shoot residues, primarily by direct binding of depolymerized root-C to mineral surfaces without subsequent microbial transformation. This root C stabilization in MAOM was more pronounced in eroded (highly C-undersaturated) soils than in non-eroded soils and in fine-textured soils, which provided more space for microbial colonization and C sorption, than in coarse-textured soils. Shoot residues were decomposed and metabolized by a microbiome rich in efficient bacterial decomposers (Actinobacteria, Xanthomonadales). This led to inevitably higher C losses related to their growth and biomass turnover, and probably also to an intense priming effect on pre-existing MAOM that lowered the efficiency of MAOM formation. Our results argue for crops with robust root systems, or for the inclusion of deep-rooted plants in crop rotations, which could help rapidly restore the C stocks in arable soils.