Zeolites are nanoporous aluminosilicates widely used as commercial adsorbents, heterogeneous catalysts, and ion-exchange materials due to their unique porosity, acidity, and thermal stability. The vast majority of synthetically-realized zeolite structures are prepared under hydrothermal conditions in alkaline media, and often in the presence of an organic structure-directing agent that facilitates the crystallization of diverse porous networks. Due to economic and environmental disadvantages of organic-based syntheses, it is often desirable to produce zeolites in organic-free media using alkali metal ions as the most commonly employed inorganic structure-directing agents (ISDAs). In this study, we were inspired by the elemental compositions of natural zeolite minerals to examine the use of an alkaline earth metal ion as the ISDA to prepare zeolites with the PHI framework type. Two natural minerals exhibiting this crystal structure are phillipsite and harmotome. Both structures contain sodium and potassium as extra-framework cations, but only harmotome contains barium cations. Here we examined how the combination of alkali and alkaline earth ISDAs promote the formation of PHI-type zeolites. Our findings reveal that each isostructure is prepared under different synthesis conditions where simply adding barium to a growth mixture does not always lead to harmotome formation. Harmotome is formed in more dilute and alkaline growth media; however, time-resolved analyses of zeolite crystallization reveal that harmotome can be synthesized at low temperatures (ca. 65 °C) with rates that are 5-times faster than syntheses of phillipsite. This seemingly indicates that barium reduces the energetic barrier for PHI-type zeolite nucleation in ways that are not fully understood. Moreover, harmotome crystals exhibit an average particle size of ca. 60 nm, which is nearly 40-fold smaller than phillipsite crystals prepared under similar conditions. Collectively, these findings identify routes to control crystallization of PHI-type zeolites and may provide a broader strategy for using the composition of natural zeolite minerals to optimize the preparation of synthetic analogues.