The Huangshaping copper-polymetallic deposit, which is located in southern Hunan Province, China, is an important resource base for Pb–Zn minerals. This study used the major sulfides (sphalerite, pyrite, pyrrhotite), which formed during the Pb–Zn mineralization stage of the Huangshaping deposit, to determine the genesis of the Pb–Zn ore minerals and element occurrence. In-situ LA-ICP-MS analysis of minerals was conducted to determine their trace element concentrations and reveal the distribution and occurrence of trace elements in different sulfides. The formation temperature and genesis of the Pb–Zn ore minerals were also constrained based on the deposit geology and trace element data. Trace elements were significantly different among different sulfides in the Pb–Zn mineralization stage of the deposit. Sphalerite primarily enriches Mn, Cu, Ag, Sn, and Pb and is the main carrier mineral of Ga, In, and Cd. Pyrite relatively enriches Tl, Sb, W, and Se, and pyrrhotite primarily enriches Ge. In sphalerite, Fe, Mn, Cd, Ga, In, Cu, Sn, Ag, and Ge exist by substituting for other elements (such as Zn). The replacement method of Ge is Ge4++2Cu+↔3Zn2+, whereas that of In (Ga) is In3+(Ga3+) + Cu+↔2Zn2+. In pyrrhotite, Ge is incorporated through coupling substitution, and the abnormal concentrations of Pb, Ag, and Se are caused by galena that has replaced pyrrhotite. In pyrite, W occurs as a solid solution. When galena replaces pyrite, it causes abnormal concentrations of Pb, Tl, Sb, and Ag. The sphalerite is characterized by high concentrations of high-temperature ore-forming elements (e.g., Fe, Mn, In, and Sn) and relatively low concentrations of Cd, Ge, Ga, and other elements. Thus, the sphalerite was formed at a medium–high temperature (288–341 °C). The trace element characteristics of sphalerite are consistent with those of high-temperature hydrothermal deposits. The deposit geology, pyrite Co/Ni ratio (averaging 0.13, n = 29), S/Se ratio (averaging 173,905, n = 19), pyrrhotite Co/Ni ratio (averaging 0.10, n = 26), and binary diagram of trace elements in sphalerite indicate that Pb–Zn mineralization is related to the late-stage hydrothermal activity of skarn mineralization. The Pb–Zn mineralization and W–Mo(Fe) mineralization together constitute a skarn-type mineralization system.