Objectives
                  Mineral trioxide aggregate (MTA) is widely used in dentistry as root perforation repair material, however due to its high alkalinity, tissue necrosis might occur. This study aimed to investigate the mineralization potential of titanium dioxide doped phosphate glass (TDPG) and in-house prepared freeze dried demineralized bone (FDDB) as substitutes for MTA.
               
                  Methods
                  TDPG and FDDB were prepared and characterized using scanning electron microscopy coupled with energy dispersive X-ray and Raman spectroscopy. The extract of FDDB, TDPG and FDDB + TDPG was used for culture of primary human osteoblast cells; cells grown in the presence of tissue culture medium was used as control. Mineral trioxide aggregate (ProRoot® MTA White) was used as a control material. Cell viability was evaluated up to 72 h using XTT assay. The mineralization potential was assessed in the presence of osteogenic and non-osteogenic media using Alizarin Red staining after 7 and 14 days. Cell morphology was captured using phase contrast microscopy.
               
                  Results
                  All tested materials showed irregular-shaped morphology with variation in particle sizes. Both TDPG and FDDB contain calcium, phosphorus, and oxygen as main elements. Phosphorus however is absent from ProRoot® MTA. The cells grown in FDDB, TDPG or FDDB + TDPG extract showed no significant difference from the control. ProRoot® MTA showed the lowest cell viability at 72 h. All tested extracts showed nodule formation at 7 and 14 days even in absence of osteogenic supplements. The mineralization significantly improved in the presence of osteogenic supplements and increased with time for all extracts except for ProRoot® MTA that showed a reduction in mineralization at day 14. FDDB + TDPG extract showed significantly higher mineralization than TDPG alone.
               
                  Conclusions
                  FDDB, TDBG or combination could be potentially used as alternative to ProRoot® MTA.