Introduction: The human rib provides a vital role in the protection of thoracic contents. Rib fractures are linked to injuries and health complications that can be fatal. Current clinical methods to assess fracture risk and bone quality are insufficient to quantify intra-element differences in bone mineral density (BMD) or to identify at-risk populations. Utilizing quantitative computed tomography (QCT) provides accurate measures of volumetric BMD (vBMD) along the length of the rib which can help delineate factors influencing differential fracture risk. Methodology: One mid-level rib was obtained from 54 post-mortem human subjects (PMHS) and scanned using QCT. Volumes of interest (VOIs) were created for sites at 30%, 50%, and 75% of rib total curve length. Mean Hounsfield units (HU) from each VOI were converted to vBMD using a scan-specific cortical phantom calibration curve. Additionally, rib and lumbar areal BMD (aBMD) were obtained from a sub-sample of 33 PMHS. Results: Significant differences in vBMD were found between all sites within the rib (p<0.01). When analyzed by sex, vBMD between the 30% and 50% site were no longer different in either males or females (p>0.05). Separating the sample into discrete age groups demonstrated the relative differences in vBMD between sites diminished with age. Further, age as a continuous variable significantly predicted rib vBMD at all sites (p<0.05), but with little practical or clinical utility (R2, 14.7- 22.8%). Similarly, only small amounts of variation in rib vBMD were explained from DXA lumbar and rib aBMD (R2 , 1.1-21.8%). Conclusions: vBMD significantly decreased from the posterior (30%) site to the anterior (75%) site within the rib which may represent adaptation to localized mechanical loading. These differences could result in differential fracture risk across the rib. As thoracic injury can be fatal, using comprehensive assessments of bone quality that accounts for variation within the rib may provide more accurate identification of at-risk populations.