Nowadays, the electricity required in the developing countries are mostly dependent on Coal-Based thermal Power plants. During the course of production of electricity, the solid waste residue namely Fly Ash (FA), which is left behind causes serious impact to the environment. On the other hand, another residue, Ground Granulated Blast Furnace Slag (GGBS) which is produced from the molten iron slag is also disposed on the land surface, resulting which several bad impacts occur on the heath of the environment. Apart from these mineral admixtures, one more such ash namely Rice Husk Ash (RHA) is also produced by the processes of burning of the rice husk itself. Some of the ashes which are directly produced by the burning of hard Bituminous coal together with hard Anthracite give rise to the mineral admixture to be often known as Silica Fume. Metakolin is also another type of Mineral Admixture which is produced by the burning of kaolin clay. In some countries, the production of Palm Tree is so high that electricity is generated there by burning of Palm shell and husk. During production, the residue, which is equally harmful to the environment, is known as Palm Oil Fly Ash (POFA). The problem does not lie with alone; the major issues is of storage of all these mineral admixtures. In most of the countries these solid waste mineral admixtures are placed on a large open area of the land. Such mineral admixtures are toxically associated with heavy metals which cause to leach the ground water and the soil as well. But researchers have found that these mineral admixtures being considered as solid waste, are, in fact, very useful materials and have also proven their worth over a period of time. This paper aims at focusing on the various ways of utilizing the different Mineral Admixtures in various areas of Civil Engineering. Also in the paper, there is strategical focus on the proper management of mineral admixtures to make use of these solid wastes, in order to save our Environment.