Modern remote sensing using satellites replaced film cameras and balloons used as platforms in aerial photography. Multispectral and hyperspectral remote sensors and geographic information system (GIS) are used in mineral exploration to evaluate mineral potential. Landsat, Advanced space borne thermal reflection and emission radiometer (ASTER), System Pourl’ Observation dela Terre (SPOT), Indian remote sensing (IRS), Sentinel-2 and Airborne Visible Infrared Imaging Spectrometer (AVIRIS) sensor image data were used in the analyses. Image data processing by minimum noise fraction (MNF), principal component analysis (PCA) band rationing (BR) and independent component analysis (ICA) improve data for easy minerals recognition. Earth Resources Data Analysis System (ERDAS) imagine software is for numerical image processing while geological, geophysical and geochemical surveys data are integrated with image data using ArcGIS software to delineate mineral potential zones. The mineral potential map is classified into low, moderate good and excellent zones. Innovations such as cloud computing, big data analytics, drones and machine learning algorithms have been introduced in mineral exploration due to depletion in available mineral reserves. These technologies are useful in mineral exploration in hard to reach areas. The review shows that ASTER sensor has higher capability to detect hydrothermal altered minerals more than Landsat, SPOT, Sentinel-2 sensors. Hyperspectral AVIRIS can identify minerals in hydrothermally altered volcanic areas better than all multispectral sensors due to its narrow bands widths. The review shows that a combination of more than one remote sensor in mineral search gives more credible results than using an individual sensor. Application of satellite remote sensing in geological mapping covers a wider area than aerial photography. However, remote sensing method has a limitation of depth, because the electromagnetic spectrum (EMS) measure properties of surface geological features not from the subsurface. Mineral exploration using satellite remote sensing and GIS can be applied in different geological settings.