Chemical defects may significantly impact the colour and solar reflective performances of cool pigments from the solid-state method. In this work, chemical defects in Cr-doped YAlO3 pigments were tailored with the aid of CaCO3, and roles of chemical defects in colour and solar reflective performances were defined in detail in Cr-doped YAlO3 pigments. In the case of CaCO3, Ca2+ substitutes Y3+ formed the negatively charged defect 
                        
                           
                              Ca
                           
                           
                              Y
                           
                           
                              ′
                           
                        
                     , which leads to an increase in high-valence chromium and oxygen vacancy (
                        
                           
                              V
                           
                           
                              O
                           
                           
                              ∙
                              ∙
                           
                        
                     ) to meet charge balances. Two formers were mainly responsible for visible absorption below 600 nm, resulting in a redness hue. The latter increased absorption between 600 and 1000 nm, resulting in low brightness values and decreased near-infrared (NIR) reflectance for pigments. Na2B4O7 mineralizers promoted the generation of larger and regular pigment particles so that the optical performances can be further enhanced. High a* value of 35.41 and the lowest solar reflectance of 43.1% were obtained by the synergistic effect of CaCO3 and Na2B4O7 mineralizers. Moreover, films based on pigments could reduce the indoor temperature of the simulation house by 7.4 ℃. The film showed excellent cooling performance due to its high infrared emissivity of 0.952. As-prepared pigments could be used as cool ones to coat roofs or exterior walls of buildings.