Scaffolds functionalized with biomolecules have been developed for bone regeneration but inducing the regeneration of complex structured bone with neovessels remains a challenge. For this study, we developed three-dimensional printed scaffolds with bioactive surfaces coated with minerals and platelet-derived growth factor. The minerals were homogeneously deposited on the surface of the scaffold using 0.01 M NaHCO3 with epigallocatechin gallate in simulated body fluid solution (M2). The M2 scaffold demonstrated enhanced mineral coating amount per scaffold with a greater compressive modulus than the others which used different concentration of NaHCO3. Then, we immobilized PDGF on the mineralized scaffold (M2/P), which enhanced the osteogenic differentiation of human adipose derived stem cells in vitro and promoted the secretion of pro-angiogenic factors. Cells cultured in M2/P showed remarkable ratio of osteocalcin- and osteopontin-positive nuclei, and M2/P-derived medium induced endothelial cells to form tubule structures. Finally, the implanted M2/P scaffolds onto mouse calvarial defects had regenerated bone in 80.8 ± 9.8% of the defect area with the arterioles were formed, after 8 weeks. In summary, our scaffold, which composed of minerals and pro-angiogenic growth factor, could be used therapeutically to improve the regeneration of bone with a highly vascularized structure.
               
                  Statement of Significance
                  Surface engineered scaffolds have been developed for bone regeneration but inducing the volumetric regeneration of bone with neovessels remains a challenge. In here, we developed 3D printed scaffolds with bioactive surfaces coated with bio-minerals and platelet-derived growth factors. We proved that the 0.01 M NaHCO3 with polyphenol in simulated body fluid solution enhanced the deposition of bio-minerals and even distribution on the surface of scaffold. The in vitro studies demonstrated that the attached cells on the bioactive surface showed the enhanced osteogenic differentiation and secretion of pro-angiogenic factors. Finally, the scaffold with bioactive surface not only improved the regenerated volume of bone tissues but also increased neovessel formation after in vivo implantation onto mouse calvarial defect.