The efficiency of mineral flotation relies on the ability to selectively recover different value minerals into their respective concentrates at optimum grades and recoveries based on the differing hydrophobicities. Many of the common hydrophobizing reagents (collectors) currently used in flotation have significant occupational and environmental implications, and hence there is a quest for environmentally benign chemical additives that give similar or better performance than the more toxic conventional reagents. In this paper, we provide substantial experimental evidence that the use of edible, fatty acid-based oils (canola and palm) can foster the flotation recovery of chalcopyrite and molybdenite minerals more selectively against pyrite than the conventional collectors, sodium isopropyl, potassium amyl xanthates and diesel oil.
                  Single and mixed chalcopyrite/pyrite minerals and plant sulphide ores’ flotation studies using canola and palm oils, in contrast with conventional collectors, are reported herein. The results indicate greater efficacy of the canola and palm oils in comparison with the conventional collectors for chalcopyrite and molybdenite recoveries and product upgrades. This is believed to be due to the edible oils’ specific interactions with iron oxides sites preferentially formed in situ on the surfaces of the chalcopyrite or molybdenite in the pulp rather than on the pyrite surfaces, causing limited recovery of the pyrite. Complementary contact angle results confirmed that more canola oil is adsorbed onto chalcopyrite surfaces than onto pyrite surfaces. For the mineral mixtures tested, the edible oil’s degree of unsaturation had a noticeable effect on its performance as a collector. A higher pyrite recovery and slightly lower chalcopyrite grade was obtained with palm oil than with canola oil. These findings suggest that the use of canola oil has a potential to add to the existing array of flotation collectors and would represent a combined opportunity for both the mining and agricultural sectors, with concomitant health, environmental and economic benefits.