Tropical glaciers are extremely sensitive to changes of climate variables. Their response to climate change is complex and depends on multiple mechanisms affecting their mass and energy balance, including deposition of light absorbing particles (LAPs) from the atmosphere on snow and ice. Such particles can reduce glaciers surface albedo, thus enhancing the melting process. LAPs include carbonaceous particles (black carbon - BC and organic carbon - OC) and mineral dust aerosol (MDA). Although their relevance in global cryosphere, LAPs observations in the Andes tropical glacier areas are limited and sparse. This review aims at providing a critical evaluation of available data on LAPs in South America tropical glaciers, and highlights research gaps that will help to improve our understanding of natural processes and anthropogenic emissions impacts on the cryosphere of the region.
                  In South American tropical glaciers, LAPs measurements in surface snow are mainly focused in the Cordillera Blanca and limited information are available about their chemical composition (carbonaceous or mineral components), while dust ice core records have been investigated in several sectors of the Andes, including in the Cordillera Blanca, Cordillera Oriental, and Cordillera Real. Remote and field observations in South American tropical glaciers indicate that LAPs might explain a significant fraction of snow albedo variability, however snow albedo reduction from modelling studies varies significantly depending on LAPs concentration and composition. Carbonaceous LAPs sources in South America are dominated by BC emissions from open fires, linked to agricultural and land clearing activities, peaking in the southern hemisphere dry season (August–October). Natural and anthropogenic dust emissions are potentially relevant contributors of LAPs on the Andes glaciers, as well. Satellite and in-situ measurements were deployed to investigate transport episodes of carbonaceous and mineral particles from lower altitudes towards the Andean glaciers. Nevertheless, the small number of atmospheric records of BC, OC, and MDA does not allow a systematic understanding of transport and deposition processes of such species in the region.