Oil and gas production from organic-rich shale formations has become viable through advancements in multistage hydraulic fracturing. However, fluctuations in oil and gas prices, coupled with the sharp decline in gas production after the initial days of fracturing operations, drive operators to devise strategies for enhancing hydrocarbon production. The use of highly reactive fracturing fluids that include strong oxidizing agents, also known as breakers, can potentially increase well productivity. The oxidative breakers are used to reduce the viscosity of gel-based fluids after the proppant is transported into fracture zones of the target formation. These breakers can also degrade the organic matter, enhancing the release of hydrocarbons. However, chemical byproducts generated by the interaction of oxidative breakers with the shale matrix have not been extensively studied. This study investigated the fluid-rock interactions between Marcellus Shale and synthetic hydraulic fracturing fluid (HFF) solutions comprising three different oxidative breakers, i.e., ammonium persulfate, sodium bromate, and sodium hypochlorite, commonly used in the Appalachian Basin, USA. Our results demonstrate that the type of oxidizing breakers used in the HFF controlled the type and amount of volatile organic compounds (VOCs) and semi-volatile organic compounds (SVOCs) produced. In all HFF reacted effluents, we observed the transformation of VOCs and the presence of organic acids in variable amounts. However, effluents from HFF containing sodium bromate and sodium hypochlorite breakers showed the presence of several halogenated organic compounds.
                  Changes in major ions and mineralogy indicate that carbonate dissolution and barite precipitation were ubiquitous in all shale reacted effluents. Our results also demonstrate that the addition of oxidative breakers increased the concentration of several major and trace elements in the effluents. These elements fall under the critical mineral (CM) or critical element category due to their high demand in emerging technologies and susceptibility to supply chain disruption due to variety of factors. However, before oxidative breakers can be used at a larger field scale to enhance the release and recovery of CM and hydrocarbons, a better understanding is required of the potential environmental impacts associated with the generation and transformation of contaminants during breaker-fluid-rock interaction.