Previous research on skarn tungsten deposits has mainly focused on causative rocks and skarn minerals. The effect of the physical and mechanical properties and geochemical characteristics of the country rock on the mineralization of skarn tungsten deposits urgently needs to be further studied. A new skarn deposit, Longjiaoshan-Fujiashan, was discovered in the Edong orefield of the Middle-Lower Yangtze River Metallogenic Belt in the contact zone between the causative intrusive rock and the country rocks. The Longjiaoshan-Fujiashan deposit is an ideal research object for the influence of country rock on skarn mineralization. Based on rich ore-hosting and lean ore-hosting strata in the Longjiaoshan-Fujiashan deposit, we conducted analyses of major and trace elements and organic carbon content, specific surface area, porosity, and permeability. Combined with previous studies, we concluded that the difference among the levels of major and trace elements and organic carbon of the strata could be negligible. The conclusion demonstrates that the influence of geochemical properties of limestones on mineralization is small, whereas the physical properties of limestones are likely the main factor influencing mineralization. The pore-type of rich ore-hosting strata (Qixia Formation and Maokou Formation) are fractured pores and organic pores, whereas those of the lean ore-hosting strata (Huanglong Formation and Dabu Formation) are intercrystalline and intercrystalline pores. The average specific surface areas of the rich ore-hosting and lean ore-hosting strata of the limestone samples were 0.1575 and 0.0167 m2/g, respectively. The lower specific surface area is probably not conducive to the adsorption of gas in the ore-forming hydrothermal fluid, which reduces the reaction rate. Similarly, a high pore volume is conducive to the full reaction of the ore-forming hydrothermal fluid with the country rock and the formation of the orebody. The pore diameter of the rich ore-hosting limestone strata in the Longjiaoshan-Fujiashan deposit was in the range of 40–110 μm, and showed “multiple peaks with one main peak and multiple secondary peaks.” The country rock with the reported pore size characteristics is likely to benefit from ore formation. The alteration scale of high porosity and high permeability country rock (i.e., rich ore-hosting strata: 9.0989 MDarcy; lean ore-hosting strata: 2.9699 MDarcy) are conducive to the formation of large skarn-type mineralization. In conclusion, compared with the geochemical properties of the country rock (major and trace elements and organic carbon content), the physical properties of the country rock (specific surface area, porosity, and permeability) have an obvious influence on the mineralization. Determining the influence of different physical property parameters of the country rock on the mineralization process of skarn is of great research value.