Background
                  Decreased bone mineral density (BMD) is a common condition after a burn with significant complications that would be a global health problem. Also, balance can further worsen due to burning complications. Therefore, this study aims to analyze the additive effects of selected Qigong training exercises for 2 months to the standard physiotherapy regimen on bone mineral density and balance control post-thermal burn injuries.
               
                  Methods
                  110 participants (75 males and 35 females), aged 25–50, with deep second and third-degree thermal burns affecting the trunk and lower extremities, and a total body surface area (TBSA) of 30–45%, allocated randomly into two equal groups of 55. Group A has Qigong training along with its standard physiotherapy regimen, and the control group (Group B) has only a standard physiotherapy regimen. For eight weeks, the interventions were used four times a week. The bone mineral density (BMD), T-score of the lumbar spine, the overall stability index (OSI), and the dynamic limits of stability (DLOS) were assessed pre-intervention and after eight weeks of intervention.
               
                  Results
                  A two-way mixed MANOVA showed that there was a significant increase in BMD, T-score, and DLOS and a significant decrease in OSI in a favor of the Qigong training group after eight weeks of treatment compared with that of the control group. Both groups showed a significant improvement in BMD, T- score, DLOS, and OSI post-treatment compared with that at the baseline. There were statistical significances in the favor of the Qigong training group after eight weeks of treatment (P < 0.001).
               
                  Conclusion
                  In patients with repaired second and third-degree thermal burns of the trunk and lower legs, Qigong training activities combined with a standard physiotherapy regimen for 2 months were more helpful in increasing bone mineral density and improving balance control than the standard physiotherapy regimen alone.