Because shale is widely used as a building material, it is critical to accurately determine its mineral alteration and porosity evolution during deterioration processes. When fluids flow through shale’s porosity spaces, their chemical properties gradually change because of the products produced by the water–rock reactions. These changes may lead to different water–rock reaction rates in the rock’s interior and on the rock’s surface, which are manifest as a “sequential” process. In this study, a self-designed reaction device was used to simulate sequential reaction conditions, and three disk-shaped shale samples were arranged in a series to represent the shale at different locations in a larger block. Deionized water was made to flow through the samples in sequence and to react for different periods of time (2, 4, and 6 months). Through X-ray diffraction (XRD) analysis, total organic carbon (TOC) measurements, nitrogen absorption tests, and scanning electron microscopy (SEM) observations, the alterations of the mineral composition and porosity characteristics of the shale specimens were investigated. The results revealed that the mineral alterations mainly involved decreases in the amount of pyrite and the TOC and an increase in the total amount of clay minerals, while the porosity changes included increases in both the specific surface area and the pore volume. These changes were greater for longer reaction times and were greater in the specimens in the later part of the sequence than in those at the beginning of the sequence. The microscopic observations were consistent with the mineral and porosity changes. For the reacted solution, the aqueous pH decreased and the electrical conductivity (EC) increased after the reactions, and these effects were magnified by the sequential water–rock reactions. These results suggest the conclusions that follow. i) The self-designed reaction system can represent sequential water–rock reactions well. ii) The sequential water–rock reactions accelerated the mineral alterations and porosity evolution in the latter part of the sequence compared to the beginning of the sequence. iii) Along the direction of the water flow, the shale deterioration increased successively, which can be primarily attributed to the accumulation of soluble protons during the sequential water–rock reactions.