Physicalcharacterization on primary or secondary minerals is imperative. One of such physical analyses is the grindability characteristics and/or work index determination. This, as well asenergy required to comminute certain critical minerals is key and has been de-emphasized in recent time. In this regard, this study is focused on investigating the work index of alluvial columbite tailings to determine the actual energy consumed during milling to the liberation size prior to beneficiation and metal extraction. Alluvial columbite tailing test samples was sourced froman abandoned mine-field, inRayfield, Jos South,Plateau state, Nigeria.Reference mineral sample with a known grindability/work index was also utilized in this study. Reference sample was Gyel-Bukuru columbite mineral ore, sourced from Gyel town,Eastern Jos, Plateau state, Nigeria. Both test and reference samples wereground, with their weights known. 80% passing particle size were obtained for both test and reference samples. The obtained grindability values were used in determining work index of test sample. Mean work index value of ̴ 2.3041 kWh/ton was determined. Thus, this indicates that a minimum average energy amount of ̴ 2.3041 kWh was required to grind/comminute one ton ofthe alluvial ferro-columbite mineral tailing test sample. This is significant in the sustainability in processing, mining, and metallurgical engineering and especially in the columbite mineral liberation and design/development of effective mineral processing/beneficiation routes for overall efficiency of recovery, separation and extraction of value metals such as Nb and Ta. This will therefore act as a deciphering factor to be considered when choosing/selecting suitable comminution equipment and design system. The grindability data can also be utilized by the mining sector and mineral processing industries for efficient beneficiation, separation, and Nb/Ta recoveries as well as the knowledge of energy quantity consumed during mechanical activation of the mineral for effective processing or concentration.