There has been considerable interest in recent years in the development of automatic systems for the measurement of mineral composition and texture to help solve mineral processing problems. These rely on three major operations — the automatic identification of the minerals, the creation of an image representing the mineral sample and, finally, the analysis and measurement of the resulting image. A further stage in the process of useful application of such results is the relating of the measured parameters to the mineral processing system.
                  The present review considers work in all these areas. Initial attempts to quantify optical images had only limited success, thus the discussion concentrates on electron beam systems. These offer many advantages for the identification and discrimination of mineral species. The methods used by different workers to develop rapid, reliable, automatic instruments which will analyse mineral specimens are described. The basis on which the identification is made and the form in which the image is created varies considerably between different systems. Sample preparation is also stressed, since without adequate care in this aspect the results are of doubtful value.
                  The practical application of these measurements has been mainly in the are of the mineralogy of sulphide particles. Most studies relate to liberation and are concerned with grinding and flotation problems. These range from plant studies to laboratory experiments aimed at improved understanding of the behaviour of composite particles. More recently the range of applications has extended to grain size measurements, ore characterisation and the analysis of some non-sulphide systems. These include coal, flyash, mineral sands, oxides and silicates.
                  Finally the future potential of these methods is discussed and the likely areas which will be developed. It is concluded that there will be great activity in the coming years in automated quantitative process mineralogy.