Introduction
                  We aimed i) to investigate the effects of a concurrent (aerobic plus strength) exercise intervention during pregnancy on placental mtDNA copy number, proportion of deleted mtDNA, and on the content of some trace and ultra-trace minerals with coenzymatic relevance; ii) to explore the association of such mitochondrial markers with the concentration of these minerals.
               
                  Methods
                  For the present study specific aims, 47 placentas were randomly selected from women that participated in the GESTAFIT project into exercise (n = 24) or control (n = 23) groups. The exercise group followed a concurrent aerobic and strength training program, three 60-min sessions/week, from the 17th gestational week until birth. Placenta tissue was collected and processed for minerals determination by the inductively coupled plasma mass spectrometry technique. RT-PCR was used to determine placentas mtDNA copy number and ND1/ND4 deletion.
               
                  Results
                  After adjusting for potential confounders, the mothers who participated in the exercise program had placentas with greater mtDNA copy number (p = 0.04) and lower mtDNA deletion (p = 0.003). Placentas from mothers in the exercise group presented higher manganese content than those from the controls (0.26 ± 0.03 mg/dL vs. 0.13 ± 0.03 mg/dL, p = 0.003). Placenta manganese content was significantly associated with lower mtDNA deletions (r = −0.382) and greater mtDNA copy number (r = 0.513). Iron content was associated with higher mtDNA copy number (r = 0.393). Selenium content was associated with lower mtDNA deletion (r = −0.377) and greater mtDNA copy number (r = 0.442). Finally, zinc and magnesium content were associated with higher mtDNA copy number (r = 0.447 and r = 0.453, respectively).
               
                  Discussion
                  This concurrent exercise training program induced a better placental status, which might be mediated through an improvement of mitochondrial bioenergetics and antioxidative capacity.