Inorganic mineral particles play an important role in the formation of atmospheric aerosols in the Sichuan Basin. Atmospheric haze formation is accompanied by the phase transition of mineral particles under high humidity and stable climatic conditions. Backward trajectory analysis was used in this study to determine the migration trajectory of atmospheric mineral particles. Furthermore, Positive matrix factorization (PMF) was used to analyze the sources of atmospheric mineral particles. The phase transition mechanisms of atmospheric mineral particles were studied using ion chromatography, inductively coupled plasma emission spectrometry, total organic carbon analysis, X-ray diffraction, Fourier-transform infrared spectroscopy, scanning electron microscopy coupled with energy dispersive spectrometry, and grand canonical Monte Carlo methods. Three migration and phase transition paths were identified for the mineral particles. Sources of atmospheric mineral particles included combustion, vehicle emissions, industrial emissions, agricultural sources, and mineral dust. The main mineral phases in atmospheric particles, calcite and dolomite, were transformed into gypsum, and muscovite may be transformed into kaolinite. The phase transition of mineral particles seriously affects the formation of aerosols and worsens haze. Typically, along the Nanchong-Suining-Neijiang-Zigong-Yibin path, calcite is converted into gypsum under the influence of man-made inorganic pollution gases, which worsen the haze conditions and cause slight air pollution for 3–5 days. However, along the Guangyuan-Mianyang-Deyang-Chengdu-Meishan-Ya'an path, anthropogenic volatile organic compounds (VOCs) hindered gypsum formation from dolomite. Furthermore, dolomite and VOCs formed stable adsorption systems (system energies from −0.41 to −4.76 eV, long bonds from 0.20 to 0.24 nm). The adsorption system of dolomite and m/p-xylene, with low system energy (−1.46 eV/−1.33 eV) and significant correlation (r2 = 0.991, p < 0.01), was the main cause of haze formation. Consequently, calcite gypsification and dolomite–-VOC synergism exacerbated regional haze conditions. This study provides a theoretical reference for the mechanism of aerosol formation in basin climates.