Late Cretaceous granitic rocks occur in the Gejiu ore district to the east and west of the N-S striking Gejiu Fault, whereas major Sn deposits are only known to occur to the east of the Gejiu Fault. Comparison of the whole-rock chemistry, the apatite trace-element chemistry, and zircon Hf and O isotope data of the various granites demonstrates that fertile granites occur to both sides of the Gejiu fault. The results demonstrate that the c. 83 Ma old granitic intrusions (i) have similar magma sources, which are dominated by metasedimentary rocks that had experienced intense chemical weathering, resulting in reduced melts, (ii) had similar melting conditions, i.e., high temperature biotite dehydration melting, and (iii) in part had experienced large extents of fractional crystallization. The most evolved granites to both sides of the Gejiu Fault have the characteristics typical of tin granites. Therefore, the absence of major deposits to the west of the Gejiu Fault is not due to the absence of fertile granites. The areas to the east and the west of the Gejiu Fault, however, have fundamentally different fault pattern, which indicates different orientation of the stress field to both sides of the Gejiu Fault at the time of the emplacement of the Cretaceous granites. Late Cretaceous dextral movement along the Ailaoshan Fault Zone resulted in a (trans)tensional setting in areas to the east of the Gejiu Fault and in a (trans)pressional setting to the west of that fault. We speculate that the tectonic setting influences the potential for mineralization because the Sn bearing fluids need efficient pathways to transporting metals from the roof zone of the batholith into the wall rocks. In contrast to regional compression, hydraulic fracturing in an overall extensional setting has the potential to develop efficient fluid pathways and, thus, may lead to major ore deposits. To the west of the Gejiu Fault, however, granite intrusions in an overall compressional setting are likely to develop no or only small mineralization.