The present study highlights the first evidence of hydrothermal mineral Thenardite (Na2SO4) from Puga geothermal area, North-western Himalayan belt in Ladakh Geothermal Province, India, which is unequivocal evidence for the presence of high-temperature hydrothermal fluid activity from one of the thickest crust areas of the Earth. The Puga geothermal belt illustrates a fault-bounded hydrothermal system with a clearly defined conductive zone, coinciding with Kiagar Tso fault typically exemplifying a shallow-level medium enthalpic geothermal reservoir. The hydrogeochemistry suggests that thermal and non-thermal waters are of Na-Cl-HCO3 and Ca-Mg-HCO3 type, respectively, with neutral to near alkaline pH. The silica and cation geothermometry reveal sub-surface temperatures around 150 °C and 250 °C, respectively, at shallow depth; however, >250 °C is anticipated at the deepest levels (~3 km). Stable isotope (δD and δ18O) studies explicate depletion of isotopic content for thermal waters over Puga river water and radiogenic isotope (3H) suggests matured thermal waters with ongoing water-rock interactions. The recharge altitude estimation and physiographic studies put forth that geothermal reservoir is recharged with the ice masses located at an altitude of 6458 m above mean sea level (msl) in the west of Puga valley, probably from the highest peak of Polokong La mountain. The two key processes participating in regulation of proportions of the dissolved salts in the thermal waters are silicate weathering and ion-exchange kinetics. The powder X-ray diffraction study reveals a major occurrence of hydrothermal mineral thenardite in the hot spring deposits for the first time along with huge encrustations of trona, borax, calcite and elemental sulfur. The high-temperature fluids encounter thenardite, pyrite, and jarosite-bearing minerals in basement rock causing enrichment of SO4
                     2− and Cl− in geothermal waters. The temperature-dependent speciation modelling (50 °C–200 °C) for major ion Na+ reveals the composition of the reservoir fluid (~150 °C): Na+ > NaCO3
                     − > NaSO4
                     − > NaHCO3 > NaF > NaOH. A conceptual evolution model of thermal waters involving the recharge-deep circulation-mixing-discharge of thermal springs is hence put forth in the study using various hydrogeochemical insights.