Our objectives were to evaluate the effects of complete replacement of inorganic salts of trace minerals (STM) with organic trace minerals (OTM) in both pre- and postpartum diets on ovarian dynamics, estrous behavior measured by sensors, preimplantation conceptus development, and reproductive performance in dairy cows. Pregnant cows and heifers (n = 273) were blocked by parity and body condition score and randomly assigned to either STM or OTM diets at 45 ± 3 d before their expected calving. Pre- and postpartum diets were formulated to meet 100% of recommended levels of each trace mineral in both treatments, taking into consideration both basal and supplemental levels. The final target concentrations of Co, Cu, Mn, Se, and Zn were, respectively, 0.25, 13.7, 40.0, 0.3, and 40.0 mg/kg in the prepartum diet, and 0.25, 15.7, 40.0, 0.3, and 63.0 mg/kg in the postpartum diet. The STM group was supplemented with Co, Cu, Mn, and Zn sulfates and sodium selenite, while the OTM group was supplemented with Co, Cu, Mn, and Zn proteinates and selenized yeast. Treatments continued until 156 d in milk (DIM) and were assigned to individual cows using automatic feeding gates. Starting at 21 DIM, ultrasonography examinations of the ovaries were performed weekly to determine the presence of a corpus luteum and postpartum resumption of ovarian cyclicity. Cows were presynchronized with 2 injections of PGF2α at 42 and 56 DIM. Estrous behavior was monitored using electronic activity tags that indirectly measured walking activity. Cows detected in estrus after the second PGF2α were inseminated, and those not detected in estrus by 67 DIM were enrolled in a synchronization program. Cows that returned to estrus after artificial insemination (AI) were reinseminated. Pregnancy diagnosis was performed 33 d after AI, and nonpregnant cows were resynchronized. Transcript expression of interferon-stimulated genes in peripheral blood leukocytes was performed in a subgroup of cows (STM, n = 67; OTM, n = 73) on d 19 after AI. A different subgroup of cows (28 STM, 29 OTM) received uterine flushing 15 d after AI for recovery of conceptuses and uterine fluid for analyses of transcriptomics and metabolomics, respectively. In addition, dominant follicle diameter, luteal size and blood flow, and concentration of progesterone in plasma were measured on d 0, 7, and 15 relative to AI. After flushing, PGF2α was given and the dominant follicle was aspirated 2 d later to measure the concentration of trace minerals by mass spectrometry. Estrous behavior, size of the dominant follicle and corpus luteum, concentration of progesterone, time to pregnancy, and proportion of cows pregnant by 100 d of the breeding period did not differ between treatments. A greater proportion of cows supplemented with OTM had a corpus luteum detected before presynchronization (64.3 vs. 75.2%), and primiparous cows supplemented with OTM tended to resume cyclicity earlier than their STM counterparts. Cows supplemented with OTM had a greater concentration of Cu in follicular fluid than cows supplemented with STM (0.89 vs. 0.77 µg/mL, respectively). In pregnant multiparous cows, expression of receptor transporter protein 4 in peripheral blood leukocytes was 42% greater in the OTM group. Conceptuses of the 2 treatments had 589 differentially expressed transcripts, with many indicating advanced conceptus elongation and greater transcript expression of selenoproteins in the OTM group. In pregnant cows, 24 metabolites were more abundant in the uterine fluid of OTM, including spermidine, sucrose, and cholesterol. In conclusion, replacing STM with OTM caused modest improvements to resumption of ovarian cyclicity and important changes in preimplantation conceptus development, but it did not alter conception risk and pregnancy rate.