The Shimensi deposit is a recently discovered W-Cu-Mo polymetallic deposit located in the Jiangnan porphyry-skarn W belt in South China. The deposit has a resource of 0.74×106 t of WO3 accompanied by 0.4×106 t Cu and 28000 t Mo and other useful components like Ga, making it one of the largest W deposits in the world. This paper is aimed to reveal the ore-controlling mechanisms of the Shimensi deposit, involving the role of the ore-related granites, the tectonic background for its formation, and the metallogenesis model. The systematic geological survey suggests multi-types of alteration are developed in the deposit, mainly including greisenization, potassic-alteration, sericitization, chloritization, and silicification. Drilling engineering data and mining works indicate that the Shimensi deposit consists of two main orebodies of I and II. Therein, the W resource has reached a supergiant scale, and the accompanied Cu, Mo, Au, Bi, Ga, and some other useful components are also of economic significance. The main ore-minerals consist of scheelite, wolframite and chalcopyrite. Disseminated mineralization is the dominant type of the W-Cu-Mo polymetallic orebodies, and mainly distributes in the inner and external contact zone that between the Neoproterozoic biotite granodiorite and the Yanshanian granites. The main orebody occurs at the external contact zone, and the pegmatoid crust near the inner contact zone is an important prospecting marker of the W mineralization. Of them, the disseminated W ores within the wall rock of the Neoproterozoic biotite granodiorite is a new mineralization type identified in this paper. Combining previous geochronological and isotopic data, we propose that the mineralization of the Shimensi deposit is closely related to the intruding of the Yanshanian porphyritic biotite granite and granite porphyry. Geochemical data suggest that the biotite granodiorite is rich in Ca and had provided a large amount of Ca for the precipitation of scheelite in this area. Thus, it is a favorable wall rock type for W mineralization. The Shimensi deposit belongs to granitic-type W polymetallic deposit related to post-magmatic hydrothermal, and the ore-forming fluid was initially derived from the Yanshanian magmas.
                  ©2022 China Geology Editorial Office.