During a break in the program at the recent MIM2018 international conference in Irvine, California, Metal Powder Report consulting editor Joseph Capus interviewed Dr. Randall German, now Emeritus Professor at San Diego State University, about his outstanding academic career in PM.Dr. Randall (Rand) German needs no introduction in these pages, having made a great many contributions to the science and technology of powder metallurgy and particulate materials over a long and brilliant career. Indeed, as guest speaker during the POWDERMET2017 conference in Las Vegas last June, he was introduced as “PM industry’s most recognizable resource”. Rand German was born in Maryland, USA, but was mostly brought up in California, where he took his bachelor’s degree in materials science and engineering at San José State University, before moving on to an MS in Metallurgical Engineering at The Ohio State University, Columbus, OH, and a PhD at University of California – Davis. After research posts at government labs and industry, he has held a succession of university professorships and chairs. In his teaching and research career he has supervised well over a hundred graduate and post-doctoral students, resulting in more than 1000 publications as well as 17 books. He has been presenting tutorials in powder injection molding in conjunction with MPIF’s annual MIM conferences since 1990, and he has co-chaired over 30 conferences. Among multiple awards, Dr. German has received an honorary doctorate from Universidad Carlos III de Madrid. Apart from academic activities, he heads up his own consulting company and serves on the Technical Advisory Board of Pangaea Ventures and has been involved in numerous start-up companies. He was interviewed for this article during a break in the recent MIM2018 conference in Irvine, California ( The real starting point, at least in my mind, was on leaving high school. A lot of us were thinking of going into engineering and we got these college manuals showing different majors, and there was one that I’d never heard of called materials science and engineering – being offered for people good at math and physics. So I took materials science and engineering at San José State University. Then I was lucky enough to work a couple of summers at a Caterpillar plant operating drill presses, but eventually got a summer internship at the Battelle Lab in Columbus, Ohio. After completing my bachelor’s degree I was hired full-time there in a group that was a contractor for the Atomic Energy Commission. So Battelle had a PM group of about twenty engineers, and I set up an atomizer, and did hot-pressing of re-entry nose-tips. I also did pressing of ferrite, and sputter-coating of powder – it was fun! But I had no idea what I was getting into! I started with a couple of 55 gal. drums in the high bay and atomized tin and then moved over to superalloys – that was in 1969. I stayed one year full-time at Battelle. Then, being from California, an opportunity showed up at Sandia National Labs at Livermore, CA, where they were working on a nuclear weapon PM component and searching for a powder metallurgist. I got one of those deals that you couldn’t refuse, where they agreed to send me back to finish my master’s degree at The Ohio State University (which I was doing part-time) if I would come and design a new PM lab that was being built. So that was what I did. After the master’s, I went on for a doctorate, part-time, at the University of California – Davis, near Sacramento, close to Livermore where I was working. I worked on a small part in a nuclear weapon that was designed to remove helium from the tritium fuel element. We did that with a combination of technologies that included making a PM sintered filter with just the right permeability. I worked out how to do that. Mott Corporation in Connecticut was actually manufacturing the filter and was the only one in the world that could make this device, and kept the secret process locked up in a closet. When Bud Mott (president) found out I had mastered how to do it independently, he hired me as Director of Research! After seven years at Sandia I was interested in getting a taste of the commercial PM world and went to work for Bud in Farmington, CT, but only lasted ten months. Bud was very successful, but had a habit of burning through people very quickly. I moved to become Director of Research for a company called J. M. Ney Corporation in Bloomfield, CT, that was into dental ceramics, precious metals for electronics as well as for dentistry. I built up a research program there and really enjoyed it. They invested in me with management training, financial and strategic planning skills, sitting frequently with the president on the latter, where I began to realize more than just the science behind research. Then Fritz Lenel, a legendary academic at Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute, wrote to me saying he had retired eight years earlier and was still holding his faculty spot open. Would I be interested? I said “I always wanted to be a professor”. At that time the only academic job I ever interviewed for was at RPI, and I took it – with a pay-cut. I thought it would be really fun to be a Prof.! RPI hired me as an untenured professor; within five years I had tenure, and after two more years I had a chair. So it was a really good spot for me to start an academic career. Lenel had written a big book on PM that came out the year I went there (1980). I used Fritz’s book for the first two years but the students didn’t really like it very much. It had no “problems” and - you’ll remember Fritz had very long and precise, but convoluted sentences. That’s when I started typing up my lecture notes and came up with a book – really geared to a short academic program, and that was the PM Science book. Yes, I had no experience in book-writing and my English wasn’t particularly well polished in terms of writing skills. Carol was a high school English teacher. She did a master’s degree at RPI and was hired and ended up as Assistant Dean of Students. At RPI Fritz Lenel had a very modest research program, although he was very good at training students, some of whom went into extremely important roles in PM. He had pretty old equipment by the time I got there, so really most of it had to be thrown away, and I started hustling to get the kind of instrumentation I wanted. Of course, the first priority was students and then the research funds. So as these things go, you start building up momentum and pretty soon you are going really fast. When the powder injection molding project came along we formed a consortium with other faculty members, and pretty soon I just needed bigger space to put molding machines and furnaces, and the Institute started getting a little nervous, and honestly I got to the point where I outgrew what they felt comfortable accommodating. It was very strange. We attracted companies like IBM and Kaiser Aluminum, and then Ray Wiech’s firm Fine Particle Technology, and Rocky Mountain Orthodontics – I didn’t even know there was an orthodontics company in Denver, but they were setting up metal injection molding and wanted to come and see what we did. Remington Arms had set up to do gun parts, and so on…we didn’t know who some of these people were. Actually what happened was, we as a faculty got together and wrote up a Yes, after three years – we had planned the thing to go 3 years and it ran about 5 years in total. I was outgrowing RPI so I started looking around at alternative openings. Penn State University had a new chair and I knew that so much of the PM industry was in Pennsylvania, so I said that would be the right place – I’d be very comfortable because people understood the field. So we had a long drawn-out discussion for a year and a half, but eventually they came up with just a phenomenal package. So I took about 8 to 10 students with me to Penn State. I sold them on the program and showed them where the new lab was being built. I brought in some other staff and students, and filled up a really nice program; a lot of the sponsors went with us and funded us for another three years in injection molding. I stayed fifteen years at Penn State and actually retired out of Penn State as an emeritus professor; it was early retirement, if you will. But Penn State was starting to experience some administrative problems, especially with the president. I had put together over a hundred sponsors to my research program – 106 companies – the largest in Penn State history. And then the administration, instead of helping, decided to start “taxing” the program! We fought and argued, but there was no logic there. Of course, none of these administrators are there any more. I then had an opportunity to move to Mississippi State University, not for PM but because the State Governor wanted a new center focused on the automotive industry. That was in 2005. So he proposed $50 million as a start-up package with $4 million in recurring funds! They had already built the buildings and started to put in the equipment by time I got there….…I went for an interview with the State Governor – the university president flew me there, no kidding – I’d never interviewed at this level before. So the deal was: I got a start-up package of about a million dollars to buy PM equipment, and within a few years we had 225 people working in four buildings, and taxed every bit of my management skills, if you know what I mean. Carol and I went there with a plan to stay four years and then I would fully retire. What happened was that San Diego State University came along looking for an associate dean of engineering, saying that people they tried to hire couldn’t afford to move there because of the cost of housing. Carol and I had already bought a house in San Diego, with a view to retirement at a beach community called Del Mar, so I got the job because of merit and because I could afford it! So we moved in 2008 after three years at Mississippi State. At San Diego State I eventually retired to become an emeritus professor on the teaching side, but am still on the payroll as a research professor, and that’s because I’ve been able to bring in enough research contracts to keep myself salaried. My NASA microgravity sintering contract is going to run until December 2019, and that will be the last of them. I’m still also an emeritus professor at Penn State, which I use because it has a top engineering library and I can go in electronically to retrieve articles. From the first day I struggled with it, but just got better and better! Several of the books were published by APMI, but the most highly cited book is “Sintering Theory and Practice”, published by Wiley. It was originally Gary Messing’s idea (he was a ceramics professor at Penn State), and he brought in the publisher’ and the idea was we would each write a chapter and exchange them and so on, but I never got Gary’s first chapter so I ended up writing the whole book. With APMI, I have served on committees, chaired conferences, and given the Powder Injection Molding tutorials for a number of years. I served on the board of APMI, but regrettably never had a turn as president because I was not working at an MPIF member company. I have always been a member of ASM and the American Ceramics Society, headed conferences, became a fellow of ASM, and was chairman of the PM committee of the Metals Society. Nowadays I tease colleagues a lot that there is no merit in these things because nobody is counting your publications and activities any more – you do it because you enjoy it! Altogether, I’ve supervised about 100 graduate students, about two-thirds of whom were doing master’s degrees and the rest were doctorate students, but many of the master’s students would stay on for a doctorate. I also ended up with about 200 post-doc students, which I learned early on were much more productive – in terms of publications. The post-docs also assisted by working with the graduate students and the graduate students with the under-grads. You may not totally agree with this, but I think ferrous pressed-and-sintered PM (technology) has been stagnant for twenty years. I keep looking for something to move forward, new presses or whatever. I hate to be so pragmatic, but you’ve got to look at the financials (profit results). When you take the North American pressed-and-sintered parts, these are selling at an average of $8.40/kg, judging from the manufacturing output and sales volume for 2017. One of my real introductions to this was from an MBA student at Penn State who did a study on the PM industry, and she concluded that the profitability of the PM industry could be no better than that of the auto industry because everything is tied together so closely. So when GKN bought into PM, they (GKN) were running something like 13% profit on things like their helicopter business, and she said “They are not going to be happy.” It took 20 years, and guess what? They are not happy! On the titanium powder side, I did a survey for one of my consulting clients on the future for titanium, and contrary to what one hears about all the titanium powder capacity going in, one of the biggest uses is in conventional metallurgical operations – in alloy melting. They don’t need this high-end powder, they want cheap titanium, probably alloyed with iron. The other thing I was going to say, without mentioning any names, is that I am somewhat disappointed in the M&A and IPO activity of the last ten years, and the way the business analysts get excited about these things, sometimes neglecting to do due diligence. Additive manufacturing has been incubating for twenty years, and often times that’s what it takes before going into fast growth, and it seems to be doing that now. Very reputable firms are putting massive amounts of dollars into it – in a way we never probably saw in other PM technology. This means you are going to solve an awful lot of problems because of the resources being dialed in. I like biking and tasting wines. Cycling is one of the things I’ve really gotten into. We have a biking group of about two dozen guys, all of a certain age, some retired, and we do regular trips of 30 miles or so. My wife and I travel a lot, and keep looking for new and interesting places to visit, most recently a cruise to Antarctica ( We have two sons, neither of whom wanted to go into engineering after they saw how hard I worked at RPI, so one is a change-management consultant in San Francisco, and the other one is an entertainment lawyer in Santa Monica, specializing in heavy metal music. We have three grandchildren. 