Electron paramagnetic resonance (EPR) at various temperatures (300–4 K) is reported for the superconducting single crystal (T
                     c≅90 K), before and after grinding. In the normal state (T>T
                     c), the EPR line from the single crystal is isotropic and asymmetrical due the skin effect. On the contrary in the superconducting state (T<T
                     c), characterised by a non-resonant signal just below T
                     c and by the noise on the spectrum, the EPR line is symmetrical and anisotropic. The grinding of crystal allowed us to avoid some of these complications. After grinding the skin effect is eliminated and the line becomes symmetrical. The temperature dependence of the EPR line width shows a Korringa-type interaction between Gd3+ moments and the conduction electrons in the normal state, and an important broadening below 20 K announcing a magnetic order of the Gd3+ at low temperature; but the origin of the line width narrowing appeared between 90 and 20 K is not clear. The line intensity varies with temperature as the Curie–Weiss law in the normal state. Below T
                     c it decreases, when the temperature is lowered from T
                     c, as result of the reducing of the volume producing the EPR signal.In order to get information upon the magnetic couplings in high- In this work, we present X-band EPR results from GdBa GdBa X-band EPR measurements were performed, in “Laboratoire d'Electronique des Milieux Condensés––Université Aix-Marseille I (France)”. The spectrometer was a Bruker ESR 300 using a variable temperature gas-flow cryostat (Oxford ESR 9) and a Varian rectangular cavity. Before grinding the crystal was stuck at the end of a silica capillary tube and placed in the centre of the cavity; the tube axis was perpendicular to the direction of the magnetic field. The glue used to stick the sample was checked to give no EPR signal. After grinding, the powder was putted into a silica EPR tube; the mean diameter of grains, measured by electron microscopy, was ∼4 μm.  After grinding, the EPR line is symmetrical and its intensity at 300 K is increased by a factor 7, indicating the skin effect problem in the initial sample. The change from an asymmetrical EPR line in the normal state ( After grinding the line is symmetrical indicating the absence of the skin effect ( As is already established by the susceptibility measurements The We observed the thermal evolution of the EPR spectrum from GdBa