Potato starch and dextrins resulting from thermolysis of potato starch in the absence of reagents and presence of l-amino acids are promising depressants for separation of lead and copper minerals present in the Polish industrial copper concentrates. The polysaccharides were used for differential xanthate flotation of the final industrial concentrates produced by flotation with sulfhydryl collectors in the absence of depressants. The polysaccharides depressed galena and provided froth concentrate rich in chalcocite and other copper minerals as well as cell product containing lead minerals. The best results of separation were obtained in the presence of plain dextrin prepared by a thermal degradation of potato starch. The industrial concentrate containing 18.5% Cu and 5.5% Pb was divided into a froth product containing 38.1% Cu with 77% recovery of copper and a cell product assaying 7.3% Pb with 83% recovery of lead. It was accomplished using 2500 g/t of dextrin, 50g/t of potassium ethyl xanthate, and 50 g/t of frother (α-terpineol). The pH of flotation was 8.0–8.2.Many polymetallic sulfide ores contain copper and lead minerals. Results of numerous studies involving pure minerals, their mixtures, and ores floated on a laboratory and industrial scale indicate that the separation of copper and lead minerals by flotation is possible. The list of depressants used to facilitate separation includes cyanide, dichromate, FeSO The Polish sulfide copper ore contains copper minerals (mostly chalcocite, some bornite, covellite, chalcopyrite), galena with other sulfides, and gangue minerals such as dolomite, sandstone, and bituminous shale. Presently, the sulfides are floated collectively with sulfhydryl collectors and monoalkyl polyethylene glycol ether frothers, while separation of lead from copper takes place during the pyrometallurgical stage of copper production. Current approach to the separation of lead from copper creates a series of technological and environmental problems because production of copper is large and in 2000 was equal to 463 Mt. For comparison, Chile, the world leader in copper production, delivers approximately three times more copper to the world market per year. The goal of this study was to apply polysaccharides to accomplish separation of lead and copper sulfides present in the industrial flotation concentrate by additional flotation in the presence of polysaccharides as depressants and xanthate as a collector. We chose copper concentrate because preliminary flotation tests indicated that the selectivity of the process in the case of concentrates was much greater than that of the copper ore. In this study, we used potato starch and dextrins produced by thermal degradation without any additive as well as thermolysis in the presence of amino acids. Dextrin produced by roasting potato starch at 256 °C for 1 h was denoted as dextrin DBM. Dextrins resulted from thermolysis of potato starch with amino acids were abbreviated as follows: threonine (THRDx), aspartic acid (ASPDx), glutamic acid (GLUDx), proline (PRODx). Their preparation and properties were described in our previous papers Freshly prepared aqueous solutions of polysaccharide were made by dissolution of 0.2 g of polysaccharides in 100 cm The wet bulk industrial flotation copper–lead concentrate was collected from the first technological line of the Copper Ore Flotation Plant in Lubin which processes bituminous shale-rich part of the ore. The industrial flotation of the copper ore is carried out in the presence of a mixture of sulfhydryl collectors (sodium ethyl xanthate, sodium isobutyl xanthate, and diethyldithiophosphate) and a mixture of frothers (Corflot) containing mostly butyl triethylene glycol ether. The concentrate was in the form of a thick suspension containing 30% water. It was transported 70 km from Lubin to Wroclaw and divided into small wet samples containing about 120 g of solids. The samples were sealed in plastic bags and stored for no longer than 1 week in a refrigerator. The flotation tests lasted for 1 additional week. Thus, the sulfide samples used in final experiments were no more than 2 weeks old. Flotation tests were carried out in a self-aerated Mekhanobr laboratory flotation machine equipped with a 500-cm Differential flotation of the bulk industrial copper concentrate in the presence of xanthate and absence of polysaccharide provides froth products of decreasing copper content and a negligible separation between copper and lead minerals. It is illustrated in The results of flotation in the presence of 2500 g/t dextrin DBM are also presented as a Mayer's upgrading curve in  Similarly, positive results were obtained with other polysaccharides including potato starch and dextrin In contrary to the plain and amino acid dextrins, thioglycolic acid (TGA) Polysaccharides are promising reagents for removal of lead minerals from the Polish copper industrial flotation concentrates containing copper sulfides, galena, and bituminous shale. Differential flotation of the industrial concentrates with polysaccharide as a depressant and xanthate as a collector is able to provide froth concentrates with up to 80% recovery of Cu and lead concentrates in the tailing also with ∼80% recovery. The author wishes to thank the managers of the Copper Ore Flotation Plant in Lubin for supplying the industrial copper flotation concentrate sample. This project was supported by a grant No. 9 T12 062 19 (I-11/350-198) from the Polish Committee for Scientific Research.