Low-grade sulphidic molybdenum ores were treated by using a combined processing route for a comprehensive recovery of molybdenum, copper, and other minor elements. As the first step, oxidation roasting was used to convert most of sulphides into metal oxides, during which 85–90% of sulphur was removed. Then both water and dilute sulphuric acid leaching of the roast were tested, in order to remove silica, iron and other impurities from the roast. Both copper and molybdenum were recovered one after another from the filtrates via cementation by iron powder under controlled temperature and pH conditions. Recovery for both elements was in all cases over 99%. Reasonable separation efficiency for copper and molybdenum was achieved from the water leach solutions. The leached cakes were dissolved in ammonia to recover the molybdenum by crystallisation as ammonium-dimolybdate. The proposed roasting, leaching and separation steps give a feasible alternative for a comprehensive processing of low grade molybdenum ores.Molybdenum metal is produced mainly from its high grade sulphide ore, the molybdenite, through oxidative roasting, purification of the calcine, and hydrogen reduction of MoO As the first step, the low grade ores were roasted with air at temperature of 620–670 °C for the oxidation of molybdenite: The filter cakes from the leaching process were dissolved with ammonia to recover undissolved Mo and precipitate the impurities. The molybdenum will be recovered by crystallisation as ammonium-dimolybdate. The processing route is shown in The low grade molybdenite concentrate was prepared with mixing two ore grades of different chemical compositions, and the mixture contains 18.21% Mo, 3.65% Fe, 2.73% Cu, 15.3% S, 0.262% K Roasting was carried out in a laboratory muffle furnace, with controlled temperature and was done in two steps. The concentrate contained in a stainless steel tray was firstly oxidised in a muffle furnace with air at a bed temperature of about 670 °C for 2.5–3.0 h, then the temperature was lowered to 620–630 °C for 2 h. During roasting the bed material was disturbed every 30 min by raking to avoid crust formation. After this process the roasted material was cooled down rapidly on a water-cooled metal plate. The roast was leached in a glass beaker with water on a heating plate at 85 °C for 6 h, at liquid/solid ratio of 2.85 with magnetic stirring. A small amount of the undissolved solids was dried and analysed by XRF and a small sample of the filtrate was analysed with ICP for molybdenum and potassium. The leaching recoveries were calculated from the filtrate. The remaining filtrate was used for molybdenum and copper precipitation by addition of fine iron powder in two steps. The wet filter cake was further dissolved with ammonia (12.5 wt.% NH Acid leaching of the roast was carried out with 5.0 and 7.5 vol.% H Ammonia dissolution tests of the acid leach cake (12.5% NH A few experiments were performed to reduce the sulphate content of the dissolver liquid. Firstly an extra repulping (washing) of the wet H Both the water and acid leach solutions contain 4 main ions: molybdenum (Mo During the roasting several samples were taken at certain time and analysed for sulphur with a LECO induction furnace. The first sample was taken after 2 h roasting and contained 2.5% S. The final sulphur content at the roast could be reduced to 1.9–2.0% within 5–5.5 h, with sulphur removal of about 87%, which was sufficient for the purpose of the tests. The leaching recoveries for various elements calculated from the filtrate analysis are shown in Higher leaching recoveries in diluted sulphuric acid were obtained for molybdenum and potassium in comparison with water leaching, as expected. Various elements show higher leaching recoveries when the sulphuric acid concentration and the leaching temperature increases except potassium for which the recovery decreases with stronger leaching conditions. There is a small difference in leaching recovery for molybdenum between both H All zinc and almost all copper are leached into the solution. The water leaching gives a filtrate containing about 15–20 g/l Mo, which is used for molybdenum and copper precipitation. Acid leaching gives a filtrate containing about 45 g/l Mo, 10–12 g/l Cu and 8–10 g/l Fe. The wet water leach filter cake was dissolved with ammonia (12.5 wt.% NH Ammonia dissolution tests of the acid leach cake (12.5% NH Sulphate removal was performed using two methods, firstly repulping and secondly by Ba(OH) From the For the copper cementation and molybdenum precipitation tests 3 types of solutions were used with different compositions as shown below: Synthetic solution Mo 15, Cu 5, Fe 5, P 0.5, Si 0.5, As 1, Se 0.2, Re 0.07 (g/l) prepared with sulphate or oxide pH=0.28 (as-is), 0.88, 1.98 (with H Real solutions (2, supplied from industry) Mo 10.4, Cu 10.5, Fe 10.9 (g/l); pH<0 Mo 16.1, Cu 8.2, Fe 8.5 (g/l); pH<0 Solutions from H Water leaching: Mo 20–30, Cu 6, Fe<1 (g/l) Acid leaching: Mo ∼45, Cu 10–12, Fe 8–10 (g/l). A series of precipitation tests were performed with these solutions to examine the influence of several parameters on the precipitation of copper and molybdenum. The most important results are summarized in the following. A real solution, supplied from the industry, was used to determine the influence of the temperature on the cementation of copper. Three cementation tests were performed at a temperature of 20 °C, 40–45 °C and 60–65 °C. The initial pH was the value of the “as-is” solution and the Cu/Fe weight-ratio was 3.0. The cake, obtained after the cementation, contains 98–100% of all the copper from the solution, the molybdenum loss was about 1% and variation of the temperature has a very small effect on the copper recovery. From this experiment it was concluded that the copper cementation will be performed at room temperature. The molybdenum recovery was also tested. The initial pH should be around 1 to 1.5 and the temperature of the solution around 40 °C. Increasing of the temperature to, e.g. 85 °C has a little effect on the molybdenum recovery and the purity of the cake. The molybdenum recovery from a real solution by precipitation with use of iron powder was almost 100%. For the solutions prepared through roasting and leaching, both copper and molybdenum precipitation were tested based on the established conditions from the synthetic solution and the solutions directly supplied from industry. Cementation of copper from both H Based on the established operating conditions, it was observed that: Oxidative roasting gives 85–90% sulphur removal. The final sulphur content at the roast could be reduced to about 1.9–2.0% within 5–5.5 h roasting. Cementation of copper and precipitation of molybdenum from the H Cementation of copper and precipitation of molybdenum from the H XRD analysis indicates that both metallic copper and Cu The pH of the solution during the copper cementation should be lower than 0.9. At a pH=2.0 no cementation reaction was observed. For molybdenum precipitation, initial pH of the solution should not be lower than 1.0, and a value close to 1.0 gives a better precipitation efficiency. Repulping of the wet H