It is experimentally shown that the stability of non-overflowing pneumatic foams, such as those used in the Bikerman foam stability test, is strongly dependent upon the gradient of humidity within the freeboard of the column. Growing foams can be prevented from exhibiting collapse, even at surfactant concentrations significantly lower than the critical micelle concentration, by saturating the air above the foam surface thereby preventing liquid evaporation. These observations have important implications for the performance of flotation devices, as well as instruments designed to measure the stability of aqueous foams. Meteorological data for two mining sites in Australia throughout a single year shows the variability of humidity, and therefore stability, of flotation froths.It is a common experience of individuals who consume carbonated beverages that, upon dispensing an aliquot of the beverage, the froth or ‘head’ on the top of the liquid rises rapidly up the glass. Sometimes the froth spills over the rim of the glass, but often it just reaches the lip and then, surprisingly, stops growing at precisely this point. In this paper we will propose that the stability of the froth is governed by the evaporation from the top of the surface which is controlled, Whilst performing measurements of bubble size distribution in foam using a nuclear magnetic resonance method (unpublished work within our group) a non-overflowing pneumatic foam was created in a column within the magnetic resonance spectrometer. A non-overflowing pneumatic foam is one that is produced by sparging a gas into a surfactant solution such that it forms an equilibrium height because the rate at which gas is added to the bottom of the froth is equal to the rate at which gas is liberated from the top surface of the foam due to bubble coalescence. Results showed that bubble size distribution was largely independent of the height at which size was probed. This indicated that the height of eventual foam collapse was a result of physical effects occurring at the foam surface rather than internal bubble coalescence within the bulk of the foam. Such physical effects include mechanical disturbance of the froth surface or evaporation, and, because the surface was located within the column, the former was largely precluded. Thus, this preliminary evidence suggested that the equilibrium height that a non-overflowing pneumatic foam can achieve is dependent upon the rate of evaporation from the foam surface. In fact, In this paper it will be shown that the stability of a non-overflowing pneumatic foam is dependent upon the gradient of relative humidity in the freeboard of a column, and the implications that this result has upon the stability of other foaming systems will be discussed. (The ‘freeboard’ is the space between the bed surface and the top of the column in fluidisation, and is used to describe the space between the froth surface and the top of the column herein.) We do not claim that this work is directly representative of practical flotation froths, although there is a precedent in the literature for using descriptions of gas–liquid foams to model mineralised systems ( The  It is possible to show that the Bikerman unit of foaminess, The surface tension may appear as an independent variable in its own right, or as a proxy for other surface variables as explained by The link between the stability of a flotation froth and flotation performance has been extensively investigated by the Cilliers group ( Given the importance of froth stability to flotation performance, and the great potential of the device of The apparatus used in the experiments consisted of a chamber of square section with 0.2 Bubble size was estimated by taking photos at the bottom of the foam layer and then the photo was zoomed and the bubble size was measured on a computer screen using the software Paint.Net V3.36 (Microsoft Corporation). The evolution of the height of layers of froth stabilised by 2.92 The relative humidity at the top of the column was raised to 96% (i.e. 17.3 Further, the concentration of SDS was decreased to one-tenth of its value for the above experiments (i.e. to 0.29 These results were investigated further by repeating experiments at By inspection of The most important finding of these results is that foam stability can be controlled by regulating the relative humidity of the air at the top of the column. By inspection of However, by changing the height of the column it is seen that it is not the absolute value of humidity at the top of the column that governs stability. Because foam stability increases when the height of the freeboard increases, it is seen that it is the gradient of humidity that governs foam stability; there is a spatial gradient of relative humidity within the freeboard ( Because foam stability in a growing pneumatic foam has been shown to be dependent upon the gradient of humidity in the freeboard of the column, it is clear that Bikerman's ‘unit of foaminess’ and results from the device of To put the values of relative humidity used in the experiments reported herein into context, monthly maximum and minimum relative humidity values recorded by the We acknowledge that we have conducted experiments on gas–liquid foams whereas those in flotation devices are mineralised (i.e. they have a surface coverage of particles). However, since equilibrium foam heights are observed in foam stability tests with mineralised froths ( To proceed further with the analysis of how humidity influences flotation, one needs to be able to predict the rate of bubble bursting on the surface, and this is extremely problematical. Bikerman's test is not the only standard method for attempting to quantify the stability of a foam layer. Two methods that are used in quality control in the brewing of beer ( Further, the Returning to the observation that, when one pours a carbonated beverage into a vessel, one often observes the threat of foam overspilling only to find that the froth stops growing just at the rim of the glass. The work communicated above suggests a possible explanation for this phenomenon. When the liquid is first poured into the glass, the humidity gradient is low because the height between the top of the foam and the rim of the glass (in effect the freeboard height) is high. However, as liquid continues to be poured into the glass, and froth grows because of bubble nucleation, the freeboard height rapidly diminishes, causing an increase in humidity gradient and therefore more evaporation. When the froth just reaches the top of the glass, the evaporation rate is at a maximum, and we suggest that this is the cause of the observation described above. The bitter irony is that, on a very humid day when a refreshing beverage is most sought after, one is more likely to lose volume due to froth overspill than on a less humid day. However, if the beverage is successfully poured, it will retain its head for longer due to lower liquid evaporation from the surface. An alternative explanation for the foam often only reaching the glass rim is that as the foam expands the films at the surface stretch and the foam gets dryer thereby encourage film rupture. In fact, the reality may be a complex amalgamation of the two physical effects.  By dimensional analysis, it has been shown that the Bikerman ‘unit of foaminess’ cannot provide an intrinsic measurement of foam stability. The foam stability value obtained by employing Bikerman's foam test can be manipulated by controlling the value of relative humidity at the top of the column freeboard. One can enhance foam stability by increasing the humidity, indicating that foam collapse is dependent upon the rate of evaporation from the surface. However, by changing the height of the column, it is apparent that it is the humidity gradient within the freeboard that governs the stability, rather than the absolute value of humidity at the top of the column. The observation that foam stability is dependent upon air humidity has important implications for the operation of froth flotation devices and instruments that measure froth stability therein. However, note that, in the device of The observation that froth stability is dependent upon humidity has implications for the reproducibility of results from other standard methods to quantify foam stability.  This work was funded under the Discovery Projects scheme of the