The copper removal process purifies copper from leaching solutions with zinc powder in reactors. Due to the complex reaction mechanism and unavailability of online measurements, zinc powder is usually added inexactly, which easily leads to unstable production. This paper proposes an online evaluation method based on oxidation–reduction potential (ORP) for the control of the copper removal process. A kinetic model is designed to translate the production requirements to evaluation indexes of ORP, and the process is then graded by evaluating the fuzzified ORP and its trends according to these indexes. By analyzing these evaluation grades, the process condition is divided into several classes, and each condition class corresponds to a control method set. The industrial experiments show that the copper removal performance is improved by using the proposed evaluation and control strategy.Zinc hydrometallurgy is the main method of zinc production, producing more than 80% of the world’s zinc These two reactions are mutually competitive as they consume the same reactant, and the former reaction can promote the latter one because the product of one reaction is the reactant of the other. Due to the interactions between the reactions, the copper removal process is sensitive to the reaction conditions Recently, many researchers have considered oxidation reduction potential (ORP) for monitoring and controlling the industrial chemical process Notably, in the studies mentioned above, the impact of ORP on the control variables should be determined exactly before monitoring and controlling these processes. Sun et al. built a mathematical model by applying the electrode reaction kinetics to determine the relationships between ORP and the reaction rate in the cobalt removal process of zinc purification Fuzzy logic offers an effective solution to solve this problem with inherent difficulty and uncertainty The evaluation and control strategy was developed and tested in a zinc hydrometallurgy plant of China. The flow chart of the copper removal process in the plant is shown in A series of sensors are installed in the copper removal process to obtain on-line information about the process state. These sensors are connected to a network system that includes several analog–digital converters (ADC), transmitters, a programmable logic controller (PLC), and an industrial computer. Most of the process parameters (e.g. temperature, pH, ORP, etc.) are monitored online every minute. The impurity concentrations in the inlet and outlet solutions are measured manually every two hours. The amounts of zinc powder added to the reactors were adjusted manually according with these industrial informations. The influent and effluent characteristics of the copper removal process are presented in The purpose of the copper removal process is to reduce the copper concentration to an acceptable amount by adding zinc powder. Practically, the operators often assess the process and adjust the amount of zinc powder according to the outlet copper concentration. However, due to the delayed measurements, the operation is always delayed, making the process under unstable. Thus, ORP, which timely and effectively describes the states of the reactions in the process, is used to monitor and adjust the copper removal process. Therefore, the relationship between ORP and the outlet copper concentration should be analyzed before evaluating the process according to ORP. Copper removal is composed of two major oxidation–reduction reactions: copper cementation and comproportionation. Both of these removal reactions are thought to follow first order kinetics The Arrhenius equation indicates that the rate constant Concerning the electrode characteristics of the materials in the major reactions, the main electrochemical reactions occurring at electrode surfaces during electrolysis in the anode are: In the cathode, the reactions are: According to the independence principle of parallel electrode reactions, these reactions uniquely share the electrode potential called the mixed potential, and the mixed potential determines the rate of all electrode reactions by affecting the electron transfer rate between the oxidant and reductant. The actual activation energies of the anode and cathode reactions are calculated as Eq. Then, according to Eqs. Among these parameters, Based on the complexity of the kinetic model and the numbers of the unknown parameters, particle swarm optimization (PSO) algorithm was applied to identify these parameters. The objective of the parameter identification is to minimize the differences between the predicted outlet copper concentration of the kinetic model ( Due to the complexity of the copper removal process and the influence of other impurities, it is difficult to estimate the outlet copper concentration accurately based on the kinetic model with ORP. However, ORP can effectively assess the state of the removal process on line. For solving uncertainties in the fuzzy nature between ORP and the process state, fuzzy logic is introduced to evaluate the copper removal process. The value of ORP presents the current state of the removal process, while its trend indicates the underlying future state under the current operation. If only the current value of ORP is considered in the evaluation process, an improper evaluation result might be produced, which could reduce the process stability. For example, when the value of ORP is higher than the regular range, the process is considered to be in a serious condition, and more zinc powder will be added to improve the process condition. However, the operation might cause the process to enter another extreme condition when there is a sharp decrease in the copper concentration. In this section, an evaluation method based on ORP and its trends is proposed for the copper removal process. In the evaluation process, ORP and its trends are classified into several fuzzy sets with several fuzzy membership functions, and the parameters of these functions are defined using the kinetic model with the production limitation of the concentrations. According to the fuzzified ORP and its trend, the process condition is graded by applying a set of fuzzy inference rules. The evaluation system mainly consists of the following four stages. The first stage is the preparation of input variables, which provides a real-time trend extraction for ORP by applying a linear regression method. The trend is extracted as follows:     Once the input variables including ORP and its trend are prepared, these quantitative variables are transformed into linguistic variables in stage 2, which is named fuzzification. In this stage, two types of membership functions are applied: the generalized bell membership function, and Z-shaped and S-shaped membership functions. The former functions are defined by the following equation: ORP reflects vaguely the changes of copper concentration in the reactors. It increases with increasing copper concentration and vice versa. To make the fuzzified value meaningful and suitable for practical control, the definition of these membership functions should be considered of the influences the outlet copper concentration limitations. Assuming that the production limits of the outlet copper concentration are The trend of ORP reveals its underlying variation, which influences the future state of ORP. A sharp trend can cause ORP to return to the stable situation from an unstable situation in minutes, whereas it can also cause ORP to depart from the stable situation in a few seconds. Therefore, the parameters in the memberships of the ORP trend are defined according to its possible influence on the ORP state. Denoting the time threshold as In stage 3, a set of rules is applied to the fuzzy sets obtained in stage 2 for evaluating the copper removal process. The ORP trend indicates the possible future situation of ORP. This possible “outlook” is thus considered in the proposed evaluation process. When ORP is currently in the acceptable situation without fluctuation, and its outlook is also acceptable, the copper process is definitely in a stable condition. When the ORP is currently acceptable but with a sharp trend that causes a cloudy outlook, the process is not stable as expected. In contrast, when ORP is beyond the limits but with a good trend that could cause it to return to the acceptable state, the process situation is not as terrible as it seems to be. According to this idea, the specific evaluation standard, presented as reference rules for the copper removal process, is illustrated in The linguistic variables are converted into a single numerical output value in stage 4. The centroid defuzzification method is applied where the crisp value of the output variable is computed by finding the center of gravity of the membership function for the fuzzy value. The value of the output is given by the algebraic expression: In the copper removal process, most of the copper ions are precipitated in the first reactor; thus, the additive amount is mainly added to this reactor. The last reactor is an auxiliary reactor for fine tuning the outlet concentration. The amount added to this reactor is small and is set manually. Practically, the added amount is adjusted manually when the measurement impurity concentrations are delivered to the operators every two hours. If the ore source is altered, or the process condition is not stable, the human experience and the off-line measurements might not easy satisfy the requirements of process production. In this section, a control strategy is developed based on the process evaluation results provided by ORP to promote process stability, as shown in The system consists of an evaluation range estimation unit, a process evaluation unit, an additive adjustment unit, and an additive control unit. The evaluation range estimation unit translates the production limitation of the outlet concentration to an ORP range based on the proposed kinetic model. The process evaluation unit then assesses the process condition using ORP and its trend. By analyzing the evaluation results, the adjustment mode selector produces adjustment mode signal. And then the corresponding adjustment mode is activated by the signal. If the model retraining mode, which could also be chosen by judge whether pH and temperature exceed set ranges, is chosen, a new set of parameters would be trained according with the resent industrial data from database for the existed additive model. When the independent adjustment mode is chosen, the adjustment amount of zinc powder added in the second reactor would be calculated based on expert system. Similarly, if the associative adjustment mode is selected, zinc amounts added in all the reactors would be adjusted. In the additive control unit, the additive model set the major amounts for the process; and the final amount of zinc powder added in each reactor is set by summing the major and adjustment amounts. To determine the adjustment mode, it is necessary to observe the process evaluation grade during a set time interval. Statistically, the distribution of these evaluation grades during the interval reveals the effect of the additive model on the removal process. When most of the grade is unacceptable, the model is so poor that it does not fit the process. Therefore, the quartiles of the grade distribution are introduced as a statistical index to determine whether the additive model should be retrained to reset the additive. The method of additive adjustment is determined according to the current grade when the model remains the same. The specific procedure of this process is illustrated in Based on material balance of CSTR and the first kinetic model of copper removal reactions, the additive model could be built to set the major amounts of zinc powder added in the reactors To amend the amounts of zinc powder, two sets of expert rules are extracted and stored in the rule base: one is built for the independent adjustment mode; and the other is for the associate adjustment mode. The evaluation grade ( The total amounts of zinc powder added in each reactor are calculated by Eq. (19). To observe the behavior of the evaluation and control strategy under the specified disturbances, three different cases are chosen from the practical process. The ranges of the inlet parameters for these cases are shown in We first present the evaluation grade obtained by the proposed method for the three cases based on ORP values sampled from the practical process ( For comparison, we also use the controller used in current practice and a conventional control strategy. In current practice, the amounts of zinc powder are set manually based on the inlet and outlet copper concentrations and the flow rate. The conventional control strategy is similar to the proposed control strategy; however, the amount of zinc added is adjusted according to the current ORP value rather than the evaluation grades. The running results of these three control strategies are illustrated in To accurately assess the running results of the control strategies, five indexes are introduced in this paper: qualification ratio, median, mean concentration, oscillation range, and average additive amount ( Based on the kinetic and Arrhenius laws, a mechanistic model is established to estimate the optimal range of ORP relevant for the production limitation of the outlet impurity concentration. An evaluation method is then proposed to grade the copper removal process. In this method, ORP and its trends are fuzzified according to the estimated range. It affords quantitative feedback information for process control that represents the current and underlying states of the removal reactions. Based on the evaluation method, a control strategy is designed. In this strategy, three types of control methods are prepared for different situations. The control methods are chosen by analyzing the statistical characteristics of the evaluation grade. This control system can improve the qualified ratio and the process stability more than using the conventional control method. Furthermore, it minimizes energy consumption and guarantees an appropriate activator amounts for the next process. However, there are still many problems to study, including associative control when more ORP information is afforded in all reactors. Overall, the simulation results show that the proposed control strategy has promising applications for industrial-scale impurity removal processes in hydrometallurgy. This work is financially supported by the innovation-driven plan in Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at 