In almost all mineral flotation systems the particles and bubbles are brought into contact with each other under turbulent flow conditions which although beneficial in promoting particle–bubble collisions, at the same time increase the probability of particle detachment. Often the detachment of a particle is described in terms of a modified Bond number (expressed as ratio of attachment force to detachment force) greater than 1.0 however very few studies include attachment force in the numerical modelling. Acknowledging the dynamic interaction of bubble–particle aggregate in an actual flotation system, in this work, a dynamic model of the particle motion on the bubble interface was developed based on Schulze's theory considering contributions from gravity, buoyancy, pressure force, capillary force and the fluid drag. The purpose of this modelling was to check the consistency of the particle detachment criterion at Bond number greater than 1.0. Transient magnitudes of both the attaching and detaching forces were presented and the resulting temporal variation of the Bond number was reported. It was found that during the process of particle motion, although the Bond number exceeded the limiting value of 1.0, the particle still remained attached to the bubble interface. It appears that the criterion holds good only for a steady state case when the Bond number remains less than 1.0 and not for a dynamic case where the Bond number may exceed 1.0.Froth flotation has been used for over a century to separate valuable mineral particles based on their hydrophobicity difference. It is extensively employed for mineral beneficiation purposes. According to As mentioned before, the performance of the flotation process depends on the attachment of the particles onto the bubble interface, it is critical to quantify the attractive force between the bubble–particle pair. With the aid of surface force measuring techniques such as atomic force microscopy, a large amount of experiments have been conducted to study particle–bubble interactions in stationary liquid ( Experimentally, the particle dropping technique on a stationary anchored bubble has been applied to directly observe particle–bubble interaction and attachment at the microscale ( Alternatively, numerical simulations have become a widely recognised tool to investigate such a complex phenomenon. Previously, bubble–particle interaction was studied in a quiescent liquid in the framework of the Basset–Boussinesq–Oseen (BBO) equation ( It is emphasised that it is the selective attractive force between the bubble interface and particles that aid in recovery of desired products. This attractive nature arises due to both long range (capillary force) and short range attractive forces (hydrophobic force, van der Waal force, electric double layer force). When long range forces are of prime interest, capillary force remains the dominant factor in such interactions that govern the stability of the bubble–particle bubble system ( In the detachment process, capillary force is not enough to counterbalance the contributions of all detaching forces. The modified Bond number used in Schulze's theory characterises the stability of particle–bubble aggregate by specifying equilibrium of forces which yields In this work, we present a two dimensional model for particle–bubble interactions in a quiescent liquid. An instantaneous force balance comprising gravity force, buoyancy force, capillary force, pressure force and drag force was developed to determine particle motion on a stationary bubble interface. Two cases were simulated: (1)when the particle remained attached to the bubble interface and (2)when the particle detached from the bubble interface. The transient variation of the modified Bond Number was reported in both cases. Also, the resultant motion (trajectory and velocity) of the particle was computed for both cases and compared with reported experimental data. To understand particle detachment from a bubble, it is important to explicitly quantify the interactions between the particle and the bubble. A mathematical model is developed to quantify the particle trajectory for a single bubble–particle system using Schulze's theory ( where A particle of finite mass immersed in fluid experiences a net buoyancy force in the direction opposite to the gravitational acceleration which can be expressed as: When the particle attaches on the bubble interface, the intervening liquid film at the solid–liquid interface drains off developing a three phase contact line and the corresponding surface tension force. This force can be expressed as: It is worth noting that if the bubble is considered to be a rigid sphere in the interaction process, capillary force yields the same magnitude of the capillary pressure force (described next) but acts in the opposite direction (please refer to The internal pressure (Laplace pressure) of the bubble is higher than the surrounding pressure of the liquid phase. Taking into consideration the depression of the bubble interface at the bubble–particle contact, and then subtracting the hydrostatic head, the net pressure force acting on the solid–gas contact area is given by: Under the condition of creeping flow, the drag force experienced by the particle is given by Stokes' law as: Here Incorporating all the above described forces from Eqs. The numerical model presented in Eqs.  To explore the reason behind the discrepancy in the prediction of the model, the particle's velocity along the trajectory was plotted and compared with the experimentally measured particle velocity profile. The central aim of this study was to obtain a quantitative trend of the Bond number variation during the course of particle–bubble interaction. One of the significant concerns in the mineral beneficiation industries is to successfully carry out coarse particle flotation which saves considerable energy in grinding to produce fine particles. Whilst it is relatively easy to collect the fine particles by bubbles, such is not the case with coarse particles due to their relatively higher inertia. Attachment force such as capillary force plays a significant role here for particle recovery. To demonstrate the influence of capillary force on particle inertia, two separate cases were simulated — low particle inertia case and high particle inertia case. Case 1 considers interaction of a 600 Due to higher inertial effect, Due to higher inertial effect, In the description of particle detachment, the Bond number is defined as the ratio of detaching force to attaching force acting on the attached particle and can be expressed as: To achieve insight into the process of the particle sliding down the bubble, the instantaneous Bond number was computed in the two cases described in It is important to understand how forces acting on the particle dynamically change in these two cases which are shown in In the particle detachment case( It was mentioned that particle trajectory was defined in terms of radial and polar positions on the bubble surface, where origin was located in the bubble centre. The radial distance between the particle centre and the bubble interface on the particle surface (meniscus) indicates particle radial position ( A model for simulating single particle–bubble interactions in quiescent liquid was developed specifically with focus on applicability of the Bond number in depicting the particle attachment and detachment phenomena. Capillary force was included in the force balance analysis and was found to be the prime force for attachment. It was shown that even assuming a constant contact angle, particle trajectory can be described satisfactorily without bringing the complexity of dynamic contact angle (receding and advancing contact angle) into the modelling framework. Fairly good agreement on the particle motion was obtained when the model prediction was compared with the published experimental data. Moreover, it was illustrated that in a quiescent case, for the same particle size, inertia (particle density) determines the detachment process. It was noted that in the dynamic case where the particle moved freely within the liquid, the attaching and detaching forces kept changing due to the orientation of the particle relative to the bubble surface which leads to fluctuation of the instantaneous Bond number. It was also noted that the particle can still remain attached to the bubble interface even when the Bond number exceeds the theoretical threshold of 1.0. These findings demonstrated that although limiting the value of the Bond number (1.0) is applicable in describing the particle detachment for a static case, it is not necessarily the sufficient condition to describe the detachment process in a dynamic process.  acceleration velocity at time t (m/s Bond number modified Bond number buoyancy force (N) capillary force (N) capillary force component in x direction (N) capillary force component in y direction (N) drag force (N) gravity force (N) resultant force (N) pressure force (N) capillary pressure force (N) capillary pressure force component in x direction (N) capillary pressure force component in y direction (N) characteristic length (m) bubble radius (m) particle radius (m) pressure (pa) acceleration velocity (m/s particle moving velocity gravity acceleration (m/s time (s) unit normal vector at three phase contact plane static contact angle (°) polar angle (°) polar angle (°) bubble density (kg/m liquid density (kg/m surface tension (N/m) dynamic viscosity (m The following are the supplementary data related to this article. Supplementary data to this article can be found online at Authors would like to thank Prof. G. Jameson for very insightful discussion on this work. Guichao Wang would like to thank theChina Scholarship Council (CSC) for financial assistance. This work was financially supported by the It is worth exploring a connection between the capillary force (Eq. Capillary pressure force is expressed as area multiplied by pressure in the following form. In this way, pressure force caused by surface tension can be written as follows, Similarly, capillary force acting in the same direction with hydrostatic pressure can be written in the same manner. In this way, summation force of pressure force and capillary force can be resolved into