Permeability evolution in coal is critical for the prediction of coalbed methane (CBM) production and CO2-enhanced-CBM. The anthracite, as the highest rank coal, has ultra-tight structure and the gas flow dynamics is complicated and influenced by multi-mechanistic flow components. Gas transport in anthracite will be a nonlinear multi-mechanistic process also including non-Darcy components like gas as-/desorption, gas slippage and diffusion flow. In this study, a series of laboratory permeability measurements were conducted on an anthracite sample for helium and CO2 depletions under both constant stress and uniaxial strain boundary conditions. The different transient pulse-decay methods were utilized to estimate the permeability and Klinkenberg correction accounting for slip effect was also used to calculate the intrinsic permeability. The helium permeability results indicate that the overall permeability under uniaxial strain condition is higher than that under constant stress condition because of larger effective stress reduction during gas depletion. At low pressure under constant stress condition, CO2 permeability enhancement due to sorption-induced matrix shrinkage effect is significant, which can be either clearly observed from the pulse-decay pressure response curves or the data reduced by Cui et al.'s method. But within the same pressure range, there is almost no difference between Brace's method and Dicker & Smits's method. Gas slippage effect is also significant at low pressure for low permeability coal based on the obtained experimental data.In the United States, the development of coalbed methane (CBM) was initially encouraged by federal tax incentive during the early 1980s. Since then CBM was considered as a valuable clean energy resource, and the most recent annual energy report by the US Energy Information Administration ( During CBM production, the permeability of coal dynamically changes as a result of pressure drawdown. When pressure decreases, there will be an increase of the effective stress, defined as the difference between the external stress and pore pressure, tending to close the aperture of existing fractures ( In this paper, the transient method “pulse-decay” technique was used to measure the low permeability on anthracite sample ( Coal is generally considered as a self-source reservoir rock with high gas storage capacity due to sorption effect. Anthracite, as the highest rank coal, has higher adsorption capacity for gas storage than lower rank coals ( Compressive storage of the reservoir in pulse-decay permeability measurements is influenced by instantaneous volumetric flow rate change, pressure drop rate and fluid and reservoir compressibility ( As a primary storage mechanism in CBM reservoirs, adsorption is, especially, necessary for indirect gas content estimation ( Significant experimental work has been tried to measure the permeability and its evolution in coal and other tight rocks. Brace et al. (  Note that unconventional reservoir rock has very tight structure, gas flow in matrix is controlled by multiple flow dynamics including Darcy's flow, diffusion and gas slippage ( Since gas slip flow is happening in tight structure during the measurements, by obtaining apparent permeability data through the pulse-decay method with sorption, Klinkenberg correction is able to back estimate the coal intrinsic permeability ( The pulse-decay technique was employed to estimate the permeability of anthracite coal. The advantages of this method is that the permeability can be calculated directly from the linear portion of the solution ( Blocks of anthracite coal were obtained from Jeddo coal mine located in Hazleton in Luzerne County, Pennsylvania. The proximate analysis is summarized in To estimate the permeability change under various stress–strain conditions, two boundary conditions were mimicked in our laboratory, that is, constant stress boundary and uniaxial strain boundary conditions. In triaxial cell test, the constant stress condition refers to both the axial and confining stresses were maintained at a constant value throughout the course of experimental duration. The stresses are generated and maintained by computer-controlled syringe pumps. The constant stress boundary condition was relatively easy to achieve. To better replicate in situ condition, the uniaxial strain condition was also implemented in our measurements. Under this condition, the circumferential dimension of the sample and the vertical stress were maintained constants (  As a non-sorbing gas, helium was firstly chosen to test the coal flow property. The sample was gradually stressed to 1000 In order to implement the uniaxial strain/in situ condition, the confining stress was passively adjusted to maintain the constant horizontal dimension at each pressure step, meanwhile, the vertical/axial stress was kept constant at 2000 After the helium cycle, CO After the constant stress boundary condition, we tried to replicate the uniaxial strain condition. Unfortunately, the sample fails during the CO The transient pulse-decay approach provides an effective way to measure the gas permeability of tight rocks. To determine the permeability, the pressure transient equation was introduced by This classic method was still one of the most popular methods to estimate the low-permeability rocks, but it is questionable whether this method can be directly applied to compressible testing fluids. To simplify the above method, Then the measured sample permeability becomes: Another feature of the organic-bearing rocks is adsorption. The Dicker & Smits's method can correct the compressive storage, but it could not handle the loss of adsorbed gas during the gas injection because the adsorbed gas is no longer in gaseous phase. In order to extend the pulse-decay technique for sorptive and tight material,  For CO If we make a careful comparison with helium and CO In order to qualitatively analyze the sorption effect on the pressure decay cures, we repeat three pressure decays for the same coal sample under the same experimental condition where we allowed fully equilibrium as shown in If we look into different scale of this phenomenon, we may see that the ad-/de-sorption effect has the real influence on the permeability evolution during reservoir pressure change. For unconventional reservoirs, the adsorption effect provides a large gas storage capacity while the desorption process leads to a significant increment on the total non-Darcy flux, and thus may control late-time production reservoir behavior, if desorption/diffusion is the rate-limiting step ( As In order to test how the contribution of pore volume compressive storage varies with pore volume, we calculated the permeability difference in percentage between Brace's method and Dicker & Smits' method, within a porosity range between 5% and 30%. Now we compare the permeability results obtained by Brace's method under two boundary conditions. Differed from stress-controlled condition, horizontal stress decreased from 1070 to 770 In order to test influence of different pulse-decay calculation methods for sorbing gas, CO In Comparing the permeability data from original pulse-decay method, the result from Dicker & Smits's method still shows almost no difference with Brace's method, indicating the pore compressive effect at low pressure is also less significant with CO In order to test whether the found permeability results were comparable with the reported results for the similar coal or not, a quantitative comparison was conducted between the experimental data from Generally speaking, rock's intrinsic permeability obtained by Klinkenberg correction can be lower than the apparent permeability, because slip effect is such a phenomenon showing that gas permeability potentially is higher than pure liquid permeability at the same condition. The influence of Klinkenberg effect on low permeability reservoirs will increase with the reduction of gas pressure ( A series of experimental studies and theoretical analyses on permeability of Hazelton anthracite core sample under different stressed controlled conditions has been presented. The results show that the permeability evolution of studied coal is pressure-boundary dependent and it is simultaneously controlled by the effective stress profile and the sorption process which tends to alter the microstructure of coal. Three different pulse-decay calculation methods for conventional and unconventional gas permeability are utilized and compared. Based on the work completed, the following conclusions are made and summarized: Under uniaxial strain condition, the applied horizontal stress linearly decreased with gas pressure depletion, which consists with traditional oil/gas reservoirs. Because of the horizontal stress loss, the permeability under constant stress condition with helium depletion was found to be less than the results under uniaxial strain condition. The sorption induced matrix shrinkage plays important role on the permeability enhancement at low pressure for the anthracite coal. But it is not strong enough to compensate the stress effect as the bituminous coal did. For the pulse-decay method, the contribution of ad-/desorption can be clearly observed from the pressure respond curves. And this effect is stronger at low pressure than high pressures. Comparing Brace's method and Dicker & Smits's method, Dicker & Smits's method incorporates the pore compressive storage effect only and it may have more influence on gas permeability at pressure higher than 1000 Cui et al.'s method gives an obvious enhancement for the contribution of sorption effect in permeability calculation, providing a good direction of how the gas sorption effect can help to predict apparent permeability. Based on the data observation, at extremely low permeability the Klinkenberg effect becomes significant, and gas slippage is considered to be an important effect when predicting unconventional reservoir gas permeability due to multiple flow mechanism. The characterization of gas slip flow, along with sorption and other non-Darcy flow components, plays an important role in both production analysis and laboratory measurement. It is worthwhile to pay more attention on how to measure and calculate the apparent permeability in a laboratory scale with so many non-Darcy components in future study. This work is supported in part by