Ionic liquids are neoteric, environmentally friendly solvents (as they do not produce emissions) composed of large organic cations and relatively small inorganic anions. They have favorable physical properties, such as negligible volatility and a wide range of liquid existence. (Liquid+liquid) equilibrium (LLE) data for systems including ionic liquids, although essential for the design, optimization and operation of separation processes, remain scarce. However, some recent studies have presented ternary LLE data involving several ionic liquids and organic compounds such as alkanes, alkenes, alkanols, ethers and aromatics, as well as water. In this work, the ASOG model for the activity coefficient is used to predict LLE data for 25 binary and 07 ternary systems at 101.3kPa and several temperatures; all the systems are formed by ionic liquids including the bis[(trifluoromethyl)sulfonyl]imide (NTf2) anion plus alkanes, alkenes, cycloalkanes, alkanols, water, thiophene and aromatics. New group interaction parameters were determined using a modified Simplex method, minimizing a composition-based objective function of experimental data obtained from the literature. The results are satisfactory, with rms deviations of approximately 3%.group interaction parameters, temperature dependent component number of data sets equations fugacity group interaction parameters, temperature independent number of systems number of tie lines number of components number of data points number of groups in the mixture pressure objective function absolute temperature mole fraction in liquid phase group mole fraction group activity coefficient activity coefficient number of groups combinatorial size contribution group contribution standard state (pure component liquid phase residual molecule 1, 2, calculated value experimental value group group analytical solutions of groups liquid–liquid equilibrium root mean square absolute deviations universal functional activity coefficient reference Ionic liquids have low melting temperatures, have thermal stability up to high temperatures, possess high solubility for both polar and nonpolar organic and inorganic substances, exhibit interesting solvation and coordination properties that depend on the nature of the cation and/or anion, and have very low vapor pressures (Liquid (Liquid (Liquid The thermodynamic requirement for any type of phase equilibrium is that the compositions of each species in each phase in which it appears are such that the equilibrium criterion The compositions of the coexisting phases are the sets of mole fractions The activity coefficient A group-contribution method is more effective than other methods in predicting the activity coefficient of the components. The effectiveness of this approach depends on the division of the solution into a number of interacting groups. As the mutual behavior of the interacting groups cannot be determined experimentally, group-contribution thermodynamic models can be used, where the interaction parameters are determined from the behavior of one or several real systems The two main group contribution methods, analytical solution of groups, ASOG In ASOG, the Flory–Huggins The activity coefficient of component In these equations, In this work, new group interaction parameters for CH In this work, a new group, the bis[(trifluoromethyl)sulfonyl]imide anion (NTf Comparisons between experimental and calculated data can be performed using the root mean square (rms) absolute deviations between the experimental and the calculated composition of each component in both phases. These rms deviations are given by The ionic liquids involved in this work are listed in    Similarly,  For a more general view of the results,   The NRTL and UNIFAC models usually give better results than the ASOG and UNIQUAC models, but the first models use molecular interaction parameters, and thus, experimental data including these molecules are needed to be able to apply these models. On the other hand, the ASOG and UNIFAC models use group contribution interaction parameters, which makes it possible to apply these models to systems that can be represented by the groups available. Thus, the group contribution parameters calculated in this paper can be applied to other molecules or systems that can be represented by the new groups. LLE data for 32 systems and 249 tie lines including ionic liquids were predicted by the ASOG model for the activity coefficient. The group interaction parameters were estimated by the minimization of a composition-based objective function using the Simplex method. The results of the prediction were satisfactory, with the rms deviation values between the experimental and calculated equilibrium compositions always below 10% and generally below 5%, respectively. The global value for rms was approximately 3%. From these deviations, we can conclude that ASOG was able to predict the phase behavior of the experimental data with good precision. Pedro A. Robles and Luis A. Cisternas are grateful to the