Banana screens are often used for high capacity separation of iron ore, coal and aggregates into different size fractions. They consist of one or more curved decks that are fitted with screen panels with arrays of square or rectangular holes. The screen structure is vibrated at high frequency to generate peak accelerations of around 4–6g which separates particles flowing over each screen according to their size. Screens are often used to close comminution circuits and return specific size fractions of rock to different destinations such as pebble mills, crushers and back into the mills. All multi-deck screens are difficult to sample for intermediate products which makes measurement and optimization very difficult. Banana screens are even more difficult because the screen cut size varies with the varying slope of the decks. In this paper, the discrete element method (DEM) is used to simulate a full industrial scale double deck banana screen for a range of accelerations. The nature of the particle flow through this complex machine is explored for a range of peak accelerations. Critical aspects of the flow are linked to the separation performance.A large proportion of two of Australia’s most valuable export commodities – iron ore and coal – are processed using high capacity, curved, vibrating screens called “banana” screens because of their curved profile. These screens have many adjustable parameters and are much less well understood than conventional flat vibrating screens. They consist of one or more curved decks that are fitted with screen panels with arrays of square or rectangular holes. The screen structure is vibrated at high frequency to generate around 4–6 Large banana screens are usually operated with a series of screen panels with different sizes and shapes of apertures. Because the screen produces only two or three products, it is very difficult to tell which panel selection strategies are most effective. Similar comments apply to wear of screen panels. Hence, a DEM study has much to recommend it in that significant quantitative data can be obtained about the relative contribution of each part of the screen. There is also a good chance that the exchange of energy between particles and each screen surface will provide at least an indicator of areas of high wear. DEM is also expected to be able to test a range of strategies for optimization of screen operating conditions, panel selection and wear minimization with a view to increasing capacity and availability. A major complexity is that the screen operation is strongly affected by particle shape. Hence the spheres and aggregations of spheres typically used for DEM simulations are not suited to this task. Parametrised super-quadric particles are used in a DEM model here to provide a flexible and more realistic class of particle shapes allowing detailed analysis of the banana screen performance. The aspect ratios of the particles have been measured for a range of ore types and should increase the degree of realism of the simulations. Much of the existing theoretical literature on granular screening is more than 20  DEM now provides the ability to simulate screening applications for millions of particles by directly modelling the collisions between individual grains in the granular mass, and their passage through screen decks of very complex geometry. However, to date there are very few published DEM models of screens, and with the exception of In this paper, DEM is used to simulate a full industrial scale double deck banana screen in three dimensions. A highly realistic screen geometry is used and realistic particle shapes are also used in the model. Flow patterns on each screen deck are predicted for a range of screen accelerations and two feed size distributions. The separation performance of each deck is then analysed and related to the structure of the flow and to the distribution of material within the screen. In the second part of this paper, detailed quantitative predictions of flow rates and residence time distributions for different size classes are used to understand the individual contributions of each screen panel for each deck. The performance characteristics of each screen deck will be shown to be quite different. The stresses applied to the screen cloths by the flowing particles and the impact and abrasive wear on the screen surfaces will also examined. Finally, the energy absorbed by particles provides insight into the extent of particle degradation produced by transiting the screen. The discrete element method is a numerical technique used to predict the behaviour of collision dominated particle flows. Each particle in the flow is tracked and all collisions between particles and between particles and boundaries are modelled. The particles are allowed to overlap and the extent of overlap is used in conjunction with a contact force law to give instantaneous forces from knowledge of the current positions, orientations, velocities and spins of the particles. Here we have used the simplest of the force laws which is the linear spring-dashpot model. The overlap Δ The essential elements of the algorithm for the simulation procedure are: A search grid regularly maintains a near-neighbour interaction list for all particle pairs and particle–boundary pairs that might participate in a collision in that given period. For each timestep, this list is used to identify all collisions involving particles and boundary elements. The forces on particle pairs and boundaries are evaluated using the contact force model. All the pair-wise collision forces and torques are summed to give net forces and torques. Forces from other forms of interaction can also be added in this step. Newton’s equations of motion and the matching kinematic equations are then integrated to give the changes in the position, speed, orientation and spin of the particles in response to these net forces and torques. Steps 2 and 3 are repeated sequentially stepping the system state forward in time until the search information is no longer valid. Then a new search (step 1) is performed to update the interaction list. This implementation of DEM has been used to model a broad variety of industrial granular flows (see DEM simulations of real materials require more complex particle shape descriptions. The inclusion of shape is important for correctly predicting the failure and flow of granular solids. Spherical particle typically flow in an overly fluid like manner, have angles of repose that are too low and often incorrectly predict quantitative details of the flows. It is also reasonable to expect that the shape of particles will affect their ability to move through rectangular holes in a vibrating screen. A flexible class of shapes that balance increased realism with acceptable loss of computational speed is the super-quadric (SQ). This enables the angularity and aspect ratios of the particles to be included in the modelling allowing more realistic flow predictions. Super-quadrics are described by: An industrial screen consists of several key components: Frame Motors Base springs Top deck cloth Bottom deck cloth Supporting infrastructure A typical configuration is shown in This screen is 2.4 Particulate material is fed into the machine at the top right end of the machine as shown in The bottom deck has a similar overall structure, with a banana shape parallel to the top deck and five sets of panels along its length. The bottom deck cloth is shown in The material falling from above collects on the bottom deck to form a flowing bed which again accelerates down the inclined slope of the cloth. Particles which are small enough can be trapped by the holes and fall through into the undersize collection chute (labeled CU in The cloth details for the top and bottom decks are summarised: Top deck 8 2 Total of 592 holes Each hole is 70 Panels inclination varies from 33° (top) to 10° (bottom) Bottom deck 4 10 Total of 2720 holes Each hole is 35 Panels inclination varies from 33° (top) to 10° (bottom) The aim of this screen is to divide the incoming particle stream into three outgoing streams; two streams of oversized material and a product stream which is the undersize of the bottom deck. Depending on the nature of what is being separated the product from the screen is one or more of these separated streams. An example of the use of a screen configured in this way would be for scalping crushed iron ore. The oversize material from the two screens would be returned to the crusher for further size reduction. The undersize iron ore product stream from this screen would be fed to a nominal 6 However, for any applications that use multi-deck screens, it is difficult to assess the quality of separation visually. A realistic DEM model should be able to reveal intermediate deck performance in detail. The key geometric and operating conditions of the screen are given in Blockiness uniformly distributed in the range 2.1–4.0 (round to moderately blocky). Aspect ratio for the intermediate axis which is uniformly distributed in the range 0.85–1.0. Aspect ratio for the short axis which is uniformly distributed in the range 0.7–1.0. The size distribution is determined by the length intermediate axis of the particles. This is used in quantitative reporting. Eighteen measurement planes are used to measure the particle size distributions, flow rates and residence times of particles passing through each screen panel and when entering or leaving the machine. The spring constant used in these simulations was 10 The screen begins each simulation empty and particles are fed onto it from a vibrating feeder that is located above and to the right of the screen. The particles flow down into the rock box where they build up before flowing along the top screen and forming a bed. Smaller particles pass through the top deck and build up on the bottom screen. Some pass through the bottom screen to the undersize. Over time, there is an accumulation of material in each part of this multi-component system until the system reaches an equilibrium state. For this particular screen, the time to reach equilibrium is 13–20 s, which is more than 10 times the minimum residence time of particles in this system. The approach to equilibrium is evaluated by monitoring the number of particles, the mass of particles and the kinetic energy of the particles. When these have all become constant then the system is in equilibrium. The approach to equilibrium is not particularly useful for studying screen performance and so a detailed analysis of this is not included.  Particles start to flow through the top deck of the screen once they have passed onto the first panel. The amount of material passing through this panel is very modest. The mass passing through the second panel is larger and a bed forms on the bottom deck. The high entry speed of the particles combined with collisional interaction with the rapidly vibrating bottom deck gives the particles high speeds of 2–5 The bed on the top deck only becomes well enough stratified by the end panel and the lower flow speed on the shallowest angle end panel allows the particles more time to pass through the screen apertures. The bottom deck is really only well loaded by the last panel. The slow build up of the bed and its dilated nature strongly inhibit the bottom deck from working effectively. Most of the separation occurs for the bottom deck around the last panel. This can be seen by the density of the undersize stream passing through each panel of the bottom deck. The undersize is collected by a large chute underneath the screen which funnels the particles falling through the bottom opening of the screen onto the bottom belt. The remaining particles on the middle deck form a stream which discharges into the middle chute and flows onto the middle conveyor. For these operating conditions the separation performance is visibly poor with a quite small undersize stream. The upper end of the bottom deck screen is seriously under-utilised because of the very low bed depth on the upper panels. The poor flow through the early panels of the top deck results from: High particle speed which gives very short capture periods for the openings and the need for fine material to percolate down through the flowing bed to reach the openings in the cloth.  The particles flowing through the top deck to form the bed on the bottom deck are entirely dark blue, light blue and green. The dilation of the bed in the upper half of the screen bottom deck makes it difficult to observe composition variation along the screen. The underflow consists of just dark and some light blue particles. The flow through the early panels of the bottom deck is very weak, with the majority of the separation occurring in the last two panels when a reasonable depth bed has finally formed. The quality of the separation is shown by the colours of the material on each of the product stream belts. Clearly all the coarser material has reported to the oversize stream (as intended) but there is also a significant fraction of light blue material retained on the top deck that has not passed through the top deck screen. The middle stream ranges in colour from dark blue to yellow. This dark blue component should have reported to the undersize stream so the separation of the screen operating at 14  The reduced screen acceleration for the case in Examining the flow through the bottom deck screen and into the undersize collection chute, it is very clear that the volume of material being separated into the undersize stream is substantially higher for the 6 The lower flow speeds on the fifth panels of each deck mean that the discharge speeds are much lower and the flows into and through the collection chutes for each of the decks are much more ordered and fluid like. There is little sign of the dilute energetic particles flowing over the dilated material flowing through the chutes observed in the 14 The bed on the bottom deck builds up much faster for the 6  The bed on the bottom deck is rapidly established and is predominantly blue with some green on the first panel. There is a clear and strong composition variation along the bottom deck with the green material becoming significant over the fourth panel. The yellow and green material dominate the bed composition over the fifth panel with only a modest amount of blue material remaining visible here. The composition variation along the bottom screen deck results from the finer material entering the bed earlier through panels 1–3 of the top deck, with the medium size material predominantly entering the bottom deck bed only over the last few panels. Similarly, the finer material having been on the bottom deck longer and having been well stratified by the third panel flows very easily through the apertures of the bottom deck. The combination of the coarser material arriving later onto the bottom deck bed along with the earlier separation of the finer fractions leads to highly visible size variation along this deck. The fill level on the exit conveyor for the bottom deck is significantly higher for the 6  The bed on the bottom deck also moves with modestly reduced speed for the lower 5 There is a slight increase in the amount of material visible in the undersize collection chute compared to the 6  Fine particles percolate through the dense shearing bed. Higher accelerations leading to more agitation of the bed and higher shear improve this component of screen flow. This is responsible for stratifying the bed and providing a layer of fine material adjacent to the screen cloth. Particles smaller than the screen aperture size and which are close to the cloth must be captured by and pass through one of the screen cloth holes. This is dependent on the size and shape of the particle and on the flow. The faster the flow speed and the denser the bed above the cloth, the lower the chance of the particle being able to pass through an aperture. From Returning to So overall, the decrease in the peak acceleration from 6 The mass of particles resident on the screen decks after 20 s was 1.56 tonnes for a 5 To help quantify the flow in different parts of the screen we show the two screen decks and the frame for the 5   DEM simulation of full size, double deck banana screens is now feasible. Models including the full geometry of the screen, its motion, and the shape of the particles can now be solved with more than 200,000 particles in reasonable computation times. Predictions of separation performance and of the flow through the screen are quite realistic. The DEM simulation offers insight into the operation of the “hidden” bottom deck. In this case, the separation on the second deck is found to be not ideal. The simulations reported here are a “proof of concept” and provide interesting insights. The next stage of this project will use measured plant conditions from an industrial screen as a base case. A comparative study of particle flow through screens operated at different peak accelerations 5 The two key components of screen separation and their differing dependency on the screen acceleration are: Fine particles percolate through the dense shearing bed: Higher accelerations lead to more dilation of the bed and to higher shear which improve this component of screen flow. This is responsible for more rapid stratification of the bed and provision of a layer of fine material adjacent to the screen cloth. Particles smaller than the screen aperture size and which are adjacent to the cloth are captured by and pass through holes in the screen cloth. This process is dependent on the size and shape of the particle and on the flow. The faster the flow speed and the denser the bed directly above the cloth, the lower is the chance of a particle being able to pass through an opening. For optimal screen separation there must be a balance between these two separation components. Lower accelerations will shift the balance further towards the near-screen separation whilst weakening the bed stratification. So accelerations that are too low will reduce the separation efficiency. Conversely, accelerations that are too high will give residence times that are too short to allow particles to pass through screen deck apertures. The presence of a large dilated surface bed with significant amounts of energetic, airborne particles is likely to indicate that a screen is being operated at too high a peak acceleration. Overall, the 3D DEM method with realistic non-round particles offers an opportunity to seriously explore industrial scale screen performance in much more detail than is possible with traditional testing techniques – although good quality survey and wear measurements will be essential for verification of the DEM models. This project is carried out under the auspice and with the financial support of the Centre for Sustainable Resource Processing, which is established and supported under the Australian Government’s Cooperative Research Centres Program. The authors would like to thank Toni Kojovic who provided screen panel details.