In this research, effect of mechanical activation on the chloride–hypochlorite leaching of gold from a refractory pyritic concentrate containing ca. 27g/t gold was investigated for the first time. Results showed that after 30min leaching, 100% of gold was extracted from a 45min-milled sample while only 37.2% of gold was obtained from the un-milled sample after 480min leaching (at 25°C and 600rpm). This improvement occurred due to the increase in specific surface and accumulated strain in the crystal structure of particles by mechanical activation. It was concluded from the experiments that sensitivity of leaching rate to the temperature decreased after mechanical activation. Results of kinetic study showed that there were two stages in the leaching rate of gold from un-milled sample. The rate of the first stage was controlled by chemical reaction and the second stage was mixed controlled (chemical reaction and diffusion through the Fe(OH)3 layer formed on the pyrite particles). In the case of milled sample, there was one stage in which chemical reaction and liquid film diffusion controlled the rate of leaching.Pyrite (FeS Application of mechanical activation (intensive milling) as a pre-treatment step before leaching has been investigated in different sulfide samples by many researchers ( Chloride–hypochlorite leaching represents an alternative route for non-cyanide leaching of gold. This leachant can dissolve gold as [AuCl In this research, a gold-bearing pyritic concentrate was activated in a high-energy planetary mill and physicochemical changes of the particles (morphology, specific surface, crystallite size and lattice strain) were investigated. Then, the effect of mechanical activation on the chloride–hypochlorite leaching of gold was studied for the first time. The concentrate used in this study was obtained from flotation of an ore located in north-west of Iran (Barika Mine). Size fraction of − Mineralogical studies using thin and polished sections under light microscopy (Leitz, Ortholux POL-BK) showed that pyrite (FeS Mechanical activation of the concentrate was performed using a planetary ball-mill (Retsch, PM 400) with 25 Changes of particles' morphology, specific surface area, crystallite size and lattice strain introduced by mechanical activation were investigated by SEM/EDX (Cam Scan MV2300), BET (Micromeritics Gemini 2375) and XRD (Philips, X'PERT, Cu–Kα radiation) techniques, respectively. Leaching tests were carried out in a 250  Variation of crystallite size and strain with milling time is listed in During the leaching, the slurry's pH decreased due to oxidation of pyrite and formation of acid while the slurry's ORP increased, since with decreasing pH, the powerful oxidant of HOCl gradually predominated.  Solid residue of leaching was washed, dried and analyzed by XRD.  During the leaching of un-milled concentrate at higher temperatures (i.e., 45 and 65 Despite the positive effect of temperature on the leaching rate of gold from the un-milled concentrate, final recovery was less than 40% ( In the present work, the shrinking core model was used to describe the leaching rate of gold. It is expected that the film diffusion is not affecting on the leaching rate of gold; because at the rotating speed of 600  Results of The results of this research showed that there was an important difference between leaching rate of gold from non-activated and mechanically activated samples in the same condition. The leaching rate of gold was substantially enhanced by mechanical activation. Gold extraction was 100% with 45