Due to its amorphous structure, smelter slag cannot efficiently be leached with sulphuric acid; the formation of silica gel induces an increase of leach liquor viscosity, difficult pulp filtration and crud formation during solvent extraction. The problem was solved by leaching with sulphuric acid under hydrogen peroxide, which also performs simultaneous iron oxidation and removal.
                  A copper smelter slag from Lubumbashi, Democratic Republic of Congo, containing 1.4% Cu, 0.7% Co, 8.9% Zn and 20.9% Fe(II), has been used in this study. The leaching tests have been carried out at normal pressure on ground slag samples (<100 μm). Silica gel-free solutions containing copper, cobalt and zinc were produced, so that pulp filtration could be easily carried out.
                  The dissolved base metals were successfully extracted from solution by solvent extraction using kerosene Shellsol D70 as diluent. Copper was extracted with LIX 984 and stripped with sulphuric acid solution. Thereafter, cobalt and zinc were collectively extracted with D2EHPA and then separated by selective scrubbing with sulphuric acid solutions of different dilutions. This method provided an overall recovery of 80% Cu, 90% Co and 90% Zn in separated solutions which could be further treated by electrowinning or salt precipitation.Various hydrometallurgical methods using lixiviants such as acids, bases and salts have been developed for base metal extraction from smelter slags. Nonferrous metal extraction, iron removal and production of good filterable pulp have been performed in this study by sulphuric acid leaching in the presence of hydrogen peroxide at normal atmosphere. Sulphide and iron oxidation takes place in leaching system according to After filtration, the leach liquor was treated by solvent extraction using classic extractants such as LIX 984 for copper and D2EHPA (di-2-ethylhexyl phosphoric acid) for cobalt and zinc. The slag sample used in this investigation is a composite from different levels of the copper slag dump in Lubumbashi, Katanga, Democratic Republic of Congo, whose chemical composition is given in The leaching batch tests of ground slag (<100 μm) with a combination of H Selective metal extraction from aqueous phase containing 1.99 g/L Cu Leaching tests were carried out at pH 2.5 on ground slag samples (<100 μm). About 60 min was required to obtain high copper, cobalt and zinc extraction. Temperature increase from 24 to 60 °C significantly increased metals leaching recoveries, especially for copper. The effect of further temperature increase, from 60 to 80 °C, was negligible in all cases. Filtration of the resulted pulp from the leaching at 24 and 60 °C was very difficult because of presence of silica gel. The silica content in the leach liquor varied between 3 and 8 g/L depending on acid content. Best leaching results were obtained at 80 °C with metals recoveries of around 60% Cu, 90% Co, 90% Zn and 90% Fe after 2 h. The H  The leaching tests have been conducted at pH 2.5 and 70 °C to investigate the effect of potential Eh on the leaching result. The potential was varied in the range 450–650 mV by H   After copper extraction, iron was removed by precipitation in a round glass vessel at 85 °C and pH 3.5 with addition of a 300 g/L CaCO Based on the present study a schematic flow sheet is given in This study clearly demonstrates that oxidising sulphuric acid leaching under hydrogen peroxide at 70 °C and normal pressure can effectively be used to extract base metals from amorphous copper smelter slags after grinding at 100% <100 μm. By using this method, both silica gel formation and iron coextraction are avoided. Silica gel-free solutions and good filterable cakes are obtained. Selective copper solvent extraction with LIX 984 followed by collective cobalt–zinc extraction by D2EPHA with subsequent cobalt–zinc separation by selective stripping were successfully performed without any crud formation. The use of an additional extractant for cobalt was not necessary by applying this method. Overall recoveries of approximately 80% Cu, 90% Co and 90% Zn in separate solutions were achieved by applying this process. The recovery of metals from their respective solutions can be carried out by electrowinning or salt precipitation. The authors would like to express their gratitude to Gécamines for supplying the slag sample which was used in this study. The award of a doctorate fellowship to A.N. Banza by the German Academic Exchange Service (DAAD) is gratefully acknowledged.