In this study, lead ion was combined with water glass to separate scheelite from calcite using flotation. The effects and underlying mechanisms of the liquid and solid phases generated in this combined depressant (Pb-water glass, a mixture of lead ion and water glass) on the flotation performance of scheelite and calcite were investigated through micro-flotation experiments, X-ray diffraction (XRD) measurements, ultraviolet–visible (UV–Vis) spectrophotometer measurements, fourier transform infrared spectrometer (FTIR) analysis, zeta potential measurements, and X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) tests. The flotation results indicate that the selective flotation separation of scheelite from calcite results from the liquid phase, not the solid phase. The XRD and FTIR results indicate that under different mass ratios of lead ion to water glass, the solid phases are the lead-silicate with amorphous structures, while the UV–Vis results reveal significant absorption differences in the liquid phases under different mass ratios of lead ion to water glass. The zeta potential and XPS results indicate that less metal silicate polymers are adsorbed on the scheelite surface than on the calcite surface, allowing NaOL to be adsorbed on the scheelite surface, but not on the calcite surface, and selective flotation separation of scheelite from calcite is therefore achieved. XPS results further reveal that the metal silicate polymers in the liquid phase are adsorbed on both mineral surfaces by firstly breaking the Ca-O group and then reacting with the Ca active sites.Tungsten, the highest melting metal, has been widely used in many fields such as machinery, electricity, metallurgy, chemistry, and so on. China is rich in tungsten resource and over 80% of the world's tungsten metal is produced in China ( In literature, there are two approaches to effectively separate scheelite from calcite by flotation, one is to increase the floatability of scheelite by activators ( However, in our research, we found that there was a solid phase generated in the solution when the lead ion was mixed with water glass. Although Feng ( The pure scheelite and calcite samples were obtained from Jiangxi province, China. Lump scheelite and calcite samples were crushed by a hammer, and then hand-selected for the high purity parts. After that, the selected parts were ground by ceramic grinding media in a ceramic pot. The ground products were screened and the size range of −74 + 38 μm was collected for micro-flotation experiments and XPS tests. Meanwhile, the −38 μm fractions were further ground to −5 μm for zeta potential measurements. The chemical analysis ( Analytical grade sodium oleate (NaOL, C The micro-flotation experiments were conducted in an XFGC flotation machine equipped with a 40 ml plexiglass flotation cell. For each experiment, 2 g of pure mineral samples and 35 ml of deionized water were added to the plexiglass flotation cell. The rotation speed of the impeller was set at 1600 r/min. Then, the pH regulator, Pb-water glass, and NaOL were sequentially added to the mineral suspension, and stirred for 2, 4, and 3 min, respectively. After 4 min of flotation, the floated and non-floated fractions were collected, filtered, dried and weighted to calculate the flotation recovery. Each experiment was repeated three times and finally averaged. To analyze the phase composition of the generated solid in the Pb-water glass, XRD measurements were conducted by a Philips X’Pert PRO diffractometer (Panalytical, Netherlands). Before measurements, the generated solid in the Pb-water glass was filtrated and then dried in a vacuum oven with the temperature maintained below 35 °C. After that, the XRD spectra of the generated solid were recorded with Cu-Kα radiation (λ = 0.1542 nm) operated at 40 kV and 40 mA, at a scanning rate of 2° (2θ)/min within the range between 10° and 90°. The UV–Vis spectra provide important information about the absorbance in the solution ( The zeta potential measurements were conducted at 25 °C through a zeta potential analyzer (Malvern Zetasizer Nano ZS90, England). For each measurement, 0.05 g of pure mineral samples (-5 μm) was mixed with 35 ml of aqueous potassium chloride (KCl, 0.01 mol/L) solution and magnetically stirred for about 2 min. Then, the corresponding reagents were added and conditioned. The conditioned time was the same as the micro-flotation experiments. After 10 min of sedimentation, the supernatant was sucked out and used for the zeta potential measurements. Each tested result was automatically repeated three times and finally averaged. The XPS test is an important surface analysis method in mineral processing technology for analyzing the chemical composition and chemical state of elements ( The FTIR tests of Pb(NO The effects of the solid and liquid phases in the Pb-water glass on the flotation performance of scheelite and calcite are shown in    According to the flotation results shown in  To have further knowledge of the solid phases in the solutions, FTIR tests were conducted and the results are shown in To analyze the difference in absorbance of the liquid phase in the Pb-water glass, the UV–Vis spectrophotometer measurements on the liquid phases in the Pb-water glass at different mass ratios of Pb(NO To have further knowledge of the liquid phases in the Pb-water glass, the contents of Pb and Si in the liquid phase were tested by the inductively coupled plasma-atomic emission spectroscopy (ICP-AES) and the results are shown in  Under natural and weakly alkaline conditions: Under alkaline conditions: To reveal the adsorption mechanism of the liquid phase in the Pb-water glass on the scheelite and calcite surfaces, zeta potentials of scheelite and calcite with or without reagents were measured as a function of the solution pH value and the results are shown in  To further reveal the adsorption mechanism of the liquid phase in the Pb-water glass on the scheelite and calcite surfaces, XPS tests were conducted and the results are shown in  To more clearly reveal the adsorption mechanism, the XPS narrow spectra of Ca2p and O1s on the scheelite and calcite surfaces are shown in For the O1s on the scheelite surface, as depicted in Based on the tests and analysis, it can be concluded that the selective flotation separation of scheelite from calcite results from the liquid phase in the Pb-water glass, not the solid phase. The generated solid phase in the Pb-water glass has none or negligible effect on the flotation performance of both scheelite and calcite. When the lead ion and water glass are mixed, there are metal silicate polymers formed in the liquid phase. These metal-silicate species are mainly adsorbed on the calcite surface via the breakage of the Ca The flotation performances of scheelite and calcite were investigated using the Pb-water glass as a depressant and the underlying mechanisms were studied through XRD tests, UV–vis measurements, FTIR analysis, zeta potential measurements, and XPS tests. The main conclusions are as follows: When the lead ion and water glass are mixed, there is a solid phase generated in the Pb-water glass. This solid (lead-silicate glass) possesses an amorphous structure and has a negligible effect on the flotation performances of both scheelite and calcite. The selective flotation separation of scheelite from calcite results from the liquid phase in the Pb-water glass and the main effective component is the metal silicate polymers in the liquid phase. The metal silicate polymers can be adsorbed on the scheelite and calcite surfaces. But much more metal-silicate species are adsorbed on the calcite surface than on the scheelite surface, inhibiting the adsorption of NaOL on the calcite surface, and thereby its flotation recovery decreases, whereas on the scheelite surface, the adsorption of NaOL is much less affected, and thus scheelite can still be recovered. The chemical adsorptions of metal silicate polymers on the scheelite and calcite surfaces are mainly through the breakage of the Ca  The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. The author would like to thank the