Batch culture techniques and a kinetic model were used to examine the effects of Al3+ and NO3
                     − ions on the cell replication rates of iron oxidising bacteria. Aluminium ions at a concentration of 2240 ppm (85 mM) were shown to reduce the cell replication rate to 85% of that observed for cells in minimal media. Nitrate ions (NO3
                     −) at a concentration of 920 ppm (15 mM) were shown to reduce the cell replication rate to 65% of that observed for cells cultured in minimal media and the culture was not viable beyond three sequential batch culture cycles. The inhibition produced by nitrate is greater than that previously observed for chloride ions, but the impact of aluminium is similar to that observed with salts such as potassium, sodium and ammonium sulphate i.e. a small reduction in replication rate associated with increased concentration but without long term effects on culture viability. The results of this study are significant for South American bio-leach operations that have reported elevated concentrations of Al3+ ions in process water. The impact of varying substrate (FeSO4) concentration was also examined; it was found that iron oxidising cells are subject to substrate inhibition.In the context of bio-hydrometallurgy, water quality can involve many different dissolved ions and uncharged species ( Metals can inhibit cell activity through a number of mechanisms these include changing enzyme conformations, binding to transport sites and inducing the loss of membrane integrity ( Aluminium and nitrate ions are often significant contributors to reduced water quality in bio-hydrometallurgical operations, particularly in South American mines. This work seeks to quantify the impact of aluminium and nitrate ions on lithotrophic cell activity and reproduction rate by use of the kinetic model developed by Assuming the rate is first order, rearranging and integrating gives: Taking the logarithms gives a linear equation: A plot vs time gives a slope Cell reproduction rates can be expressed in terms of either the cell-doubling rate constant ( In this study, we also report the effect of increasing the Fe All chemicals used in this study were analytical grade reagents (AR) unless otherwise stated and all aqueous solutions were prepared with de-ionised water. Shake-flask batch culture experiments were incubated in a Ratek orbital incubator at 35 Media were prepared according to the methods of The addition of potassium nitrate in the above concentration range did not significantly alter the calibration parameters of the electrodes, but addition of aluminium sulphate produced a significant change ( The bacteria source used for this study was the mixed culture selected by repeated growth on IEM media ( The IEM culture was selected by sequential batch culture cycles in media with a total iron concentration of 73 mM. It rapidly adapted to the IGM media that has a total iron concentration of 180 mM. The first batch culture cycle in IGM media produced average doubling constant ( Despite the higher total iron concentration in the IGM media, the kinetic model produced reasonable agreement between the predicted behaviour and that observed (0.980 Aluminium sulphate was added to the minimal media in the range of 563 to 2250 ppm Al (20–85 mM). Increasing the concentration of aluminium resulted in a significant but small reduction in The addition of potassium nitrate to IGM minimal media produced a significant reduction in the culture The adaptation of a mixed culture of iron oxidising bacteria to an increased iron concentration proceeded rapidly. As can be seen from The apparent upper limit to With the current data set we are unable to propose an alternative interpretation for so called ‘substrate inhibition’ but some intriguing alternatives to the enzyme kinetics model can be formulated from the colligative and electronic effects of dissolved ions. According to ionic solution models ( In the bio-hydrometallurgical context we argue that total iron concentration and ionic strength are related process variables that can be optimised. Low ionic strength is optimal and consequently the benefits of increasing iron sulphate substrate concentration will be eventually reduced. The optimum lies above 73 mM and below 180 mM total iron. At the lower limit, the maximum rate of cell production becomes first order with respect to Fe Inoculation of cells into media with added Al The impact of aluminium sulphate within this concentration range was similar to that observed for other background electrolyte ions K Potassium nitrate concentrations of 6500 ppm (65 mM) or more, comprehensively inhibited inoculum growth; after a period of 7 days and there were no visible differences between blank and inoculated flasks. Over a concentration range of 0 The reported concentration of nitrate ions in the process water of Australian gold plants is low, with none of 24 operations surveyed reporting c This study provides more quantitative measures of the inhibition arising from common metal ions and anions found in hydrometallurgical process water. Aluminium ions do not exert any direct metabolic affect on iron oxidising cells but high concentrations (> The authors wish to thank the AJ Parker Cooperative Research Centre for Hydrometallurgy for the funding and support provided for Dr. K Blight. Also Murdoch University for the support provided to this project.