Potassic quartz syenite, composed of microcline and quartz, is a promising source for the recovery of potassium, alumina, and silica values. Hydrothermal extraction of potassium by dissolution of the potassic quartz syenite powder in NaOH solution and utilization of alumina and silica in the potassic quartz syenite powder for preparation of acicular wollastonite and aluminum hydroxide were explored in this research. It mainly contains alkali-hydrothermal process, causticization process, and low-lime sintering process. The samples were characterized by using wet chemical analysis, X-ray diffraction, and scanning electron microscopy. The results indicated that the optimal extractions of K2O and SiO2 from the potassic quartz syenite powder were 93.2% and 62.5%, respectively. The purities of as-prepared acicular wollastonite, potassium carbonate, and aluminum hydroxide were 93.8%, 96%, 99%, respectively. The approach presented in this work is a promising process of comprehensive utilization of potassic silicate minerals such as K-feldspar.Potassium (K), one of essential elements in fertilizers, can improve agricultural yields and enhence food security. Based on estimates of the United States Geological Survey, potash ores are expected to last about 400 The principle mineral in the potassic rocks is microcline. Dissolution of microcline for the subsequent preparation of potassium compounds and utilization of alumina and silica as byproducts represent challenges for using this type resource ( Most commercial production of alumina from bauxite is performed by a process patented by Bayer in 1888 ( Wollastonite, a new non-metallic industrial mineral, has been used in ceramics, plastic, rubber, paint, metallurgy, and paper making industries ( Considering the above-mentioned demand and supply, a systematic study has been undertaken on the recovery of potassium, alumina, and silica values from potassic quartz syenite in this work. The experiments explored the effects of NaOH/syenite mass ratio and reaction temperature on the extractions of K Potassic quartz syenite (QS), derived from Nanling county, Anhui province, China, was used as the raw material. After crushing and grinding, 50% of the particles are less than 12.9 The QS powder can be dissolved in NaOH solution through alkali-hydrothermal treatment ( The K The solid product zeolite, mixing with sodium carbonate and calcium carbonate was sintered at 1050 The main chemical reactions that occurred in this research are as equations from (1) to (7). The whole processing flowchart for the extraction of potassium from the QS powder and its comprehensive utilization is shown in The chemical compositions of the QS powder and the solid samples were measured by wet chemical analysis. The XRD patterns of the QS powder and the solid samples were recorded by a Rigaku D/Max-2500 diffractometer with Cu- In the previous work, it was concluded that reaction factors (NaOH/QS mass ratio, reaction temperature) had an influence on the hydrothermal dissolution of the QS powder in NaOH solution ( Dissolution of the QS powder with NaOH/QS mass ratio of 0.50 to 0.80 at 220 Under the optimized conditions for the dissolution of QS powder, the contents of chemical composition of the filtrate K The lime milk and K In order to prepare acicular wollastonite, the product xonotlite and foshagite was calcined in open-air system. The TG-DTA plot of sample (GW-13) obtained at 260 The K The solid product hydroxycancrinite with Al/Si mole ratio of 0.72 was used as the starting material for production of aluminum hydroxide using low-lime sintering process. The reaction was occurred at lower temperature using low-lime sintering process than traditional lime sintering process and lime-soda sintering process ( When sintering temperature is 950 The NaAlO It can be seen from The solid slag Na For the purpose of leaching potassium and utilizing the alumina and silica from potassic quartz syenite, the new technique presented in this work is an efficient way with an optimal potassium extraction of 93.2% and three byproducts (acicular wollastonite, aluminum hydroxide, calcium silicate). In addition, this systemic process is lower energy consumption for hydrothermal dissolution of potassic quartz syenite at lower temperature in the alkali-hydrothermal process, lower consumptions of disposable mineral resources for utilization of only lime in the causticization process, lower CO Hydrothermal extraction of potassium, preparation of acicular wollstonite and aluminum hydroxide were explored using potassic quartz syenite as the raw material. The optimal extractions of K It can be concluded from the experimental results that this systemic process is efficient, energy-saving, and clean. Furthermore, it appears to be suitable for the comprehensive utilization of potassium, alumina, and silica in potassic silicate minerals such as K-feldspar. Hongli Wang, Mingyu Zhang, and Xiaoting Liu from School of Materials Science and Technology, China University of Geoscience, Beijing, China are acknowledged for their experimental work. The authors would like to acknowledge the support of the funds from