Pharmaceutical products as well as active pharmaceutical ingredients (APIs) are checked for levels of elemental contaminants to guarantee medicines administration will not involve the consumption of level of contaminants greater than their maximum admissible intake. However, the conformity decision is affected by the measurement uncertainty function of analytical steps performance, used standards quality and how measurement performance is assessed during method validation. When an ingredient is considered conform, since the measured concentration is lower than the maximum limit, the risk of a false acceptance depends on how close the measured concentration is from the limit and on the measurement uncertainty. The analytical methods used for pharmaceutical analysis should be validated by ICH and USP recommendations, in order to prove measurements are fit for purpose. The validation must also be economically feasible and have an acceptable duration. This work discusses how to evaluate the uncertainty of elemental analysis in pharmaceutical ingredients from data collected during the validation of the analytical method by following ICH guidelines and USP chapters. A top-down uncertainty evaluation based on results from the analysis of a model API intermediate, with the native analyte after spiking at three concentration levels, where analyses are performed by two analysts in two different days, is presented. The impact of the correlation of some uncertainty components of collected results on the uncertainty evaluation is discussed and considered in the calculations. The developed measurement model was checked by a cross-validation procedure where some validation data was randomly removed and used for an independent model control. The developed uncertainty evaluation methodology was successfully applied to the analysis of Pd in a model API intermediate by ICP-MS after a micro-wave assisted acid digestion, where the risk of a false acceptance of the pharmaceuticals is determined. The measurement performance data and used spreadsheet are made available as Supplementary Material.The monitoring of elemental impurities (EIs) plays a crucial role in quality control of pharmaceutical production as some of these may pose significant human health risks. Elemental impurities in active pharmaceutical ingredients or final drug products may originate from several sources, including starting materials, solvents or reagents, metal catalysts, packing material and equipment used throughout the manufacturing process, etc. In recently adopted general chapters of the US Pharmacopeia, namely USP <232> Elemental impurities – Limits [ Despite the fact that measurement uncertainty (MU) and its evaluation is not widely spread in routine quality control pharmaceutical laboratories, analytical method development and validation in the pharmaceutical industry is currently evolving with the emphasis being placed on understanding the measurement error/uncertainty in an effort to ensure methods of analysis are fit for purpose. The USP Validation and Verification Expert Panel recently published a new draft general chapter <1220> The Analytical Procedure Lifecycle [ Several stimuli articles were also published providing details about how to calculate the MU and the target measurement uncertainty [ This text does not strictly follow the terminology proposed in the International Vocabulary of Metrology (VIM) [ This work describes a top-down measurement uncertainty evaluation based on results from the analysis of an iAPI with native Pd concentration after spiking, at three concentration levels, and the replicate analysis of the spiked samples by two analysts in two different days. In the studied case, the native concentration was only estimated by one analyst. This common experimental design is challenging regarding the quantification of the uncertainty components since some collected experimental data has relevant correlation. For instance, native concentration was determined in the same or different condition as the analysis of spiked samples by analyst 1 and 2, respectively. Therefore, this research shows how the measurement uncertainty evaluation adapts to the specificity of the experimental data instead of being the other way around. The metrological assessment of the measurement problem allows this flexibility although calculations are not necessarily straightforward. The developed uncertainty evaluation methodology is illustrated on a model case of palladium determination in an iAPI by ICP-MS after microwave-assisted closed vessel acid digestion. This work also discusses how the measurement uncertainty can be used to quantify the risk of a false acceptance of an iAPI with a permitted concentration limit. An iAPI, which is regularly analysed for possible contamination from Pd catalyst was chosen as the test sample. This work can also be considered as a case study of the MU evaluation for the determination of EIs in pharmaceutical products by ICP-MS. The proposed study was probed on iAPI collected during the early stage of the manufacturing process of orally administered API, where a Pd based catalysis is used. Therefore, the study was focused only on the determination of palladium by ICP-MS. The oral permitted daily exposure for palladium (100 μg/day) was obtained from the ICH-Q3D(R1) guideline [ A microwave digestion unit (MLS 1200 mega, Milestone, Italy) and 100 mL PTFE vessels were used for the digestion of an iAPI sample using seven-step power-controlled digestion program consisting of 5 min at 250 W, 2 min at 0 W, 5 min at 400 W, 2 min at 0 W, 10 min at 600 W, 2 min at 0 W, and 10 min at 600 W. To achive complete digestion the mixture of 4 mL of 67% HNO The determination of Pd was carried out using a quadrupole based ICP-MS (7700x, Agilent Technologies, Japan) in No-Gas mode. Measured isotpes were The analytical method was validated and subsequently it was applied to determine Pd in the iAPI sample. Validation was performed in accordance with ICH-Q2(R1) Validation of analytical procedures: Text and Methodology and USP <233> chapter [ The measurement uncertainty was evaluated by a “top-down” approach based on collected in-house validation data. This approach can be applied to any other elemental impurities measurements by atomic spectrometry techniques whose analytical method is validated to comply with USP <233˃ requirements for alternative procedure [ The used approach for measurement uncertainty evaluation involves dividing the analytical range in two intervals: Interval I, between the Limit of Quantification, In this pragmatic approach for measurement uncertainty evaluation, uncertainty components are divided in the responsible for the between days disagreement of replicate results ( The The If In this work, the same iAPI with native analyte is spiked at three, After estimating Spiked samples analysis is adequate to estimate analyte recovery if spiked analyte behaves equivalently to the native analyte in the measurement process as expected in this iAPI analysis [ In the described study case, since the same Pd stock solution is used for the daily preparation of standards for ICP-MS calibration, the Assuming the estimated Pd concentration in a specific iAPI batch, expressed with uncertainty, has an approximate normal distribution and represents an estimate of the conventional “true” value of the measured concentration, the risk of false conformity decisions by comparing the measured concentration with the permitted concentration limit ( Assuming the Pd concentration in the analysed batch of iAPI is homogeneous, the The false rejection of an iAPI is undesirable, but the assessment of iAPI conformity is focused on trying to minimise the false acceptance of non-conforming iAPI. In these cases, typically, the risk of false acceptance should be not greater than 1%. The conformity assessment is easier if it is defined an acceptance limit, The measurement repeatability was quantified by pooling the relative standard deviations of measurement repeatability estimated by analyst 1 from the replicate analysis of the analysed iAPI before spiking ( The The intermediate precision was quantified by pooling the standard deviations of the relative differences of duplicate results from the analysis of spiked iAPI at three concentration levels performed by analyst 1 and 2 in two different days. The first measured concentrations of the iAPI spiked at the lower concentration level, (11), obtained by analyst 1, The The estimated The The measurement trueness was assessed from the results of the analysis of spiked samples obtained by analyst 1, using directly Eqs. Whenever results from analyst 1 are considered, the estimated Equivalent conclusions are drawn from the results of spiked samples analysis obtained by analyst 2 relying on the estimated concentration of the native analyte by analyst 1. In this case, Both estimated mean analyte recoveries (from analyst 1: The equivalence between the estimated mean recoveries, given the respective uncertainties, proves that the mean recovery estimated from the analysis of spiked samples by analyst 1 or 2 can be used to correct the analyte recovery in the analysis performed by the other analyst. The maximum The stock solution used to prepare the standard solution employed for the ICP-MS calibration has a mass concentration of ((1.000 ± 0.002) mg/L) with a coverage factor of 2. Therefore, the relative standard uncertainty of the other uncertainty components, Equation Assuming a coverage factor of 2 to expand the measurement uncertainty for approximately 95% confidence level, the calculated relative expanded uncertainty is 5.91%. Therefore, when the Pd concentration of an iAPI is determined, the original concentration must be corrected for recovery by multiplying by 0.9605 ( The major uncertainty component is the measurement intermediate precision responsible for 88.7% of the global uncertainty ( When comparing figures of merit obtained from validation in this study with literature data following conclusions can be drawn. The limit of detection (0.06 μg/g) is higher than the published data (0.00001 μg/g to 0.002 μg/g) but is enough for the intended use. Repeatability and intermediate precision (3% or less, expressed as RSD) are comparable with published results. In terms of trueness, the observed Pd recovery varies between 97% and 117%, while the published work reports an analyte recovery interval between 84% and 97% [ Only a few publications describing MU quantification while using the same methodology (i.e. microwave-assisted digestion of solid samples followed by ICP-MS determination of selected metals) have been found. Generally, “top-down” approach to MU quantification is less common in the literature. I. Coelho et al. calculated the uncertainty of the determination of trace levels of inorganic contaminants in foodstuffs based on in-house validation data [ Assuming the analysed iAPI has a negligible heterogeneity, considering the measurement uncertainty, the acceptance limit, If the iAPI has a heterogeneous distribution of Pd concentration quantified by the relative standard deviation, The adequacy of the measurement model was assessed by a cross validation where some analysis results previously considered in method validation and uncertainty evaluation are removed from the validation set and treated as control samples. The uncertainty of the analysis of these control samples is evaluated by using the reduced validation set and the estimated and reference values checked for metrological compatibility (i.e. for metrological equivalence). Two values, The analysis results removed from the validation set and considered in the compatibility test were randomly selected in various runs in order to estimate the success rate of the developed uncertainty model as the probability of a measurement result being compatible with the reference value. The following results were randomly removed from the validation set: One determination of the native concentration performed by analyst 1, and one determination of spiked sample concentration per spiking level performed by analyst 1 and 2. Therefore, seven analysis results were randomly removed from method validation and uncertainty evaluation, and considered in the compatibility test. From these seven results, it was determined six single analyte recoveries, It was performed 1000 random and independent selections of the seven analysis results removed from the validation set and considered for measurement uncertainty control. Each run produced six single analyte recovery controls. In the performed 6000 compatibility tests for 95% and 99% compatibility tests, 512 (i.e. 8.53%) and 63 (i.e. 1.05%) of the single recovery values are not compatible with the mean recovery determined from the validation set. These rates of disagreement are equivalent to the expected 5% and 1% values of 95% and 99% confidence level tests, respectively, proving the validity of the uncertainty evaluations. The sheet “Cross_Validation” of the MS-Excel file from the Supplementary Material allows the random selection of control samples and the automatic assessment of the compatibility between single and mean recovery determined from the validation set. Pressing F9, generates a new set of control samples. The developed methodology for the evaluation of the measurement uncertainty was successfully applied to the quantification of Pd in an iAPI by ICP-MS after a microwave-assisted acid digestion of the sample. The methodology has adapted to the experimental design of the validation and considered the correlation between data collected in the same day by using the same calibration curve and data supported on the use of the same standard solutions. The measurement trueness was assessed from the analysis of a sample with native Pd concentration after spiked at three concentration levels. The fact that native concentration was determined in the same precision condition of only some spiked samples analysis was also considered in the uncertainty model. The uncertainty evaluation was accomplished with simple algorithms for the determination of precision and trueness components. Some negligible complex correlation was omitted from calculations due to its irrelevant impact on the calculated uncertainty. This work represents an example where the measurement uncertainty model is built to adapt to the experimental reality. The developed analytical method is associated with a mean analyte recovery of 104.1%, significantly different from the ideal recovery of 100%, indicating the need for correcting the original measured values by multiplying by 0.9605. It was determined a relative expanded MU of 5.91%, for a confidence level of 95% (coverage factor of 2), where the precision and trueness are responsible for 88.7% and 11.2% of the global uncertainty. The developed measurement model proved to be valid for determining the measurement quality after a cross validation procedure were six spiked samples analysis were randomly excluded from the experimental data that supported method validation and uncertainty evaluation. The spiked samples analyses excluded from method validation were used for measurement model quality control by evaluation the compatibility between estimated single recoveries and the mean recovery determined from the validation. The 6000 random selections of these experimental data transferred to model quality control produced single recoveries compatible with the mean recovery in 91.5% and 99.0% of the cases when the compatibility was tested for 95% and 99% confidence level, respectively. The calculated measurement uncertainty allowed to conclude that if the estimated Pd concentration in an analysed iAPI, after recovery correction, is below 116.4 The spreadsheet used in calculations is made available as Supplementary Material.  The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. This work was supported by Palacký University Olomouc [IGA_PrF_2020_030] and Fundacão para a Ciência e Tecnologia ( The following is the Supplementary data to this article: Supplementary data to this article can be found online at