Between January 1996 and July 2003, 93 consecutive patients operated on with a diagnosis of olecranon fractures were identified from our trauma unit files. Fourteen transolecranon fracture-dislocations were found after a retrospective X-radiographic evaluation. Eight patients were women and six were men, with a mean age of 54 years. There were 4 noncomminuted olecranon fractures, treated with K-wires and single tension-band wiring. The remaining 10 fractures were complex fractures, treated in 3 cases with multiple K-wires and single tension-band wiring, in 2 by use of one-third tubular plates, in 1 with a 3.5-mm dynamic compression plate, and in the remaining 4 with 3.5-mm reconstruction plates. Ligament repair was not performed in any case. Three patients needed reoperation because of early failure of primary fixation. Patients were reviewed at a mean follow-up of 3.6 years. Two reported difficulties in daily activities, none with any symptoms of elbow instability. According to the Broberg and Morrey score, 4 patients had excellent results, 6 had good results, 2 had fair results, and 2 had poor results. Four patients showed signs of degenerative arthritis on the radiographs obtained at follow-up. We conclude that transolecranon fracture-dislocation is an underreported and misdiagnosed injury. Various fixation techniques can restore the anatomic relationships and contour of the trochlear notch; the imperative goal is to obtain a good stable primary fixation and allow early active mobilization.Transolecranon fracture-dislocation of the elbow occurs when a high-energy direct blow is applied to the dorsal aspect of the forearm with the elbow in midflexion and causes an olecranon fracture associated with an anterior dislocation of the forearm with respect to the distal humerus. The trochlea appears to have fractured through the olecranon process as the forearm is displaced anteriorly. Biga and Thomine, The transolecranon fracture-dislocation is different from the anterior Monteggia, Bado 1 lesion The capsuloligamentous restraints, in particular the annular ligament, Ninety-three patients with an olecranon fracture treated surgically between January 1996 and August 2003 were identified from our trauma unit files, and complete clinical charts, as well as preoperative and postoperative radiographs, were collected. Preoperative radiographic trauma series were evaluated retrospectively by 2 of the authors, and 14 patients with transolecranon fracture-dislocations were identified. The diagnosis was made in the presence of an olecranon process fracture or a fracture of the very proximal ulnar metaphysis, associated with anterior translation of the forearm in relation to the humeral trochlea on the lateral radiographic view and with a nondissociation of the proximal radioulnar complex on the anteroposterior and lateral view. The data are summarized in After evaluation of the patients’ clinical charts, we noted that 9 patients had a correct diagnosis whereas the other 5 were initially misdiagnosed as having a Monteggia Bado 1 fracture The surgical procedures were performed by 7 different surgeons with different levels of experience but all using a posterior approach to the elbow. The 6 patients with open fractures were treated by irrigation and debridement, with primary closure in the 4 Gustilo type II cases. Two cases presenting with type IIIB lesions had additional plastic surgery consisting of a split-thickness skin graft. The types of internal fixation used were as follows: 2 K-wires with 1 wiring band in 4 patients with simple noncomminuted unstable fractures, multiple K-wires with 1 wiring band in 3 patients with comminuted unstable fractures, a one-third tubular plate in 2 cases, a 3.5-mm dynamic compression plate (DCP) in 1 case, and a 3.5-mm reconstruction plate in the remaining 4 cases. One case of associated radial head fracture was treated nonoperatively, whereas associated fractures of the coronoid process were stabilized by an interfragmentary screw placed through the posterior plate. In all of these cases, an intraarticular control of the coronoid process fracture reduction was performed through a subcutaneous lateral dissection after a posterior universal incision. Ligamentous repair was not performed in any of the patients; nevertheless, we were unable to obtain information about the intraoperative and immediate postoperative status of collateral ligaments. Postoperative care consisted of immobilization in a plaster cast with 90° of elbow flexion for a mean time of 14 days (range, 10-24 days). At the end of this period, the cast was removed and active-assisted mobilization of the elbow was started. No weight-bearing was allowed for the first 6 weeks after surgery. The patients were contacted by phone and returned for follow-up examination. They were questioned and evaluated by 1 of the authors, who did not participate in the surgical interventions. The mean follow-up period was 3.6 years (range, 7 months to 7 years). Patients were asked about their ability to perform daily activities and their return to prior employment. Clinical examination included assessment of elbow stability and active range of motion. Anteroposterior and lateral radiographs were obtained to assess bony union, dislocation, degenerative changes, and heterotopic ossification. Overall outcome was determined by use of the scoring system described by Broberg and Morrey. Early complications developed in 3 patients. In 2 of them, comminuted fractures were treated with multiple K-wires and metallic tension-band wiring and a delay of union associated with clinical instability of the elbow developed at a mean time of 3 months from surgery. These 2 patients underwent a second operative intervention consisting of excision of the central comminuted segment of the olecranon process and autogenous iliac crest bone graft combined with fixation via a 3.5-mm reconstruction plate. This type of surgery allowed good stabilization of the olecranon fracture and restored the congruence of the ulnohumeral joint. The third case with early complications was a simple oblique fracture treated with K-wires and wiring in which a fatigue failure of the wire developed. A second operation was performed, during which the fracture was stabilized with a 3.5-mm reconstruction plate. Including these 3 cases, the mean time to obtain fracture healing after the last operation was 4.2 months (range, 3-6 months). No infection was observed. At follow-up evaluation, 2 patients reported difficulty in daily activities; none of them had symptoms of elbow instability. Four patients described mild pain during heavy manual activities. Thirteen patients, employed at the time of injury, were able to resume preinjury professional duties. The mean range of flexion was 125° (range, 110°-140°), with a mean extension of −22° (range, −40° to 0°). The mean forearm supination was 76° (range, 60°-90°), and the mean pronation was 68° (range, 55°-85°). Radiographs at follow-up examination showed the presence of anterior or lateral heterotopic ossification in 4 cases. One of these patients was in the group that underwent a second operation, another was the patient with a comminuted fracture of the olecranon treated with multiple K-wires and tension-band wiring, and two were in the group of five patients with an associated coronoid fracture. Two cases of articular stepoff were noted. In 2 cases, there was a gap of 1 mm at the level of the trochlear notch. In 4, signs of degenerative changes were observed at a mean of 14 months from surgery. As graded according to the functional scale of Broberg and Morrey, Transolecranon fracture-dislocation of the elbow was the term introduced by Biga and Thomine We believe that the low reported incidence is also related, as in our series, to possible confusion with a Monteggia lesion. Our results at follow-up examination were satisfactory in 90% of patients. These data compare favorably with other series. When a dislocation occurs with a fracture of the olecranon, the restoration of stability depends mainly on the reconstruction of the anatomy of the trochlear notch. Assessing the difference between simple and comminuted olecranon fractures is an important first step in choosing the appropriate procedure. In a simple fracture, the pattern of the fracture line should be identified. Recommended techniques for treating oblique fractures include the use of an oblique screw Various methods of fixation have been used in earlier series to treat comminuted fractures in transolecranon fracture-dislocations: multiple K-wires with single Two important characteristics of transolecranon fracture-dislocations are as follows: Fractures are often distal and may present an oblique pattern in a simple noncomminuted fracture, a fact that might explain the failure rate of fixation with K-wires and single tension-band wiring, as reported in our series. On the other hand, when the fracture of the olecranon is simple and transverse, tension-band wire reconstruction can be used with good results. Early active postoperative mobilization is, in fact, the key to success, and if not applied, treatment failures can be expected. Reviewing the various reports, In conclusion, we believe that the type of injury described in our study should be distinguished as an anterior dislocation of the elbow associated with an olecranon fracture and discussed as an entity per se. Common terminology should be used to allow coherent communication among orthopaedic and trauma surgeons. This injury represents an intrinsically unstable bony lesion that requires good preoperative planning and stable internal fixation with complete restoration of articular congruence and the coronoid buttress, allowing early active mobilization, which is critical to obtain good long-term results, (