One of the most important steps to obtain high-temperature superconductive and self-activated luminescence strontium compounds is the production of strontium oxalate as precursor. The aim of this study is to determine the conversion reaction mechanism of celestite to acidic strontium oxalate hydrate in solutions obtained by dissolving H2C2O4 in distilled water. The effect of temperature on the conversion reaction mechanism using excess amounts of H2C2O4 with respect to the conversion reaction stoichiometry was determined.
                  The conversion of celestite to acidic strontium oxalate in H2C2O4 solutions proceeds in two consecutive reaction steps. In the first step, SrC2O4·H2O is formed and in the second, H[Sr(C2O4)1.5(H2O)] is formed. The conversion reaction ends by the formation of SrC2O4·H2O on the surfaces of the celestite particles. The saturation concentration of H[Sr(C2O4)1.5(H2O)] chelate compound decreases during cooling of the solution and the excess amount of Sr(HC2O4)(C2O4)0.5·H2O crystallizes. XRD, ICP - OES and simultaneous TG/DTA – MS analytical techniques were used to explain the conversion reaction mechanism.One of the most important steps to obtain strontium compounds is the production of strontium oxalate as precursor. The structure must be homogeneous, without any alkali cation contamination and with a definite chemical composition. This is required particularly in the production of Bi-Sr-Ca-Cu-O (BSCCO) high-temperature superconductive materials ( Previous studies have focused on co-precipitation of metal oxalates from nitrate solutions of the elements present in the system of Bi-Sr-Ca-Cu using H  Thermal decomposition mechanism of neutral oxalate hydrate (SrC Hence, there is no study that examined systematically the conversion of celestite (SrSO Celestite is only naturally occurring strontium sulfate mineral. Celestite concentrate was obtained from Barit Maden Turk A.S (Turkey). The powdered celestite concentrate was wet sieved (Octagon 200) and the fractions of − Reagent grade H The conversion reaction of SrSO Sr(HC The characterization of the solid residues obtained at the end of the conversion reaction and of the synthesized Sr(HC Celestite concentrate fractions with − Sr(HC XRD pattern of synthetic Sr(HC TGA diagram of synthetic Sr(HC DTA diagram of Sr(HC MS diagram of Sr(HC  The neutral strontium oxalate hydrate (SrC  The solubility of H H The temperature dependency of the acid dissociation constants of The concentrations of H The concentration of H Experiments were carried out using 5, 10 and 25 The quantitative chemical analyses of Ba The quantitative chemical elemental analyses showed that Sr was also present in the solution together with S coming from dissolved HSO It can be seen from For the explanation of the above finding, it is necessary to clarify whether SrC Eq. The equilibrium constants for the Eq. The solubility product constant for By replacement of the By using the measured pH value of the solution (0.74) obtained by dissolving 0.8 The slightly less concentration of Sr in the solution with respect to the concentration of S ( The fractional conversions of celestite at different times were calculated by using the quantitatively determined amounts of dissolved elements (Sr and S) in the solutions taken during the experiments at certain time intervals. The fractional conversion was calculated according to Eq. X The molar volume of SrC Although − The excess amount of the chelate compound above its saturation concentration at room temperature precipitates as Sr(HC  XRD pattern of the solid reaction product ( TGA diagram ( The dehydration of SrC On the other hand, weight loss obtained from the TGA diagram can help explain the conversion reaction mechanism of concentrated celestite in aqueous solution of H From the above mentioned TGA and XRD findings, it is clear that SrC DTA diagram ( Another series of experiments were made using 2 Even though same amounts of H It can be seen from The XRD pattern of the crystallized solid ( TGA diagram of the reaction product ( DTA diagram of the reaction product ( It is clear that all these results obtained applying hydrometallurgical, XRD and thermal analysis techniques are in very good agreement with each other. According to these findings, the conversion reaction mechanism of SrSO Acidic solutions were obtained by dissolving H ad given in parenthesis in the reactions denotes “adsorbed”. The overall heterogeneous solid - liquid type conversion reaction of SrSO H SrC Sr and S dissolve in solution simultaneously during the reaction of SrSO The molar volume of SrC The conversion reaction of SrSO The saturation concentration of H[Sr(C The authors gratefully acknowledge the financial support of the Scientific Research Projects Coordination Unit of