Higher heating value (HHV) and lower heating value (LHV) of 39 biomass species that include woody samples, herbaceous materials, agricultural residues, juice pulps, nut shells, etc. were predicted based on elemental analysis results. Simple linear equations were developed in which C, H, N, S, and O contents exist and the prediction performance of these empirical equations was evaluated comparing the experimental and the predicted values of calorific values according to the criteria of mean absolute error (MAE), average absolute error (AAE), and average bias error (ABE). For this purpose, equations that include parameters changing from only C to sum of C, H, N, S, and O were tested to compare the prediction performance of each additional parameter. It was concluded that, the use of only two parameters including carbon and extra one element either nitrogen or oxygen is optimal to predict the calorific value. These condensed forms of ultimate analysis-based equations gave r2 values changing in the range of 0.9219–0.9572. Improving effects of additional parameters are rather limited and the addition of H and S contents did not lead so significant improvement in prediction performance.average absolute error artificial neural network average bias error fixed carbon higher heating value lower heating value least squares regression mean absolute error multiple linear regression municipal solid waste ordinary least squares refuse derived fuel root mean square deviation volatile matter Efficient use of biomass energy is of great interest since biomass is a sustainable and renewable energy resource and it includes every type of carbonaceous materials except fossil fuels There have been studies to predict the calorific value of biomass from analysis results. HHV (higher heating value) or LHV (lower heating value) of biomass were predicted using proximate analysis In this paper, HHV and LHV predictions for full set of wide range of waste biomass samples were carried out using linear equations that contain various combinations of ultimate analysis parameters (C, H, N, S, and O) to decide how condensed forms of these equations are convenient to estimate the calorific value. Furthermore, the constant values in these linear equations were also taken into consideration as an independent parameter and the effects of presence or absence of these constants in estimation performance were interpreted. Likewise, many of the samples used in this study have not been investigated in calorific value estimation studies in literature yet. For example, fruit juice pulps, specific agricultural residues, stalks, stems, etc. are unusual materials investigated in the same study due to handling problems and easy decomposition. Thirty-nine different biomass species used in this study were provided either from companies operating in food/beverage industries in Turkey or collected from agricultural/forestry sector. These samples were kept in open trays to get air-dried specimens and then the particle size was reduced to lower than 250 µm by milling and sieving. The proximate analysis was performed according to ASTM standards, while Leco TruSpec® CHN ultimate equipment with Leco TruSpec® S module was employed to perform the ultimate analysis. HHV was determined by IKA C2000 calorimeter from which LHV was calculated from HHV using the following simplified equation These characterization tests were repeated several times to assure the reproducibility of the data that repeatability for ultimate analysis results were within ±0.5%, while it was up to ±5% for calorific value determination. Four different criteria that include HHVs with and without constants and LHVs with and without constants were regarded for estimation of the heating values. For which, twenty-four equations were employed to the experimental data and Analysis results of the samples are given in Equations used to calculate the calorific value and the results of performance criteria are given in Equations from #2 to #6 only exclude one parameter compared to Eqn#1. Among these equations, irrespective of the availability of constant in equations, the best HHV prediction performance was determined in case of Eqn#3 that ignores the effect of S content. That is, Eqn#3 gave the satisfactory predictions of HHVs in both cases of with (r Using the equations from #7 to #15 that consider three parameters indicated that elimination of S and O (Eqn#8) yielded the best predictions for HHV (r As to the dual parameter equations (#16-22), Eqn#16 that is consisted of C and N gave the highest r Carbon is the essential element in all types of carbonaceous fuels, while nitrogen can be found in varying proportions. In case of biomass, nitrogen content is usually unignorably high compared to other fossil fuels. All living biomass requires nutrients other than C, H, and O to synthesize cellular material and nitrogen is a nutrition for green plants and it is taken by the fresh biomass to produce proteins and other nitrogen containing compounds. Some biomass species such as legumes fix nitrogen from ambient atmosphere and often contain high protein concentrations. Namely, the average weight percentage of nitrogen in pure dry protein is about 16% Eqn#23 that comprised of only C gave r  On the other hand, effect of H content on the prediction is controversial in literature. Friedl et al. In this study, using the binary parameters of (C and N) or (C and O) resulted in maximum r Chen et al. As regards to error functions, it can be seen from MAE values that HHV and LHV predictions could be carried out with a minimum mean absolute errors of 0.3113 MJ/kg and 0.2904 MJ/kg, respectively. Besides, AAE(%) values varied in the intervals of (1.6629–4.8021) for HHV with constant, (1.7057–4.8545) for HHV without constant, (1.8202–5.8004) for LHV with constant, and (1.9120–6.0658) for LHV without constant. Although the upper limits of these AAE(%) results may be regarded a bit high, they are consistent with those reported in literature. Nhuchen and Abdul Salam Bousdira et al. The best results of RMSD were obtained when all parameters were included (Equation#1). That is best RMSD values were 0.4230 and 0.4452 for HHV and 0.3607 and 0.3931 for LHV. In this study, thirty-nine different biomass species from highly different origins have been used to establish correlations between the ultimate analysis results and the calorific value. Comparison of the experimental HHV and LHV with the predicted ones revealed that linear equations containing only binary parameters of ultimate analysis can be used to predict the calorific value satisfactorily. Carbon that is the base parameter of these equations may be powered by accompany of nitrogen or oxygen. Nitrogen was found the main secondary element for three cases, while oxygen gave the best result in one case (LHV without constant). The error analyses based on MAE, AAE, and ABE showed that the prediction performances of these highly condensed forms of equations are still usable. It can be also suggested that subsets of biomasses that consisted of samples with relatively similar properties may be used for a better prediction performance.