The objective of this study was to investigate the morphology and organization of apatite crystallites in mature mammalian bone. Anorganic bovine bone was studied in this investigation to allow for the examination of the mineral crystallites after removal of the organic phase. Field-emission low-voltage scanning electron microscopy (FE-LVSEM) was employed to obtain images at nanometer resolution without the application of a conductive coating. Transmission electron microscopy (TEM) of the samples was also performed to confirm the identification of features observed in the SEM and to allow for comparison with earlier studies of bone mineral architecture. For comparison, in order to demonstrate how the interaction of collagen and apatite results in the architecture and crystal structure of bone mineral, two synthetic hydroxyapatite materials were also analyzed: OsteoGen and OsteoGraf/LD300.
                  FE-LVSEM revealed distinctive features of bone mineral: a fibrillar organization of crystallites, a periodic spacing of crystallites along the fibrils consistent with the banding pattern of collagen, inter-fibrillar bridging crystallites, and a plate-like habit of the crystallites. These findings supported the hypothesis, derived from the earlier TEM data of others, that the mineralization of collagen comprising osteoid proceeds by the formation of apatite crystallites within the fibers at selected periodic sites along their length. Moreover, the very presence in this anorganic material of distinct fibers comprised of the crystallites is demonstration of inter-crystallite bonding. The crystallites of the synthetic hydroxyapatite materials did not display any of these ultrastructural features.The mineral phase of bone imparts to the tissue its mechanical properties and serves as an important depot for calcium and certain polypeptides. The mechanical properties of bone, its solubility, and its ability to adsorb selected proteins are critically dependent on the molecular structure and morphology of the individual apatitic crystallites. The mineral phase is the result of the coordinated arrangement of calcium and phosphate ions within the apatite crystallites as they form within a collagen template. Investigation of the collagen–mineral complex is challenged by the high density of the mineral phase that generally obscures the individual crystallite morphology and the relationship of the crystallites to the collagen template. The presence of the organic phase of bone also limits the morphological features of the individual apatite crystallites that can be detected The objective of this study was to investigate the morphology and organization of apatite crystallites in mature mammalian (bovine) bone from which most of the organic material was removed (viz., anorganic bone). Field-emission low-voltage scanning electron microscopy (FE-LVSEM) was employed in order to obtain topographical images at nanometer resolution without applying a conductive coating to the specimen Anorganic bovine cortical and trabecular bone (Bio-Oss, Geistlich Biomaterials, Wolhusen, Switzerland) were obtained as particulates, approximately 1 Particles of the trabecular bone mineral and synthetic hyroxyapatites were mounted as received onto 10 Individual pieces of anorganic trabecular bone and 1 As control material for the TEM studies, trabecular bone was cut from the distal femur of an adult mongrel dog and processed using an anhydrous method FE-LVSEM revealed a distinctive hierarchical architecture of the mineral in the anorganic bone: the organization of individual apatite crystallites in fibril-like structures; the aggregation of parallel fibrils into bundles; and the meshing of these bundles to form interlocking structures that reflected the lamellar organization of bone ( In both the trabecular and cortical anorganic bone material, the mineral crystallite fibrils reflected the quaternary structure of collagen. The diameter of the mineral fibrils, 65–80 Also of interest was the presence of periodic mineral bridges from one fibril to another, with a spacing similar to that of the crystallites along the fibrils ( Fractured surfaces of trabecular Bio-Oss revealed layered structures, within which mineral fibrils ran parallel to each other in networks several micrometers in width and which achieved lengths of 6 Fracture surfaces also exposed the cross-section of the fibrillar networks, which exhibited porosity reminiscent of the individual fibrils ( In contrast to the highly structured natural bone mineral, the synthetic hydroxyapatite specimens exhibited architecture with little structure. For example, at low magnification FE-LVSEM revealed that the OsteoGraf/LD300 had a uniform but somewhat rough surface punctuated by small nodules and pits. Higher magnification SEM micrographs of the more mature anorganic bone specimens revealed individual platelets of the mineral crystallites, from 60 to 100 In TEM, natural mineral crystallites in the anorganic bone samples were frequently seen to be aggregated in parallel networks at least several micrometers in length and 60 to several hundred nanometers across, ( Also of interest was the periodic spacing of the platelets along the long axis of the fibrils ( The periodic arrangement of crystallites along the long axis of fibrils included crystallites viewed both on edge and The regularly spaced interfibrillar bridges seen in FE-LVSEM were not as evident in TEM. However, closer examination of the TEM micrographs did reveal crystallites that could be interpreted as serving this bridging function ( Higher magnification TEM imaging revealed more clearly the differences in the morphology of the natural bone mineral crystallites and those of the synthetic hydroxyapatites. Selected area electron diffraction confirmed the common hydroxyapatite identity of the substances (insets, The morphology of the individual crystallites of the synthetic hydroxyapatites, unclear in FE-LVSEM ( The growth habit of the crystallites was revealed via lattice imaging in both high-resolution TEM, which also confirmed that the individual crystallites of the Bio-Oss comprised single crystals of apatite. The orientation of the lattice fringes within the crystallites was consistent with alignment of the long axis of the crystallites along the Investigation of the features of the mineral architecture of bone tissue is generally confounded by the presence of the organic phase in which the mineral crystallites are contained and by the number density of the mineral crystallites. To address the latter problem, some studies of bone architecture have employed demineralized bone or partially mineralized fibrous tissue such as tendon The use of a particular anorganic bone material, Bio-Oss, for this study of the mineral crystallites was predicated on its demonstrated ultrastructural similarity to whole bone by TEM in our investigation (cf., A notable finding of the present study of anorganic bone is the fiber-like structures comprised of the mineral crystallites. It is of interest that these fibers were found to be continuous, self-supporting and with the same diameter as collagen fibrils. This finding demonstrates that the mineral crystallites that had formed within the collagen fibrils can achieve sufficient inter-crystallite bonding to retain the fibrillar structure even after dissolution of the protein template. The nature of this bonding could not be determined, but the small diameter of the fibers might suggest that crystallite entanglement and interlocking alone, absent chemical bonding, would not have been sufficient to preserve the microstructure. Another notable feature of the polycrystalline fibers was the periodic spacing of the crystallites along their length. This spacing of approximately 65 The fibrils that demonstrated the periodic arrangement of crystallite aggregates would have been those that were at a particular stage in the mineralization process. Less mineralized collagen fibrils (i.e., at an earlier stage of mineralization) would not have been seen because there would not have been a sufficient number of crystallites along the length of the fibril to provide the necessary mechanical continuity to allow the polycrystalline fibril to survive the de-organification process. At later stages of mineralization, interfibrillar mineralization and the high number density of crystallites would have obscured the individual fibrils. Another significant related finding is the presence of crystallites bridging the fibrils, with the same spacing as the intra-fibrillar crystallite aggregates. These bridging crystallites may have been responsible for stabilizing the mineralizing fibrils in the early mineralization stage of ossification. Crystallites observed among the crystallite fibrils provide evidence that the mineral phase of bone, like the collagen matrix, is continuous. That anorganic bone specimens retain approximately one-third of their compressive strength At higher magnification, FE-LVSEM revealed the plate-like morphology of the individual bone mineral crystallites. The value of this microscopy method for revealing the three-dimensional character of the individual crystallites and the fibrillar organization could not be realized in the more highly mineralized interior regions of the anorganic bone specimens. Our own and prior TEM observations of bone mineral crystallites have also revealed the plate-like morphology of the crystallites The advent of high-resolution LVSEM employing a field emission gun is what has enabled the present study of bone mineral architecture at a resolution previously available only via TEM. Owing to the smaller excitation volume provided by low-voltage operation and the requisite higher source brightness and smaller spot size provided by the field emission source, the FE-LVSEM can achieve resolution nearly comparable to that available in TEM while maintaining the depth of field which is the hallmark of SEM. In addition, the reduced voltage of the electrons (1 The combined use of TEM and FE-LVSEM in this study has enabled the comparison of two-dimensional and three-dimensional images of a given object at the same magnification and the correlation of SEM and TEM observations. The crystallites viewed in the TEM could be seen directly in three dimensions in the SEM micrographs, providing clarity of morphological information that was only implied by the change in crystallite projection with tilt in the TEM. The plate-like nature of the crystallites also explains the wide range of crystallite dimensions observed in TEM. Only crystallites oriented perfectly parallel to the TEM section are viewed full size; the measured dimensions decrease as the angle of tilt increases within the section. While this foreshortening precludes the use of traditional statistical methods to determine average grain dimensions, observation of a large number of crystallites can provide an indication of the maximum dimensions they achieve. In summary, the distinctive features of bone mineral—the fibrillar organization of crystallites, the periodic spacing of crystallites along the fibrils, the inter-fibrillar bridging crystallites, and the plate-like habit of the crystallites—all reflect mineral–collagen interactions. These structural characteristics of the mineral phase of bone are not demonstrated by synthetic apatite-like material, which are formed without a guiding organic template. This work was supported in part by the Office of Naval Research (Graduate Fellowship—VBR), the William Branstrom Fellowship, and supplemented by research funds from the John F. Elliott Chair (LWH), and the US National Science Foundation grant award 9904046. Support from the Biokinetix Foundation (MS) is also gratefully acknowledged.