304 austenitic stainless steel reinforced by Al2O3 particles was prepared by microwave assisted self-propagating high temperature synthesis process using the Fe2O3Cr2O3NiOAlFe reaction system. Furthermore, effects of mechanical activation of the reactants and the addition of 21.2wt.% extra Al to the chemical composition of the reactants on the chemical composition of the produced stainless steel was investigated. Atomic absorption spectroscopy analysis results indicated that by the addition of extra Al to the reactant mixture and using 30minute mechanical activation, stainless steel containing 17.27wt.% Cr and 7.73wt.% Ni could be produced with its chemical composition very close to the chemical composition of 304 stainless steel. X-ray diffraction analysis showed that the stainless steel contains nanostructured austenite and ferrite phases. Also microstructural characterizations indicated that there is a uniform distribution of black particles in the steel matrix. Energy dispersive spectroscopy analysis showed that these particles are composed of Al and O elements while the matrix contains Fe, Cr and Ni elements. The presence of Al2O3 particles and nanostructure matrix improved the hardness and therefore the wear properties of the composite in comparison with the wrought 304 stainless steel plate.Stainless steels are a group of materials, which usually are used for corrosion resistance applications. Austenitic stainless steels are the most common type of stainless steels. Good corrosion resistance and welding characteristics, high formability and nonmagnetic nature due to the presence of fully austenitic microstructure are the most common properties of these alloys Fabrication of stainless steels by SHS process can have some difficulties due to the presence of different alloying elements in the composition of the alloy. Gowtam and co-workers Xi and co-workers But, up to now there is no report on the fabrication of 304 stainless steel by SHS process using the Fe In this study Al (99.5%, 20 In order to control the heat liberated from the reaction and fabrication of a nanostructure stainless steel, some of the Fe It should be noted that during mechanical milling some ethanol droplets were used as process control agent (PCA) to reduce the agglomeration of powders. After mixing, two grams from each mixture was uniaxially pressed and cylindrical pellet with a diameter of 12.8 After the synthesis process, a slag layer covered the main product of the synthesis. In order to separate this layer, pellets were cold rolled. Then, the atomic absorption spectroscopy (AAS) apparatus (Shimadzu-AA-760) was used for measurement of Fe, Cr, and Ni weight percent in the products. Also, X-ray diffraction with Cu Kα radiation (PC 1800) was used for phase analysis of the samples. The microstructures of the samples were analyzed by an optical and scanning electron microscope (SEM LEO 1450 VP, Germany) equipped with energy dispersive spectroscopy (EDS Oxford INCA 7353). Dry pin on disk sliding wear test of the composite was performed on the 180 emery paper using 5 and 10N normal loads for 600m sliding distance. The weight loss of the samples was measured by a precision digital balance at each 50 As stated before, the main purpose of the present study was fabricating a nanostructured 304 stainless steel reinforced with alumina particles. Clearly during synthesis processes, as the temperature increases, the growth process of the products will happen more easily. So, to fabricate a nanostructure stainless steel, the temperature of the combustion synthesis process should be decreased as low as possible. This can be performed by the addition of a diluent agent to the reaction. So, as stated in the Thermodynamic calculations indicated that the adiabatic temperature of reaction The chemical compositions of the products measured by atomic absorption spectroscopy analysis are indicated in In the present research, only mechanical milling was performed for the activation of powder mixture and increasing the reducibility of the oxides by Al during the combustion synthesis process. Therefore, no reaction must happen during mechanical milling. In order to retard the reactions into the milling vial, low rotation speed (200 The XRD spectrum of the stainless steel in sample D is indicated in   The raw materials used for synthesis of 304 stainless steel contained Al, Fe  During heating of the reactants in the microwave apparatus, the first reaction that happened was a reduction of NiO by Al powders (reaction  The aim of the present study was fabricating nanostructured 304 stainless steel, reinforced by Al