In single-particle roll mill comminution, the degree of size reduction is controlled by the ratio of the nip size of the particle and the roll gap. However, the nip size or effective particle size of irregularly shaped particles is generally unknown. An experimental procedure is presented to assess nip size of irregularly shaped particles and to evaluate energy consumption and energy utilization in their comminution. A series of experiments in which the roll gap was successively reduced reveals that the height of a particle, that is, the particle's dimension normal to the plane in which it resides in its most stable position, is a satisfactory approximation of the nip size which can be conveniently measured with a slot classifier. The nip size or particle height is distributed in √2 and √4 sieve–size fraction according to a Gaussian normal distribution, the median size being roughly 80% of the geometric sieve size. The energy investment for comminuting single particles in a rigidly mounted roll mill varies with the nip size in the manner of a power function. Estimated Weibull coefficients of uniformity for dolomite, galena, and quartz are 7.5, 1.9, and 7.9. Product size distributions of comminuted nip-size fractions are self-preserving in a dimensionless size X/X
                     50 and thus, the median size is a measure of product fineness. Grindabilities calculated from the linear reduction ratio energy relationships are 7.8, 14.0, and 4.5 t/kWh for dolomite, galena, and quartz, respectively. Single-particle grindabilities of these three minerals are power functions of the nip size. Dolomite and quartz data follow closely Rittinger's Law of Comminution.Many process engineering operations require the characterization of an assembly or mass of particulates. This task generally involves classification of the particulate according to a common, measurable physical characteristic. Depending on the unit operation, different particle characteristics can be defined, one being particle size. The size of regular-shaped particles such as spheres or cubes is fully given by a shape descriptor (spherical, cubic, etc.) and the length of the main dimension Sieving, as a means of preparing feed material for single-particle roll mill comminution experiments, classifies particles according to their largest dimension The experimental setup includes a rigidly mounted roll mill, a single-particle feeder and a slot classifier. The diameter of the rolls is 150 mm and their width is 100 mm. Details of the roll mill and the single-particle feeder can be found in a previous publication Depending on the type of experiments being conducted, the variables were sieve size, particle height, and roll gap. Preparation of feed material falls into two broad categories of experimentation. For the initial study of the effect of roll gap, 2.4×2.8 mm height fractions were prepared from 4×6 mesh particles and for the determination of the effect of sieve size on specific energy consumption and product size distribution, 2.0×2.4 mm height fractions were prepared from a sequence of sieved particles. Height-classified feeds extracted from 6×7 mesh sieve size fractions were employed to study the effect of particle height. The minerals tested were dolomite, galena, and quartz as representatives of soft, semimetallic and readily cleavable, and hard minerals, respectively. The roll speed was kept constant at 0.15 m/s tangential speed. Unless otherwise stated, all products were wet–dry sieved using standard procedures. The experimental details are summarized in The first experiments to be presented were designed to show whether the orientation of the particle at the moment of nip is random. The experimental procedure involved successively reducing the roll gap from a multiple of the feed size to a fraction of it. At each gap setting, a known mass of 2.4×2.8-mm height-classified particles was fed singly to the mill and the product particles were passed through the slot-classifier to determine the amount of unbroken particles. Results are presented in The plots of the breakage fraction-vs.-roll gap for each of the three minerals demonstrate the effectiveness of the slot classifier for sorting particles according to their nip size. The steep increase of the breakage fraction-vs.-roll gap curve in the 2.4×2.8-mm feed–height interval illustrates the attainable quality of this height-classification technique. In addition, the results demonstrate that the spatial orientation of a particle at the moment of nip is not random. Upon contact with the roll surface, particles appear to take their most stable position. Deviations occur with rotationally symmetrical particles. In the case of dolomite and galena, about 5% and 15%, respectively, of the particles do break at gap widths larger than the upper boundary of the height fraction. These deviations are due to shape effects caused by more rotationally symmetrical particles which have more than one stable position when lying on a horizontal surface. In fact, cubic galena deviates the most, then followed by the more “rounded” dolomite particles while flaky quartz behaves nearly perfectly. Experiments with a conventional feeder hopper show that about the same percentage of flaky particles slide through the mill without being crushed as when the single-particle feeder is used, indicating that particle orientation takes place upon contact with the rolls. Thus, nip size appears to be independent of operating parameters such as roll speed. The location on the rolls where particles are being nipped can be described by a radial and an axial position parameter. The radial position parameter is the angle of the nip which describes how far a particle can slide down before being crushed. The angle of nip is a function of nip size The nip size of a particle is, thus, characterized by an angle of nip. The attribute height or nip size of a particle is statistically distributed even over narrow sieve size fractions. Conversely, narrow sieve size fractions of a √4 series contain particles of the same particle height. Do such particles comminute differently? The following experiments were designed to study the effect of sieve size on energy consumption and on product size distributions of same height particles. The experimental procedure involved extracting particles of 2.0×2.4-mm height fractions from 4×5, 5×6, 6×7, 7×8, and 8×10 mesh feeds. Their respective 2.0×2.4-mm height fractions were subsequently fed to the roll mill at the same gap width such that the compression factor, The specific comminution energy, as well as the product size distributions, shows no dependence on the sieve size fraction for these height-classified feed particles, as can be seen by the results given in To test the influence of nip size on the specific energy and product size distribution, several height classes of particles were extracted from a 4×6-mesh sieve size fraction using the slot classifier and were then comminuted at the same compression ratio This section compares the energy–nip size relationship with energy–particle size relationships published in the literature. Kanda and Weichert incorporated the Weibull theory of strength into Hertz–Huber equations and derived a relationship among breakage energy, Weibull coefficients of uniformity and particle size An alternate expression for the mean breakage energy has been derived by Weichert Hence, a second estimate of The exponent Height or nip size of a particle is statistically distributed over narrow-sieve size fractions. With a single-particle roll mill, energy input and extent of size reduction can be controlled with the compression ratio, Depending on particle geometry and load application particles can experience single, multiple, and secondary load application events. Single loading events occur at low compression ratios when the particle is nipped in two points and shatters into smaller fragments that pass the roll gap without further stress application. Elongated platy particles can be nipped simultaneously in several locations and break as a result of multiple parallel stress applications. Such platy particles break in agreement with the Saint–Venant principle of localized stresses as if they were made of a number of smaller particles that are each nipped and stressed. At high compression ratios, particles are stressed and fractured at higher nip angles. Resulting daughter fragments whose nip size exceeds the roll gap are stressed in secondary loading events. Austin et al. Because comminution is such an energy-intensive unit operation, a quantity of great interest is the grindability of a material, which is defined as the amount of product produced per unit of expended energy. Several methods for measuring grindability of materials have been proposed in the literature. Gutsche et al. Kapur et al. The variation of the slope The effective feed size of irregularly shaped particles in the compression loading of single particles between two counter-rotating, rigidly held rolls is the nip size. The nip size is the distance between the roll–particle contact points when the latter is locked between the rolls and the force is being transmitted. The height of a particle, as measured with the slot classifier, gives a satisfactory estimate of the nip size. Energy expended and the corresponding product size distributions of comminuted quartz particles are only a function of the nip size and are insensitive to the magnitude of the largest dimensions of the feed particles, indicating that particle shape is limiting the radius of strain propagation in the solid, in accordance with the Saint–Venant principle of localized stresses. Particle height is distributed normally in √2 and √4 sieved dolomite, galena, and quartz fractions. The energy expended in comminuting narrow height fractions of dolomite, galena, and quartz varies with particle height in the manner of a power function. The estimated Weibull coefficients of uniformity are in good agreement with published data. Product size distributions obtained from comminuting narrow height fractions of the three minerals at different roll gap settings are self-preserving in a dimensionless size This research was supported by the U.S. Department of the Interior Generic Mineral Technology Center for Comminution.