The fatigue properties of a quenched and tempered (Q&T) 4340 (NiCrMo) steel coated with a commercial electroless Ni-P (EN) deposit, has been investigated. Such an EN deposit had a P content of approximately 10 wt.% and a thickness of approximately 18 μm. The evaluation of the fatigue properties of the coated material was conducted in two different conditions: (a) as-deposited and (b) deposited and post-heat treated (PHT) at 698 K for 1 h, a condition in which the maximum hardness of the deposit was observed. It has been determined that both the fatigue life and fatigue limit of the coated substrate are substantially reduced, in comparison with the uncoated material, and that such a reduction is significantly higher if the deposit is in the PHT condition. The Basquin parameters of the materials tested under different conditions have been determined and used to compute the reduction in fatigue life. Thus, it has been shown that the fatigue life of the steel substrate can be reduced up to 94% in the as-deposited condition and up to 99.1% in the as-deposited and PHT condition. Also, the fatigue limit can be reduced between 28.3–50.5% depending upon the condition of the coating. From the microscopic point of view, it has been observed that the fatigue fracture of the substrate-coating composite initiates in the deposit and that it remains well adhered to the substrate during fatigue testing since interfacial cracks have been very rarely observed. Such adhesion characteristics enhance the transference of the early cracks nucleated towards the substrate steel, a belief that is supported by the analysis of the fracture surfaces of the samples tested at different stress levels.EN plating is widely used in many different industrial applications, for restoring worn or undersized parts, due to its good corrosion, chemical and wear resistence and ability for achieving a uniform thickness. Also, it can be hardened by heat treatment after deposition, maintaining a satisfactory ductility Several authors However, all the advantages that could be provided by EN deposits either as single coatings or interlayer films in multi-coating systems could be gained at the expense of a decrease in other mechanical properties that could be of utmost importance in some of the applications, such as fatigue life and fatigue limit, which is particularly true for high strength steels. Previous studies carried out by Wu et al. The studies conducted by Zhang et al. More recent studies conducted by Garcés et al. Similarly, Guzmán et al. Thus, the present investigation has been conducted as part of a wide research program aimed at evaluating the effect of EN deposits, plated by different companies, on the fatigue properties of Q&T high strength steels, as well as 316 L stainless steel. The coating analyzed in the present case is 18 μm in thickness, has a P content of approximately 10 wt.% and was plated onto a Q&T CrNi Mo steel similar to that employed by Garcés et al. The present investigation has been carried out with samples of a Q&T CrNiMo steel (SAE 4340) with the following composition (wt.%): 0.41 C, 0.79 Mn, 0.24 Si, 0.79 Cr, 0.23 Mo and 1.73 Ni. This material is widely employed in the manufacture of automotive crankshafts and rear axle shafts, aircraft crankshafts, connecting rods, propeller hubs, gears, drive shafts, landing gear parts and heavy duty parts of rock drills. The material was provided as bars of approximately 16 mm diameter and 6-m length. Such bars were cut to pieces of different lengths: 10 pieces of approximately 120 mm for machining tensile specimens, 138 pieces of approximately 102 mm for machining the fatigue samples and 10 pieces of approximately 10 mm for characterizing the deposit and to conduct hardness tests.  All the samples were coated at Reliable Plating Corporation, (Chicago, IL, USA). The deposit applied had a phosphorous content in the range of 9–12 wt.% and a thickness of approximately 18 μm, which was corroborated by means of the ball cratering technique (Calotest, CSEM) and image analysis (LECO 500). The optimum PHT temperature was determined by conducting a number of heat treatments at temperatures of 623, 673, 698, 723, 773 and 823 K for 1 h in an argon atmosphere. Subsequently, hardness measurements were conducted on the cross section of the shortest cylindrical samples employed for this purpose. A total of 12 microhardness measurements were carried out on each specimen according to the ASTM standards B-578 and E-384. Such measurements were conducted employing a Vickers indenter (Leitz) with a load of 50 g applied during 10 s. The highest hardness of this deposit was achieved at a temperature of 698 K. As discussed later, the PHT applied gave rise to marginal increase in the tensile mechanical properties of the deposit–substrate composite. The evaluation of the static and dynamic mechanical properties of the coated and PHT samples was conducted employing 3 tensile and 34 fatigue specimens. These were PHT at 698 K for 1 h in an argon atmosphere, at a heating rate of 473 K h A computer-controlled servohydraulic machine (Instron 8502, USA) was used in order to evaluate the static mechanical properties of the uncoated and coated samples, employing a constant cross head speed of 3 mm/min. Such a characterization required the test of at least three samples for each condition. A RBF-200 equipment (Fatigue Dynamics Inc., Walled Lake, USA) was employed in order to carry out the fatigue tests. These were conducted under rotating bending conditions ( In order to conduct a meaningful comparison of the fatigue life of the uncoated, coated and coated and PHT specimens, all the samples were mechanically prepared in order to have similar mirror-like polished surfaces before testing. The staircase method was used for the evaluation of the fatigue limit of the coated and uncoated specimens. The step employed was of 7 MPa and 10 samples were tested for each condition. Infinite life was specified at a number of 5×10 SEM techniques (Hitachi S-2400, Japan) with EDS facilities were employed both for determining approximately the chemical analysis of the plating both in the as-deposited and PHT conditions and for examining the fracture surfaces of the samples. Particular attention was paid to the site initiation of fatigue cracks and the different stages of their subsequent propagation. All SEM observations were conducted at a constant potential of 20 kV. The substrate microstructure under the scanning electron microscope was observed to be composed of a large number of relatively coarse martensite plates together with carbides. The latter are visible as small particles which constitute a typical tempered martensite structure. A typical section of the interface between the EN coating and the substrate, prior to fatigue testing, is shown in Tensile testing of the coated material up to the yield stress as well as the examination of the fracture surfaces of the specimens after fatigue testing allowed the corroboration of the previous observation. The ball cratering technique and also SEM analyzes allowed the measurement of the deposit thickness, which was found to be approximately 18 μm. Regarding the P content of the film, The P content of any EN deposit is intimately associated with the residual stresses present in it, which in turn will play a fundamental role in the fatigue behavior of the coated material. The early investigation conducted by Parker and Shah On the other hand, Wu et al. The coating, plated in the as-deposited condition, presented a hardness of approximately 561±12 HVN Also, the present results confirm that heat treatments conducted after deposition, in the vicinity of 673 K for 1 h, lead to increases in hardness from approximately 500–600 to near 1000 VHN. Solid state diffusion processes that occur during the post heat treatment, give rise to important modifications of the atomic structure and microstructure, which in turn lead to the observed changes in hardness. According to Riedel Prior to the fatigue tests, the monotonic mechanical properties of the composite coating–substrate material were evaluated in tension, employing samples both in the uncoated and coated conditions. The substrate material in the as-received condition showed a yield stress of approximately 1037±43 MPa and a tensile strength of 1143±30 MPa. After deposition, the coated samples showed a yield stress of 955±3 MPa and a tensile strength of 1031±1 MPa, whereas in the as-deposited and PHT condition the yield stress was observed to increase slightly to 972±14 MPa and the tensile strength was of 1075±4 MPa. Thus, it can be observed that the deposit plated onto the substrate employed in the present study gave rise to a slight decrease both in the yield stress and tensile strength, in comparison with the substrate material in the as-received condition, which is more pronounced when the coating is evaluated as-deposited than after post heat treated. It is important to mention that during tensile testing, the coatings plated onto the samples in the as-deposited condition, were observed to delaminate from the substrate, whereas after post heat treatment the deposits remained adhered to the base metal. Such an observation indicates that post heat treatment at 698 K for 1 h not only improves the hardness of the plating but also its adhesion to the substrate. Fatigue tests of both the coated and uncoated samples were conducted in a range of fractions of their yield stress, σ   for the description of this type of the experimental data. This relationship was first proposed by Basquin Therefore, it can be employed, together with the values reported in Regarding the reduction in fatigue limit computed from the curves in The present results agree with the general trend reported in previous works conducted with similar substrates. For example, Garcés et al. Wu and co-workers More recently, Guzmán and co-workers Similarly, Pertuz and co-workers Thus, the present results indicate that high strength substrates, such as Q&T NiCrMo steels, are bound to undergo a significant decrease in fatigue properties when these materials are coated with EN deposits of different thicknesses and phosphorous content. Such a reduction is expected to increase if the deposit is PHT after plating in order to achieve a harder coating, due to the decrease in the magnitude of the compressive residual stresses present in the film. After fracture, a number of specimens tested under different alternating stress conditions were closely examined by SEM techniques. The study was conducted mainly with two different purposes: to investigate the microstructural characteristics of the fatigue crack initiation sites and to analyze the microstructural changes that take place both in the coating and substrate during the subsequent propagation of such cracks. The observations were carried out both on the plane of fracture and on sections perpendicular to such a plane. Thus, The fracture of the coating at the site initiation suggests that initially the crack was associated with the deposit and that its propagation occurred both on the plane of fracture and normal to it, along the substrate-deposit interface.  The fact that the fatigue cracks form and propagate first within the EN deposit before they are transferred to the substrate is clearly shown in On the left of the picture it can be seen that one of such cracks, identified as A, has given rise to the localized fracture and displacement of the coating. Also, the crack within the area identified as B, which has been enlarged in All these observations lead to the conclusion that the EN deposit has a lower fatigue strength than the steel substrate, which gives rise to the nucleation and growth of fatigue cracks within it, prior to the nucleation of fatigue cracks at the substrate–deposit interface. Once such cracks have traversed the cross-section of the deposit, they propagate towards the substrate — giving rise to a significant reduction in the fatigue properties of the steel. The fact that the deposit has a high phosphorous content indicates that the residual stresses present in it are of a compressive nature. These stresses will contribute to the endurance of the coating for opposing the propagation of the crack, but it is clear that they do not increase substantially the fatigue strength of the EN plating. On the contrary, any post heat treatment applied to the coating in order to improve its hardness, will reduce the compressive stresses in the plating and decrease its fatigue resistance. The present results agree very well with the conclusions drawn from the work of Pertuz et al. The fatigue properties of a Q&T NiCrMo steel are severely decreased by plating it with an EN deposit of the characteristics described in this work (18 μm in thickness and 10 wt.% phosphorous content). Depending on the alternating stresses applied to the material, in the as-deposited condition the reduction in fatigue life could reach between 93–94%, in comparison with the substrate. The decrease in fatigue life in the PHT condition, could achieve between 98–99%. The fatigue limit can also be reduced between 28–51% for each condition, respectively. It is believed that the decrease in fatigue properties is due to the lower fatigue resistance of the coating in comparison with that of the substrate, leading to the early nucleation and growth of fatigue cracks within the deposit which reach the substrate–deposit interface and are subsequently propagated towards the base steel below the coating. Therefore, the EN coating acts as a stress concentrator on the surface of the base steel that decreases the time required for the nucleation of the fatigue cracks. Thus, the improvement of the corrosion and abrasive wear resistance of Q&T NiCrMo steels or the restoration of parts and components made of this material by means EN deposits such as the one investigated in this work, can be achieved at the expense of a significant fatigue debt of the composite material. As expected, the reduction in fatigue life has been found to be less marked for the samples in the as-deposited condition than those PHT, which agrees with previous studies that have reported a decrease in the compressive residual stresses of the EN plating after post heat treatment. Structural components and parts made of this steel and coated with EN deposits such as the one used in the present investigation, should be designed against a potential fatigue failure under high cycle fatigue conditions, by taking into account the fatigue curves derived for the coated materials either in the as-deposited or PHT conditions, rather than the fatigue properties of the uncoated Q&T NiCrMo steel. This investigation has been conducted with the financial support of the Venezuelan National Council for Scientific and Technological Research (CONICIT) through the projects LAB-97000644 and S1-2000000642, and the Scientific and Humanistic Development Council of the Universidad Central de Venezuela through the project PG-08-17-4595-2000. J.A. Berrı́os is deeply grateful to the School of Mechanical Engineering, Faculty of Engineering and Architecture of the University of El Salvador.