The effect of the sample preparation method on the observation of amorphous structure in glass forming Cu–Zr, Cu–Zr–Ti and Cu–Zr–Ti–Ni alloys (Cu–Zr-based alloys) using transmission electron microscopy (TEM) has been investigated. The result shows that the selection of a proper sample preparation method is crucial in observing artifact-free amorphous microstructure, since Cu–Zr-based alloy is readily oxidized in air atmosphere. Electro-chemical thinning or electro-chemical thinning followed by ion milling causes oxide (Cu2O and CuO) contamination on the surface of the sample. Only low-energy ion milling with liquid nitrogen cooling can result in the observation of a fully amorphous structure. The exposure time of the thin foil sample in air before TEM examination should be minimized to observe the microstructure without contamination.Development of bulk amorphous and nano-crystalline alloys receives a great attention due to their unique properties attributed to the atomic structure Alloy ingots with a composition of Cu The samples for TEM were prepared by three different routes, i.e. (1) electro-chemical jet thinning only, (2) electro-chemical jet thinning followed by ion milling and (3) ion milling. In the case of electro-chemical jet thinning, the samples were perforated using four different solutions of 10 and 15% perchloric acid in ethanol, and 10 and 20% nitric acid in ethanol at a temperature of 238   However, when the sample was not cooled by liquid nitrogen during ion milling, fully amorphous structure was not observed. The TEM BF images and corresponding SADPs shown in Another example showing microstructural change during ion milling of the electro-chemically thinned Cu To further reveal the oxidation effect upon exposure in air atmosphere, the ion-milled sample (accelerate voltage: 2.6 Although XRD, DSC and SANS results reported that the melt-spun Cu The results in the present study indicate that the Cu–Zr amorphous alloy is very much prone to oxidation, compared with other amorphous alloys. Earlier, Asami et al. Generally, the amorphous phases in most alloy systems such as Zr-, Ti-, Ni-, Fe-, Al-based systems are more resistant to the oxidation compared with the corresponding crystalline phases. Therefore, in most cases, the amorphous structure can be observed easily using TEM. However, since the bulk glass forming Cu–Zr-based alloy readily oxidizes in air atmosphere, the sample for TEM observation should be prepared with great care, i.e. by low-energy ion milling with liquid nitrogen cooling and observed without delay in TEM to minimize the exposure time in air. Present study shows that the selection of the proper sample preparation method is crucial in observing artifact-free amorphous microstructure of glass forming Cu–Zr-based alloys. Electro-chemical thinning or electro-chemical thinning followed by ion milling causes oxide contamination on the surface of the thin foil sample. Only low-energy ion milling with liquid nitrogen cooling can result in the observation of a fully amorphous structure. Since the amorphous Cu–Zr-based alloy readily oxidizes in air atmosphere, exposure time in air atmosphere before TEM examination has a significant effect in observing the microstructure without contamination. This work was supported by the Creative Research Initiatives of the Korean Ministry of Science and Technology.