The infiltration of compacted cubic BN (cBN) with molten aluminum has been investigated as a potential route for a cheap and easy method of manufacturing cBN/metal composites. CBN compacts have been infiltrated with molten Al at a temperature between 670 and 800°C and pressure of 15MPa in vacuum. At these temperatures no pronounced interactions between hexagonal and cubic BN with Al was observed, allowing the complete infiltration of cBN with 12μm mean grain size. After infiltration at 800°C, the temperature was increased without pressure to convert aluminum into borides and AlN. The hardness of the resulting materials depends on the content of hexagonal, cubic BN and the rate of conversion of Al into borides and AlN. The infiltration height of less than 1mm obtained from infiltrating the 3μm cBN powder green compacts gave a hardness of 22.0±0.6GPa after heat treatment.Sintering of cubic boron nitride (cBN) requires an ultra-high pressure and high temperature. The application of high pressure and high temperature facilitates mass transfer and hence bonding between phases in cBN-based composites. Composite structures prepared by mixing powders of boron nitride and metal aluminum followed by compressing into pellets and sintering at various high temperatures and high pressures (∼5 The starting materials used were hexagonal Boron Nitride from H.C. Starck (average particle size 40 For the preparation of partially hexagonalized cBN, small quantities of 12 The tube furnace used during infiltration was a typical vertical tube furnace made by Thermopower Furnaces (TPF). This tube furnace allows the introduction of low uniaxial pressure (maximum 15 Both reacted and unreacted composite samples were examined using a PW 1710 Philips powder diffractometer using Cu Kα radiation (2 Infiltration of a hBN (average particle size 40 The results of the heat treatment at different temperatures of all samples are summarized in The XRD measurements of the samples S2 and S3 (which were prepared using different amounts of hBN in the starting material) reveal the presence of some hBN after infiltration and after heat treatment at different temperatures. It was observed (S2) that the intensities of the hBN peaks decrease from 1100 to 1200 There is no hBN present in sample S4 after heat treatment to a maximum of 1400 The micrograph of the polished surface for the sample S4-14-7 ( The results showed that the hBN samples could be successfully infiltrated at a temperature of 800 The infiltration of the preforms prepared from the 12 The lowest temperature at which Al reacted completely with BN after 1 Sample S2 was heat treated for 1 Sample S4 was prepared without any hBN in the starting powder. The Al reacted with cBN and no hBN was observed at temperatures up to 1400 The hardness of the materials obtained in this work strongly depends in one hand on the remaining cBN content in the samples, and on the other hand on the amount of remaining hBN. Therefore all samples containing hBN (S1, S2 and S3) exhibit low hardness ( cBN preforms were fully infiltrated with molten aluminum when the cBN used had a grain size of 12