The aim of this study is to obtain real-time information of flocculation processes in the fibre–cement manufacture through a soft sensor. This paper presents three different applied trials, carried out in different Hatschek machines, representing the main two industrial processes (air curing and autoclaving), in order to monitor the flocculant dosage changes, flocculant changes and the relationship between final product properties and flocculation. Three different anionic poly-acrylamides of low charge with different molecular weights were used as flocculants. The obtained results demonstrate that focused beam reflectance measurement (FBRM) is a valuable in-line sensor as well as a control and predictive process tool to monitor the flocculation processes in fibre–cement manufacture. Furthermore, a correlation between the sensor data (counts/s of particles between 50 and 86μm) and the final product properties (density) was established, thus minimising the production of fibre–cement outside the intended specifications to achieve a better control on the final product quality.Asbestos–cement is a valuable composite for construction materials because of its excellent cost effectiveness and durability. However, all uses of asbestos are expected to be banned in the future because asbestos may cause adverse health effects. For instance, the use of asbestos as a raw material for industry was forbidden in Europe some years ago and the moratoria for existing installations has finished in January 2005. Cost and reinforcement properties are considered while substituting the asbestos fibres. From the many possibilities that have been studied, the most widely used, at industrial scale, are the cellulose fibres from unbleached softwood Kraft pulp, either alone or in a mixture with synthetic fibres Asbestos is a naturally occurring fibrous silicate and the fibre’s size together with its chemical structure allows cement particles retention. However, the different chemical compositions and the hygroscopic character of the cellulose fibre pulp make the compatibility of the cellulose fibres with the cement much more complex, particularly when low fibre content is needed for economical and technological reasons. Therefore, it is necessary to consider the new aspects of manufacturing to improve the fibre/matrix bonding and the cement retention. Thus, in the Hatschek process it is necessary to use a suitable flocculant to produce the flocculation of cement particles on the fibres. Therefore, a good optimisation of the flocculation process is crucial in the industrial process because of its effect not only on mineral fines retention, but also on dewatering and formation (e.g. elephant skin appearance and delamination) and, as a consequence, on the overall efficiency of the machine. So this is a key issue for the industry and there is hardly any published literature available on it. This will specifically be useful when mills of the developing countries, with low research capabilities, change to fibre–cement production. The objective of this paper is to study the feasibility of using a focused beam reflectance measurement (FBRM) as a soft sensor to monitor flocculation, in-line in a Hatschek machine, during the manufacture of fibre–cement products and to predict the final product quality. Flocculation is, in general, a complex process that is difficult to control. It has been monitored in different industries by different means, without a common approach being agreed. The first methods were based on the different sedimentation rates of particles and agglomerates before and after flocculation. However, these methods give very limited information about the flocculation process The most important group of methods relies on the study of the electro-kinetic properties of the suspensions, which are the most common methods used in many industrial processes e.g. the paper industry. Colloidal titration, cationic demand and zeta potential measurements are used at laboratory scale and on-line, in a bypass stream from the process. In many cases, the sample has to be filtered or diluted prior to its analysis. Although these methods are useful, in many cases they are not applicable to this manufacture sector because of the high abrasion character of the fibre–cement suspensions (it will damage the Teflon measuring cells), of the colour and the high solid content of the samples Recently the use of a rheometer has also been proposed to monitor the flocculation process in some industries, e.g. to follow the flocculation of silica-filled rubbers In principle, the flocculation phenomenon is based on the agglomeration of suspended particles and on the increased size of the aggregates. Therefore, the consequences of agglomeration determine the performance of each flocculant. The change in floc size gives important information on the interaction between the flocculant and the suspended particles which is independent of the flocculation mechanism that takes places. Thus a pioneer method based on particle size measurements was proposed by the authors to optimise qualitatively and quantitatively the use of polymers in the paper industry Low-angle laser light scattering or laser diffraction has been used as a laboratory technique since 1960s. It is generally used both in the laboratory, when diluted suspensions are being analysed, and on-line, especially for dry-process control Ultrasonic attenuation has been applied in wet mineral processes since the 1970s. Recently it has been combined with gamma-ray transmission and sound velocity measurement for more accurate solid content compensation but the major limitation is its high sensitivity to entrained air bubbles Various optical image analysis methods based on particle counting have been proposed and applied to specific situations, but the wide size distributions present in some suspensions, such as fibre–cement, limits their use because the size number distribution will be heavily weighted towards fine particles. On the other hand, the need for transparency in the medium is another disadvantage of these techniques Another option is the use of spectral turbidity measurements, which can be done in situ, but these are quasi-real-time measurements Focused beam reflectance measurement (FBRM) probes that allow in situ measurement of chord length distribution over a wide range of solid concentrations have been available since 1990. Since then a number of studies have been performed in order to monitor particle systems in different areas as diverse as oceanography, pharmaceutics, mineral processing, effluent treatments, etc. Sengupta et al. used FBRM to study the flocculation of kaolin by a cationic polyacrylamide in a stirred beaker The authors have developed a methodology to study floc stability and resistance to shear forces, re-flocculation tendency and reversibility of the flocs. Furthermore, optimal dosage of any polymer and the associated flocculation mechanism and flocculation kinetics can be determined The objective of this work was to prove the suitability of using a FBRM probe for in-line flocculation monitoring in a Hatschek machine. In order to reach the objective three different trials were performed: Monitoring the effect of flocculant dosage changes. Monitoring the effect of flocculant change. Correlating sensor data with final product properties. In order to obtain results that could be applied to a wide range of industrial installations, the trials were performed in three different Hatschek machines using two different technologies (air cured and autoclave curing), with different mineral raw material compositions and using unbleached softwood pulp alone and in a mixture with poly-vinylalcohol (PVA) as reinforcing fibres. An FBRM M500P probe supplied by Lasentec The right selection of the probe location with respect to the full flow sheet of the process and the orientation inside the pipe is essential to obtain accurate data. It was decided to install the unit in a process pipe after flocculant addition but before it is being fed to the vat machine.  A set of preliminary tests was performed to check the adequacy of the probe location and its sensitivity to process changes. A cleaning sequence was defined in order to avoid window probe plugging. It comprised cleaning with pressurized water if any machine stopped for longer than 10 This trial was carried out in a Hatschek machine with four vats working at 60–65  In A few minutes after reducing the flocculant dosage to 420 This trial was carried out in a different production line with a similar Hatschek machine and the same raw material composition as in the first trial. As new flocculant an A-PAM2 with higher molecular weight (17  When the suspension behaviour is studied in greater detail it is also possible to monitor the counts per second evolution for different chord size ranges. As an example, The increase in flocculation reported by FBRM was also noticed in the production line since retention of fillers grew significantly during this period and machine productivity was improved. No quality problems were found in the final product from this trial. After the trial the mill used the new flocculant for several weeks without any production problems. In order to validate these results in other industrial cases, trials were performed with another flocculant change in another Hatschek machine using the same reinforcing fibre but in a different amount and with different mineral raw materials. The new flocculant had a much higher molecular weight and it was used to increase the dewatering rate of mineral sludge. Finally, after the flocculation process had been monitored by FBRM, the next step in the research was to focus on establishing the correlation between the sensor data and the final product properties. If this can be achieved in the future, the sensor could be used as a predictive control tool. Therefore, to probe the relationship between the sensor data and the final product properties, it was decided to install the probe during three different full weeks of machine operation in order to process sensor data to find correlations between the obtained FBRM values and the final product properties. These trials were carried out in a Hatschek machine with four vats working at a speed of 60–65 The steps followed to establish these correlations were: To find machine stable periods in which sensor data were processed and product properties were measured. To select statistics to correlate with a given parameter. To select an averaging method and data discrimination to have good correlations. These studies were applied to correlate the density of the fibre–cement sheet produced in the trial and measured 7 days after its production, as explained in EN494:1994 standard. Several sets of statistics as well as different averaging methods were used to find these correlations over different periods of stability in the measured data with the FBRM. Good correlations were found with the evolution of the counts per second cubic weighted in the interval from 50 to 86 Results show that flocculation has to be addressed in the manufacture of fibre–cement products to increase retention because of the low affinity between cellulose fibres and cement. Furthermore, the flocculant dosage has to be well optimised to avoid problems in machine productivity and product quality. Traditional measurement techniques used in other industries to control flocculation cannot be applied in this case because of the high abrasion, the high solid content and the colour of the fibre–cement suspensions. Furthermore, flocculation has to be monitored in-line to avoid the alteration of floc characteristics due to sample manipulation. The feasibility of using a focused beam reflectance measurement (FBRM) as a soft sensor to monitor flocculation, in-line in a Hatschek machine, during the manufacture of fibre–cement products and to predict the final product quality has been proved. FBRM provides useful information about the evolution of particle chord size over time, monitoring the flocculation process. It was possible to quantify the flocculation changes produced by both flocculant dosage and type of flocculant changes, for different furnish formulations. A good correlation between the sensor data and the density of the final product was obtained. This will allow the mill to predict product quality based on floc properties and to detect out of specification production in real time instead of waiting 7 days to get the product data. Thus, FBRM data can be used to control the flocculation process and as an alarm sensor to predict quality problems related to low density values. The authors want to express their gratitude to Uralita S.A. for sponsoring this project. We are grateful for technical discussions with Jose M