A previous study conducted by the authors introduced a novel process for atmospheric pyrite oxidation with Lewatit® AF 5, a micro/mesoporous carbonaceous bead. This paper presents a parameters study of the atmospheric oxidation of the AF 5 catalysed pyrite oxidation process, promoting maximum pyrite oxidation and maximizing the elemental sulphur generation. Tests were conducted in 2 L jacketed reactors with controlled conditions. The study consisted of multiple tests investigating the effect of temperature (75, 80, 85 and 90 °C), initial sulphuric acid concentration (0.25, 0.5 and 1.0 M), initial ferric concentration (0, 1, 5 and 10 g/L), pyrite concentrate to catalyst mass ratio (4:1, 2:1, 1:1 and 1:2), and test slurry solid pulp density (5, 10 and 20 wt%) on the atmospheric leaching of a pyrite concentrate assisted by AF 5. The study indicated that the most effective parameters in the pyrite oxidation are the test temperature and concentrate to catalyst mass ratio. The best tests in terms of overall pyrite oxidation and elemental sulphur production were those with a 1:2 concentrate to catalyst ratio at 90 °C. These tests had an average of 96.2% overall pyrite oxidation and an elemental sulphur yield on average of 51.0%. Increasing temperature from 75 to 90 °C improved overall pyrite oxidation from 71.9 to 93.6%, however elemental sulphur yields of approximately 46.3% were experienced at temperatures below 90 °C versus 43.3% at 90 °C. Other trends experienced in the investigation of the various parameters will be further discussed.Pyrite is of constant importance to the gold extraction industry due to its affinity with high gold grades, sometimes up to 132 g/t ( Elemental sulphur and sulphate have been identified to be the stable products when ferric ions act as the oxidant in pyrite oxidation ( It is also important to note that in the presence of oxygen, the ferrous ions generated in Eq. Singer and Stumm reported that the rate of pyrite oxidation is controlled by the oxidation of ferrous ions to ferric ions ( Previous research by the authors studied the impact of two carbon catalysts (granular coconut shell based activated carbon and AF 5) on the atmospheric oxidation of pyrite. The activated carbon and Lewatit® AF 5 (AF 5), a micro/mesoporous carbonaceous bead, improved the overall pyrite oxidation over the course of 96 h from approximately 60 to 100% and 96%, respectively. The catalysts also resulted in elemental sulphur yields improving from approximately 22.5% without catalyst addition to approximately 63.4% with activated carbon and 69.3% with AF 5 addition. AF 5 was also observed to retain close to 100% of the elemental sulphur generated on and in the beads, rather than only 40% sulphur retention with the activated carbon, and had superior mechanical properties leading to negligible carbon losses ( The use of activated carbon in the assistance of sulphide leaching and oxidation is not a new procedure. In the past, activated carbon has been incorporated as a catalyst to increase sulphide oxidation, and much of the research has been conducted on chalcopyrite, however the inclusion of activated carbon to promote pyrite oxidation as well as elemental sulphur generation/retention is not thoroughly researched. The inclusion of AF 5 acting as a pyrite oxidation and sulphur generation promoter as well as an active sulphur sink is an innovative concept that should be able to provide practical application value. AF 5's ability to reduce sulphate yield, while removing the issue of elemental sulphur being present in the residue causing downstream gold leaching issues, and its mechanical superiority over standard activated carbon provide good reason for this process to be considered for industrial application. In order for this to occur however, a more in-depth study needs to be conducted on the effect of various operating parameters on the AF 5 catalysed atmospheric oxidation of pyrite. This paper aims to provide the study of the various operating parameters and the impact they have on atmospheric pyrite oxidation in the presence of AF 5. Tests were performed on a pyrite leach feed concentrate with a P The oxidative pre-treatment tests were conducted in 2 L round-bottomed glass-kettle batch reactors. The operating parameters for each test are outlined in Tests were conducted for a total of 96 h, and 10 mL liquid samples for kinetic testing were drawn at 0, 1, 3, 6, 12, 24, 36, 48, 60, 72, 84 and 96 h. Each sample was subjected to centrifuging in a Hermle Labnet Z 206 A centrifuge at 6000 rpm for 3 min, aiding in solid-liquid separation, followed by filtering via a 0.45 μm Sarstedt non-pyrogenic sterile syringe filter. The remaining solids were returned to the reactor along with 10 mL of stock solution replacing what was removed during sampling. Kinetic samples were subjected to ferrous-ferric ion titration as outlined in the After 96 h, the reactors were decommissioned and solid-liquid separation was performed using a pressure filter. The filtrate, as well as two 1 L 0.3 M H The results of solid analysis during the investigation are summarized in The impact of temperature on the oxidation of pyrite without the addition of AF 5 was investigated by comparing atmospheric tests operated at 75, 80, 85, and 90 °C. Pyrite oxidation determined by kinetic sample results represented in Temperature has a drastic effect on the overall oxidation of pyrite, demonstrated in   Three initial concentrations of sulphuric acid were studied in this investigation, 1.0, 0.5 and 0.25 M. Acid concentration did affect the concentrations of ferrous and ferric species present in solution outlined in Fig. S1 A and B presented in the Supplementary Material. It is noticeable that ferrous concentrations were lower throughout the oxidation tests at lower acid concentrations. Fig. S1 A indicates that at the test with 0.25 M starting acid the ferrous concentration reached a plateau between 36 and 48 h and began to decrease. This same effect occurred at 48 to 60 h in the 0.5 and 1.0 M acid tests. After 96 h of testing approximately 8.6, 7.3 and 6.2 g/L of ferrous ions are present in the test solutions of the tests with 1.0, 0.5 and 0.25 M acid, respectively. The ferric species concentration depicted in Fig. S1 B show that with reduced acidity, increased ferric iron is present and that by the end of the 96 h, approximately 9.2 g/L of iron present in solution is in the ferric form in the 0.25 M acid test followed by approximately 8.2 g/L in the 0.5 M acid test and roughly 7.0 g/L in the 1.0 M acid test. This indicates that the acidity did not impact how much iron was leached into the solution during the oxidation tests. The total amount of iron in the solution was approximately 15.6, 15.5, and 15.4 g/L for the tests with 1.0, 0.5 and 0.25 M acid in the solutions, respectively, with approximately 5 g/L attributed to the initial ferric added to the lixiviant before the oxidation process. It is evident, however, that the test solution acidity does impact the ratio of the ferric and ferrous ions in the solution, with less acidic solutions seeming to promote ferric iron generation in the presence of AF 5. This observation can be explained by dissolved oxygen trends outlined in literature. The ORP measured versus SHE shown in Fig. S1 C, depicts that although the test with 0.25 M acid had a higher ferric to ferrous ratio than the tests with 0.5 and 1.0 M acid, it had the lowest ORP values measured. Fig. S1 C illustrates that ORP increased with increasing the acidity in the presence of AF 5. A potential explanation for this increase in ORP is that the increase in H Previous research involving the pressure oxidation of pyrite indicated that increasing sulphuric acid concentration up to 1.0 M promotes higher elemental sulphur generation. In that study, the sulphate yields decreased from 88.9% at 0.01 M sulphuric acid, to 80.0% at 0.1 M, to 72.1% at 0.2 M, to 68.9% at 0.4 M, to 66.9% at 1.0 M, and to 63.7% at 3.0 M sulphuric acid ( Initial concentrations of 0, 1, 5 and 10 g/L ferric ions in the lixiviant were investigated. Kinetic results, presented in The impact of initial ferric concentration on pyrite oxidation kinetics is evident in Fig. S2 A and B. As initial ferric concentration is increased the maximum concentrations of ferrous species represented in Fig. S2 A occurred earlier in the tests. The 10 g/L initial ferric test reached a maximum concentration of ferrous species of approximately 14.0 g/L at 36 h, this was followed by the 5 g/L test which reached its peak of 10.4 g/L ferrous species at 48 to 60 h. The 1 g/L and 0 g/L tests reached peak values at 72 to 84 h of 8.2 and 7.2 g/L respectively. The ferrous peak reached at 36 h followed by a sharp decrease in ferrous concentration suggesting that in the 10 g/L initial ferric test, pyrite oxidation is occurring quickly and after 36 h of testing oxidation is slowing. This is further justified by Fig. S2 B where after 36 h a sharp increase in the ferric concentration is observed. The constant rate of ferric concentration increase observed between 70 and 96 h in the 10 g/L test suggests that the pyrite oxidation process is very close to completion. The same trends observed in Fig. S2 A and B for the 10 g/L test present for the 5 g/L test however they are delayed approximately 12 to 24 h, indicating reduced oxidation kinetics. These trends are even further delayed in the 0 and 1 g/L tests indicating the slowest kinetics of the four tests. The 0 and 1 g/L tests reach a peak ferrous concentration at the same point of the oxidation test, suggesting similar reaction kinetics, however the 1 g/L ferrous concentration decreases more rapidly after 84 h than the 0 g/L test with a steeper increase in ferric at the same point, implying further pyrite oxidation. These results agree with the pyrite oxidation results previously discussed, and it can be concluded that in the presence of AF 5, increasing the initial ferric concentration increases the pyrite oxidation kinetics. Although tests showed that as initial ferric concentration is increased the pyrite oxidation also increases, the elemental sulphur production remains relatively stable as ferric concentration was increased from 0 g/L to 10 g/L, shown in Four weight ratios of concentrate to AF 5 (4:1, 2:1, 1:1 and 1:2) were tested in order to determine the impact that the ratio of concentrate to AF 5 has on both pyrite oxidation kinetics and elemental sulphur yield. The kinetic solution analysis outlined in The impact that the concentrate to AF 5 ratio has on the pyrite oxidation kinetics can be seen clearly in Fig. S3 A. As the AF 5 content increases, the time necessary to reach peak ferrous species concentration decreases. When a concentrate to AF 5 ratio of 4:1 is applied, the peak ferrous concentration occurs at 60 to 72 h. This peak occurs at 60 h with a 2:1 ratio, and slightly earlier at 48 to 60 h with the 1:1 ratio. There is a distinct ferrous concentration peak at 48 h when a 1:2 ratio is used. It is important to recognize that the initial pulp densities of the tests were maintained throughout this suite of tests, and as a result, the most concentrate was used in the 4:1 test and the least was used in the 1:2 test, which explains the reason for much higher measured ferrous concentrations in the tests with higher concentrate to AF 5 ratios. Decreasing the concentrate to AF 5 ratio not only improved the overall pyrite oxidation kinetics and efficiency, but also promoted an increased elemental sulphur generation. As presented in Three densities were investigated, 5, 10 and 20%, resulting in 95.4, 84.9 and 76.6% pyrite oxidation based on kinetic sample analysis portrayed in The ferrous species concentration presented in Fig. S4 A provides a better understanding of how pulp density impacts the oxidation kinetics. It becomes evident that as pulp density increases, oxidation kinetics slow, as the maximum ferrous concentrations are reached at 48 h, 48 to 60 h and 60 h for 5, 10 and 20% pulp densities, respectively. It is clear that as pulp density increases, the pyrite oxidation and its oxidation kinetics decrease, however, the elemental sulphur yield increases only slightly. The goal of this study was to effectively oxidize pyrite while promoting the maximum elemental sulphur generation. The study of the oxidative pyrite leaching only by the aqueous kinetics samples is difficult, particularly because a proportion of aqueous iron can always precipitate into the residue, thus the iron analysis of the residue would misrepresent the total pyrite oxidation rate. The removal of solid kinetics samples from the leach slurry is also challenging as the kinetics samples hardly will be representative samples of the solids. Also, by taking several solid kinetics samples the pyrite mass available for the oxidation in the test will change during the test. Realizing the above challenges, in order to achieve a better understanding of the reaction retention time, four tests with identical test parameters were conducted for the duration of 24, 48, 72 and 96 h. The parameters employed for these tests were a temperature of 85 °C, a concentrate to AF 5 ratio of 1:2, an initial sulphuric acid concentration of 1.0 M, an initial ferric concentration of 5 g/L, a pulp density of 10% and an oxygen flowrate of 0.2 L/min. The four lines presented in Analyzing the elemental sulphur yields of the four separate solid residues provides interesting insight to the formation of elemental sulphur over each 24 h interval of the 96 h of oxidation. Elemental sulphur yields were 64.0, 56.1, 50.0 and 50.8% over the course of 24, 48, 72 and 96 h, respectively, which means that a greater ratio of sulphur is generated in the first 24 h and the ratio continuously reduces every 24 h interval after that. From data presented in Eqs. The solid residues were also subjected to SEM and XRD analysis, and spent AF 5 from the four tests were analyzed via SEM analysis. The analysis of AF 5 via SEM and EDS sulphur mapping, displayed in The objective of this study was to learn how various parameters effect atmospheric pyrite oxidation in the presence of AF 5. Pyrite oxidation with AF 5 enhanced the oxidation kinetics by approximately 25 to 40% over the tests without catalysts at the same conditions (considering the temperature tests and previous work conducted by Temperature has a drastic impact on pyrite oxidation with and without catalyst, however it does not strongly impact elemental sulphur yields. Pyrite oxidation increased with temperature between 75 and 90 °C in the presence of AF 5. Although elemental sulphur yields did not indicate drastic differences, the highest yields were experienced at 85 °C, with lower temperatures achieving higher yields than the test at 90 °C. Initial acid concentration did not greatly impact pyrite oxidation in the presence of AF 5, indicating a slight increase (3.7%) in the oxidation by decreasing acid concentration from 1.0 to 0.5 M. The test with 0.25 M test resulted in a higher oxidation rate than the tests with 1.0 M initial acid, yet lower than the test with 0.5 M initial acid. The highest elemental sulphur yield was obtained in the test with 1.0 M acid (43.3%). Decreasing the initial acid concentration seemed to reduce the AF 5`s ability to promote elemental sulphur yield as yields were similar in the tests with 0.5 and 0.25 M initial acid. Increasing the initial ferric ion concentration from 0 to 10 g/L indicated an increase in the pyrite oxidation from 84.6 to 97.1%, however the elemental sulphur yield remained relatively constant ranging between 42.4 and 43.4%. The test with 5% pulp density achieved the highest pyrite oxidation of about 96.0%, where the tests with 10 and 20% pulp density resulted in 88.9 and 89.0% pyrite oxidation, respectively. The mass ratio of concentrate to AF 5 was shown to have the largest impact on the elemental sulphur yield of the process, with the highest yields across all testing achieved at a concentrate to AF 5 ratio of 1:2. Basically the more catalyst that is introduced to the leach slurry, the more functional groups that not only benefit pyrite oxidation but also the elemental sulphur formation are introduced into the system. The retention time tests indicated that the majority of elemental sulphur is generated during the first 24 h of pyrite oxidation, when AF 5 is present in solution. This is interesting and could indicate that replenishing the system with fresh AF 5 could promote higher elemental sulphur yields. This should be further investigated. The authors acknowledge the financial support of the  Supplementary data to this article can be found online at