The Symposium organised by the guest editors as part of the Division of Geochemistry programme at the Spring 2002 American Chemical Society meeting in Orlando included 17 contributions encompassing advances in pyrolysis/thermochemolysis instrumentation and methodology; hydrous pyrolysis, hydropyrolysis, thermochemolysis; characterization of recalcitrant geo-macromolecules; simulating natural thermal maturation of organic matter and determining petroleum generation kinetic parameters. As well as the USA, the Symposium attracted participants from Europe and Australia. This edition includes a selection of five papers presented at the Symposium. Although the number is relatively small, the topics encompass off and on-line pyrolysis procedures, thermochemolysis and hydropyrolysis, each of which has played, and will continue to play, an important role in organic geochemistry in terms of understanding petroleum formation and improving the structural characterization of natural and sedimentary organic matter, both for fingerprinting and providing bulk structural parameters. The paper by Burkle-Vitzthum et al. describes the effect of decylbenzene on the thermal degradation of The paper by Pedentchouk et al. considers sources of alkyl benzenes in lower Cretaceous lacustrine source rocks. Molecular biomarker and compound-specific carbon isotope data from off-line pyrolyzates containing 1,2,3,4-tetramethylbenzene and 1,2,4-trimethylbenzene are reported for samples from the Gabon and Kwanza Basins in West Africa. The results indicate that off-line pyrolyzates from lacustrine source rocks in these basins contain 1,2,3,4-tetramethylbenzene and 1,2,4-trimethylbenzene, both of which have two distinct sources: isotopically depleted diagenetic products of β-carotene sourced by lacustrine algae and isotopically enriched diagenetic products of isorenieratene derived from green sulfur bacteria. The paper by Joll et al. compares a range of tetramethylammonium (TMA) salt reagents for off-line thermochemolysis of natural aquatic organic matter. Similar distributions and abundances of products were observed from thermochemolysis of an aquatic sample with the most alkaline reagents, tetramethylammonmium hydroxide (TMAH) in methanol and TMACO The final two papers cover aspects of hydropyrolysis (pyrolysis assisted by high hydrogen pressures), a technique that gives higher product yields with less structural alteration than conventional pyrolysis at low pressures. The contribution by Beramendi-Orosco et al. describes how hydropyrolysis is a potentially rapid procedure for obtaining lignin-enriched residues from wood for either simply estimating lignin content or for performing stable isotope ratio measurements. At 300 and 350 °C, the extents of conversion achieved for cellulose were 88 and 95%, respectively, suggesting that highly lignin-enriched residues should be obtained for wood samples. This was confirmed by solid-state The contribution by Meredith et al. describes the development of an experimental procedure for trapping the product oils from hydropyrolysis (hydropyrolysates) on silica to facilitate more convenient recovery than conventional collection and to allow analysis by thermal desorption-GC–MS without any prior work-up. The quantitative recovery of hydrocarbons from a light crude oil desorbed from silica under hydropyrolysis conditions demonstrates that no significant loss of the high molecular weight We would like to thank the reviewers of the papers for their cooperation and the Petroleum Research Fund of the American Chemical Society for a travel award that assisted overseas participants in the Symposium.