Haul road pavement design is often completed through application of axisymmetric linear-elastic modelling. This may be implemented either through the derivation of cover curves employing the California Bearing Ratio, or within linear-elastic modelling completed by commercially available software. In recent years, a significant amount of research has been conducted on the application of the Finite Element Method for the analysis of pavements. A study to determine the accuracy of predicted haul road pavement response made by various linear-elastic and Finite Element Methods was undertaken. The deflected pavement surface profile was measured for three haul road pavement sections utilising terrestrial laser scanning, which also allowed measurement of the tyre/pavement contact geometry. Laboratory testing was completed to define the stiffness of each material through triaxial testing. Results of the field and laboratory testing allowed modelling via each method. Only minor variations were observed between the various linear-elastic modelling approaches that were investigated. In general, the Finite Element Method was found to produce the most accurate predictions. These findings provide the impetus for further investigation and the use of Finite Element Method for haul road pavement modelling.Mining and mineral processing often requires significant energy consumption. In 2012, 8.5% of the total energy consumed in Australia was consumed within the mining sector Haul roads are critical assets in the mining of mineral ores, but typically employ unsurfaced flexible pavements designed with empirical techniques that often rely heavily on local experience Flexible pavement design involves a multifaceted soil/tyre interaction problem, with the added complexity of interdependent material models. Unbound Granular Material (UGM) is the term used to describe materials that are granular in nature and do not have any internal binding action, which typically includes natural gravels and crushed rock Design techniques for unbound, flexible pavements have evolved in recent decades. For heavy wheel loads, the method most commonly applied is the S77-1 method Detailed pavement modelling is available through the use of multi-layered linear-elastic theory and simulation with the Finite Element Method (FEM). Linear-elastic modelling is typically completed with software such as CIRCLY FEM simulation analyses the mechanical response of a pavement structure to a prescribed loading. Within this process, a constitutive model relating soil response and material behaviour is required. This is commonly achieved with either of two characterisations; linear-elastic or nonlinear behaviour. Although a linear-elastic characterisation provides simplicity, it is incapable of modelling the nonlinear stress-dependency response of granular materials. The effect of nonlinear behaviour of granular materials has been investigated extensively The following benefits of FEM highlighted by Sukumaran et al. two and three-dimensional calculation static, harmonic and transient dynamic simulated loading interface modelling with friction. Lastly, linear-elastic modelling techniques can predict fictitious vertical tensile strains The field testing involved three different pavement sections on top of a mine waste dump. Each pavement section was selected as it had experienced differing volumes of traffic. Section ‘Introduction’ was within the access haul road onto the waste dump. Section ‘Materials and methods’ is likely to have experienced around half the traffic of Section ‘Introduction’, as it appeared to have been used to access approximately one-half of the waste dump. Section ‘Results and discussion’ was not within a designated access area and as such was expected to have experienced significantly less traffic than the other sections. Pavement surface deflection under static wheel loading from a Komatsu 830E haul truck was measured via the use of a Leica C10 terrestrial laser scanner Tyre/pavement contact geometry was also able to be determined from analysis of the laser scans. There was minor variation in the dimensions measured for each pavement section with all dimensions varying by between 5% and 7%. The average dimensions of an unloaded rear axle dual-wheel gear (half a rear-axle) was 2.156 m transversely (‘M’ in Soil samples were collected from each pavement section and were subjected to a regime of laboratory testing. Particle size distribution testing was completed in accordance with AS 1289.3.6.1, which limited the maximum particle size to 37.5 mm. It is possible much larger particles could have been present within the pavement at the deflection testing sites, especially at depth, as large particles near the surface would likely have been removed to assist in forming a smooth pavement surface. To facilitate triaxial testing, Maximum Modified Dry Density/Optimum Moisture Content (MDD/OMC) testing was completed in accordance with AS 1289.5.2.1. Triaxial testing with monotonic loading was completed on samples at approximately 95% MDD and OMC with the exception of the sample taken from Section ‘Introduction’, which was preserved in a sealed state for a number of weeks due to machine malfunction at the commencement of testing. This testing followed the approach presented in AS 1289.6.4.1, however, 100 mm diameter samples were utilised in lieu of the ability to prepare an intact 67 mm diameter sample. The aspect ratio was maintained at two, with a sample height of 200 mm utilised throughout. Sample preparation followed the procedure of the Austroads Testing Methodology AG:PT/T053 The pavement deflected profile under a Komatsu 830E haul truck load was calculated for the contact geometry and pavement structure shown in Deflection was calculated by hand following the method employing Boussinesq’s theorem, as detailed by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers The method above has been expanded by linear-elastic software, such as HIPAVE The HIPAVE software includes a sub-layering technique that approximates nonlinearity of unbound granular materials, that was originally reported by Barker and Brabston The following provides some background and basis to the FEM. This method has been applied to flexible pavements as explained in detail in Ghadimi et al. For elastic behaviour, the mechanical response of a medium can be calculated from Eq. FEM utilises an incremental approach, whereby the calculated strain in the current increment is used to estimate stress for the subsequent increment. Therefore, Eq. Incorporation of the constitutive model is possible through application of the Jacobian matrix (D), which defines the relationship between strain and stress vectors. Within ABAQUS the constitutive matrix is computed incrementally through Eq. ABAQUS enables the user to update the constitutive matrix for specific problems through the modification of the D matrix  I is the identity tensor G is the shear modulus  Under an isotropic assumption Eq. In linear-elastic materials, constant values for G and λ are assumed, where both are functions of stress invariants for nonlinear materials. This is represented by Eq. Within application of the above method, M FEM also involves decisions relating to the geometry and mesh of the pavement model. Ghadimi et al. FEM was conducted with use of the program ABAQUS. The model geometry at the surface of the pavement is presented in The unbound granular material from which the pavements were constructed was modelled as nonlinear. The approach previously proposed by Kim and Tutumluer Finally, as stated previously, eight node elements have been used throughout this analysis. A minimum mesh size of 40 × 30 × 30 cm was utilised near the load centres. The mesh analysis conducted presented results that were found to be consistent with 70200 C3D8R elements. A finer mesh was trialled and found to have an immaterial impact on the calculated pavement response. Throughout the remainder of the paper, reference is made to maximum deflection and deflection at the centre of the rear axle. These terms refer to the deflection directly under the centroid of the contact area of one of the two dual wheel-gears present on the rear axle (Point A on Deflection at any point was reported to the nearest 0.1 mm for all measured and modelled results. As noted previously, the deflection measuring technique was only validated to an accuracy of 0.5 mm, which produced some uncertainty with the results. This was overcome by testing the correlations between the predicted pavement deflection and the measured pavement deflection with the results stated an accuracy of 0.5 mm. A statistical analysis of the measured and modelled deflection was completed. Firstly, the mean variance between the measured and modelled maximum deflection was calculated for each modelling method. Secondly, the correlation coefficient between the six measured and predicted values of deflection and curvature values listed below was calculated for each modelling method. This statistic provides insight into the consistency of the modelling method in predicting the pavement response and ensuring that the calculated mean variance was not significantly influenced by outliers. The correlation coefficient between measured and predicted values for each of the following was then calculated for each of the six load scenarios. maximum deflection deflection at the centre of the rear axle transverse curvature longitudinal curvature Comparison of results relating to maximum deflection was considered to be the primary indicator of accuracy for each modelling method, as it was expected to be the most powerful indicator of the maximum vertical subgrade strain, which is typically used to estimate the life of a flexible pavement. Secondly, the results relating to curvature provided further insight into the accuracy of the modelling methods. A comparison of the measured tyre/pavement contact geometry and how this was adopted for each modelling method is presented in The laser scanning techniques described in Section ‘Field testing’ produced the maximum deflection values in Particle size distribution testing showed the material from the three sections to be well graded or poorly graded gravels in accordance with AS 1726 (Standards Australia, 1993), with 2–4% passing the 0.075 mm sieve. As presented in The constitutive models derived from monotonic triaxial tests are presented in   The maximum deflection at the centre of the rear axle for Section ‘Introduction’ was not predicted well by any of the modelling methods, see The over-prediction of the measured longitudinal curvature for Section ‘Materials and methods’ is replicated for the results relating to the loaded truck, see In order to summarise the results presented above, a statistical analysis was undertaken.  Simply comparing the mean variance between the measured and predicted deflection and curvature for each method may be misleading. For example, a large overestimate of the maximum deflection for one section may be offset be a large underestimation for another section. Consequently, the analysis outlined in Section ‘Analysis and Comparison of Results’ has been completed, with the results presented in Some caution needs to be used in considering the various results relating to curvature presented above, due to the noted validated accuracy of the measurement via laser scanning. However, it appears that FEM (ABAQUS) produces the most accurate estimates of pavement deflection directly under the centre of the rear axle of the haul truck, as presented in The results above show that FEM is able to most accurately predict the surface deflection of a haul road with a single-layer unbound pavement. It appears likely that FEM is also able to more accurately predict the deflection and compressive strains generated in the sub-grade, which govern the design curves developed via the S77-1 method and the damage models adopted in linear-elastic software used for mechanistic-empirical design. Although the utilisation of FEM for haul road pavement design would provide greater demands on testing for pavement and sub-grade material characterisation and the designer’s time, it should be considered in the future. Based on the inaccuracy of the methods considered in this study it seems likely that pavements designed with cover curves generated by the S77-1 method or through linear-elastic software will perform unsatisfactorily in at least some instances. Given that a miner’s output relies, at least to some extent, on the condition of the site’s haul roads, excessive maintenance requirements and/or loss of production has the potential to impact the profitability of a mining operation. The results of this paper are focussed on a single pavement layer above the sub-grade. It is recommended that multi-layer pavements are investigated in the future, as it is possible that FEM is better able to account for interaction between multiple layers. Lastly, linear-elastic modelling is typically required for the incorporation of stabilised pavement layers in haul road pavement design. FEM may provide superior prediction of the response of a stabilised pavement and should be investigated further in the future. From the results the following conclusions are made: FEM completed with ABAQUS has been shown to produce more accurate predictions of the measured deflection and curvature than any of the linear-elastic modelling methods trialled in this study. The primary difference between the two modelling approaches is the nonlinear constitutive relationship in the FEM modelling. Consequently, it appears that the inclusion of nonlinearity produces a more accurate prediction of haul road pavement response to haul truck loading. Therefore, it is suggested that FEM is the most proficient of the methods trialled for predicting pavement response. The predicted pavement deflections calculated with the S77-1 method produced similar results to the HIPAVE analysis. Therefore, it appears that the haul road pavement designs generated through the use of linear-elastic software are unlikely to vary significantly from designs produced by the S77-1 method. One caveat to this recommendation is when stabilised, bound or coarse rock layers are included within the pavement design, which are not able to be included in the S77-1 method. The approximation of nonlinearity of pavement material behaviour through the sub-layering technique proposed by Barker et al. The following recommendations are made: The above study should be repeated with measurement of pavement strain and/or deflection to assess the efficacy of each modelling method in greater detail. The CBR curves derived with the S77-1 method may be used for the design of unbound haul road pavements composed solely of UGMs in lieu of linear-elastic software which adopt sub-grade damage models derived from the S77-1 method. Benefits of the S77-1 method include simplicity in determining material input parameters (CBR values for each layer), reduced calculation time and repeatability once cover curves have been derived for a given design vehicle. Further investigation of the S77-1 method should be undertaken for haul roads to determine if the linear-elastic analysis underpinning the resulting design curves adequately predicts measured deflection. Areas for further research include investigation of the accuracy of constants included in the method to approximate wheel load interaction and the accuracy of the deflections calculated at depth that govern the pavement thickness. Whilst nonlinear 3D FEM modelling has generally produced more accurate predictions of the measured pavement deflections, greater accuracy was achieved by linear-elastic methods for isolated cases. Such cases should be investigated further to determine if nonlinear constitutive material models included in the FEM contributed to the poor accuracy in such cases. At present these is no pavement failure theory for nonlinear 3D FEM modelling and as such efforts should be made to develop a failure theory in order to utilise the FEM method for haul road pavement design in the future. FEM should be further investigated and compared to linear-elastic modelling for designs incorporating: Multi-layered haul road pavements Haul truck wheel-load interaction Haul road pavements with modified/stabilised layers The authors wish to acknowledge Rio Tinto for granting access to the mine site and haul truck used in the completion of the research detailed in this paper.