Ceramic-magnetic nanoparticles (CMNPs) are attracting attention due to their various applications, especially in biomedical industries. Among them, spinel ferrite CMNPs have received considerable deliberations among different spinel metal oxides due to their fascinating characteristics. Spinel ferrite CMNPs are used for enhancement of the applicability of CMNPs without affecting the intrinsic advantages of iron oxide CMNPs. Spinel ferrites with doping agents have useful electrical and magnetic properties in various fields. Moreover, the replacement of metallic atoms in ferrites is promising to manipulate physical characteristics and improve their performance. Among different spinel ferrites, CoFe2O4 nanoparticles are the most investigated CMNPs. Furthermore, they are used as permanent magnets, magnetic recorders in high-density and micro-wave devices, and magnetic fluids. This study reviews the CoFe2O4 nanoparticles doped with various elements and their applications in various fields.Nowadays, magnetic metal oxide nanoparticles possess some magnetic characteristics, which make them as proper materials applicable in the sensor field. Furthermore, these magnetic nanoparticles (CMNPs) have attracted attention in the field of biomedicine, since there is a possibility of manipulation of the particulates with applying an external magnetic field [ Ferrites with superparamagnetic behavior, are currently used in drug delivery, microwave devices, magnetic imaging, and magnetic data storage [ Considering the above-mentioned applications and properties for cobalt ferrite, this study aims to firstly report about magnetic metal oxides (MMOs), magnetic nanoparticles (MNPs) as well as cobalt ferrite CMNPs. In the following, the most important magnetic properties and synthesis methods (i.e., co-precipitation, hydrothermal, microemulsion, sol-gel) of CMNPs are presented. Finally, a review of the utilization and effect of various dopants on the properties of cobalt ferrite nanoparticles is performed. Magnetic oxides have the most critical role in expanding the applications in emerging technologies because of their low magnetic losses, high resistivity, low dielectric losses, corrosion resistance, and remarkable mechanical characteristics [ Existing of numerous atoms on the nanoparticles' surface causes to change in their behavior compared to the bulk oxide. The difference in surface atomic spins in comparison with the bulk ions is due to the difference in the oxidation state. Spinel ferrites within the nano range have been investigated widely, due to narrow size distribution and smaller size of particles possessing a larger surface area [ Recently, ferrites as a category of ferrimagnetic ceramics are known as promising materials due to their magnetic properties and their different applications in electric, optoelectric devices, as well as having significant electrical resistance with low losses of eddy current [ Cobalt and iron oxides are known as highly attractive magnetic materials among other oxides due to their specific properties and low-cost production. By using cobalt ferrite CMNPs as an alternative to Fe Various techniques such as chemical substitution, heat treatment, sudden cooling, etc. have been applied to change properties of cobalt ferrite [ The origin of the word “hysteresis” is from the Greek language meaning “to lag behind” [ Furthermore, when a material with magnetic properties is placed in a magnetic field, its magnetization (M) increases rapidly. As the magnitude of the magnetic field (H) increases, the magnetization reaches its maximum value called saturation magnetization (M According to Hamiltonian, 3D isolated ion has spherical symmetry. However, ion is influenced by the crystal field created by the electron interactions between different ions and their surrounded atoms, when resides in a crystal. The degeneracy of orbital is completely disappeared when a strong crystal field exists, and an orbital singlet is in the ground state. In the case of a strong crystal field, the total magnetic moment of the ion is only affected by spin and is completely decoupled from the crystal lattice, i.e., there is no magnetic anisotropy within the system. On the other hand, in the case of low crystal field, the spin-orbit interaction hinders the orbital momentum quenching, which leads to couple the spin to the lattice resulting in a magnetic anisotropy establishment. The spin-orbit interaction is proportional to the total orbital momentum operator (L) and total spin operator (S). Regarding the d-shell electrons' Coulomb interactions, the crystal field in 3D ionic compounds with cubic structure is a small perturbation (of 10 Various techniques of preparation such as microwave [ Chemical synthesis is the most prevalent method used for the preparation of NPs due to the high capacity of CMNPs production in a reasonable amount and cost in a rather straightforward way. In this regard, co-precipitation [ Hydrothermal reactions are carried out in aqueous phase with high-pressure reactors or autoclaves in which the pressure mostly is higher than 125 atm and the temperature rise to 200 °C. Water acts as a reactant in these conditions that results in acceleration of the hydrolysis reaction kinetics with the increase in the precursor materials solubility showing more considerable mobility due to the lower viscosity of water and also leads to the increase in the uniformity, crystallinity, and faster Ostwald ripening of the production (magnetic nanoparticles). This method is used to synthesis various CMNPs with high crystallinity and water solubility. Generally, this technique produces water-dispersible CMNPs with high magnetic response and crystallinity, but sometimes the particle size of the CMNPs is too large for special applications and causes problems due to colloidal stability. Moreover, the reaction time tends to become longer. Therefore, It is not easy to control the aspect ratio and shape of the synthesized magnetic nanoparticles [ A microemulsion is a colloidal suspension that is thermodynamically stable. In this method, two immiscible liquids exist in a single phase by helping of surfactants. The water/oil is one of the microemulsion solvents through which the solution is prepared by the immiscible solvents dispersion. The surfactant is used for stabilization of the solution (e.g. dodecyl sulfate). Generally, the aqueous phase, which consists of the magnetic nanoparticles precursor inside, is dispersed as 1–100 nm nanodroplets. Surfactant molecules surround aqueous droplets and form the so-called “micelles” acting as nanoreactors. Subsequently, magnetic nanoparticles are formed inside the micelles, which confine the particles and restrict the nucleation of particles, their growth, and agglomeration. Finally, for precipitation of the nanoparticles, a second emulsion is added to the solution. The advantage of this procedure is the easy CMNPs size control by the size modulating of the particles to small nanometer size. However, the shape and size distribution by the microemulsion method is in a wide range. In comparison with other methods, this synthesis method of CMNPs has low yield with a narrow working window. However, various researches have shown good results which are promising for scaling up the process for an environmental or economic plant [ Sol-gel route, schematically illustrated in Cobalt ferrite as a member of category of ferrites shows excellent magnetic, catalytic, and electric properties known as oxides of mixed metals with the formula of MFe In an FCC lattice built by oxygen ions, metal ions occupy the octahedral [B] or tetrahedral (A) sites. The oxides can have a normal spinel or reverse spinel structure. In normal spinel with the formula ( In cobalt ferrite structure, Fe Spins in B sites have ferromagnetic alignment and antiferromagnetic alignment for Fe The substitution of a suitable amount of dopant in the right site can lead to the enhancement of the magnetic moment ( Chakradhary et al. [ Maaz et al. [ Madhukara Naik et al. [ Omelyanchik et al. [ Singh et al. [ Srinivasamurthy et al. [ Accordingly, there is a contradiction about the effect of nickel on the magnetic properties of cobalt ferrite CMNPs. However, since nickel ferrite is a soft magnet, it seems that the addition of nickel firstly increases the M Ni and Mn co-doping influence on electrical, structural, and optical characteristics of CoFe Koseoglu et al. [ The magnetic properties can be tuned and controlled by the doping of cobalt with other divalent ions. Muscas et al. [ Sundararajan et al. [ Shobana et al. [ In another study [ Chakrabarty et al. [ In a study, Dunn et al. [ Generally, the addition of yttrium to the CoFe Mounkachi et al. [ Singh Yadav et al. [ The nanoparticles of Ti-doped CoFe Nanoparticles of Co Inverse spinel CoFe Mund et al. [ Single-phase Cu Ghosh et al. [ Thus, an increase in H Panda et al. [ In other research, Raju et al. [ The nanoparticles of Co Gharibshahian et al. [ The research conducted in the characterization of Cd Priya et al. [ Single-phase spinel-structured Al Satheeshkumar et al. [ Ag substituted nano-ferrites, Ag Sodaee et al. [ Murugesan et al. [ CoFe Despite the Zhao et al. study [ Kumar et al. [ In another research, Yadav et al. [ Mohammadifar et al. [ Using the chemical co-precipitation route, Amiri et al. [ Zubair et al. [ Vilan et al. [ Cedeno-Mattei et al. [ Nongjai et al. [ Xi et al. [ Wu et al. [ Cubic spinel ferrite CoFe Pachpinde et al. [ Accordingly, different trends for variation of M Wu et al. [ Almessiere et al. [ Patankar et al. [ In another research conducted by Ghone et al. [ Accordingly, by increasing the Ho content, the M Kakade et al. [ Prathapani et al. [ Kumar et al. [ The lanthanum-doped nano ferrites were produced by Haque et al. [ Based on the reported studies, The M Elayakumar et al. [ Xi et al. [ In a research performed by Heiba et al. [ An overview of the effects of various dopants on the magnetic and structural properties of cobalt ferrite were carried out in this work. The spinel ferrite magnetic nanoparticles are useful materials which have attracted the attention of researchers in recent years. These materials can be fabricated by different techniques such as mechanical (mechanochemical) high-energy ball milling, co-precipitation, sol-gel, wet-chemical, spark plasma sintering, sonochemical technique, and even combination of these methods with high-temperature calcination. The particle size of spinel ferrites is a function of the selected synthesis method and the associated metal nature. The particle size of the magnetic spinel ferrite is within the range of 3–100 nm. Spinel ferrites with doping of elements have exceptional electrical and magnetic properties which result in a wide range of applications such as magnetic fluids, microwave absorbers, and medical diagnostics. Moreover, by replacing the metallic atoms in ferrites, their physical characteristics can be enhanced for their performance improvement. The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. The following is the Supplementary data to this article: Supplementary data to this article can be found online at