Conventional coal froth flotation has been used for decades to upgrade the finest fraction of coal (0.60 mm×0 or 0.147 mm×0) in commercial coal cleaning plants. While this fraction amounts to a modest 5–10% of the plant feed in typical U.S. coal cleaning plants, it can amount to over half of the feed to pond fine recovery circuits. Proper operation of the froth flotation circuit becomes critical, especially for these pond fine circuits. Much has been made of column flotation cell performance. However, the high capital cost, the requirement for large amounts of compressed air for some cell designs, and the often higher reagent cost, cannot often be justified in the overall economics of a typical coal cleaning plant and, especially, for pond fine recovery. By selecting operating conditions that improve the selectivity between the organic and inorganic fractions of the coal, conventional coal flotation cell performance can approach the performance of column flotation cells. Operators can successfully accomplish this by selecting circuitry like the `Grab and Run' circuit, with operating conditions that allow for the increased drainage of ash-forming and sulfur-bearing minerals from the froth. This paper provides a review of data regarding flotation circuitry that gives coal flotation operators guidance in selecting the best operating conditions for conventional coal froth flotation cells.Conventional froth flotation has been evaluated by many investigators over the past century and was first applied in the United States at Pittsburgh Coal and Coke's Champion cleaning plant in the 1930s ( Today, coal flotation is still being applied and improved in existing coal cleaning plants. Some recent expansion and improvement projects have included the installation of column flotation cells. In addition to these traditional applications, coal flotation is being called on to recover fine coal from previously discarded refuse impoundments. Many of these pond fine applications have evaluated the use of column cells because of the high ash content of these very fine materials (many contain more than 50% −0.044 mm coal), and several plants recovering pond fines have been built that include column cells ( Despite the presence of these large amounts of fines, the opportunity exists to use conventional coal flotation cells in pond fine applications as well as to continue to improve conventional cell operation in existing coal flotation circuits. In order to accomplish this, operators need to pay attention to the operating conditions that affect coal flotation performance. This paper provides a guide to improving conventional flotation performance for existing circuits and for the cleaning of pond fines using operating conditions suggested by such circuitry as the `Grab and Run', developed by Frank F. Aplan and coworkers ( For the most part, the ash-forming and sulfur-bearing minerals found in coal are hydrophilic and, therefore, should remain in the tailings from coal flotation. One exception is pyrite, which is slightly hydrophobic and can be made more floatable with the addition of oily collector ( In column flotation cells, these problems are reduced through the use of deep, quiescent froths that allow drainage of the entrapped particles and through countercurrent washing of the froth with fresh water. These same conditions can be approximated in conventional cells to improve their performance. Flotation cell operating parameters in combination with reagent conditions affect the flotation performance of a given coal, affecting both recovery and grade. Generally, with lower levels of air and turbulence and at lower frother and collector dosages, yield is lower and ash and sulfur content is reduced. As shown in In order to take advantage of these operating conditions to improve froth flotation selectivity, modifications in circuitry, such as the `Grab and Run' circuit, can be applied. The `Grab and Run' circuit was first evaluated fully by Laboratory data to support the improved performance of the `Grab and Run' are given in Results from The key to the application of this circuit is the gentle conditions used in the first stage, which allow for the reduction of entrapment of mineral matter particles. Similarly, results from testing circuit variations have been reported by Australian authors ( These circuits can be applied to pond fines as well, keeping in mind that these materials often contain much higher levels of ash-forming minerals. With these higher ash contents in the feeds from ponds, it is important to use gentle flotation conditions, maintain deep froths, and apply froth sprinkling. When applying the `Grab and Run' in existing conventional coal flotation circuits, it is important to note that circuit residence time should be considered. Generally speaking, at least 4 min of residence time should be available if the rougher and scavenger stages are to be run with one bank of cells. Some coals (lower rank and oxidized) will require more time. To determine residence time, calculate the total volume of the flotation cells by multiplying the volume of each cell times the number of cells times 0.85 (to allow for the volume associated with the impeller and air holdup which has been determined to be about 15%). Next, determine the slurry flow rate to the cells. Divide flow rate by the adjusted volume to get residence time in minutes, accounting for changes in units of measure. If you have sufficient residence time, you can apply the `Grab and Run' simply as a two-stage reagent addition circuit, one of the best circuits shown by Set up a reagent addition point after the first two cells to add more reagents to the remaining cells that are operated at typical impeller and aeration rates. Using a deep froth in these last cells will also aid in mineral matter rejection. A second bank of cells will be required to clean the second stage (or scavenger) concentrate, if the product does not meet specifications for ash or sulfur. This bank will be much smaller than the first bank as it will only be required to treat the froth from the latter cells in the first bank — an advantage over a traditional cleaner circuit. In addition, this stage can be run at somewhat higher percent solids (say, up to 10–15% solids for 0.589 mm [28 mesh] particles), as these particles will be coarser than those floated in the first stage of flotation. If residence time is a problem, consider the addition of a classification circuit and second bank of cells. Operate the existing bank as the `Grab' stage and classify the tails prior to the new bank of cells, removing high ash and high sulfur fines prior to reflotation. This second bank of cells will also be of a reduced capacity as much of the volume will be removed in the classification circuit. The reflotation stage can be run at a somewhat higher solids concentration (say, up to 10–15% solids for 0.589 mm [28 mesh] particles) as the coal will be somewhat coarser. The size for classification depends upon the size of coal being treated and the size distribution and ash content of the ultra-fines that will be removed. However, as a rule-of-thumb, if the coal being treated in the circuit is 0.589 mm×0 (28 mesh×0), then this classification could be accomplished at about 0.104 mm (150 mesh). The coal floated in the first stage will be of this size and finer, and the remaining material of this size should be ash-forming minerals and pyrite. This classification step can be accomplished with a classifying cyclone or, perhaps, with a rapped sieve bend. If the circuit is treating 0.147 mm×0 material, then the size separation may be accomplished at 0.053 mm (270 mesh) or even finer. This will also depend on the size distribution and the quality of these ultra-fines. In any case, the finest fraction that remains after the first flotation stage should be removed. The oversize material, most likely cyclone underflow for this separation, should be repulped to about 5% solids and refloated. Less fines will be present to contaminate the froth product and the separation will be between coarse (relatively speaking) clean coal and coarse minerals. The presence of large quantities of high ash fines has caused some coal cleaning plants to use desliming cyclones prior to froth flotation ( The large quantity of high ash fines present in material recovered from ponds creates a challenge for flotation, since these fines will want to go with the water split in both classifying cyclones (bypass to the oversize) and in froth flotation (water carryover). The `Grab and Run' with the classification option should prove to be of value in this case, especially if fine pyritic sulfur is present. The first stage of flotation should be operated with the gentle conditions (low air, impeller, and reagents; deep froth; and froth sprinkling), as noted above. This will produce a clean concentrate. Following this stage of flotation, the tailings should be classified. The size for classification again depends upon the size of the coal being treated as noted above. A scavenger stage can then be applied. These guidelines can also be used to configure a new froth flotation circuit. Again, note that the classification circuit in this case will be of significantly reduced size as compared to a desliming circuit prior to froth flotation. The following summary and conclusions are offered. (1) The `Grab and Run' froth flotation circuit takes advantage of gentle operating conditions to produce clean coal products with lower ash and sulfur contents when compared to clean coals produced at similar yields using a rougher-only circuit. In many cases, the simple rougher–scavenger variation will increase yield at similar or lower sulfur values. This is likely due to the reduction of entrapment of mineral matter particles in the froth when using these gentle flotation conditions. (2) In cases where the scavenger cleaner is required to reduce further the sulfur (or ash) content, the requirements for the cleaner circuit are reduced as compared to a traditional cleaner circuit that would treat all of the rougher concentrates. (3) Using a classification step following the rougher or `Grab' stage limits the size requirement for the classification circuit as compared to classifying prior to flotation. (4) Combining this circuitry with deep froths and froth sprinkling, it should be possible to recover and upgrade fines recovered from refuse impoundments, though this application has not yet been tested. The author acknowledges the contributions of Frank F. Aplan, Distinguished Professor Emeritus of Metallurgy and Mineral Processing, The Pennsylvania State University, for his many investigations into improving coal froth flotation and for the conception of the `Grab and Run' circuit. Clifford E. Raleigh is also acknowledged for contributing data collected during his master's program in the Mineral Processing Section at The Pennsylvania State University.