For the first time, uniform monodispersed FeWO4 nanorods were developed by a hydrothermal-assisted reverse microemulsion method. The effects of synthesis conditions such as the molar ratio (w) between water to surfactant, reactant concentrations (C), raw materials on FeWO4 morphology and particles size were investigated. The results indicated that rod-like FeWO4 with different sizes can be obtained by tuning the w values and reaction concentration. Photocatalytic experiment shows that due to the relatively narrow band gap 2.35 eV, FeWO4 nanorods exhibits significant visible-light-driven activity for the degradation of MB dye. Cycle experiment and magnetic test show that this novel visible-driven photocatalyst may have a potential application in the water treatment due to its high performance and easy recycle.Semiconductor photocatalysis in the degradation of organic pollutants has numerous advantages, making it become a good candidate which meeting the development trend for the water treatment Morphological controllable strategy is important for FeWO The rod-like FeWO The samples were characterized by X-ray diffraction (XRD), scanning electron microscope (SEM), transmission electron microscopy (TEM), high resolution transmission electron microscopy (HRTEM), X-ray photoelectron spectra (XPS), Brunauer-Emmett-Teller (BET) and UV–vis diffuse reflectance spectra (DRS). In a typical photocatalytic process, 300 W Xe lamps were used as an illuminating source with a 420 nm cutoff filter. 0.025 g of FeWO The as-prepared FTO glass samples, a piece of Pt sheet and Ag/AgCl were used as the working electrode, counter electrode and reference electrode, respectively. The KOH (1 mol/L) aqueous solution was used as the electrolyte. The detailed preparation procedures of working electrode can be seen in S8. The XRD of FeWO There were nano cylindrical rods with straight sides and a smooth surface shown in the SEM and TEM images of FeWO The photocatalytic activities of FeWO The photogenerated electrons would be excited and then transfer to conduction band. Therefore, there is leaving a hole in the valence band. At the same time the hydroxyl radical would be generated when the holes react with H FeWO The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. The authors greatly acknowledge the Supplementary data to this article can be found online at The following are the Supplementary data to this article: