Microwave chemistry has been developed quickly and has been applied to almost every field of the chemistry over the past decades. With the nuclear renaissance, microwaves have been applied in nuclear chemistry and engineering in recent years. This paper is a brief review about microwave sintering of UO2 pellets, (U, Th)O2 and MOX powders, conversion of high enriched uranyl (HEU) nitrate into uranium oxide by microwave heating and microwave assisted analysis of radioactive elements. It has been realized that microwave energy has great potential to improve the nuclear fuel process in terms of reduction in required processing time and temperature and increased recovery of elements. However, the application of microwave energy in nuclear chemistry and engineering is in the early stages. Microwave energy has significant advantages that are waiting to be explored.Microwaves have been applied primarily for communications and food processing. The applications of microwave energy in chemistry are from 1950s just for the inducement of plasma and then for determination of isotopes of hydrogen ( Microwave heating is observed with a number of unique advantages ( Although there are a lot of studies on the microwaves energy applications and have achieved so many highly attractive qualities, there is no agreement to explain the mechanism of microwaves interaction with reactants such as acceleration of the reaction rate and drastic reduction in the processing time. There are two viewpoints proposed in literature to interpret the microwave process. The first viewpoint suggests that the tremendous acceleration is due to “non-thermal activation”. According to this viewpoint, microwaves have non-thermal interaction with reactants, which could considerably decrease the activation energy of chemical reaction ( The nuclear renaissance has brought the development of nuclear chemistry and engineering, and the applications of microwaves in nuclear chemistry and engineering have been researched in recent years with the significant good qualities of microwaves. This paper reviews the applications of microwaves in the procedure of nuclear fuel cycle such as sintering of uranium pellets and MOX powders, conversion of HEU to uranium oxides, analysis of uranium elements, etc. Microwave energy is a form of electromagnetic energy with the frequency range of 300 According to the interaction with microwaves, materials can be categorized into three principal groups (Clark et al., 2000): transparent which are low loss materials, where microwaves pass through without any losses; conductors where microwaves are reflected and cannot penetrate; and absorbing which are high loss materials, where microwaves are absorbed depending on the value of the dielectric loss factor. The dielectric interaction of materials with microwaves can be described by two important parameters: absorbed power ( The average absorbed power, The penetration depth As can be seen from these equations, the dielectric properties ( Sintered uranium dioxide pellets are used as fuel in nuclear reactors. The high theoretical density, stable pore structure and large grain size of the pellets are important parameters for its qualification as reactor fuel. These properties could attain by the fabrication process. Therefore, it is a very important step for fuel fabrication. Microwave heating is emerging as one of the attractive alternate technologies in the synthesis of many materials especially ceramics. It could significantly save processing time and energy because that microwaves can give a selective and direct heating ( Studies on microwave heating for sintering UO The microwave sintering apparatus used in experiments was just a kitchen type microwave oven at 2450 On later studies, with the developments of the microwave oven technology, a microwave oven with multi-mode type cubic cavity was used ( For the sake of sintering UO UO The microwave heating could be applied to prepare (U, Th)O Urania–plutonia MOX powders have been successfully produced by using microwaves ( All the studies have shown that the fabrication of oxide fuels consumes much shorter time and lower energy, and the density of the pellets obtained with microwave heating was comparable with that obtained using conventional method. In addition, no active liquid waste will be generated from microwave processing. Conversion of high enriched uranyl (HEU) nitrate into uranium oxide is an important process in reprocessing procedure. The experimental results show that microwave assisted thermal denitration process has obvious advantages for the conversion of HEU compared with other processes such as sol–gel process and precipitation process. The operation is quite simple and uranium loss during denitration is very low, this is because that the denitration can be accomplished in the same vessel. So the microwave denitration is a perspective process for converting HEU in reprocessing of nuclear fuels. Microwave can give selective and volumetric heating, under the condition of high pressure, microwave digestion technique can be used for pretreating the uranium ore samples ( Microwave energy could also be used to assist the determination of Pu, Am, U, Th and Sr of marine sediment samples. In addition, when using a mixture of HF Microwaves were also used in other fields in the early years, which are not discussed in detail here such as the measurement of nuclear fuel burnup by means of the microwave cavity resonance method ( It has been shown that microwaves have potential application in nuclear chemistry and engineering such as preparing nuclear fuels, reprocessing of uranium and analysis of the fission elements in the environmental samples, etc. For fabrication of the nuclear fuel pellets, microwave heating could obviously save processing time and energy. The products are good qualities and comparable to that obtained by the conventional method too. Although many researches have been conducted to study microwave heating technology, and oxide fuels have been fabricated for reactors, there are still limited industrial applications of the technology. This may be due to the reason that microwave energy is expensive in terms of capital cost and energy conversion factors. However, the application of this technique which could lead to an economical and rapid sintering process in the nuclear fuel fabrication may overcome the cost of the energy. Therefore, it needs an in-depth study and an optimized design of equipment in order to industrialize the process. In addition, according to the good qualities of metal leaching, microwaves could be used in uranium ore leaching and the recovery of uranium from spent fuel elements in all probability. However, such researches have not been reported. Microwave energy has not been used to these fields despite so many applications of microwaves in nuclear chemistry and engineering. This may be because of the research of metals leaching is still on the age of laboratory scale and has not been applied to the industry widely. But in the future, the microwave heating is likely to be used in uranium leaching and recovery because there has been shown distinct effect on metals leaching by microwave heating. By giving selective and volumetric heating under the condition of high pressure, microwave digestion technique can be used to assist the determination of uranium and other radionuclides of the environmental samples. The research results showed that microwave digestion could evidently shorten the pretreating time. The uranium recovery could be attained above 99% with only about 5 The application of microwave energy in nuclear chemistry and engineering is in early stages. Microwave energy has significant advantages that are waiting to be explored. Further research and development of microwave techniques will lead to more effective and wide range of application in nuclear chemistry and engineering.