Understanding the contact mechanism between a cutting tool and rock is important in mining, drilling, and tunneling industries as the physical contact can cause frictional ignition and bit wear. The heat generated in the rock cutting process can be a precursor to frictional ignition, which can potentially ignite methane (CH Additionally, understanding the bit wear is crucial for preventing financial losses and saving project budgets by reducing bit replacement. Many factors are taken into account in cutting tool wear as the physical contact mechanism between a tool and rock varies with the properties of the rock, tool, and working conditions (cutting speed, line spacing, depth of cut, etc.), significantly affecting the bit wear process. Skew angle is an important parameter when cutting materials such as rock, wood, and metal. The skew angle of conical bits can significantly change the physical contact mechanism between a tool and rock, affecting bit temperature, bit wear, and rock cutting performance. In a previous study, In this study, we explored the effects of skew angle not only on the temperature of bit tips (as a function of the tip surface area) but also on bit wear and rock cutting performance. The results of this study provide insightful information for designing cutting bits with safer and more wear-tolerant shapes, significantly contributing to improving the safety and productivity in the mining and tunneling industries. An advanced rock friction machine was designed and fabricated ( The weight of four bit types (S1, S2, B1, and B2) used in the previous study varied from 558.8 to 1133.2 The granite wheel was mounted on the rock cutting machine, and the cutting bit was placed near the top of the rock wheel at a specific skew angle. The rock cutting test was performed under ~ 672 In this paper, we examined the effects of skew angle on bit temperature, bit wear, and rock cutting performance. Each cutting test was performed for 5 After the 5 Interestingly, in our previous study, the effect of skew angle on bit temperature was observed in S2 and B1, Also, noticeably, the negative correlation between bit tip surface area and bit temperature (after the 5 In our previous study, Remarkably, we demonstrated experimentally that temperatures higher than 537 The effect of the skew angle on cutting tool wear was examined by measuring the reduced bit weight after the 5 Unexpectedly, a significant skew angle effect on bit wear was observed in S1, which had the smallest tip surface area among the four bit types. After the 5-min cutting test, the weight of S1 was significantly reduced by ~ 57% at an 18° skew angle when compared with a 0° skew angle ( The wear of rock cutting bits can be significantly affected by the sliding and impact motion at the interface between a tool and rock. To examine the effect of skew angle on rock cutting performance, the reduction of rock weight was measured before and after the 5 Additionally, a skew angle effect on the reduction of rock weight was observed in S1. After the 5 The correlation between bit wear and rock cutting performance was examined at the four different skew angles. The R Additionally, it is noticeable that the effects of skew angle on bit temperature, bit wear, and rock weight loss were significant only in B2, supporting the conclusion that skew angle effects are greater when bit tip surface area is large. Based on the results, we propose to use cutting bits having large tip surface areas when studying skew angle effects on bit wear, rock cutting performance, bit temperature, and other related mechanisms. Thus, our results obtained from rock cutting tests provide insightful information for improving cutting tool design and technology. In the future, cutting speed, depth of cut, line spacing, and rock physical characteristics other than skew angle may have significant impacts on rock cutting performance, our further work will focus on these parameters to provide useful information for practical applications. Understanding the effects of skew angle on bit temperature, bit wear, and rock excavation performance are critical to improve the workplace safety and the cost effectiveness of the excavation process in the mining and tunneling industries. The rock cutting and friction ignition processes between a cutting tool and a rock wheel were examined with a bench-scale device. The main findings of this study are as follows: (1) skew angle effect on temperature was significant in B2 (large tip surface area); (2) bit tip surface area was negatively related to bit tip temperature during the cutting tests; (3) bit wear of B2 and S1 was significantly reduced at a certain skew angle when compared with a 0° skew angle, suggesting that tip angle and tip surface area are related to skew angle effect on bit wear; and (4) a significant positive correlation between bit wear and rock weight loss was observed only in B2. The results support the conclusions that skew angle effects on bit temperature, bit wear, and rock excavation performance are greater when bit tip surface area is large. The results of this study will be useful for cutting bit technology, contributing significantly to improving workplace safety and cost effectiveness. The authors wish to thank Talitta Aarao for her technical assistance. This work was supported through a