Fracture toughness, as a measure of resistance against crack instability and propagation, is one of the most important parameters in fracture mechanics of rocks and other solid materials. Different methods have so far been proposed in order to determine mode I fracture toughness. In practice, however, considerable differences between their results have been reported. In this study, six conventional tests, including the Single Edge Round Bar Bending test, the Chevron Bend test, the Semi-Circular Bend test, the Straight Notch Disk Bend test, the Brazilian disk test, and the Flattened Brazilian Disk test have been performed on a uniform specimen of gabbro rock for determination of mode I fracture toughness. A notable maximum difference of 42% is observed between the results.
                  The tests are categorized into three groups in terms of their similarities. Several factors which affect the prediction of fracture toughness are investigated by both the numerical and experimental evidences. Distribution of the fracture process zone around the crack tip, is numerically computed using the 3D finite element analysis and based on both the “normal tensile stress” and the “von-Mises” criteria. According to the investigated features, the Chevron Bend test is the most reliable test for determination of the fracture toughness. Furthermore, the distribution of fracture process zone around the crack tip in this test is non-uniform which leads to over estimation of fracture toughness predicted by the effective crack theory.short rod international society of rock mechanics single edge crack round bar bending chevron bend semi-circular bend chevron notch semi-circular bend straight notch disk bend Brazilian disk flattened Brazilian disk crack straight through Brazilian disc modified ring crack chevron notched Brazilian disc mode I fracture toughness load maximum load distance between supports sample diameter average grain size dimensionless stress intensity factor of straight notch samples crack length dimensionless stress intensity factor of chevron notch samples minimum dimensionless stress intensity factor of chevron notch samples initial notch length sample radius sample thickness crack front  stress intensity factor half of crack length half of loading angle in case of Brazilian disk is equal to 920 m dimensionless stress intensity factor of BDT and FBD samples maximum dimensionless stress intensity factor of BDT and FBD samples local minimum point in the recorded load-displacement curve material testing systems single edge notched beam sample width maximum depth of chevron flanks fracture process zone tensile stress of rock Von-Mises stress the stress normal to the crack plane Fracture toughness or critical stress intensity factor represents the material resistance against crack extension and is one of the most important parameters in fracture mechanics of solid materials It is generally accepted that an existing crack may behave either in one of the three pure modes of fracture (opening, shearing, and tearing) or in a mixed mode The short rod (SR) test is an ISRM suggested method in which a tensile load is used for determining the mode I fracture toughness Since the fracture toughness is one of the inherent characteristics of materials, fracture toughness values measured from different tests for one type of rock should be in good agreement with each other. Unfortunately, this is not the case in practice. Sun and Ouchterlony based on studies on granite samples concluded that the fracture toughness values of SR samples were more than those of SECRBB samples and once SECRBB samples became pre-cracked, they could provide results closer to SR samples The study of Chang et al. on granite and marble samples showed that there was a good agreement in fracture toughness values of CCNBD, CNSCB and BDT tests, all were clearly more than the SCB value. The reason was believed to be due to non-pre cracking of SCB samples In this paper, six tests i.e. CB, SECRBB, BDT, FBD, SCB, SNDB are performed on a uniform gabbro rock to investigate the range of differences obtained in mode I test results by these methods. Then, the tests are modeled numerically after sufficient verifications. The tests are categorized into similar groups and the experimental and numerical results are investigated to determine the influencing factors and their effects. Finally, general comparisons are conducted to better determine the reliability of each test. The process is typically shown in Ouchterlony used this method to determine the fracture toughness of Marble. The main feature of this method is to use core samples of rocks in which a straight notch is cut ( This test is one of the ISRM suggested methods for determining the fracture toughness This test is carried out in two levels. In the first level, only the failure load is recorded while in the second level, the full load-displacement curve is recorded with the help of a stiff loading frame. The second level of the test is used only if the sample shows a significant non-linear behavior. Therefore, the first level of the test is sufficient for the present study. The rock fracture toughness is determined by the following equation This test was designated in 2014 as an ISRM method for determining the mode I fracture toughness. In this test, the core is divided into 2 halves ( Here, This is one of the newest tests proposed by Totluoglu and Keles to determine the fracture toughness of rock samples In 1993, Guo et al. presented the Brazilian test for determining the fracture toughness of rock samples. No initial notch is required in this test ( The test terminates after the maximum load where a local minimum drop is observed in the loading. There is no need to record the full load-displacement curve in this test. The fracture toughness of the samples is determined from Eq. where This test was proposed by Wang and Xing to improve the Brazilian test for determining the fracture toughness. In this method, the Brazilian test sample is flattened at both ends to simplify the application of loading ( In this test, it is only required to record the local minimum point of the load-displacement curve. Eq. where Gabbro samples were chosen for performing fracture toughness tests in the Rock Mechanics Laboratory of University of Tehran. Mineralogical and mechanical properties of the gabbro samples are mentioned in Higher values of notch thickness can increase fracture toughness values Servo-controlled material testing machine, MTS 815, was used to load the samples. All experiments were performed at a speed of 0.002 mm/s in order to avoid the effects of loading rate and dynamic effects on fracture toughness. A load cell with capacity of 5 ton was used to record the test loading. In each test type, three tests were performed to determine the fracture toughness accurately. Samples with 54 mm diameter, 216 mm length and 180 mm support distance (S/D = 3.33) and straight notch with 11.7 mm length were used to determine the fracture toughness in SECRBB test. Samples with 54 mm diameter, 216 mm length and 180 mm support distance (S/D = 3.33) were used in the CB test. The chevron notch angle was 90° and the initial length of notch was 11 mm. In SCB test, semicircle samples were used with 74 mm diameter, 37.5 mm thickness and 50 mm span length and straight notch with 15 mm length. In the SNDB test, cylindrical samples were used with 74 mm diameter, 37.5 mm thickness and 50 mm span length and straight notch with 18 mm length. For the BDT test, samples with 54 mm diameter, 27 mm thickness and the contact angle of jaws with samples about 10° (α = 5°), were tested to determine fracture toughness. Finally, same samples were used in the FBD test with 54 mm diameter and 27 mm thickness, flattened at both ends with an angle of 30° (2α = 30°).  Three-dimensional finite element method based on singular elements for crack tip modeling is used to simulate the tests. The fracture toughness is determined from the J integral. Only half of the sample in SECRBB, CB, SCB, SNDB tests and a quarter of sample in BDT and FBD tests are modeled due to symmetry to reduce the size of the model. Experimentally obtained failure loads for CB, SECRBB, SCB, SNDB tests and local minimum loads in BDT and FBD tests are used for determining the fracture toughness in models. Also, fracture toughness and stress intensity factors are determined with 10 contours around the crack tip. In straight notch tests (i.e. SECRBB, SCB, and SNDB), the fracture toughness is calculated around the notch crack tip. However, for remaining tests (i.e. CB, BDT, and FBD), the toughness is computed for the critical stress induced crack length in which the dimensionless stress intensity factor reaches its critical value. Reliability of this numerical approach has been confirmed by several researches A cubic block of 45 cm length, 10 cm width and 10 cm thickness is used to model the SENB sample (   5600 elements and 25,000 nodes are used to model the SECRBB test. Six different levels of increasing crack length are considered to represent the crack growth. The dimensionless stress intensity factor is calculated for each constant load and the obtained values are compared with the results of Eq. The model for CB specimen for 6 different lengths of crack front (the crack front is shown in 6 different levels of increasing crack length are modeled by 14,500 elements and 62,300 nodes. The dimensionless stress intensity factor is calculated for one constant load and it is compared with the reference ISRM values of Eq. For modeling the crack growth, four different levels of increasing crack length are used on a model of 9300 elements and 40,100 nodes. The dimensionless stress intensity factor is calculated for one constant load. The ascending shape of the A quarter of the disk is modeled with similar dimensions of the experimental samples. A finite element mesh of 6200 elements and 27,300 nodes are generated for the modeling and 9 different levels of increasing crack length are considered. The modeling begins from the point of fracture initiation, which is considered at the center of the disk. According to In both Brazilian and flattened Brazilian test models, an initial crack exists in the model and the way it is extended is examined. Wang et al. The maximum dimensionless stress intensity factor is 0.47, which is close to 0.445, achieved by Keles and Tutluoglu Comprehensive results and discussions in sections 3 and 4 clearly indicate that the values of fracture toughness depend on various factors such as shape and dimensions of sample, type of notch, sample thickness, stability of crack extension, size of fracture process zone, loading conditions, and so on. In order to better examine these effects, samples are divided into 3 similar groups: CB and SECRBB samples: The difference between these two samples is just the type of notch. SCB and SNDB samples: Only differ in their shapes. BDT and FBD samples: Flattening is the only source of difference. Despite the fact that the test failure load in samples with chevron notch is lower than samples with straight notch, the values of fracture toughness of CB samples are greater than values obtained by SECRBB samples. Stable crack growth in CB samples is one of the most important advantages of this type of notch compared with SECRBB samples. In order to determine the fracture process zone in all tests, first, the corresponding equivalent stress is evaluated based on the linear elastic assumption. Then, the points with levels above the yield stress are considered as part of fracture process zone. Two criteria are used to estimate the fracture process zone: the uniaxial normal tensile stress criterion, and the von-Mises multiaxial criterion. According to the brittle behavior of rocks and assuming that the tensile yield stress of rock is equal to the tensile strength, each part of the sample with stresses greater than the tensile strength is assumed to be part of the fracture process zone, which develops due to subcritical stable crack growth. The stress normal to the crack plane and the equivalent von-Mises stress of the two criteria are compared with the tensile strength of rock. The size of the fracture process zone is determined along two axes at the center and corner of the samples. In the SECRBB test, the center of the notch and 15.57 mm out of the center are chosen. In the CB test, similarly, two axes at the center of the crack front inside the notch, and 26.38 mm away from the center along the crack front (which corresponds to the minimum dimensionless stress intensity factor) are considered. According to It is also noted that a limited localized compressive stress zone can be observed around the loading points and supports, as depicted in The shape of fracture process zone is assumed to be circular (in reality it is dumbbell shape). According to the normal tensile stress criterion, the ratios of volume of fracture process zone to the total volume of SECRBB and CB samples are 0.71 and 0.38 percent, respectively. The same ratios become 0.18 and 0.13 percent based on the von-Mises criterion. Therefore, the size of fracture process zone in SECRBB samples are greater than CB samples. The CB test produces more accurate value for the fracture toughness than the SECRBB test because of its stable crack growth, which results in creation of a sharp and narrow crack on the top of notch and smaller size of the fracture process zone, better matching of the linear elastic assumption. Although the straight-through assumption may have some limits in determining the fracture toughness in chevron notched samples Geometric characteristics of both SNDB and SCB samples are similar. In both samples, the thickness and radius are the same and there may only be an insignificant difference between the notch lengths. Failure load in SNDB samples is approximately twice of SCB samples and the fracture toughness of SNDB samples is almost 20% greater than SCB samples. In both tests, the dimensionless stress intensity factor follows an ascending trend, so unstable crack growth occurs in both cases. Two axes are specified to determine the size of the fracture process zone. The first axis is at the center of the notch in both samples while the second axis is 32.38 mm and 15.58 mm out of the center in SNDB and SCB samples, respectively. The length of fracture process zone based on the normal tensile stress criterion at the center and corners of SCB sample is 2.5 mm, while it is 2.5 mm and 1.7 mm, respectively, at the center and corners of the SNDB experimental samples. It should be stated that the length of the fracture process zone predicted by the normal stress criterion in the SCB test is very close to the prediction of Similar to the previous tests, some compressive stress is observed near the loading point ( According to the normal tensile stress and von-Mises criteria, the fracture process zone around the crack tip in SCB samples is greater than in SNDB samples. Since the linear elastic assumption is more accurate for SNDB samples, the fracture toughness obtained from this test is more accurate than the typical semicircular samples. As shown in As mentioned in  The large yield zone observed in An important note in both tests is that although the fracture toughness can be computed for a sharp and narrow crack, it is calculated at the point where stable crack growth starts. This stability is due to crack reaching to the vicinity of boundaries (loading surfaces) at the point of calculating the fracture toughness. Therefore, BDT test is not an appropriate test to determine the fracture toughness due to: lack of uniform load distribution on the sample, using the infinite plate assumption for calculation of fracture toughness, initiation of fractures from the lateral surfaces and elongated crack close to the boundaries at the point of calculation of fracture toughness. In contrast, the FBD test is more appropriate than the BDT test for determining the fracture toughness because of uniform distribution of load on the sample, using the finite plate assumption to determine the fracture toughness and the initiation of fracture from the center of sample. Nevertheless, the fracture toughness in this test is similarly affected by the boundary conditions due to the development of long crack. Values of fracture toughness obtained from different methods differ by 42%. The maximum value is obtained from the CB test while the lowest belongs to the SCB test. The tests can be divided into two categories: samples without a notch and samples with a notch. Without notch tests include the BDT and FBD tests. The BDT test predicts unreliable values for the fracture toughness, whereas the FBD test generates more reliable values. According to the von-Mises criterion, the fracture process zone around the notched samples is a dumbbell-shape. In case of samples without the notch, the size of the fracture process zone is not reliably obtained by this criterion due to long crack length and the direct effect of boundaries. Moreover, the size of the fracture process zone around the crack tip in notched samples is obtained larger based on the normal tensile stress criterion than the von-Mises criterion. In tests with a straight notch, i.e. SECRBB, SNDB, and SCB, the crack growth is unstable. Among them, the SECRBB and SCB tests provide the highest and lowest values of fracture toughness, respectively. It is recommended that the loading-unloading cycles be applied for pre-cracking of samples with straight notch Another factor that makes a difference in tests with a straight notch is the ratio of size of the fracture process zone around the crack tip to the total size of sample. This ratio in SECRBB and SNDB samples is lower than SCB samples. Furthermore, there is insignificant difference between the size of fracture process zone of SNDB and SECRBB samples due to the low volume of the fracture process zone in these tests, so these two tests are better adapted with the linear elastic assumption. Wei et al General comparison of tests shows that the distribution of fracture process zone around the crack tip varies in the chevron notch samples while it approximately remains uniform in other tests. Therefore, application of the effective crack length for determination of the fracture toughness in the chevron notch samples overestimates this parameter. In general, CB is the best test among the studied tests to determine the fracture toughness due to stable crack growth, which makes a sharp and narrow crack at the top of notch before calculating the fracture toughness, and lower size of the fracture process zone around the crack tip. Also, the boundaries have the least influence on the crack behavior in this test. Accordingly, variations of the fracture toughness of different tests are compared with the CB test in In this study, six tests of CB, SECRBB, SCB, SNDB, BDT and FBD have been investigated experimentally and numerically, so the following conclusions can be made: The results of fracture toughness show a maximum difference of 42% between various tests. The highest and lowest values are observed in CB and SCB tests, respectively. Among the fracture toughness tests, a suitable agreement (difference less than 8%) is observed between 3D finite element modeling of CB, SECRBB and SCB tests with equations presented earlier in order to determine the fracture toughness. Due to the infinite plate assumption in determination of fracture toughness in the BDT test and finite dimensions of Brazilian disk, there is a significant difference between the numerical results and analytical solutions. In the FBD test, the results of numerical modeling are closer to the reference results To determine the fracture process zone in the samples, two criteria of uniaxial normal tensile stress and multi-axial von-Mises can be adapted. It is noted that in the case of notched samples, the fracture process zone obtained by the normal tensile stress criterion is higher than that of the von-Mises criterion. However, in the samples without a notch, the von-Mises criterion is not reliable due to long crack length and its proximity to the loading surfaces. The shape of the fracture process zone around the notched samples based on the von-Mises criterion becomes dumbbell-shape. However, in samples without a notch, this shape cannot be achieved due to the long crack length and its proximity to the loading surfaces. CB samples produce more accurate values for fracture toughness compared with SECRBB samples due to its stable crack growth which creates sharp and narrow crack at the tip of the notch and a smaller fracture process zone. Both SCB and SNDB tests have unstable crack growth. But, due to smaller fracture process zone in the SNDB test, more reliable values for the fracture toughness are obtained. Despite the fact that the growth of sharp and narrow crack occurs in the BDT test, it is not appropriate for determining the fracture toughness due to non-uniform distribution of load on the sample, initiation of crack from the loading surfaces, assumption of infinite plate to derive an equation for the fracture toughness, long cracking and the effect of boundaries at the point of calculating the fracture toughness. Although most of the flaws of the BDT test have been eliminated in the FBD test, the results remain directly affected by boundaries. In the case of straight notch tests which show an unstable crack growth, the SECRBB test provides more accurate values for the fracture toughness than the SCB and SNDB tests. This is because of the small ratio of the volume of fracture process zone at the crack tip to the total sample volume. Moreover, the SECRBB test is less influenced by the boundaries according to its longer support span. General comparison of the fracture process zone distribution around the crack tip shows that this distribution is non-uniform around the chevron notch samples, although it approximately remains uniform along the crack tip in other tests. Therefore, application of the effective crack length for calculating the fracture toughness of chevron samples leads to over estimation. CB is the best test to determine fracture toughness of rocks amongst all the mentioned methods due to its stable crack growth, which results in creating a sharp and narrow crack at the top of notch, and the small size of the fracture process zone around the crack tip. Furthermore, the boundary conditions do not have any considerable effect on crack behavior. The authors wish to acknowledge the Rock Mechanics Laboratory at the School of Mining Engineering, University of Tehran, for assistance in conducting the experiments; with special thanks to Mr. Mohammad Hoveidafar.