Manufacturing method for 1–3 PZT composites for medical ultrasonic transducer array (UTA) using sacrificial polymethyl-methacrylate (PMMA) micro molds was investigated. The purpose of study was to compare this proposed method (briefly, micro-pressing) with conventional dicing method for UTA fabrication. The cell size was 135μm × 135μm with the 35μm gap between cells, and the cell height was 170μm. Microstructure of 1–3 PZT composites was dense and had uniform morphology. Dielectric constants at 1kHz were 2627 for the dicing method and 2221 for the micro-pressing method. Two methods produced similar values for the thickness mode electromechanical coupling coefficients (K
                     t): 73% for the dicing method and 68% for the micro-pressing method. Acoustic properties of fabricated ultrasonic transducer by the dicing method were similar to those of the micro-pressing method. Microstructure, electromechanical properties and acoustic properties of 1–3 PZT composites fabricated by the micro-pressing method were comparable to the properties obtained with the conventional dicing method. The micro-pressing method is a cost-effective way of manufacturing micro-ceramic rod arrays with high aspect ratio based on the batch type LIGA process.Medical ultrasonic diagnosis has been widely used because of its weak influence on patients, ability of blood flow measurement, and real time measurements. The improvement of the resolution is always required; therefore many techniques are being studied The purpose of study was the comparison between the proposed method and dicing method for UTA fabrications. Dicing a sintered PZT sheet is a conventional fabrication process of 1–3 PZT composite  Microstructure, electrical and electromechanical properties of fabricated 1–3 PZT composites of two cases were analyzed. The    Manufacturing method of 1–3 PZT composites for medical UTA using sacrificial PMMA micro molds fabricated by industrial-based plastic molding technology were investigated. PZT microstructures of 1–3 PZT composites were dense and had uniform morphology. Dielectric constants at 1 This work was supported as one of projects of micro-electromechanical systems development (G7 project) by MOCIE and MOST. The authors would like to thank government for financial support. And we also wish to thank Pohang Accelerator Laboratory (PAL) for helpful support.