The use of air bubbles of varying size distribution in ore and wastewater treatment, including conventional (froth) and dissolved air flotation (DAF), Jameson flotation cell and Microcel (among others), has attracted much interest recently. These flotation processes are governed by the physical characteristics of the bubbles as well as the particles, and therefore it is necessary to investigate accurately the size distribution of bubbles that are generated. A new method was developed to measure the bubble size distribution based on the bubbles’ capture (without movement) combining microscopy with digital image processing procedures. The technique (LTM-BSizer) employs a sampler to draw bubbles, rising in a column, into a special viewing chamber and exposes them to a digital camera after they have decelerated and stopped. Thus common problems related to the movement of bubbles, namely focus, illumination, photographic speed and bubbles overlapping are all overcome. Results obtained are in good correlation with some values reported with the traditional image analysis method and show that using this technique accurate size distributions can be produced conveniently and efficiently. The influence of some operational parameters on the formation of bubbles was studied. It is believed that the bubble size measurement technique developed in this study will assist understanding and improvement of the DAF and conventional fines and ultrafines mineral flotation, from both theoretical and practical viewpoints.Although flotation has been used as a process for the removal of suspended (“target”) particles from mineral slurries and wastewater for many years, the characterisation of the bubbles used and their technical role has attracted interest only recently. The flotation process depends on the ability of bubbles to collect particles from the suspension and carry them to the surface where a layer of froth or sludge can be removed over a lip (launder). In ore processing the particles to be floated are first made hydrophobic. The collection mechanism is one in which the hydrophobic particles attach to bubbles (>600 μm in diameter) by the formation of a finite contact angle at the gas–liquid–solid contact line. Froth flotation is very inefficient when particles are very small (<13 μm). The main drawbacks are related to the low probability of bubble-particle collision and adhesion, and low process kinetics. Regarding the optimisation of the “capture” (collection) stage, all existing models are addressed to the need for a wide bubble size distribution (100 μm–2 mm) to obtain a better size-by-size flotation ( Column flotation has been heralded as one of the solutions to this problem and different types of flotation columns, incorporating microbubble generators, have been developed in recent years ( In wastewater treatment, the technique most often employed is dissolved air flotation (DAF) where a similar mechanism can apply but particles, coagulates or flocs, are usually hydrophilic and are not necessarily converted to be hydrophobic. In this case, bubbles that are very minute (<100 μm) are either physically entrapped within the aggregate or they also nucleate within or at the aggregate’s surface. Both mechanisms may cause physical entrainment while rising (buoyancy effect). It is believed that entrapment will most easily occur when the bubbles are much smaller than the aggregate, as in the case of microbubbles generated in DAF operations ( In mineral flotation devices, coarse bubbles (about 600–2000 μm) are employed and are introduced into the liquid either by supplying air to the vicinity of a rotating impeller or the air can be induced from the atmosphere without the need for blowers or compressors. This type of flotation is known as “induced-air flotation” (IAF) in the water treatment industry. Several methods have been developed to measure the size of bubbles, which may be classified depending on the nature of the sensors contacting the bubble phase as “intrusive” or not. The first category presents higher errors (tool interference) than the “non-intrusive” as long as the method provides good visual observation and bubble capture. Thus, The most straightforward and most widely used method is image analysis but this technique requires a complicated experimental set-up and is time-consuming. Also, studies report that usually it is not easy to produce and reproduce enough data to generate bubble (in movement) size distributions under different conditions, despite the use of modern CCD cameras, widely used in recent years due to their great precision ( Another method is to measure the rising velocity of the bubbles followed by calculation of the sizes by Stokes’ Law. However, because the sizes of bubbles are not uniform, and because the rising velocity of multiple bubbles is different from that of single bubbles, no general equations are available to predict the size distribution of bubbles from the rising velocities. Counters are known to yield wider bubble size distributions and higher mean size values. Finally, bubbles larger than the capillaries through which the bubbles are sucked are usually not measured or might break, yielding smaller bubbles ( In this study, a new method to measure the size of small and therefore difficult-to-characterise bubbles, using the concept of bubble capture, was developed and compared with some techniques already known. Accordingly, microbubbles, generated as in DAF (different operating conditions) and by drawing air by suction through flow constrictors (mid-sized bubbles) are measured and studied in detail. The study will continue, in the near future, to measure bubble size distribution (BSD) in froth flotation cells (three phases). A schematic representation of the complete rig and the new device, named LTM-BSizer, is shown in The column (clear acrylic), where the bubbles rise, measures 130 cm in height and 7.1 cm in diameter. Tests were conducted using two different bubble generation systems, induced air and depressurisation of saturated water flow (DAF system). The rig includes fluid vessels, microbubble or mid sized bubble generators, pumps and a system to draw the flow into the columns uniformly throughout the whole cross-section. In the DAF-dissolved air system, a water stream (tap water) was continuously pumped from a tank into a saturator, jointly with air under varying pressures (294–588 kPa). Then, the saturated water flowed from the bottom, into a modified needle valve before entering the column (for details of the sampling procedure and the valve, see In the induced air system, a liquid stream was continuously pumped from a tank into a venturi whereby air is drawn and injected into the column. Adding a frother (Dowfroth 250) decreases the size of the bubbles ( The image analysis system included the bubble capture cell, a microscope and a CCD camera. The system utilised in the capture and visualisation of bubbles was projected to avoid abrupt changes of direction or turbulence in the column. The capture cell is connected to a sampler tube (made of steel) of 10 mm diameter and adaptable length, up to the centre of the column, at an angle of 45°. The body of the capture cell was made of stainless steel and had a removable lid, designed for cleaning purposes. The central part of the cell was made of two plane walls (glass sheets) with a viewing area of 25 The monitored area (photographed) was of 1.42 mm For a representative sampling of bubbles from the column into the tube, the flow rate was about 0.8–1.0 l A computer with special software for image data processing ( Thus, excellent quality images could be obtained only through this parallel illumination (transmitted). When the bubbles are sidelong illuminated, a strong reflection occurred making the definition of the contour of the bubbles difficult. Examples of the obtained photographs are shown in Between 1000 and 3000 bubbles were counted for determination of the size distribution. The mean bubble diameter adopted was the Sauter diameter, calculated by the equation: All experiments were conducted at 25 °C and the surface tension measurements were monitored with a dynamic tensiometer, Nima, model DST 9005. The errors in the measurement of BSD by the present method have, at least, two main sources. The first is the random error inherent in the measuring apparatus (set-up) and the second is related to the form the bubbles acquired when resting under the glass slide. With respect to the second source of error, two aspects can be considered. The first is the deviation of bubble forms from the spherical shape, after resting under a slide, due to the hydrostatic pressure acting on the bubbles. This error is usually very small, less than 0.5% in the working range of diameters used in this work. The second aspect is when bubbles present a finite contact angle with the glass slide. The form which the bubbles acquired, normally is that of a sphere with its upper portion cut off by a horizontal plane. Thus, the diameter measured may be larger than that of a free bubble, considering that both had the same volume. According to Anfruns, this error fluctuated around 2% and it did not depend significantly on bubble size.  These results are different in magnitude to the 40–70 μm mean diameters reported for DAF systems in several works ( A small number of big bubbles may be present and measured in their image analysis (photographic, digital images and videos) methods, increasing the mean size values. This is usually due to overlapping of bubbles inside the sensor, resulting in counting fewer but larger bubbles. This is an inherent shortcoming of the instrument. Some coalescence of bubbles while in movement during their transport to the sensor. Overlapping of bubbles inside the sensor, which would result in counting fewer but larger bubbles. This is another inherent shortcoming of the instrument. Different types of nozzles usually cause release problems with bubble formation and coalescence. Further, different to our results, The effect of a frother on the BSD was investigated. It is shown in However, The new technique (LTM-BSizer) for the determination of BSD presented the following advantages: The method allows the accurate measurement of very fine bubbles, as those generated in DAF systems. Coalescence and enlargement of the DAF microbubbles are substantially reduced through an improved design of a needle valve which provides an uniform and continuous flow. The bubbles all positioned in the focus of the microscope plus the illumination and contrast allowed high quality photos (images) to be taken. The column cell, where the bubbles rise, does not need to be transparent. Bubbles of wide size distribution are measured accurately. No bubble breakage (as in capillaries) was found. The actual “capture” of bubbles in the viewing chamber minimises the known problem of bubbles overlapping. It is believed that this technique may also serve as a basis to obtain images of flocs and particles, adhered or not to rising bubbles. The technique allows also the estimate of other parameters such as bubble volume; superficial gas bubble flow rate and air hold-up. A new basis for measuring BSD was developed using the bubble capture concept. The study reports an experimental investigation on BSD in bubble columns using dispersed systems, air–tap water. An original photographic technique was successfully applied using a simple sampler to draw bubbles into a special viewing chamber where they decelerate and stopped, exposing them to a digital camera. With this new technique, common problems such as quality of the bubble images, focus, illumination and concentration of bubbles (overlapping) were all solved. Results presented small differences when compared with the traditional image analysis method or particle counters yielding smaller but accurate mean diameters. It is believed that this technique will be helpful for research in DAF and IAF processes, either theoretically or practically. Authors thank to James Varela and Fernanda Bordin, for their assistance and to all Institutions supporting research in Brazil. Jorge Rubio would like to dedicate this work to his friend Dr. Jaime Anfruns (1947–2002).