The Bond ball mill grindability test is run in a laboratory until a circulating load of 250% is developed. It provides the Bond Ball Mill Work Index which expresses the resistance of material to ball milling. This happens after 7–10 grinding cycles, which shows that the procedure is a lengthy and complex one and is therefore susceptible to procedural errors. Starting from the first-order grinding kinetics defined by means of the Bond ball mill, this paper discusses a simplified procedure for a rapid determination of the work index by just two grinding tests. The applicability of the simplified procedure has been proved on samples of copper and Iron ores that are located in Iran. The values obtained by this procedure do not differ by more than 7% from those obtained in the standard Bond test.A Bond Ball Mill Work Index test is a standard test for determining the ball mill work index of a sample of ore. It was developed by Fred Bond in 1952 and modified in 1961 ( In the determination of ball mill work index 15 kg of representative ore at 100% The first grinding test is started with an arbitrarily chosen number of mill revolutions. At the end of each grinding cycle, the entire product is discharged from the mill and is screened on a test sieve. Fresh feed material is added to the oversize to bring the total weight back to that of the original charge. This charge is then returned to the mill. The number of revolutions in the second grinding cycle is calculated so as to gradually produce the 250% circulating load. After the second cycle, the same procedure of screening and grinding is continued until the test-sieve under size produced per mill revolution becomes constant for the last three grinding cycles. This will give the 250% circulating load ( The Bond test takes 7–10 cycles. The test-sieve undersize from the last grinding cycle is analyzed by screening, ( Tests of grinding kinetics in the Bond ball mill ( The grinding rate constant ( This makes it possible to achieve substantial time savings and simplifications in the procedure for determining the work index (Wi). In the standard Bond test at a standard 250% circulating load: From Eqs. In a standard grinding cycle at the 250% circulating load, the weight of the test sieve oversize at the beginning of grinding ( From Eq. With the Bond ball mill, the total number of mill revolutions ( By substituting the expression of the t from Eq.  The work index is determined from feed crushed to 100% The feed is screened to determine its size distribution which is then plotted on a graph. A 700 The value of From the original feed an adequate sample is taken and screened on a test sieve. The under size is discarded while the over size is retained. At least Two separate samples, weighting (1/3.5) Two samples are formed for the two grinding tests by mixing test sieve oversize weighting (2.5/3.5) The proportion of the coarse size ( The first sample is fed into the Bond mill and is ground for an arbitrarily chosen number of mill revolutions ( After grinding, the entire sample is screened on a test sieve and the oversize is weighed ( The oversize grinding rate constant ( The total number of mill revolutions ( The second sample is fed into Bond mill and is ground for After grinding, the entire sample is screened on the test sieve. Both the oversize and the undersize are weighed. The weight of the oversize should be equal or approximately equal to (2.5/3.5) Size distribution of the undersize from the second test is determined by means of screen analysis and the value P is determined graphically. The weight ( The work index (Wi) is derived from the Bond formula. The work index (Wi) has been obtained for the sample of iron and copper ore following both the standard Bond procedure and the abbreviated procedure as described in this paper. The results are given in By comparing the values of the work index obtained by means of the Bond and the abbreviated test procedures it can be seen that the differences never exceed 7%. This confirms that the abbreviated procedure can be employed for a rapid and simple determination of the work index. The proposed procedure can be very useful in routine monitoring of ore grindability and for the control of the abbreviated procedure can indicate the initial number of mill revolutions derived from Eq. Based on the defined first-order grinding kinetics in the Bond ball mill, a procedure has been developed for the rapid determination of the work index (Wi) by means of just two grinding tests. The applicability of the proposed abbreviated procedure has been proved on samples of copper and iron ore. The differences between the values of the work index obtained in the two test procedures do not exceed 7%. The procedure presented here can be very useful for monitoring day-to-day variation of the grindability of ore and for control of grinding at commercial operations. Its great merit is that it allows for a reduction of the number of grinding tests in the Bond test procedure. The authors gratefully acknowledge the Iran Mineral Processing Research Center (IMPRC) for this work.