A new process is proposed for the leaching and recovery of niobium and tantalum from a low-grade refractory niobium–tantalum ore after adding pure Nb2O5 to adjust the niobium to tantalum ratio. The ore was roasted and decomposed with KOH then leached with water. Experiments were carried out to study the effect of the Nb2O5-to-Ta2O5 mass ratio, decomposition temperature, alkali-to-ore mass ratio and decomposition time on the leaching of niobium and tantalum, as well as the associated impurity elements, such as titanium, iron, manganese, silicon and tin. The optimal conditions were determined to be: Nb2O5-to-Ta2O5 mass ratio 2.33:1; KOH-to-ore mass ratio 2:1; reacting for 60 min at 400 °C. Leaching with water extracted ~95% Nb and 94% Ta together with about 80% Si and Sn, 50% Ti and <20% Fe and Mn. The niobium and tantalum was recovered as high purity (Nb,Ta)2O5 (99.3%) through evaporation, crystallization and phase transformation processes.Niobium and tantalum, with high melting points, have been utilized widely in the steel, electronic and other high-tech industries ( Currently, most niobium–tantalum ores are decomposed by concentrated hydrofluoric acid ( Recently, a new process for the leaching of low-grade refractory niobium–tantalum ores with KOH sub-molten salt was proposed with the objective to eliminate fluorine pollution at the source ( The new process is based on the decomposition of the ore minerals by molten KOH into K However, a side reaction also occurs in the decomposition process that produces insoluble K(Ta,Nb)O Earlier studies ( Based on our preliminary experiments, we found that increasing the ratio of Nb:Ta in the ore can significantly increase the leach recovery. Therefore, the improved process included first adding a certain amount of Nb The purpose of the present work is to investigate the leaching behavior of niobium, tantalum and other associated mineral impurities such as titanium, iron, manganese, silicon, and tin, and to obtain optimal treatment conditions. Based on all the previous work, the effects of parameters such as the Nb Potassium hydroxide was of analytical grade (Beijing Chemical Plant) and distilled water was used for leaching experiments. The niobium–tantalum ore sample, Nb The batch reactor used in this work was a 500 mL SUS316 stainless steel container equipped with a thermometer, a mechanical stirrer and a reflux condenser. The reactor was heated by immersing it in a furnace to reach and maintain the desired temperature within ± The Nb  To investigate the formation mechanism of the KTaO It can be concluded that when niobium–tantalum ore is reacted with KOH, the KTaO   The results of leaching tests conducted under different KOH-to-ore mass ratios (  As the solubility of K After evaporation/crystallization, the K The hydrous niobium–tantalum oxide obtained was calcined at 800 °C for 1 h giving a (Nb,Ta) Although the impurities (Si, Sn, Ti, Fe and Mn) in the leach solution showed no effect on the product quality of (Nb,Ta)  A new improved method is proposed for the leaching of low-grade niobium–tantalum ores, which includes ore enrichment with Nb Enrichment with Nb The optimum process conditions were determined to be: Nb High purity (Nb,Ta) Compared with the sub-molten salt method proposed earlier, the KOH-to-ore mass ratio decreased from 7:1 to 2:1 resulting in reduced energy consumption. From a process point of view, the Nb Financial support from the National 11th Five-Year Plan 863 Project of China under Grant No. 2006AA06Z129, 973 Program under Grant No.2007CB613500 and National Key Technology R&D Program under Grant No.2006BAC02A05 is gratefully acknowledged.