 Radial head ORIF immobilized in splint for 1 to 2 weeks Radial head replacement without associated ligamentous injury may start ROM if tolerable the first postoperative day A sling for comfort may be used in early postoperative period Elbow active and active-assisted ROM for flexion and extension Stress in the coronal plane (varus/valgus) should be avoided by performing ROM with arm close to body. Avoid flexion in pronation. An extension splint may be used with subsequent increase in extension parameters per surgeon discretion in radial head replacement. Maintain motion of adjacent joints.  Sutures or staples removed at two weeks Continue Phase I exercises. Active and active-assisted supination and pronation are initiated. By end of 6 weeks full ROM of elbow in flexion and extension should be obtained Maintain motion of adjacent joints. Check with surgeon regarding bony healing in ORIF group but should generally be achieved by 6 weeks Weight restriction limitations decreased per surgeon discretion.  Continue previous exercise. By 8 weeks full preoperative motion should be obtained, including supination and pronation. The proximal ulna articulation with the distal humerus is a hinge type joint. It forms a semilunar shape as it articulates with the trochlea of the distal humerus. The most proximal aspect of the olecranon articulates with the olecranon fossa of the distal humerus posteriorly and the coronoid process articulates with the coronoid fossa of the humerus anteriorly. Fractures of the olecranon can occur in isolation or with other structures such as the radial head, coronoid process, or collateral ligaments of the elbow. Isolated fractures of the ulna are classified by the Mayo classification ( The classification helps dictate treatment as it classifies based on the amount of displacement, comminution, and stability of the elbow. Olecranon fractures that are minimally displaced and stable may be treated with nonoperative measures. Generally the elbow is splinted or casted in 90 degrees of flexion for three to four weeks with gentle active motion initiated ( The degree of extension and flexion and when to start active-assisted ROM are at the discretion of the surgeon and are dependent on healing and initial fracture characteristics. Olecranon fractures in the elderly not amenable to repair may be treated with excision and advancement of the triceps ( Operative fixation of the olecranon includes tension band wiring, intramedullary fixation, or fixation with plates and screws. Tension band wiring and intramedullary screw fixation are generally reserved for the simpler, noncomminuted fractures, and plate and screw fixation are used for the more complex and comminuted fractures. An example of a 57-year-old female with an olecranon fracture treated with ORIF is shown in  Posterior splint placed for 1 to 2 weeks Gentle passive and active-assisted ROM are started after splint removal. For highly comminuted fractures where direction compression cannot be achieved a splint may be placed for longer than two weeks with motion delayed per surgeon discretion.  Sutures or staples removed at week two Continue gentle movements of elbow, no resistance exercises Maintain ROM of shoulder, wrist, and fingers.  Once confirmation of bony union has been achieved, gentle and progressive resistance exercises may be initiated. Weight bearing restrictions decreased as bony union is achieved Work on regaining preoperative ROM.  Elbow splinted in 90 degrees flexion for 5 to 10 days  Splint removed and ROM initiated A sling or splint may be used in early phase for comfort Extension gradually increased over 3 to 6 weeks A hinged brace may be used blocking certain degrees of extension if continued instability occurs at certain motions of movement. Extension blocking parameters and progression per treating physician discretion Avoid passive ROM.  Elbow is splinted for one week  Sutures or staples removed at two weeks Postoperative splint removed Flexion, extension, pronation, and supination ROM exercises started after splint removal Hinged elbow brace may be used by treating surgeon to help with stability Full, unprotected ROM delayed up to 4 weeks in elderly or severely comminuted fractures per surgeon preference  Resistive exercises are initiated.  Extremity splinted according to ligaments repaired  Sutures or staples removed at two weeks Splint removed after one week Hinged elbow brace placed with terminal extension limited to 30 degrees for 4 weeks Gentle active ROM No passive ROM of elbow Forearm pronation and supination exercises with elbow at 90 degrees and done with elbow at side to avoid varus or valgus stress  Resistive exercises initiated and progressed if bony union is evident  Elbow placed in postoperative splint  Sutures or staples removed at two weeks Splint removed and hinged elbow brace placed Gentle active ROM Avoid varus stress by performing exercises with elbow close to the body Stability of coronoid fixation dictates degree of extension Terminal 30 degrees of extension blocked for 4 weeks for coronoid fixation concerns  Resistive exercises initiated and progressed if bony union is evident The radius and ulna make up the bones of the forearm and the movement and articulation changes moving from the wrist to the elbow. The ulna can mostly be considered to be a straight bone while the radius has a curvature to it called the radial bow. A strong interosseous membrane holds the two bones together. Some fractures of the forearm are coupled with a dislocation of the joint proximal or distal to the fracture. A fracture of the ulna with a dislocation of the radial head is called a Monteggia fracture dislocation. A fracture of the radius with a disruption/dislocation of the distal radioulnar joint is called a Galeazzi fracture dislocation. In adults fractures of the radius and ulna are rarely treated nonoperatively, and no current study has compared the outcomes of nonoperative versus operative treatment of nondisplaced fractures of the forearm ( Generally fractures of the radius and ulna are fixed via direct methods such as open reduction internal fixation (ORIF) with plates and screws or indirect methods such as intramedullary (IM) devices. An example of a 24-year-old male with radial and ulnar shaft fractures treated with ORIF is shown in  Patient is placed into a splint and surgical incisions are protected Sutures or staples are removed at week two. Elevation of extremity encouraged Edema control and ROM of fingers  Active and active-assisted ROM of elbow, forearm, and wrist No repetitive forearm twisting 5-pound weight restriction though some surgeons prefer strict nonweight bearing  Lifting and twisting restrictions lifted once union has been achieved Work on regaining preoperative motion if not already achieved. It is crucial to communicate with the treating surgeon regarding when union has been achieved and when restrictions may be removed or surgeon preference regarding weight lifting limits despite lack of full union. The elbow is an articulation of the distal humerus and the proximal ulna and radius. The most distal portion of the humerus laterally is made up of the capitellum, which is covered with articular cartilage as it articulates with the radial head. Moving proximally up the lateral distal humerus is the lateral epicondyle and lateral condyle before the distal flare of the humerus starts to narrow as it makes up the humeral shaft. The most distal aspect of the medial humerus is the trochlea, which is covered with articular cartilage as it articulates with the proximal aspect of the ulna: the olecranon. Like the medial side, the proximal aspect of the medial distal humerus is the medial epicondyle and medial condyle as it narrows to the humeral shaft. The bony articulation of the elbow helps maintain the stability of the elbow. The ulnohumeral articulation is considered a hinge type joint. The radiocapitellar joint is considered a pivot joint. The third articulation is between the radial head and proximal ulna. Collectively the different types of joints of the elbow allow for flexion and extension as well as pronation and supination. The normal full motion of the elbow in women aged 20 to 44 is 150.0 degrees of flexion and 4.7 degrees of extension ( The surrounding ligaments and capsule of the elbow are critical in the inherent stability of the elbow. The medial collateral The radial head articulates with the capitellum at the elbow and may be injured in isolated radial head or neck fractures or in association with fractures of the forearm or elbow dislocations. A large majority of these fractures in isolation may be treated nonoperatively if there is not a block to motion or less than 2 mm of articular step-off. Initially these patients are placed into a simple sling for comfort and are encouraged to start motion immediately to prevent stiffness. Motion may be inhibited early due to the hemarthrosis that develops from the fracture, and the treating physician may aspirate the joint to reduce the volume to help facilitate early motion. Active and passive motion are encouraged early on and restricted weight bearing for the first six to eight weeks until bony union is achieved. Keys for successful rehabilitation include maintaining preinjury motion. For those fractures that require operative treatment, the type of treatment depends on the extent of the injury. Operative treatment includes open reduction internal fixation (ORIF), resection of the radial head, or replacement of the radial head with a prosthetic device. Resection of the radial head without replacement is an option when the surrounding MCL and interosseous membrane are competent, though long-term outcomes studies have shown conflicting results regarding success ( Elbow dislocations can be broken up into simple and complex patterns. Simple dislocations of the elbow are those in which the injury is only ligamentous without any associated fractures. Complex dislocations are elbow dislocations with associated fractures. For the majority of simple dislocations, the treatment is nonoperative with initiation of early ROM. Conscious sedation is generally all that is required to reduce the elbow back into place. When the elbow is reduced the treating physician will place the elbow through a ROM with varus and valgus stress. As long as the elbow is stable throughout the arc of motion the patient is generally placed in a splint with the elbow flexed to 90 degrees for a week. Early ROM with a therapist is encouraged. If the elbow is unstable throughout an arc of motion the physician will splint the elbow in a reduced position and may elect for ligamentous repair. The therapy initiated after repair should follow that in the ligamentous repair protocol chapter ( Complex elbow dislocations are elbow dislocations that include associated fractures. The most common associated fractures include the radial head, coronoid process of the ulna, and the olecranon. The “terrible triad” elbow dislocation commonly mentioned is an elbow dislocation with injuries to the coronoid process, radial head, and lateral collateral ligament. Complex elbow dislocations may be divided further into the particular mechanism: axial, valgus posterolateral rotatory, and varus posteromedial rotatory injuries ( In the axial complex elbow dislocation the collateral ligaments are often intact whereas the olecranon is fractured with an associated radial head dislocation ( A complete reference list is available at