The experimental and numerical modeling of cold forging operations conducted on commercial Al alloys requires a precise knowledge of the functional dependence of both flow stress and work-hardening rate on microstructure and deformation conditions. In order to contribute to the improvement of the finite element computer modeling of forming operations conducted on Al alloys, under cold-warm working conditions, an original and rational constitutive description, able to predict accurately both the flow stress and work-hardening rate of an AA6082-T6 Al alloy is proposed. The constitutive formulation has been developed on the basis of the Mechanical Threshold Stress (MTS) model and its applicability is limited to the deformation of the material under cold-warm working conditions, that is to say, in the temperature range of 298–423 K. A novel differential equation for the description of the continuous change in the work-hardening rate of the alloy has been developed, which allows the prediction of the changes in flow stress and work-hardening rate during deformation either under constant and variable temperature and strain rate conditions. The validation of the developed constitutive description has been accomplished by its implementation into a finite element (FE) model for the accurate prediction of the change in some local contact parameters, such as contact pressure, sliding velocity and interface temperature, during the friction test employed in the evaluation of friction conditions in metalworking, known as the Upsetting Sliding Test (UST).Burgers vector Elastic constants Specific heat Thermal effusivities Normalized activation energy associated with the interaction of dislocations with precipitates and solute atoms Normalized activation energy associated with the interaction of glide dislocations with forest dislocations Boltzmann constant Distance between subsequent obstacles on the slip plane Parameters for the characterization of the obstacles profiles Parameters for the characterization of the obstacles profiles Sliding distance Ratio between σ and Ratio between σ and Temperature Initial temperature Temperature increase due to plastic work Taylor-Quinney coefficient Strain increment Effective strain Effective strain rate, s Material constant, s Fraction of the friction energy converted into heat Heat flux density generated by friction Billet heat flux density Temperature-dependent shear modulus Shear modulus at 0 K Atom vibrational frequency Effective stress Athermal stress Yield stress Mechanical threshold corresponding to the interaction of dislocations with solute atoms and precipitates Mechanical threshold corresponding to the interaction of glide dislocations with forest dislocations Material constant Density Dislocation density Work-hardening rate Initial work-hardening rate corresponding to stage III hardening Work-hardening rate corresponding to stage IV hardening Shear stress The AA6082 Al alloy constitutes an important structural engineering material, which belongs to the Al-Mg-Si system and therefore, it derives its mechanical strength from precipitation hardening after artificial aging. This alloy is widely used in many different applications for weight reduction purposes and particularly, it represents an attractive material for the automotive industry. The interest in this industrial field arises not only due to its high strength to weight ratio and good corrosion resistance but also to its outstanding capability to be formed into useful parts and components by means of plastic deformation. The mechanical properties and performance of structural Al alloys have been extensively investigated in the past few years. These studies have encompassed many different fields, some of which include the analysis of their strengthening mechanisms and related mechanical properties [ The changes in flow stress with microstructure and deformation conditions (deformation temperature and strain rate), when these materials are plastically deformed, have been described by means of many different approaches. Some of these include the so-called strain compensation of different material parameters [ Most of the above-referenced works have been developed in order to analyze the changes in flow stress during deformation under hot-working conditions. However, in spite of the great importance of those forming operations that are conducted under cold-warm working conditions employing Al alloys, the appropriate description of the flow stress and work-hardening rate of the material, in this case, has been investigated to a lesser extent. As an example, Yan and co-workers [ In a similar investigation, Chen et al. [ Scapin and Manes [ Concerning specifically the AA6082 Al alloy, Vilamosa and co-workers [ A plausible alternative formulation that can be readily employed for accomplishing the constitutive description of different metals and alloys deformed in a wide range of temperatures and strain rates is the physically-based approach known as the Mechanical Threshold Stress (MTS) model, developed and commonly employed at Los Alamos National Laboratory. As indicated by Horstemeyer et al. [ The model was first applied by Follansbee and co-workers to the description of the dynamic deformation of Cu and nitronic 40 [ Thus, the present communication reports the main findings of an investigation that has been carried out in order to develop an original and rational physically-based constitutive formulation for the AA6082-T6 Al alloy deformed in the temperature and strain rate interval, typical of cold-warm forming operations conducted on this material, that is to say, in the temperature range of 298–423 K. Such a description is formulated on the basis of the MTS model. As required for the correct numerical analysis of different FEM models devoted to the study of such forming operations, the advanced constitutive description is able to predict quite accurately the changes in flow stress and work-hardening rate when the material is deformed either under constant and transient deformation conditions. A comparison of the results of the new proposed constitutive description with those obtained with the Hansel-Spittel [ The present investigation has been carried out employing samples of an AA6082-T6 Al alloy with the following composition (Wt.%), as indicated by the supplier: 0.73 Si, 0.62 Mg, 0.49 Fe, 0.44 Mn, 0.1 Cu, 0.11 Zn, 0.03 Cr, Al rem. The material was provided in the form of bars, from which cylindrical compression specimens of 12 mm in height and 10 mm in diameter were machined. The compression tests were conducted in vacuum employing a Gleeble 3500 thermo-mechanical system ( The testing procedure involved the heating of the specimens from room temperature to the corresponding testing temperature, at a mean constant heating rate of 5 K s  As can be observed from the above Figures, the flow stress curves are characterized by the presence of an initial non-linear work-hardening transient followed by an approximately linear increase in the flow stress with strain, at elevated plastic strains. Also, even under the present deformation conditions, it can be observed that both temperature and strain rate have a moderate influence on the flow stress and work-hardening rate of the material. As expected, as deformation temperature increases and strain rate decreases both the flow stress and work-hardening rate decrease. Thus, as far as the analysis of the work-hardening behavior of the material is concerned, it can be clearly observed that after the initiation of plastic flow and as the applied strain increases the material exhibits a typical non-linear dependence of the flow stress on the applied strain, characterized by a strong decrease in the work-hardening rate, typical of stage III hardening, which is subsequently followed by the attainment of an apparently constant work-hardening rate, giving rise to a linear relationship between σ and ε, a behavior which has long been reported in the literature as stage IV hardening [  As deformation temperature increases, the work-hardening rate decreases to a large extent and the transition from stage III to stage IV hardening is also displaced to lower values of the normalized flow stress. It can be clearly observed that the work-hardening rate in stage IV hardening varies between approximately μ/620 - μ/360, with the trend of achieving lower values as deformation temperature increases. As indicated above, in order to model the change in flow stress with microstructure and deformation conditions, the concepts behind the MTS model are employed [ Accordingly, the normalized flow stress is expressed as: In the above equation, σ In the above equations, b represents the magnitude of the Burgers vector, k the Boltzmann constant, g Following the above formulation, the temperature and strain rate dependence of the yield stress can be described by the following relationship: In this case, as reported by Cheng et al. [  The above Figure clearly illustrates that the MTS model constitutes a sound approach for describing the temperature and strain rate dependence of σ The determination of the mechanical threshold  In order to describe the normalized To our knowledge, this is the first time that such an evolution equation has been proposed in the literature for describing the type of work-hardening behavior shown in In the above equation, The above result does not correspond exactly to the mean value of the experimental points shown in On the contrary, as shown in Thus, it can be observed that the constant work-hardening rate corresponding to the subsequent stage IV hardening shown in Finally, it has also been determined that the temperature dependence of the parameter In summary, the computation of the parameter Besides the experimental flow stress curves, Therefore, the proposed formulation fulfills all the requirements of the constitutive law that should be employed for the FE modeling of forming operations in this material, as initially established in the objectives of the present work. However, some important aspects remain to be discussed concerning the nature of the proposed constitutive description, particularly regarding its intrinsic features and limitations, as well as the comparison of its results with other simple parametric constitutive laws usually employed in FEM analysis. It has long been acknowledged that, in general, sheet metal forming of Al alloys gives rise to severe adhesive wear and galling of the tools, which in turn leads to an increase in energy needs and production costs, as well as a decrease in tool life and quality of manufactured parts [ Such a goal can be achieved by means of adequate laboratory tests able to reproduce industrial forming operations, such as the Upsetting Sliding Test (UST), combined with numerical simulation employing FEM, an aspect that has been addressed to a lesser extent than other research topics. The UST is a friction testing system able to reproduce a large variety of industrial forming processes, which constitutes an appropriate tool for the analysis of galling during stamping and deep drawing operations of this material [ The numerical simulation of such a testing system by means of FEM, prior to performing the actual laboratory tests, allows the determination of a number of important parameters, such as contact pressure and sliding speed, as well as the temperature, strain and stress distributions at the tool/piece interface. However, in order to carry out such a computational modeling a precise description of the changes in the flow stress of the material with deformation conditions and microstructure is of utmost importance. As indicated above, the UST allows the investigation of tribological characteristics of forging processes conducted under a wide range of temperatures. This specific test is able to reproduce the local conditions of contact experienced at the tool/workpiece interface such as contact pressure, sliding velocity and interface temperature. During this friction test, an X38CrMoV5 tool is compressed 100 μm within the AA6082-T6 Al alloy cylindrical specimen and subsequently driven at a constant velocity of 20 mm/s along the axial length of the sample. The UST device includes two load cells for measuring both normal and tangential forces resulting from the compression of the billet and friction at the tool/specimen interface. Bouquerel et al. [ Finite element modeling and analysis of the UST configuration have been performed with the Abaqus/Explicit software. According to a previous study conducted by Brocail et al. [ A symmetry condition was applied to the right faces of both opposing parts. Two Eulerian surfaces were defined on the modeled specimen. The first one is the material inlet boundary where the experimental sliding velocity is applied. The opposite surface is the material outlet. Boundary conditions are set on the mesh for both Eulerian surfaces. Indeed, all degrees of freedom were blocked on the material inlet, whereas the material outlet nodes were not constrained on the y and z-axis. A boundary condition on the bottom face of the billet was applied, which releases its displacement through the x-axis. The X38CrMoV5 tool steel was constrained to move towards the specimen following the mean normal force (z-axis) of the corresponding experimental configuration. Friction between both parts is modeled using the Coulomb's friction coefficient. This parameter is a variable, which was optimized by means of an iterative least square method aimed at minimizing the difference between the experimental tangential force and the predicted one. The constitutive model developed previously for the AA6082-T6 alloy is implemented in tabular form. The X38CrMoV5 tool steel behavior is assumed as perfectly elastic in this simulation. Both parts are meshed with the 3D continuum elements of Abaqus/Explicit finite element library. These are coupled displacement-temperature 8 nodes solid elements with reduced integration and hourglass control (C3D8RT). A sensitivity analysis of the finite element discretization has been undertaken and the mesh size has been finally set to 0.28 mm in order to get an appropriate amount of CPU time consumed, as well as an acceptable accuracy for the post-processing of the contact pressure, local sliding velocity, and interface temperature. The entire finite element model was considered adiabatic. Heat losses by thermal convection and radiation were omitted for all surfaces. The heat generated by the plastic deformation of the Al alloy and the friction-induced heat were both considered. The heat generation resulting from friction was computed by means of the following equation: Where  At the outset, it is important to point out that, although the proposed evolution equation for the normalized work-hardening rate,  The subsequent transient part is determined by the temperature-dependence of All the features indicated on Commercial finite element computer codes employed for modeling the plastic deformation of different alloys under a range of deformation conditions usually employ simple parametric relationships of the above-mentioned characteristics, such as the widely used Hansel-Spittel work-hardening law [ The assumption that the current flow stress of the material depends on the total applied strain is fundamentally wrong since ε cannot represent any microstructural feature whatsoever. Clearly, as shown in The description of the change in the work-hardening rate and particularly its transition from stage III to stage IV hardening in a continuous manner by means of Eq. Finally, it is important to point out that the proposed constitutive law is strictly valid for the temperature interval explored in the present work, that is to say, 298–423 K, which encompasses the range of expected temperatures that will be found during the cold-warm forming operations of Al parts. If the experimental alloy employed in the present investigation is deformed at temperatures above this range, the evolution of flow stress behavior changes significantly, as shown in In this Figure, it can be clearly observed that, at both strain rates, the material exhibits limited work-hardening at the beginning of plastic deformation followed by a significant work-softening transient. Such a behavior has been reported before by other researchers, not only for the AA6082 alloy, as reported by Spigarelli et al. [ Thus, at deformation temperatures less than approximately 473 K, due to the T6 condition of the alloy, the interaction of dislocations with precipitates inhibits significantly the dynamic recovery processes, as has been pointed out by Myhr et al. [ As indicated above, to show the potential industrial applications of the developed constitutive description, the formulation was employed in the FE analysis of the so-called UST, from whose results several important aspects should be further discussed. In the first place, In the second place, given the fact that the experimental normal force reflects the mechanical behavior of the specimen, the results shown in In the present work, axisymmetric compression tests were conducted on samples of an AA6082-T6 Al alloy in the temperature interval of 298–423 K, at strain rates in the span of 0.1–1 s An original constitutive formulation for the description of the flow stress and work-hardening rate of an AA6082-T6 Al alloy deformed under cold-warm working conditions, developed on the basis of the Mechanical Threshold Stress Model, has been proposed. The constitutive description encompasses three different components, which describe the contribution of the athermal interaction of dislocations with long-range barriers (grain boundaries), σ The rate of change of the component The constitutive formulation is able to describe correctly the changes in work-hardening during stages III and IV in a continuous manner. Also, it is able to predict quite accurately the flow stress of the material under both constant and transient loading conditions. The new proposed constitutive description is a more sound approach than the simple parametric relationships usually employed in FE modeling, which consider the total plastic strain as a state parameter. Therefore, it is an appropriate tool for modeling the behavior of this material during deformation by means of finite element computer codes. The work-hardening behavior exhibited by the AA6082-T6 Al alloy under the present microstructural and deformation conditions encompasses two distinct stages. Firstly, stage III hardening, which is characterized by an initial value of approximately μ/10 and a linear decrease in the work-hardening rate with the applied stress. Secondly, stage IV hardening, which is characterized by a temperature-dependent constant work-hardening rate exhibited at elevated plastic strains, whose value decreases from approximately μ/390 at 298 K to approximately μ/570 at 423 K. Such a behavior is believed to be a consequence of the interaction of dislocations with solute atoms and precipitates, with the resulting inhibition of the dynamic recovery processes. At deformation temperatures above approximately 473 K, it is expected that particle coalescence during plastic deformation allows a significant improvement of the dynamic recovery processes of the AA6082-T6 Al alloy. This would lead to the presence of a peak stress and a marked work-softening transient of the flow stress curves, as it has been experimentally observed in the present work. The potential industrial applications of the developed constitutive description have been shown by its implementation into a finite element model, which allows an accurate and reliable prediction of the change in the local contact parameters such contact pressure, sliding velocity and interface temperature during the friction test employed in metalworking referred to as the Upsetting Sliding Test. The raw/processed data required to reproduce these findings cannot be shared at this time due to technical or time limitations. The authors gratefully acknowledge the financial support of Valenciennes Metropole granted to Professor Puchi-Cabrera, as well as the infrastructure provided by the Laboratory Under constant conditions of deformation temperature and strain rate, the mechanical threshold The evolution of the mechanical threshold is given by: From Eq. By replacing Eq. The first step in the computation of the flow stress is the numerical integration of Eq. The above equation is computed taking into account that: In this way, the parameter The second step in the computation is the determination of the yield stress, σ The third step in the computation is the determination of the parameter S The flow stress for each data point can be finally computed as: