The leaching behavior of metallic copper has been investigated using chlorine electro-generated at the anode in 1.0mol/L HCl solution. An electrochemical reactor divided into two compartments by an anion exchange membrane was employed for these experiments. Various parameters, viz., current density, chloride concentration, leaching temperature and time, and agitation speed, were studied to understand the mechanism of copper leaching. The leaching rate of copper increased with increasing current density, from 10 to 40mA/cm2, increasing agitation speed, from 200 to 600rpm, and increasing temperature, from 25 to 50°C. The addition of Cl− ions enhanced the leaching efficiency of copper remarkably by dissolving CuCl precipitated on the surface of the copper plate. Based on the results of the leaching experiment, the leaching of copper by electro-generated chlorine is proposed to proceed through three stages: stage I (ORP of leach solution≈1300mVSHE), stage II (380mVSHE
                     <ORP<490mVSHE), and stage III (ORP>490mVSHE).Printed circuit boards are built in most electric and electronic equipment (EEE) as a main constituent used to control its operation. Consequently, the considerable increase in EEE end-of-life (EOL) resulting from the rapid replacement of old models by the latest advanced models has led to the generation of a tremendous amount of waste printed circuit boards ( Since waste printed circuit boards contain not only valuable metals but also environmentally hazardous materials, efficient recycling should be required to secure the metallic resources and to prevent environmental pollution at the same time. In the recycling of waste printed circuit boards, the prevailing commercial process has thus far been the pyrometallurgical route, which utilizes a copper smelter and focuses mainly on the recovery of precious metals and copper ( On the other hand, many hydrometallurgical methods have been proposed to replace the pyrometallurgical processes, but they have several drawbacks, and the existing technologies are not available for the recovery of valuable metals from waste printed circuit boards. Nevertheless, more stringent environmental regulations are stimulating further research on the recycling of waste printed circuit boards by employing environmentally friendly and energy-saving hydrometallurgical processes. From this point of view, several researchers have explored the recycling process of metal components from waste printed circuit boards utilizing electrochemical methods (   We have been investigating the leaching of copper from waste printed circuit boards using electro-generated chlorine in hydrochloric acid solution ( In the present study, the leaching behavior of copper was investigated using electro-generated chlorine at the anode in HCl solution. The quantitative analysis of the total oxidants (residual Cl Metallic copper plates with 99.9% purity were used for the experiments. Copper plates were first cut into fragments of about 6 An electrochemical reactor with three electrodes was employed for the leaching experiments on copper using electro-generated chlorine. Leaching experiments were conducted using three copper plates with a contact surface area of 25 The leaching of copper using chlorine is affected by the solubility of the chlorine gas electro-generated at the anode in the HCl solution. Gaseous Cl   Gaseous Cl The copper dissolves to form a variety of Cu(I) and Cu(II) chloride complexes, CuCl, CuCl In the cathode compartment, the main cathode reaction is the hydrogen evolution and the possible side reaction is the reduction of copper ions which migrate from the anode compartment to the cathode by the permeation through an anion exchange membrane. In our experiments, a negligible amount of copper leached in the anode compartment was permeated to the cathode and then mostly were reduced to metallic copper. The concentrations of Cu(I), Cu(II), and residual Cl When the ORP (oxidation-reduction potential, mV When the ORP (oxidation–reduction potential, mV  The surface of the copper plate sample after electro-chlorine leaching was analyzed with SEM-EDS and XRD. The SEM image and SEM-EDS peaks presented in The leaching of copper with agitation speeds varying between 200 and 800  A solution of 2.0 Based on the above results, the leaching of copper by electro-generated chlorine in 1.0 In stage I, the ORP of the leach solution was maintained at around 1300 In stage II, the ORP of the leach solution was observed to drop suddenly from 1300 In stage III, the ORP of the leach solution increased to 500–600 The leaching of copper by electro-generated chlorine is assumed to proceed through the three stages: stage I (ORP of leach solution The leaching rate of copper increased with increasing current density, from 10 to 40 This paper is based on work supported by the Resources Recycling R&D Center (Korea) under the project entitled "Development of total recycling technology for WEEE".