A variety of researchers have constructed and presented lifecycle assessments of the microalgae-to-biofuel process, however, inconsistencies in system boundary definitions and high-level process modeling have led to a wide range of results. This study integrates engineering process models validated through experimental and modeling research to perform an environmental assessment of four microalgae-to-biofuel production scenarios leveraging the Argonne National Laboratory GREET model. The baseline scenario consists of a down flow open pond growth system, three phase de-watering step (settling, dissolved air flotation, and a centrifuge), hexane extraction and nutrient recovery using anaerobic digestion. The net energy ratio (NER), defined as energy consumed over the produced energy, and greenhouse gases (GHG) for the baseline scenario are 0.7MJMJ−1 and −41.7gCO2-eq
                     MJ−1 respectively. Three alternative scenarios are also evaluated: 1) Improved microalgal productivity, 2) supercritical CO2 extraction, and 3) no nutrient recycle. This research shows that supercritical CO2 extraction is neither currently energetically- nor environmentally favorable and that nutrient recycle plays an integral role in achieving favorable NER and GHGs. The study highlights on the systems level, two findings related to the NER; 1) the NER is minimally impacted with increased productivity and 2) increasing microalgae lipid content detrimentally affects the NER which is attributed to the reduction in the total energy that can be captured by the anaerobic digester.The next generation of biofuel feedstock processes must be critically analyzed to quantify the potential scalability and corresponding environmental impact. Compared to first-generation biofuel feedstocks, microalgae are characterized by higher solar energy yield, year-round cultivation, the use of lower quality or brackish water, and the use of less- and lower-quality land Lifecycle assessment (LCA) has emerged as the fundamental tool to evaluate the sustainability of next generation biofuels. The LCA literature makes use of the metrics of net energy ratio (NER, defined here as the ratio of energy consumed to fuel energy produced) and greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions per unit of energy produced as the functional units. The results from LCA are highly sensitive to definitions of system boundaries, lifecycle inventories, process efficiencies, and functional units This study focuses on a LCA founded on the integration of a systems engineering model informed by experimental and modeling research together with the Argonne National Laboratory's Greenhouse Gases, Regulated Emissions, and Energy USE in Transportation (GREET) model to directly compare multiple process paths The systems engineering process model serves as the foundation for the assessment of the various scenarios in terms of environmental impact and sustainability. Confidence in the results from these assessments is directly related to the validity of the foundational modeling. For this reason care has been taken to ensure that each process model is independently validated and seamlessly integrated into the systems modeling. Validation and proper function were assessed through the integration of experimental and literature data and the use of sub-system sensitivity analysis. The modularity of the systems engineering model facilitates the evaluation of a variety of alternative processing scenarios for a microalgae-to-biofuel process. Systems engineering models were integrated with the ANL GREET model to evaluate each process in terms of the NER and environmental impact. This research focused on three of the main process steps to produce biofuel from microalgae; microalgae production, lipid extraction, and end-use of LEA. The following section details the production system and the various assumptions for the LCA. Specifically, four scenarios are evaluated; 1) A three stage bioreactor system for both growing The following sections detail the differences between the four LCA scenarios with a summary of the GREET inputs for the various cases presented in As mentioned above, the production system modeled is based on a 3 stage bioreactor system. The energy required to move the culture between bioreactors and processing facilities is assumed to be 4.8 Microalgae cultivation requires a variety of nutrients including but not limited to nitrogen, phosphorous, CO The de-water system includes three de-watering steps: settling (bioflocculation), dissolved air flotation, and a centrifuge. Upon harvest, it is assumed that the microalgae are passively settled to a density of 10 The system uses a two-step extraction process; pressure homogenization and hexane extraction. The pressure homogenization is assumed to be 90% efficient and consumes 1.83 The baseline system used an anaerobic digester to recover nutrients and generate electricity and heat. The following assumptions are used, a mass ratio of 0.9 volatile solids (VS) to total solids, methane yield of 0.33 The lipid extracted microalgae can be utilized in several ways; through digestion for production of heat and energy, as fertilizer, or as cattle feed. Each involves its own particular energy or GHG credits. The digested solids from the anaerobic digester are assumed to replace purchased fertilizer with energy and environmental credits based on the ANL GREET model This scenario is based on improved biomass production. The biomass productivity was increased to 50 Supercritical carbon dioxide (SC-CO The assumptions for Scenario 3 are based on a dry supercritical CO  The results for the four scenarios and the baseline results from Frank et al. The GREET results for the four scenarios and the baseline results from Frank et al. From a technoeconomic standpoint, higher lipid content is desirable as it reduces equipment cost and footprint proportionately. For this reason, the baseline of this study assumes a lipid percentage of 50% compared to the baseline of Frank et al. The high energy consumption centered on the SC-CO The elimination of the anaerobic digester illustrates the impact of on-site heat and energy production and nutrient recycle from the LEA on the NER. In this scenario, the NER is double that of the baseline and these results confirm the importance and need to fully understand the performance of an anaerobic system operated on LEA. In terms of energy analysis, the performance of this sub-system is as important as understanding the growth performance of the microalgae-to-biofuel process in terms of quantifying the energy consumption and environmental impact on a systems level. The GHG results for the various scenarios are presented in The impact of the anaerobic digester is also illustrated by the GHG results. The baseline, improved growth, and Frank et al. In addition to the “strain-to-pump” analysis designed to be equivalent to the well-to-pump boundary, the results from this study can be expanded to include the combustion of the fuel for a “strain-to-wheel” LCA boundary, which is equivalent to the traditional well-to-wheel for conventional diesel. The “strain-to-wheel” analysis includes all stages of “strain-to-pump” as well as the combustion of fuel in transportation vehicles. For this expanded analysis it is assumed that soybean-derived and microalgae-based diesel fuels are used in 100% pure form in compression–ignition, direct-injection (CIDI) engine vehicles. Due to the lack of emissions data from the combustion of microalgae-based biofuel, it was assumed that the fuel economy and emissions from soy- and microalgae-based biofuels in CIDI vehicles are the same. The emissions associated with the combustion of the fuel were determined to be 72.0 A variety of literature LCAs have been performed with the NER results ranging from microalgae-based biofuels being comparable to traditional fuels to worse by two orders of magnitude. Recent meta-analysis has made efforts to decrease the variability by using modeling techniques that harmonize boundaries and processes. The baseline process model for the recent meta-analysis included the integration of an anaerobic digestion unit This study through the integration of engineering process models validated through experimental and modeling research illustrates the systems level effects of an anaerobic digester on the overall energy balance and GHGs for a microalgae-to-biofuel process. The process sensitivity analysis demonstrated the importance of a wet extraction process and the need to effectively recycle LEA. The study shows that higher lipid content in the biomass is detrimental to the NER due to a reduction in the total energy that can be captured by the anaerobic digester. Systems level assessments show the interconnection between process steps which can dramatically impact the environmental impact of the system. The authors gratefully acknowledge financial support from the  Supplementary material to this article can be found online at