Hydriding and chlorination of buttons of metallic cerium have been tested as a head-end step to separating metal impurities from actinides. The objective was to achieve complete conversion to chlorides while maintaining high surface area via small particles and open porosity. Hydriding by reaction with 100% H2 gas at 573 K was successful at reducing cm-scale metal buttons into small particles/fragments. This step was followed by reaction with flowing 99.5% anhydrous Cl2 gas at temperatures ranging from 423 to 573 K for 60 min. In experiments reported here, up to 92% conversion to cerium chloride was achieved from reacting with the anhydrous chlorine gas. The final chloride product has high porosity coupled with small particle sizes (microns to 1600 μm), which makes it suitable for subsequent purification processes. Higher chlorine concentrations in the gas favor higher conversion to chloride. The optimal temperature to achieve high chlorination is 523 K. Oxygen is a minor impurity in the chlorine gas which appears to prevent complete chlorination from being achieved.Separation of rare earth metals from actinide metals has numerous applications related to commercial metal production, nuclear power, nuclear material/waste treatment, and rare earth metal recycling. Two notable technologies have been extensively studied and developed for such separations—aqueous extraction processes, such as PUREX, and high-temperature electrochemical separation, such as pyroprocessing [ Hydriding of metals such as uranium, thorium, zirconium, titanium, and hafnium by H  Kinetics of cerium hydride formation was studied by Bloch et al. using hydrogen gas on cerium metal [ Cerium hydride formation is not limited to the dihydride. Cerium has been reported to form CeH Evidence that the hydride is a suitable precursor for the formation of the chloride was reported in 1944 based on the following route to the synthesis of UCl Meanwhile, synthesis of UCl Much work has been published on chlorination of ores or metal oxides using chlorine gas [ We, thus, aimed in this project to study the conditions that are conducive to converting the impure metal to hydrides followed by chlorides. The cerium and hydride system has been well established and extensively studied [ Or All reactions proposed for the process in The remaining uncertainty regarding the process pertains to reaction kinetics and mass transport limitations. An essential requirement for complete conversion of metal to chloride is to form small, porous particles in which mass transfer resistance for impurity separation is minimized. This paper reports on the results of a study in which cerium was used as the base metal and was doped with Al, Fe, Ga, Ta and U as the impurities. Experiments were performed in which the metal was first hydride by reaction with H Cerium (Alfa Asar 99%) was melted with 0.1 wt% each of tantalum (Alfa Asar 99.8%), iron (Alfa Asar 99.98%), uranium (IBILabs 99.98%), aluminum (Alfa Asar 99.97%), and gallium (Alfa Asar 99.9999%) at 1173 K in a tantalum crucible. This procedure was conducted in an argon atmosphere Inert glovebox with less than 1 PPM H Reactions were carried out in a vertical tube furnace with an upward flow of gas. The metal or metal hydride starting material was loaded into a quartz basket with 15 μm opening frit that was supported in a 2.54-cm diameter quartz tube by another frit. This system is shown in The furnace was constructed from Omega heating elements (CRWS-63/120-A) and rated up to 1255 K. Each end of the reactor was capped with an MTI vacuum seal that allows for an inlet and outlet gas line as well as a compression fitting for a corrosion-resistant K-type thermocouple (Omega KQXL-14G-12). All of these components were installed in an argon-atmosphere glovebox (Inert Technologies) with <1 ppm H The cut metal pieces (1–6 g) were loaded into the quartz basket and placed in the reactor for hydriding. Hydrogen gas was openly flowed through the reactor at 300 cc/min with a measured absolute pressure of 0.89 atm while the furnace was heated up to 573 K at 5 K/min. Crushing and sieving of the hydride products were performed in the glove box to yield the desired particle size range before chlorination. For each chlorination test, approximately 1 g of size-reduced hydride particles were weighed into the quartz basket and then lowered into the quartz reactor tube. The basket rests on the quartz frit located half-way down the length of the quartz tube. The reactor was sealed and flushed using argon. The reactor was evacuated to approximately 0.03 atm by switching Valve 5 to the vacuum pump and closing Valve 4. Then the reactor was heated to the chosen set point at 5 K/min. After reaching the temperature set point, chlorine flowed through the reactor at 100 cc/min by closing Valve 5, then opening Valve 4, then switching Valve 5 to direct the gas to the exhaust once the reactor was at atmospheric pressure. X-ray diffraction (XRD), D2 Phaser from Bruker, was used to determine the phases in the hydride and chloride samples. Scans were done using two-theta angles from 5° to 100° using 0.02-degree steps and a scan rate of 0.5-sec/step. A 1-mm slit and a PSD of 2.489 were used. Samples were analyzed using an airtight sample holder with a knife edge (Bruker A100B141). For determining the conversion to chloride for each sample, two methods were used—weight change and measurement of chloride ion concentration with an ion selective electrode (Orion 9617BNWP) after dissolving a sample in water. For using the mass change, the following formula was utilized. The change in theoretical mass ( For the chloride ion measurement approach, a 0.1 g sample was dissolved in 100 mL of ultra-pure water. Ionic strength adjuster (ISA) (Orion) was added at 2 vol%. A chloride ion selective electrode (Orion combination chloride electrode 9617BNWP) was immersed in the solution, and the concentration was measured using a benchtop pH/ISE meter (Orion Star A214) based on a calibration equation determined on the same day. Fractional conversion to chloride was calculated by dividing the moles of CeCl A scanning electron microscope (SEM) Quanta 600 from FEI was used for sample imaging. Samples were mounted using a carbon dot. Ultraviolet photoelectron spectroscopy (UPS) Axis Ultra from Kratos Analytical was used to determine the oxidation state of the cerium hydride by measuring the bandgap. The source used was He(I). X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) was used to determine the oxidation state of the cerium chloride by comparing the binding energy of the sample to purchased cerium chloride. The source used was monochromatic aluminum. Scans were conducted using 40-eV pass energy, 0.1-eV steps, and a dwell time of 300-ms. A quadrupole mass spectrometer (QMS) from Pfieffer Vacuum (QME 220) was used to determine the composition of the effluent gases during the hydriding and chlorination reactions. A Faraday detector was used with a 200-ms dwell time. The QMS was calibrated for concentration with 50/50 mixtures of H A LECO oxygen analyzer (TCH600) was used to determine the oxygen content in select cerium metal samples. The standard ASTM method was used with a stainless steel standard (502–867) and nickel crucibles. The metal samples were placed into a nickel crucible, which dropped into a graphite crucible with graphite powder. Before reaction with chlorine gas, batches of Ce metal with impurities were hydrided by reaction with hydrogen gas (99.999%) flowing at 300 cc/min while being heated by programming the furnace to increase temperature at a rate of 5 K/min to a set point of 573 K. The function of the hydriding step is only to reduce the particle size. The hydriding process was run similar to that published by Bloch et al. [ There was concern that the negative flow rate and pressure drop might introduce oxygen into the system by back flowing air from the exhaust. Several samples of metal and hydride were analyzed using LECO to measure oxygen content before and after hydriding. The results are shown in The problem with formation of oxide is that it can prevent the eventual formation of the chloride. This is illustrated in  Samples of the hydride material were analyzed with XRD to verify the formation of hydride. The XRD for one sample of hydride material is shown in In order to further evaluate the composition for the hydride, a sample was analyzed with UPS. This method measures the bandgap for metallic or semiconductor properties. For each chlorination experiment, approximately 1 g of the metal hydride (CeH  The effluent gas was sampled during this test, and concentrations of H Based on standard state data from Barin and substituting CeH Based on the free energy of change of reactions (9) and (10), it was calculated for a total pressure of 1 atm that at equilibrium the partial pressure of Cl The product from this experiment was weighed and dissolved in water to determine fractional conversion to chloride using the chloride ion selective electrode (CIE). The fractional conversion of hydride to chloride based on the mass change was measured to be 84.3% to chloride, while the ion selective electrode analysis method indicated a fractional conversion of 87.3%. In another experiment, 99.5% Cl Another hydride sample was heated to 523 K under vacuum and then analyzed using the QMS under flowing Ar. The QMS did not show any increase in the H  A photograph of the chloride product is shown in the left image in Since the conversion to chloride was relatively low using 523 K, Cl  In another series of experiments, the process temperature was varied from 423 to 573 K. These experiments were run with 100% chlorine gas and the time varied from 10 to 90 min.  While the chlorination reaction proceeds rapidly, for some reason it does reach a plateau at about 92% conversion. We have considered both mass transport limitations and competitive reactions as an explanation for this limit. The collapse of pores caused by sintering or melting of the material could lead to mass transport limitations. Cerium chloride melts at a much higher temperature than any of the chlorination experiments that were performed. However, the exothermic reaction of CeH It was originally thought that unreacted cores were the cause of incomplete conversion to chlorides. The data on limited chlorination and oxygen contamination is interpreted as representing a competitive reaction with cerium between oxygen and chlorine. The reaction of O We also need to consider the possible formation of oxychlorides. Anderson and Mishra conducted experiments on converting cerium oxide to cerium chloride [ The formation of oxychlorides was explored by chlorinating purchased CeO Cerium metal pieces doped with uranium, tantalum, gallium, aluminum, and iron impurities can be reduced in size from several centimeters to hundreds of micrometers in diameter by reacting with H  The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. Dr. Paulo Perez for much assistance with literature review and operations with TEM, XPS, and UPS. Dr. Randy Polson for sample preparation and analysis using SEM and FIB. Colleagues in the Pyrometallurgy Lab at the University of Utah for assisting me with daily lab activities, ideas, and using equipment. This work was performed under the auspices of the