A sandwich-structured bimetallic blank containing high chromium cast iron (HCCI) and low carbon steel (LCS) claddings was newly prepared by composite casting, and then the blank was hot-rolled into composite plate. The evolution of microstructures, phase constituents and texture components of hot-rolled HCCI was analyzed. During hot rolling, the eutectic carbides of M7C3 were broken and partly dissolved into the austenitic matrix, resulting in the precipitation of secondary carbides of M2C during air cooling. Significant refinement of austenitic grains and carbides are discovered in hot-rolled HCCI specimens. The hardness of hot-rolled HCCI increases from around 600.5 to 850–900HV due to the large carbides volume fraction, indicating a high strength and good wear resistance of hot-rolled HCCI. Strong orientation densities at {110}〈490〉, {111}〈110〉, {001}〈142〉 and {112}〈110〉 location are found after hot rolling.High chromium cast irons (HCCIs) are known as excellent wear-resistant materials, which have been widely used for wear-affected equipments operated under extreme conditions, such as facilities in the slurry pumping systems used in the oil sands handling, mineral processing, coal and cement industries Metallic sandwich structures have recently been investigated due to their lightweight and multifunctional characteristics A sandwich-structured bimetallic blank containing a HCCI core of 80 To investigate the evaluation of its mechanical properties, the microhardness of as-cast, hot-rolled and heat-treated states was measured using HV-1000 Vickers hardness gauge with load of 100 {1  The austenitizing and quenching treatment is conducted to ensure the transformation of austenitic matrix into martensite, and furthermore enhance the hardness and wear resistance. More secondary carbides are observed in the quenched specimens, since the alloyed elements content in austenitic matrix increases with partly dissolution of eutectic carbides at austenitizing temperatures. Three types of secondary carbides could be easily distinguished in X-ray diffraction profiles of the as-cast and hot-rolled HCCI specimens are shown in  Hot-rolled HCCI was successfully obtained by rolling of a sandwich-structured composite blank. Significant refinement of austenitic grains and carbides are found in hot-rolled HCCI specimens. The eutectic carbides of M We would like to thank the Experimental Center at University of Science and Technology Beijing and Professor Huiping Feng for experimental advice.