The National Aeronautics and Space Administration's (NASA's) PS304 coating is a plasma spray deposited tribological coating with feedstock composed of NiCr, Cr2O3, Ag and BaF2–CaF2 powders. The effects of rounded BaF2–CaF2 particles on the gravity-fed flow characteristics of PS304 feedstock have been investigated. The BaF2–CaF2 powder was fabricated by water atomization using four sets of process parameters. Each of these powders was then characterized by microscopy and classified by screening to obtain 45–106 μm particles and added incrementally from 0–10 wt.% to the other constituents of the PS304 feedstock, namely nichrome, chromia and silver powders. The relationship between feedstock flow rate, measured with the Hall flowmeter, and concentration of fluorides was found to be linear in each case. The slopes of the lines were between those of the linear relationships previously reported using angular and spherical fluorides and were closer to the relationship predicted using the rule of mixtures. The results offer a fluoride fabrication technique potentially more cost-effective than gas atomization processes or traditional comminution processes.NASA's PS304 coating is a high temperature composite solid lubricant material  Large blocks of the solidified fluoride material (5–10 cm) were removed from the crucible and comminuted into a coarse powder for subsequent processing by water atomization. Approximately 1060 g of the fluorides were loaded into a graphite crucible and induction melted at 1250 °C for processing with four sets of parameters (Processes A, B, C and D), as listed in Morphology of the fluorides was measured using commercially available image analysis software with images imported from an SEM. A small amount of powder was poured onto waxed paper and tapped gently to allow the particles to come to rest at their most stable position, which will also produce the largest projected area, in the method described by Wadell The flow rate of each powder blend was tested with a Hall flowmeter PS304 coating was applied by plasma spray The morphologies of the water atomized fluorides are shown in Particle size measurements, as measured by a light blockage particle analysis technique, are listed in The results from flow testing are shown graphically in Regardless of the possible particle–particle interactions, simply based on the rule of mixtures, the volume of a standard 50 g powder sample of PS304 feedstock powder is expected to increase with increasing content of fluorides because the theoretical density of the fluorides, 4.01 g/cm The as-deposited pull-off adhesion strength of the coatings on the Inconel substrates was measured using a standard test procedure The objective of this study was to investigate the effects of the addition of rounded fluorides on the flow characteristics of PS304 feedstock. Based on the results, the following conclusions were drawn. Water atomization can be used to fabricate novel rounded fluorides, which tend to have aspect ratio and sphericity measurements similar to those of angular fluorides and larger mean diameters than previously studied gas atomized spherical fluorides. Further work is needed to develop a metric that quantifies particle morphology in a way that is distinct to flow behavior. Increasing water pressure during atomization tends to produce particles with more attached satellites. Increasing the concentration of fluorides in the powder blend produces a linear increase in powder flow times. Fluorides with smoother surfaces generate less of an increase in the powder flow time. The flow behavior of PS304 with rounded fluorides is intermediate to that with angular and spherical fluorides and is approximated by a rule of mixtures calculation. The PS304 coating characteristics obtained with rounded fluorides are equivalent to those with angular and spherical fluorides. Water atomization is potentially a good method for high volume, low cost production BaF Thank you to J.A. Buehler, A.M. Yanke, D.J. Dixon, B.J. Edmonds, V. Lukaszewicz, A.R. Zaldana, J.M. Lucero, and M.S. McQuater for assistance with technical matters during the course of this investigation. The comments and suggestions provided by Dr. P.B. Abel and Dr. K.W. Street are greatly appreciated.