In this paper, we critically assess the contribution of Field (2007) in this issue. The author casts some doubts concerning the exceptionality of the 20th century as experiencing ‘growth in the era of knowledge based progress’, using new quantitative evidence on the TFP growth on the period 1855–2005, stressing the importance of a proper periodization as well as correcting for biases in earlier assessments by various authors. He shows that the actual TFP growth was rather strong from the 1870s to the first decade of the 20th century, while it was quite low during long periods of the 20th century (1906–1919; 1941–1948; 1973–1989). Field tried to explain this stylized fact using more conventional historical evidence (impact of technological innovation; rise of the Modern Business Enterprise – the latter being favoured by the development of communication technologies). We put forward some methodological discussion concerning the proper meaning of TFP (productivity growth is not the same as technological change) as well as putting the results in a more theoretical perspective (determinants of the periods of high TFP growth). We also stress some elements of a more historical nature not stressed by the author as the role of the State (protectionism, migration policy, R&D…), and more particularly the emergence of the Modern American University during the last three decades of the 19th century.In this paper, the author proposes a new assessment of the US economic growth performance during the last three decades of the 19th century (the post-Civil War period) and the first decade of the 20th century. More precisely, he tries to accurately assess the growth of the total productivity of the factors, i.e. the growth not accounted for by the growth of factors (inputs) conventionally measured. He focuses on data for the private domestic economy as well as the private nonfarm economy. He provides estimates for both the period before and after the one he analyses – and provides even estimates up to the beginning of the 21st century. This long term perspective allows the reader to put the post-Civil War and pre-WW1 period in perspective. The author aims at breaking some myths put forward in several standard work (the estimates made by The paper by Field is organised as a tryptic: a first part synthesises the results to be found in the conventional literature and the associated problems, a second one proposes very careful estimates (accounting for the procyclicity of TFP growth) of the total productivity of the factors growth for the entire period 1855–2005 divided in key subperiods, while the last part interprets the results at the light of more standard economic and business history works (history of techniques as well). The principal statistical source for the investigation is Field uses than more standard (less quantitative) economic history materials to show that his results are more compatible with this extraneous information than were the results (or interpretations) made inter alia by Besides the role of MBE (organizational innovation), Field also stresses in his article the contribution of late 19th century scientific and technical advance to 20th century growth (referring to the paper by The paper by Field has several merits: quantification as well as an in-depth reflection on the optimal periodisation (a key general problem in history), coupled with both statistical caution and historical awareness. A shortcoming might be the lack of a thorough methodological discussion regarding the proper meaning of TFP, and the difficulties with the concept (as admirably summarized by As far as research is concerned, but not solely that, a great absent in this paper is the role of the State. The author mentions one time of government sponsored R&D in agriculture (see p. 12, quoting If we turn here simply to higher scientific and technical education, the author could have enriched his argumentation. Following