Dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO) is an excellent organic solvent, and widely used in laboratories and industries. Therefore, plenty amount of wastewater containing DMSO have been discharged. As the DMSO is high resistant to biological process which is mostly used for wastewater treatments, other strong treatments are needed. Electrochemical oxidation using boron-doped diamond (BDD) anode is a promising method due to effective generation of free hydroxyl radicals which are quite strong oxidizing agents. In this work, a simulated wastewater containing DMSO was treated by the anodic oxidation using BDD electrodes. We found that BDD electrodes could oxidize and completely mineralize DMSO. Removal of total organic carbon was more than 99% after the electrolysis for 5 h using BDD electrodes. This is first observation for the electrochemical mineralization of persistent DMSO. Moreover, BDD electrodes enabled to mineralize DMSO without electrolytic corrosion at low current densities and high pH of the solution for the treatments.Dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO) is a colorless and stable organic solvent, which has strong solvency for various organic and inorganic compounds as well as miscibility with other organic solvents and water. Due to the excellent properties, it is widely used in laboratories and industries as an aprotic polar solvent for organic synthesis and an eluent of photoresist in manufacturing processes for semiconductor, which results in generating a large amount of wastewater containing DMSO. Although DMSO has relatively low toxicity, excessive use and exposure to DMSO leads to negative effect for animals and humans, because of its high osmosis for organisms and concurrent absorption of other chemicals contained in wastewater ( In general, the wastewater treatments are performed by biological and/or chemical methods ( On the other hand, electrochemical oxidation is one of the most promising candidates for DMSO decomposition ( In this work, we studied the degradation of DMSO by the electrochemical oxidation using BDD electrodes. We prepared three kinds of BDD electrodes with different boron doping levels and investigated the performance for DMSO mineralization, and for comparison, we used Pt and PbO BDD electrodes were prepared onto Si(111) wafer substrates using a microwave plasma-assisted chemical vapor deposition (MPCVD) devise (Model AX6500, CORNES Technologies Corp., Japan) as described elsewhere ( Dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO), sulfuric acid (H Electrochemical measurements were carried out in a single-compartment PTFE flow cell with DC power supply (DP-3005, Custom Corp., Japan) at ambient temperatures and pressures. BDD, Pt, or PbO The BDD electrodes prepared by MPCVD method were characterized by Raman spectroscopy and SEM. Raman spectra are shown in  Electrochemical degradation of DMSO was carried out in 0.1 M DMSO aqueous solution containing 0.3 M NaOH as a supporting electrolyte using three kinds of BDD electrodes, and using Pt and PbO  Next, we investigated the electrolyte-concentration dependence of DMSO mineralization in the aqueous solution of 0.1 M DMSO with 0.1, 0.2, and 0.3 M NaOH using BDD electrodes.   Finally, we investigated the durability of BDD electrodes for the mineralization of DMSO. For the accelerated corrosion test, the concentration of DMSO was increased to 3 M, and strong acid (1 M HClO On the other hand, our previous work (  In summary, we demonstrated the electrochemical mineralization of dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO) with boron-doped diamond (BDD) electrodes. We prepared three kinds of BDD electrodes with different boron doping levels and investigated the performance for DMSO mineralization, and using Pt and PbO