A novel systematic approach for reactor design was described for iron electrocoagulation (EC) and applied to drinking water treatment. Suwannee NOM was used as a model compound; performance was quantified by UV-abs-254 and DOC removal. Significant EC design variables were identified and examined: current density (i) (2.43–26.8mAcm−2), coagulant or charge loading rate (CLR) (100–1000CL−1
                     min−1), and flocculation methodology (“fast” and “slow”). A correlation was found between increased i and decreased current efficiency (φ), optimum NOM removal was found at i ∼10mAcm−2. A lower CLR showed greater total DOC removal, while a higher CLR led to less reactor residence time and required either longer flocculation times or greater coagulant dose for similar NOM removal. This paper defines and describes the four general EC “classes” of operation that have implications on several important measures of success: coagulant dose, electrical consumption, process speed, volumetric footprint, and post-EC flocculation requirements. Two classes were further examined with or without pH adjustment for DOC removal, showing that a “fast” EC mode without flocculation is more appropriate for smaller applications, while a “slow” EC mode is more effective for large permanent applications, where flocculation and settling can reduce coagulant and electrical consumption. The effect of pH adjustment showed greater impact with the “fast” dosing mode than with the “slow” mode, adjustment to pH 6 with the “fast” mode gave 13.8% and 29.1% greater DOC and UV-abs-254 removal, respectively, compared to the baseline without pH adjustment.A technology currently used in wastewater treatment, and only recently investigated for drinking water treatment, is electrochemical coagulation, or electrocoagulation (EC), the While chemical coagulation has an accepted and time-tested design methodology, EC reactor design has had no such consensus. Fundamentally, EC design requires electrochemically generating a solid-state coagulant in a manner that allows appropriate pollutant-coagulant contact and minimizes electrical consumption. In some cases, EC designers also wish to harness the electrolytic bubble generation for an EC-flotation process. Electrode configurations vary widely, with most studies using parallel plate electrodes, while cylinders, tubes, perforated plates, and fluidized reactors have shown no significant advantage ( Several parameters have been investigated Natural organic matter (NOM), a product of broken-down plant and animal matter, is typically removed with a coagulation process, and has been investigated with EC previously. For EC anode choice, Five Synthetic water was composed of Milli-Q deionized water and standardized NOM isolate (Suwannee River reverse osmosis standard, International Humic Substances Society). Conductivity was increased to a nominal value of 300 Filtrate was analyzed for remaining DOC by a UV/persulfate oxidation TOC analyzer (Shimadzu TOC-VCPH). Temperature, pH (Denver Instruments ATC UB-10), and conductivity (YSI-3200) were continuously monitored. Absorbance measurements were determined using a UV–Vis spectrophotometer (Shimadzu UV-mini 1240) with a cell path of 1 A custom built 60 The reductions of DOC and UV-abs-254 were noticeably different for high and low The effect of differing CLR on NOM removal ( These results have valuable implications for EC as a process, since industrial EC units generally operate at high To optimize the EC process, operating classes II, III, and IV will have a lower Previous studies on the effect of flocculation time for EC showed conflicting results, some reporting no benefit ( These results suggest that at a lower CL, flocculation is critical for high CLR values (“fast” mode), and only slightly beneficial for low CLR values (“slow” mode), while at a higher CL, flocculation has little benefit regardless of CLR. This finding explains the higher residual DOC at higher CLR seen earlier; higher CLR requires either greater total dose (CL) or greater post-EC flocculation time for maximum NOM removal. Consequently, the major difference between dosing modes is that the “fast” mode requires post-EC flocculation at lower CL, while flocculation in the “slow” mode can be done either externally or To assess sedimentation for floc removal, the “fast” and “slow” modes with a high and low CL were compared with either 0.45 Classes II and IV are both used currently in industry in both batch and continuous operations, with no apparent distinction between them. For drinking water, low conductivity suggests that Post-EC pH was adjusted to values of 6 and 7 immediately after EC for both the “fast” and the “slow” dosing modes, results are shown in The effect of different operational parameters affecting iron EC performance for NOM removal was comprehensively investigated, finding increased NOM removal at lower The authors would like to acknowledge the financial support of the Natural Science and Engineering Research Council of Canada and RES’EAU-WaterNET Strategic Network.