This article presents the treatment of complex carpal dislocations and fracture dislocations by external fixation. Twenty-four patients were treated with external fixation after complex carpal trauma. Operative technique, aftertreatment, complications and long-term results are presented and discussed.Traditional treatment of carpal dislocations or fracture dislocations in the acute stages include reduction with finger trap traction, open reduction and internal fixation of fractures and primary capsular and ligament repair followed by cast immobilization for a period of 10–12 weeks Conservative treatment is also feasible provided that an anatomic reduction with normal carpal alignment is maintained throughout the period of immobilization. Therefore careful radiographic follow-up to rule out secondary instability patterns and correct plaster technique are imperative to guarantee satisfactory results. However, the unpredictability of closed treatment has been pointed out by several authors For the so-called complex fracture dislocations represented by: (a) injuries to the “greater arc” with fracture of two or more carpal bones, (b) complete irreducible palmar dislocations associated with intrarticular fractures of the distal radius, and (c) open carpal injuries, a wrist fixator is routinely used. This is not only as a means to obtain indirect reduction by ligamentotaxis, but also for protective immobilization using the frame in a neutralizing mode to block the axial load of the cartilage on the injured proximal carpal row, and to maintain normal carpal alignment during the initial stages of ligament healing Subsequently, external fixation was found particularly useful in the treatment of carpal dislocations with ipsilateral fractures of the upper extremity, especially forearm and elbow fractures. This permits castfree aftertreatment, providing early rehabilitation of forearm rotation and elbow motion. Further indications for external fixation include the old neglected unreduced transscaphoperilunate dislocations, as well as the compression fracture of the lunate as a result of an axially directed force on the proximal row. The purpose of this article is to present the technique and results obtained in 24 consecutive patients in which an transarticular external fixator was used for complex carpal trauma. Our clinical material consisted of 24 patients (23 m, 1 f) with an mean age of 31.3 years (range 8–56 years), and the average follow-up was 2 years and 4 months (rage 1–4 years). There were 14 complex carpal dislocations, seven intraarticular fractures of the distal radius with associated carpal fractures and three compression fractures of the lunate, two of which had an associated rotatory subluxation of the scaphoid and one a concomitant scaphoid waist fracture. Five of the seven distal radius fractures were radiocarpal fracture dislocations, while two cases were compression fractures of the joint surface (four-part fractures). Nine patients had additional lesions to the same extremity and two on the contralateral wrist, and only three patients out of 24 had open injuries. Four patients had old unreduced dislocations and were operated upon at 3, 4, 7 and 8 weeks after injury. As in any articular injury, restoration of joint congruity and ligament repair are best obtained immediately after injury. If surgery has to be delayed, a closed reduction under adequate anaesthesia should be attempted in every case. Occasionally, the perilunar dislocation may reduce spontaneously after 5–10 min of continuous finger-trap traction. Otherwise, while maintaining longitudinal traction, the dorsally displaced capitate is reduced with gradual palmar flexion onto the concavity of the lunate which is stabilized on the palmar side with the surgeon's thumb. Following a successful anatomic closed reduction percutaneous pin fixation as proposed by Green Since most of these complex injuries are the result of high energy trauma, careful evaluation of associated injuries to the upper extremity is imperative. Anatomical integrity of the radius is a prerequisite for application of a wrist fixator. Although unstable forearm shaft fractures are easily recognized, fractures of the head of the radius and elbow injuries should be ruled out, especially in the unconscious polytraumatized patient. We routinely drape the iliac crest to harvest a bone graft for cases with massive comminution or bone loss. This is especially important to restore anatomic length in comminuted scaphoid fractures or in neglected transscaphoperilunar dislocations in which the scaphoid fracture exhibits a more or less extensive bone resorption The choice of the surgical approach is basically dictated by the displacement of the dislocated carpal fragments. Therefore, a palmar approach is routinely used for irreducible palmarly dislocated bones into the carpal tunnel. The palmar approach is also useful for scaphoid reconstruction, it permits a solid suture of the palmar capsular rent, and decompression of the median nerve, especially for old unreduced dislocations A combined dorsal and palmar approach permits complete exposure of the bony and ligamentous injuries and a better assessment of the anatomy, simplifying direct ligament repair and bony reconstruction on both sides of the wrist The standard volar incision used for complex dislocations is an extended carpal tunnel release approach. The volar capsule of the wrist is exposed by retracting the median nerve and flexor tendons ulnarly. Invariably a transverse tear of the palmar capsule is present revealing the dislocated lunate. If a dorsal approach is needed a straight longitudinal incision just ulnar to Lister's tubercle is employed and the wrist capsule is exposed between the third and fourth dorsal compartments. Having the extensor pollicis longus tendon retracted radially and the common extensors ulnarly, a clear view of the capsular lesion, the distal radius, and both carpal rows is obtained. Usually the proximal pole of the scaphoid, the scapholunate junction and the subluxed capitate are promptly seen through the capsular tear. Having completed the surgical exposure, the wrist fixator is applied before reduction is attemped manually, using a simple unilateral dorsoradial frame fixator inserted into the distal radius and the second metacarpal. After tightening the proximal clamps, longitudinal manual distraction to the hand is applied. Because of the intact ligamentous structures of the distal part of the wrist the distal carpal row is pulled “out of the way” through ligamentotaxis. In this manner the space in which the lunate and/or proximal pole of the scaphoid was previously located is retracted, allowing easier reduction of the fractured bones of the proximal carpal row. At this point the distal clamps are tightened, and reduction can easily be achieved without the constant need for manual distraction by the surgeon or the assistant. If adequte reduction of the lunate is not achieved with longitudinal traction alone, a limited open reduction through a volar approach is carried out with the fixator in place. A single approach is recommended to preserve at least one of the nutrient vessels entering the dorsal or palmar poles of this bone. The key to anatomic restoration of the unstable carpus is to relocate the lunate which has lost practically all of its extrinsic and interosseous ligament attachments. Having reduced the lunate against its radial facet, proper rotation in the sagittal plane is checked with the image intensifier and a 1.2 mm Kirschner wire is passed through the palmar pole obliquely upwards across the distal radius and retrieved dorsally. One has to make sure that the tip of the K-wire lies flush on the palmar pole of the lunate so that there is no impingement on the flexor tendons in the carpal tunnel. If successful direct reduction of the midcarpal displacement has been achieved with the wrist fixator and the congruity of the head of the capitate in the concavity of the lunate is anatomic, reduction and internal fixation of the carpal bones are performed. In old unreduced perilunar dislocations there is extensive scarring of the joint capsule on both sides of the wrist, therefore a double-sided exposure is mandatory For this particular scenario, once the frame is placed across the wrist with the proximal clamp tight, an additional threaded pin is introduced into the lunate and loosely assembled to the fixator rod with a separate free clamp. Without paying attention to the still dorsally displaced capitate, lunate rotation is corrected using the half threaded pin as a “joy stick” ( Rigid internal fixation of the scaphoid fracture using a conventional 2.7 mm ASIF cortical lag screw or a Herbert screw is advocated For compression fractures of the lunate with associated rotatory subluxation of the scaphoid ( Ligamentous and capsular repair is performed with transosseous suture techniques for the interosseous ligaments using non-absorbable material For intra-articular fractures of the distal radius with concomitant carpal lesions, joint distraction with a wrist fixator is applied and the quality of reduction is assessed using the image intensifier. Fragments needing open reduction due to residual incongruity (more than 1 mm step-off) are dealt with by an open approach, depending on the displacement of the fracture. If metaphyseal comminution or defect is present, bone grafting to accelerate healing and provide a mechanical buttress of the joint fragments is mandatory. Usually K-wire fixation or screw fixation provides adequate stability for the distal radius fracture. Following reconstruction of the joint surface of the radius, internal fixation of the carpal fracture or ligament reconstruction is carried out. At this point of the operation it is important to release the distraction of the wrist applied initially with the fixator to reduce the distal radial fracture and utilize the fixator in a neutralizing mode, otherwise a concomitant scaphoid fracture will remain overdistracted and reduction prior to screw fixation is jeopardized. After wound closure a second connecting rod may be applied to the protuding ends of the threaded K-wires to increase frame rigidity. In massive open carpal injuries, especially in combined lesions with soft tissue injuries (tendons, arteries and nerves) overdistraction of the wrist should be avoided. Postoperatively, external fixation is continued for 8–12 weeks (average 8.4, range 4–12 weeks in this series). Additional plaster splints and/or dynamic splinting may be used in addition to the external fixator in cases of combined injuries of the forearm and the hand. The prophylaxis of pin-track infection is achieved preventing primary skin necrosis, making sure that the skin surrounding the pins is not under excessive tension and by instructing the patient on daily pin care. The incidence of pin-track infection can be substantially reduced with refinement of pin insertion techniques, the use of threadened pins and predrilling of cortical bone to avoid heat necrosis. However, pin loosening may occur in the early stages of treatment in cases with osteoporotic bone without associated pin-tract infection. This is invariably associated with loss of reduction. If this complication occurs in the first 3 weeks, pin removal and reapplication of a frame using thicker pre-loaded pins is the treatment of choice ( Late pin loosening is practically always associated with pin-track infection. In such situations removal of the frame, debridement of pin-tract and curettage of ring sequestra are imperative. Further immobilization in plaster will depend on the healing stage of the carpal fractures. In this series there were no fixator pin-tract infections. However, in one case a pin-track infection of the additional percutaneous pins applied in the carpus resulted in pyogenic early wrist arthritis that was salvaged by total wrist fusion. The length of follow-up ranged in this study from 1 to 4 years (average 2 years), and the patients were evaluated for pain, active range of movement of the wrist, grip strength and working ability. Radiographic assessment included the analysis of carpal alignment, scapholunate angle, carpal collapse, presence of signs of avascular necrosis and secondary degenerative changes. Bony union of carpal fractures took a minimum of 6 weeks and a maximum of 18 weeks, with an average of 9.7 weeks. All fractures, except one scaphoid fracture case, which was malunited, healed anatomically. There were no nonunions in this series. Transient avascular changes, as evidenced by increased density in plain radiographs, were noted in four cases at follow-up. These included two proximal scaphoid poles, one head of the capitate and one lunate. The scapholunate angle was measured and compared to the contralateral wrist in 20 patients and the average was 45°. In the four cases where the scapholunate angle was 60° or more the end results were rated poor, two of which were salvaged with a wrist fusion. In three cases the scapholunate angle was not measurable due to primary partial wrist fusion, and in one case it was not recorded. Measurement of the scapholunate angle appeared to be a satisfactory and simple measure to assess residual malalignment, and provided a prognostic radiographic parameter in the final evalution. At late follow-up 11 patients had no evidence of arthritic changes, nine had mild radiographic changes (slight narrowing of the joint space, mild subchondral sclerosis) and four had severe degenerative changes with severe joint space narrowing, subluxation, subchondral sclerosis and osteophyte formation. Three of these patients had their wrists fused and one had a Sauvé-Kapandji procedure at a later date. Although the final outcome regarding pain and working ability after reoperation was adequate, all four patients were rated poor. Twelve patients were free of pain, eight had mild pain and two severe. There was a direct correlation of pain in patients with severe degenerative changes, however, some patients with mild arthritic changes had no discomfort at late follow-up. All our patients exhibited some limitation of joint motion as compared to the contralateral wrist. The average dorsiflexion was 39°, palmar flexion 43°, radial deviation 10° and ulnar deviation 17°. Forearm rotation showed the least limitation with an average of active pronation of 74° and supination of 75°. The average loss of motion of the wrist (expressed as a percentage of the values of the uninvolved wrist) were: dorsiflexion 46%, palmar flexion 42%, radial deviation 33%, ulnar deviation 37%, pronation 13%, supination 16%. Grip strength was measured with a Schaerer dynamometer in the affected and unaffected hands. The overall decrease of grip strength of the involved hand (expressed in percentage of strength of the uninvolved hand) was 23%. Out of 24 patients, late complications were recorded in five patients. In one case a Darrach procedure due to persistent subluxation of the ulna was performed shortly after healing of the primary wrist fusion. In one case a bone grafting procedure for established avascular necrosis of the capitate was performed. One patient had a residual scapholunate gap and mild avascular changes of the lunate. During removal of hardware a painful palmar exostosis at the radial styloid was resected and the patient had mild discomfort only for strenuous activities. The only child in the series developed a progressive volar subluxation of the carpus due to partial epiphyseal fusion of the radius. A corrective palmar opening wedge osteotomy was performed one and a half years later and the final result was satisfactory. One patient developed progressive carpal collapse with persistant severe pain in his dominant wrist and was subsequently fused. There was one case of reflex sympathetic dystrophy, progressive ulnar translocation of the carpus, and a chronic dorsal dislocation of the distal ulna. Since the source of pain was the radioulnar joint and the main complaint was complete loss of supination, a Sauvé-Kapandji procedure was performed in this patient. There was one case of early wrist arthritis as a result of a pintract infection, which was the only infection in the series. This patient was salvaged with a total wrist fusion. The final assessment of results was based on the combined appreciation of residual pain, range of motion, grip strength, working capacity and radiographic results. For this both the Green and O'Brien Considering the severity of the injuries in this series, it was gratifying to obtain satisfactory results in over two-thirds of the patient population. External fixation of the wrist as a method of immobilization of carpal fracture dislocations was proposed in 1980 by Ballmer and Büchler (personal communication). Short case reports in the literature were published External fixation greatly facilitates both exposure and reduction of dislocated carpal bones. The constant distracting force of the external fixator frees the surgeon intraoperatively from the continuous struggle to move the distal carpal “out of the way”, allowing him to concentrate his efforts on the proper realignment, internal fixation, and bone grafting of the dislocated or fractured bones. The frame should be used during the operation as a distraction device, to allow indirect reduction, but after completion of bone and ligament reconstruction distraction should be reduced allowing the fixator to function only as a neutralization frame. Thus normal carpal alignment is maintained protecting the ligament repair especially at the scapholunate junction during the first 8–10 weeks. Although the fixator was used in only three cases of compression fractures of the lunate in our series, the indirect reduction results with the wrist distraction were remarkably good. Furthermore, the wrist fixator with direct fixation of the malrotated lunate in old neglected perilunar dislocations was found to be less traumatizing for the radiocarpal joint then to transfix the lunate to the distal radius. External fixation is the treatment of choice for skeletal immobilization of hand and wrist fractures with severe soft tissue damage In the light of the encouraging results obtained with external fixation in this representative group of patients, we believe that a wrist fixator should now be thought of as a routine tool for primary stabilization of complex carpal fracture dislocations.