A theoretical investigation on the esterification mechanism of free fatty acid (FFA) in waste cooking oils (WCOs) has been carried out using DMol3 module based on the density functional theory (DFT). Three potential pathways of FFA esterification reaction are designed to achieve the formation of fatty acid methyl ester (FAME), and calculated results show that the energy barrier can be efficiently reduced from 88.597kcal/mol to 15.318kcal/mol by acid catalyst. The molar enthalpy changes (ΔrHm°) of designed pathways are negative, indicating that FFA esterification reaction is an exothermic process. The obtained favorable energy pathway is: H+ firstly activates FFA, then the intermediate combines with methanol to form a tetrahedral structure, and finally, producing FAME after removing a water molecule. The rate-determining step is the combination of the activated FFA with methanol, and the activation energy is about 11.513kcal/mol at 298.15K. Our results should provide basic and reliable theoretical data for further understanding the elimination mechanism of FFA over acid catalyst in the conversion of WCOs to biodiesel products.With the rapid development of international economy, the global energy supply has become more and more strained. However, the problems confronting us are worldwide energy shortages and rising energy prices due to the continuous consumption of non-renewable traditional fossil fuels. In the past decades, scientists have spared no effort to explore for new replacements of energy sources. Results found that the waste cooking oils (WCOs), including inedible vegetable oils or animal fats At present, the homogeneous catalytic In this work, oleic acid, as a typical kind of FFA in WCOs DFT calculations are conducted using the DMol The typical FFA eliminating reaction is an esterification reaction of FFA with methanol over acid catalyst to produce FAME. It is generally designed as the first step in a two-step process for biodiesel synthesis from WCO. In this paper, an esterification reaction between oleic acid and methanol is catalysed by H Path 1 is a simply oleic acid one-step esterification reaction without catalyst. The esterification process catalyzed by H Firstly, the structures of reactants, intermediates and products should be geometrically optimized, obtaining the transition states after the process of TS confirmation. Meanwhile, five chemical bonds, closely related to the reaction mechanism, are monitored, including C1–O1, C3–O3, H3–O1, H3–O2 and H3–O3 (marked in The calculated chemical bond lengths are presented in The detailed thermodynamic calculation and kinetic analysis of three pathways will be discussed in this section. After analyzing the vibration frequencies for the optimized geometry of each species involved in FFA esterification reaction, the electron energy, standard molar enthalpies, standard molar entropy, and standard molar Gibbs free energies at 298.15 According to the Gibbs free energies change Δ According to the transition state theory by Eyring  In this work, a theoretical insight into the FFA esterification reaction mechanism has been performed using DMol This work was supported the