In this study, the electrochemical and anodic behaviors of CoPb anodes in electrowinning process were investigated. Accumulative roll bonding (ARB) method was applied to fabricate CoPb composites. The electrochemical properties of the produced anodes were investigated by electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS), cyclic voltammetry technique (CV), electrowinning tests, and scanning electron microscopy (SEM). The results indicated that ARB-process is an appropriate method to developed CoPb anodes. The produced anodes containing 0.5% of Cobalt particles as a second phase after 10 cycles of ARB process which is named Pb-0.5%Co-10pass samples showed 83.37% increase in current density compared to pure lead anode. The results of electrowinning tests revealed that Pb-0.5%Co-10pass samples had the best anodic performance with a significant lower corrosion rate, product and electrolyte contamination, slime formation, energy consumption and a higher Zn deposit as a product and energy conservation.The electroextraction of zinc metal from its ores is briefly referred to as electrowinning. During this hydrometallurgical/electroextraction process, by passing DC current through the resulting electrolytic (leach) solution, the zinc (II) cations are electrodeposited upon the aluminum cathodes. The anodes of the electrowinning cells, however, are fabricated from lead and its alloys ( insoluble anode material used for electrowinning from sulfate solution should possess at least three characteristics: high electrical conductivity, good electro-catalytically capabilities (for oxygen evolution) and good stability (corrosion resistance). Evidently, pure Pb and its alloying with other metals do not satisfy these requirements ( The oxygen evolution reaction (OER) is an important counter reaction for metal reduction during the electrowinning. Water oxidation reaction produces acid, expressed as follows: Lead-based alloy anodes are often used to produce high-purity zinc, as they have advantageous corrosion resistance properties in acidic sulfate solutions. There are still several inherent problems for lead-based alloys, however, including high OER over-potential, cathodic product contamination due to anode dissolution, poor mechanical properties, and over-consumption of Ag. In effort to solve these problems, different metal elements were added to the Pb anode. Such as Ag, Co, Pt, Sn, Bi, Sb, Ca which can improve the electrochemical catalytic activity of the lead-based alloy anodes, enhance corrosion resistance and affect the adsorption processes and refine the grain size as the Pb alloy melt crystallizes ( Accumulative roll-bonding (ARB) as solid state method with industrial, continuous and easy monitoring noticeable advantages. So, this method is useful to manufacturing of the metallic composites with second phase low solubility at ambient temperature. In this research, lead-based composite manufactured by accumulative roll-bonding with Co particles as the second phase. Co has been candidate because of its electro-catalytic activity ( Anodic behavior ARB fabricated anodes have been characterized via Electrochemical Impedance Spectroscopy, Cyclic Voltammetry, electrowinning tests, and Scanning Electron Microscopy were used to investigate the electrochemical characteristics of the anodes prepared. In this study, pure Pb with the composition shown in The ARB-processed sheets were cut in rolling direction (RD) into small pieces of 1 * 1 * 1 cm, then casted in the acrylic resin mounting, connected with a plastic isolated copper wire. For the electrochemical characterization of the samples, cyclic Voltammetry was carried out in a standard flat cell connected to an AUTOLAB/PGSTAT30 system at 40 °C temperature. An aqueous solution containing 30 g/L of Zn as ZnSO4.7H2O (Chemikar Co., Iran, 99.0 wt. pct), 0.5 g/L of Mn as MnSO4.H2O (Chemikar Co., Iran, 99.0 wt. pct), and 90 g/L of H2SO4 (Merck Co., 97 wt. pct) as the ingredients of most common cell feeds in electrowinning industries was prepared by dissolving the ingredients in doubly distilled water. Electrochemical Impedance Spectroscopy (EIS) were carried out. For impedance measurements, the amplitude of the AC signal was set to 5 mV and the frequency range was set to 100 kHz to 10 mHz. Ag/AgCl reference electrode was used in electrochemical tests. Electrowinning tests were performed for 8 h continuously in same cells with 1-l volume with constant flow rate continues make up solution current. Electrode distance was set to 2 cm constant. Certain current density (500 A/m2, 0.05 A for samples with 1 cm2 surface area) was applied. Current efficiency (η) and energy consumption (W) were calculated based on the electrowinning tests condition using the following simplified equations: Where m is the weight of the Zn product (g) and U is average cell voltage (V). Corresponding corrosion rate of anodes has been evaluated using Pb mass balance in slime, electrolyte, and Zn product. Microstructures of anodes and cathodes have been evaluated using X-ray Diffraction (Cu ka 1.5406 A °) was used to investigate microstructure changes after ARB process via a X-ray diffractometer (XRD, Philips Xpert) using Ni-filtered Cu ka (kCu ka = 0.154186 nm, radiation at 40 kV) over the 2 h range of 10 to 90 deg. and scanning electron microscope (SEM-EDS LEO1550 and iXRF 5500i at 25 kV). General characterizations have been carried out On the Pb For example, mechanical behavior of Pb-0.5%Co were shown in To investigate the structure of Nano-composite Pb-0.5%Co-10pass, Back Scatter Electron (BSE)-SEM micrograph was carried out. The contrast in this micrograph is based on differences between atomic number of elements, so the Pb matrix with higher atomic number (82) is appeared with light dark gray level in comparison with cobalt (27). As could be seen, homogeneous distributions and complete matrix/additives interface continuity have been obtained in Pb-0.5%Co-10pass sample. By increasing the layers of matrix exponentially, distribution of second phase in the matrix is improved. This fact is the ARB method's characterization and caused Co uniform distribution in the Pb matrix, which is shown in To investigate the microstructure of anodes, X-ray diffraction (XRD) was carried out. XRD pattern of samples have been shown in To characterize the electrochemical behavior of the Pb Anodic current is increased because of formation of Lead sulfate on the anode's surfaces at this potential. Further, by increasing the potential the anodic current has been decreased significantly, this behavior could be result of anodic surface passivation due to superficial formation of un-conductive PbSO4 phase. At the “a” point, anodic current has been increased considerably where the potential has reached to more than 2 V(SHE). This performance could be occurred because of nucleation and growth of lead oxide (reaction (3)), which associated with accelerated and enhanced oxygen evolution reaction (OER) (Peak 2). By development of the reaction (3), Lead oxide was formed in superficial lead sulfate layer. Cracks and pores were appeared in the anodic surface because of the differences between density of lead oxide (25 cm3/mol) and lead sulfate (48 cm3/mol). This behavior causes the significant current density increase which is accomplished by fresh lead accessibility. In the backward scan, the small anodic peak 3 could be result of the formation of PbSO4 from PbO2 (as OER product), reaction (4). PbSO Conversion of PbO2 to PbSO4 (peak 4) makes more cracks in the anodic surface layer due to the molar volume of PbSO4 is higher than that of PbO2. Consequently, the metallic lead surface is partially exposed to the electrolyte and oxidized (peak 5 at 1.5 V (SHE)). This reaction has occurred with 1.3 V (SHE) over voltage in comparison with calculated voltage from Nernst equation (reaction (5)). Therefore, Peak 4 represents the formation of PbSO4 from PbO2. Through the formed cracks and pores, the reaction of PbO to PbSO4 and Pb to PbSO4 could be occurred simultaneously (peak 3). Peaks 6 and 7 could be represented the reduction of PbO to Pb and PbSO4 to Pb, respectively. In addition, it must be noted that, the formation of some intermediate compound like PbO.PbSO4 could be possible. Cyclic voltammogram of the Pb-0.5%Co-10pass compared with the pure Pb and ARB processed pure Pb anodes are shown in  Peak “b” is caused by occurrence of Cyclic voltammogram of the Pb For more investigation of Pb where, R Furthermore, to evaluate the ARB effects on the Pb The best anodic behavior in lead anodes is associated with conductive lead oxide formation ( According to the CPE calculation, by improving the Co particles distribution during the ARB process, the anodic behavior approaches the ideal anodes (CPE = 1). Based on microstructure and mechanical examination were described in the Electrowinning test was performed in 500 A/m where M To more examination the morphology of anodes surface after electrowinning test via SEM observation was studied. The structure of anodic layer of Pb-10pass and Pb-0.5%Co-10pass are shown in To investigate the anode performance during Zinc electrowinning, the morphology of Zinc product on the cathode was observed. Results in presence of lead processed anode and Pb Zamanzadeh and et al. ( In this research work, lead base composite sheets containing 0.5 Wt% Co were manufactured by Accumulative Roll Bonding (ARB). The electrochemical behavior and characteristics of the ARB-processed composite sheets were studied and summarized as follows: Cyclic voltammogram of ARB-processed anodes indicated that lower peaks and an increase in current density, especially with the Pb-0.5%Co-10pass sample. These properties could lead to improve the energy efficiency in electrowinning industries. EIS Nyquist plots of the ARB-processed anodes showed a lower charge transfer resistance and multiple times higher induction capacitance. The Pb-0.5%Co-10pass sample exhibits the lower anodic resistance (R Electrowinning tests results revealed the Pb-0.5%Co-10pass has best anodic performance with lower product and electrolyte pollution, energy consumption and higher Zn deposit on the cathode as a product, and energy conservation (to 3155 kWh/t-Zn in presence of Co powder compared with 3250kWh/t-Zn in pure Pb). Based on SEM observations results, homogeneous and dense morphology was achieved in the Pb-0.5%Co-10pass sample which has the best surface protection is provided consequences and anode decay rate could be risen. Also, best Zn deposit morphology achieved in presence of Pb-0.5%Co-10pass as an anode. That could be resulted from enhanced growth rate of Zn in lack of Pb contamination as suitable nucleation sites.