From ancient times to the present day, gold has been valued by man. Man valued gold for its lustrous color and its resistance to tarnishing, and so it was used for special decorative ornaments and jewellery. The veneration reserved for gold by the ancients has led to its use for many centuries for religious artefacts. Egypt was the principal gold-producing country in ancient times. Herodotus refers to several great gold-mining centers in Asia Minor and Strabo mentions gold mining in many different places. Pliny gives many details of ancient placer mining, which was extensive. To the medieval alchemists, gold has been regarded as a metal of perfection. They identified it with the sun by virtue of its bright yellow color and it was given the symbol of a circle with a dot in the center. Through the centuries gold-making has been alternately encouraged, and banned by monarchs and the church.From ancient times to the present day gold has been valued by man. Egypt was the principal gold-producing country in ancient times. Coptos, the present Quft on the eastern side of the River Nile, was the chief town of the Nomos of Harawi and was once politically important, but under the eleventh dynasty (2133–1991 BC) it was overshadowed by Thebes, 50 In the old Egyptian language, the word The ancient Egyptians did not have an important port on the Mediterranean and all their trade was through the Red Sea. Coptos was at the starting point of the two great routes leading to the coast of the Red Sea, one toward the port of Tââ ou (Myos Hormos) and the other more southerly, toward the port of Shashirit (Berenice). Under the Pharaohs, the whole trade of southern Egypt with the Red Sea passed over these two roads. Under the Ptolemys, and in Roman and Byzantine times, merchants followed the same roads for purposes of barter with the coasts of Zanzibar, Southern Arabia, India, and the Far East. This place and the surrounding area was known for the richness of its gold mines and semi-precious stones. A temple was built there by Tahutmes III, who ruled from 1503 to 1450 BC and was co-regent with Queen Hatshepsut for 21 years. The area that it occupied was about twice as large as his temple at Madinet Habu in Luxor. The Egyptians were the first to quarry gold-bearing rocks. This is well documented on wall paintings, an example of which is given in Herodotus (484–425 BC) refers to several great gold-mining centers in Asia Minor, and Strabo (63 BC) mentions gold mining in many different places. Pliny (23–79 AD) gives many details of ancient placer mining, which was extensive. The Romans had little of the metal in their own regions, but their military expeditions brought them major amounts in the form of booty. They also exploited the mineral wealth of the countries they had conquered, especially Spain, where up to 40,000 slaves were employed in mining. The state's accumulation of gold bars and coins was immense, but during the barbarian invasions and the collapse of the empire this gold was scattered, and gold mining languished in the Middle Ages. Following the discovery of America at the end of the fifteenth century, the Spaniards transferred considerable amounts of gold from the New World to Europe. Although the conquistadors found a highly developed mining industry in Central America, their efforts to increase gold production were largely unsuccessful because most of the finds consisted of silver. It was not until the discovery of deposits in Brazil, in 1691, that there was a noticeable increase in world gold production. Since about 1750 gold has been mined on a major scale on the eastern slopes of the Ural mountains. In 1840, alluvial gold was discovered in Siberia then at Coloma, California in January 1848, a few days before the signing of a treaty between Mexico and the United States to end their hostilities. California was thus ceded by Mexico after a discovery that was apparently not known to either government. Coloma is about 50 Gold deposits were also found in Eastern Australia (1851), Nevada (1859), Colorado (1875), Alaska (1886), New Zealand and Western Australia (1892), and Western Canada (1896). However, these deposits soon lost much of their importance. The strongest impetus was given to gold production through the discovery of the goldfields of the Witwatersrand in South Africa in 1885. South African gold soon occupied a commanding position in the world market. Production grew continuously except for a short interruption by the Boer War (1899–1902). Gold mining in Ghana (Gold Coast) began to play a modest role in the twentieth century, although the deposits were known in the Middle Ages. To the medieval alchemists gold has been regarded as a metal of perfection. They identified it with the sun by virtue of its bright yellow color and it was given the symbol of a circle with a dot in the center. Gold was so precious that from earliest times man has left no stone unturned in searching for it in nature. It is not surprising, therefore, that humans should have sought to convert other metals into gold. The agent for transmuting base metals into gold was known as the Ancient Egypt is considered the birthplace of alchemy. Zosimos ( Through the centuries gold-making has been alternately encouraged and banned by monarchs and the Church. For example, Diocletian (AD 245–316), Emperor of Rome from 284 to 313, fearing that the Egyptians (Egypt was then under the domination of the Roman Empire) might become powerful through their knowledge of alchemy ordered in AD 296 all books and manuscripts “which treated the art of making gold and silver” to be burned. Consequently, only very few Egyptian alchemical works have been preserved. During medieval times European kings and princes supported alchemists at their courts hoping to acquire wealth through their work. Man valued gold for its lustrous color and its resistance to tarnishing and so it was used for special decorative ornaments and jewellery. The veneration reserved for gold by the ancients has led to its use for many centuries for religious artefacts. Gold was often cast in form of idols or hammered into foil to make masks for the dead. Gold was employed for barter and subsequently for coinage. By the eighth century BC small irregular bars of impure gold were being exchanged as currency in Asia Minor and by the fifth century BC gold coins were being used freely. Even today the majority of the gold produced is turned into gold bars, Gold differs from most other metals in that the majority of the metal that has ever been mined is still in existence. The total amount of gold now in existence is estimated to amount to around 125,000 Gold ornaments have been found in Egyptian tombs of the prehistoric Stone Age, and the Egyptian goldsmiths of the earliest dynasties were skilful artisans. Today, gold used in jewellery is about 2,000 The extreme ductility of the metal is shown by the fact that 1 Because of its occurrence in nature in minute amounts, gold was an expensive metal. It was not necessary to have articles made of solid gold since it was possible to prepare gold in thin foils and cover the object completely with them so that they appear as if they were made of gold. Gilding is the art of applying and permanently attaching gold leaf or gold dust to surfaces of wood, stone, and metals. Gold is the most malleable of metals, and can be reduced to extremely thin leaves by hammering. Such leaves sometimes do not exceed 0.1 Gold foil was first used for gilding and when the technology was developed, the foil became thinner and thinner and was referred to as gold leaf. The invention of gold leaf was impossible before the perfection of methods for the purification of gold, as only pure gold or gold-rich alloys free from certain impurities can be beaten out to produce the thinnest leaf. Indeed, the methods of beating gold have not changed significantly since the days of the early Egyptians. The rounded stone has been replaced by a cast iron hammer with a wooden shaft and some machinery has been introduced to reduce the effort of beating by hand but, in essence, the process remains the same. The ability to make gold in very thin leaves made it more economical to use for gilding large objects such as statues, ceilings, columns, domes of churches, When the gold leaf is applied on metal, the adhesion of the gold is enhanced by the application of heat to promote inter-diffusion with the underlying metal. To cover a large metallic object such as the dome of a church or a statue standing in the street with a very thin layer of gold that would resist exposure to rain and wind, mercury use was made of as a sticking medium. Copper and not bronze or brass was usually the metal of choice, although it is more difficult to cast than the alloys. The reason is that the alloying elements tin, zinc, and lead interfere with the gilding process because these metals have a high solubility in mercury and thus result in a defective layer. Although gilding with mercury was a rare and costly process in the first century AD it had become the standard method of gilding by the third or fourth centuries and it remained unchallenged throughout history. Two processes were developed to gild a copper substrate. In the cold process, mercury is rubbed on the clean copper surface until it has a mirror-like finish. Some copper dissolves in the mercury and forms a thin layer of copper amalgam. Any excess mercury is mechanically removed. Gold leaf is then pressed upon the surface. It bonds with the copper-amalgam very firmly. More than one layer of gold leaf is usually necessary to obtain the desired color. The hot process was developed at a later date to gild copper alloys and overcome the difficulty of casting unalloyed copper. In this method gold leaf is dissolved in mercury; this takes place very rapidly. The amalgam is applied on the copper substrate to the desired thickness. The object is then heated to expel the mercury, leaving a tenacious gold layer. The poisonous fumes emitted during the process were a health hazard not only to the workers but also to those living in the neighborhood of a gilding workshop. St. Isaac's cathedral in St. Petersburg was constructed in the 40-year period 1818–1858 with a gilded dome 21.83 The gilding of glass, porcelain, and pottery, ranging from the simple edging on a plate to the elaborately decorated vase with richly gilt panels, has always been a prominent feature in industry. The Chinese applied gold leaf over a layer of linseed oil and litharge [PbO], or with egg white or shellac; however, these gilded layers were not durable. Other workers used gold leaf ground up in honey, washed, dried, and applied with a flux; in these cases; however, the product was expensive because the gold layer was thick. The German chemist Johann Kunckel (1630–1703) discovered the precipitation of gold powder by the addition of a solution of ferrous sulfate to a solution of gold in aqua regia. This was published in his book In the 1650s, the German chemist Andreas Cassius (1605–1673) discovered a purple pigment that can be used in coloring glass and porcelain, yielding an exceptionally beautiful purple color. The color was known as In modern times gold films deposited on glass by thermal evaporation are superior to other metals for reflectivity in the infrared wavelength range. Such films applied to glass windows for offices permit good vision by substantially reducing the transmission of infrared energy by reflection rather than by absorption. The cost of production is very low and the economy in energy saving due to cutting down on heating in winter or air conditioning in summer is appreciable. Many modern office buildings are now constructed using glass windows with a gold coating about 0.01 Most gold occurs as native metal, nearly all alloyed with various amounts of silver as the mineral electrum, but not with copper. Certain minerals are characteristically associated with gold, and the most important are pyrite [FeS  Gold played a central role in the development of metallurgy. At one time, however, there was no need for any chemical or metallurgical knowledge to recover gold; it occurred in nature in the native state and simple panning was enough to collect the glittering particles and sometimes nuggets. Because gold has such a high density (19.3 Although mercury was known to the ancient Chinese and Hindus, and has been found in Egyptian tombs dating back to 1600 BC, it was extracted and used only in the Roman times. Mercury ores occur in abundance in Italy and Spain. The Roman writer, Dioscorides mentioned its preparation from cinnabar. Pliny gave a method of purifying mercury by squeezing it through leather. He described the amalgamation process and introduced the term Although the Romans were acquainted with the fact that mercury dissolves gold and silver, it does not appear that they applied this knowledge to the extraction of these metals from their ores. Vanoccio Biringuccio mentioned the amalgamation of ores in his book, Stamp mills (see Fine powdered ore slurry containing native gold and silver is then passed over copper plates amalgamated with a thin layer of mercury onto which the noble metals adhere. Depending on the gold content of the ore, the amalgam is scraped once or twice a day and a fresh mercury surface is exposed. About 3–10 The amalgamation process was used extensively for the recovery of gold and silver from their ores. In many countries it is now illegal to use this process because of the toxicity of mercury. In spite of this, the process is used on a large scale by numerous small illegal operators in several parts of Africa and by the so-called Gold, the most noble of all metals, was insoluble in all acids and alkalis known at that time. The discovery of Chlorine was discovered and isolated by the Swedish chemist Carl Wilhelm Scheele (1742–1786) by the action of hydrochloric acid on manganese dioxide in 1774; Scheele also noted that it attacked all known metals. This knowledge was first applied to the recovery of gold from its ores in 1851 by Karl Friedrich Plattner (1800–1858) of Freiberg using aqueous solutions of the gas. Although the concept of the transmutation of metals was abandoned by the chemists of the nineteenth century, metallic iron was used to displace gold from the chloride leach solution. A variation of this technology was the barrel chlorination process, in which chlorine gas was generated by means of bleaching powder and sulfuric acid inside a rotating barrel. In 1863, Plattner's method of chlorination was introduced in gold mines in the United States and shortly afterwards in Australia. The cyanide process was based on the fact that dilute cyanide solutions will dissolve gold from its ores and that when the solution is brought into contact with zinc, gold will be precipitated. The cyanide process has been a great help in the extraction of gold at the Witwatersrand deposit because gold occurred in such fine particles that extraction of only 55–65% could be obtained by amalgamation and chlorination. Today about one billion tons of ore are treated annually world wide using cyanide solution to recover gold, representing the largest tonnage of any mineral raw material that is treated chemically. To understand the factors that led to the discovery of the cyanidation process, it is essential to refer to the activities of chemists during the eighteenth century. Extensive researches were under way in the emerging chemistry of the so-called The French chemist Pierre Joseph Macquer (1718–1784) discovered in 1752 that when Berlin blue was boiled with alkali, iron oxide separated out and the remaining solution when concentrated by evaporation yielded yellow crystals, now known as potassium ferrocyanide. In 1782, Scheele heated the blue pigment with dilute sulfuric acid and obtained an inflammable gas that dissolved in water and reacted acidic with litmus paper; he called it As we know today, blood contains the red pigment In 1835, the formation of HCN in blast furnaces became known, and in 1843, the existence of cyanogen compounds in coal gas was discovered (in the 1950s, cyanides were also identified in different forms and at different locations throughout a petrochemical complex). Coal gas was produced in large amounts for heating and illuminating purposes; it was the equivalent of today's electricity. Because of their poisoning action, it was necessary to remove cyanogens; this was accomplished by absorption, using a mixture of ferrous and ferric hydroxides. Many other processes were developed that contributed considerably to an understanding of the chemistry of cyanides, cyanogens, thiocyanates, cyanates, cyanamides, amides, nitrites, guanidines, and other related compounds. The dissolution reaction was studied by noted chemists of the time, It was difficult to understand why gold, the most noble of all metals, which could not be attacked by any strong acid except hot concentrated A strong solution of NaCN was found to be no better than a dilute solution, whereas in the case of other metals dissolving in an acid, for example, the more concentrated the acid, the faster the metal dissolved. It was not obvious why oxygen was necessary even though, alone, it has no action whatsoever on gold. By analogy with the ‘transmutation’ of iron into copper, MacArthur used zinc shavings to precipitate gold from the cyanide solution. The process became more efficient when zinc dust was introduced by Charles W. Merrill (1869–1956) in 1904 and further improved when Thomas B. Crowe removed air from the solution by passing it through a vacuum tank before introducing the zinc. This new technique, developed in the USA, later became known as the Merrill–Crowe process. Activated charcoal was first applied in metallurgy for the recovery of gold by the chlorination process. When this process was displaced by cyanidation, charcoal was also used for the new process because large stockpiles of activated charcoal from gas masks were available after World War I when poisonous gas was used in combat and the charcoal in the masks no longer needed. In both cases gold was recovered from the gold-laden carbon by burning the carbon to ashes and melting to bullion, which was a wasteful process. This disadvantage, coupled with the major advances that were made in the technology of gold recovery by precipitation with zinc dust at that time, led to abandoning the process utilizing activated carbon. In the early 1950s, however, interest in the metallurgical application of activated carbon was revived when a procedure was developed by Jack B. Zadra at US Bureau of Mines for the elution and electrowinning of gold and silver adsorbed on carbon granules, which allowed re-use of the carbon, and the utilization of the process as a concentration purification step. Practical developments in the 1980s led to a widespread application of the carbon-in-pulp technology. The adsorption capacity of activated carbon for metal ions is small compared with that of ion exchange resins; however, activated carbon is a much cheaper material to manufacture and is more selective. The process also has the advantage of eliminating an expensive filtration operation. There are three methods for the refining of gold. The hydrometallurgical process is the oldest and depends on the gold content and the type of impurities present. While silver is soluble in both nitric and sulfuric acids and gold is insoluble, these acids cannot be used to dissolve silver away from an alloy containing more than 25% Au. For high-gold alloys, The chlorination process was first applied at the Sydney Mint in Australia in 1867 by F. B. Miller. It is based on the fact that chlorine readily combines with silver and the base metals present, forming chlorides, before it starts to attack gold. The electrolytic process was invented by Emil Wohlwill in 1874 at the Norddeusche Affinerie in Hamburg. The cyanidation process has remained practically unchanged since its discovery, but tremendous engineering developments have occurred, making it very efficient. The developments include the introduction of heap leaching, the application to the so-called refractory ores, the improved use of activated carbon technology, and the increased attention paid to the abatement of pollution. The increased price of gold in the 1970s made possible the leaching of old tailings containing as little as 1 Refractory ores were often treated by roasting followed by leaching, but this could be an expensive proposition, as well as creating potential environmental issues. A hydrometallurgical approach proved to be a successful solution for this type of ores, for example that now in operation at Goldstrike, using horizontal autoclaves operating at 160–180°C and 2,000 Cyanidation under high oxygen pressure has recently been used commercially at the Consolidated Murchison Mine near Gravellote in South Africa. The process has been developed by Lurgi in Germany using tube autoclaves 1.5 The carbon-in-leach process is another variation that was developed to circumvent problems faced when leaching gold ores containing carbonaceous material, Gold is too soft in the pure state for the purposes to which it is generally applied. For practical application it is alloyed with copper or silver. The former renders the gold more red and the latter metals paler than their true colors. The proportion of gold contained in an alloy is expressed in Georgius Agricola (1490–1555) described the use of the touchstone and touch needles for examining bullion, coins, and jewellery. The gold content of ores and rocks is commonly determined by means of a Incidentally, gold has almost exactly the same density as tungsten, 19.3. In the 1970s, a person deposited gold-plated tungsten bricks in a bank in lieu of true gold. The fraud was discovered later, and since then all gold bullion deposits are now routinely examined by banks by neutron diffraction to confirm their identity. Gold has been used as a medium of exchange and as a form of savings from the earliest times to the present day. For many civilizations gold and money have been, and still are, regarded as one and the same thing. The East Slovak Museum in Košice has one of the largest collections of gold coins in the world, dating back to the eighteenth century. The collection, comprising 2,500 pieces, was discovered in a box buried under a building during construction. It is believed that the owner had to flee in a hurry during a revolution. The first use of gold coins is attributed to the Chinese. In the West, the first gold coins were minted by the Lydians in Asia Minor from around the sixth century BC. It was only in the fifth century BC, however, that techniques were developed to produce pure gold coins by removing the naturally occurring silver content. Thereafter, coins became more important and were widely produced by the Romans in a variety of metals, besides gold. Metals other than gold were commonly used for coinage for much of history. The scarcity of gold precluded its widespread use as a means of payment. It was only with the major gold discoveries of the nineteenth century that gold became widely used as a form of currency. There is a close historical relationship between the growth of banks and the use of gold as money. At one time, people would leave their gold at goldsmiths, who had safe places to store the gold. Carrying gold around as a means of exchange was inconvenient because of its weight and great value. To facilitate trade, goldsmiths began to issue certificates of deposits of gold, which were handed over as payment. These were equivalent to today's cheques. The second step, which completed the transformation from being a goldsmith to being a bank, was the realization by goldsmiths that the majority of the gold sitting in their vaults was rarely withdrawn at the same time. This meant that the goldsmiths could lend out a portion of the gold in their vaults. They could charge interest for the loan and so make a return. If they lent gold prudently, they could still retain enough gold in their vaults to honor the daily demands for withdrawals from their depositors. As a result of the goldsmith/bank's activity there was a net increase in the amount of money in circulation. In 1717, Sir Isaac Newton, then Master of the Mint in London, fixed the value of the British pound in terms of its value in gold, since the price of an ounce of gold was set at four pounds seventeen shillings and ten and a half pence. In the early nineteenth century, discoveries of gold in California and elsewhere greatly increased the world stocks of gold. For the first time, there was sufficient gold to act as the sole basis for monetary systems. Starting with the UK in 1816 and culminating with the USA in 1900, the majority of the world's trading nations adopted the gold standard. This meant that gold was minted into coins and circulated as currency. These coins were not token money, since they provided full value. Because of gold's bulk, bank notes were issued in a number of countries. The gold backing to this paper currency meant that the notes could be taken to the bank at any time and cashed in for the prescribed amount of gold. During the financial crisis caused by World War I most countries suspended the convertibility of their currencies into gold. The warring nations decided to conserve their reserves to finance the war effort. They would otherwise have been in danger of losing their gold reserves as the gold standard moved to correct the balance of payments deficits they found it necessary to run. After World War I bank notes were made legally acceptable at their face value, and the requirement for a complete gold covering for the money supply was removed. This gave governments the power to control the supply of money in circulation according to the needs of the economy. Gold did, however, retain its key functions as a measure of value and as a central bank reserve asset, although no longer exclusively but now in conjunction with foreign exchange. Consequently, currencies were still defined in terms of a specific amount of gold, but there was no obligation to deliver gold on demand and the value of money in terms of gold could be changed. This system was eventually ratified after World War II. Because currencies were still denominated in terms of gold there were still semi-fixed exchange rates between nations. The USA fixed its currency at $35 per ounce, although US citizens were banned from holding gold. As a result the dollar took on the role of the official monetary price of gold. Many countries began to denominate their currencies relative to the dollar, which came to be regarded as “as good as gold”. By the late 1960s, the US balance of payments had slipped so far into deficit that the dollar was perceived to be overvalued relative to gold. Many gold mines were shut down because the cost of production was higher than the value of gold recovered as fixed by the government. The USA revoked its undertaking to pay dollars in exchange for gold in August 1971. Eventually the gold price was left to find its own level. Consequently gold rose progressively through the 1970s, rising to its all time high of USD 850/oz on 21 January 1980. A large part of the gold stocks of the United States is stored in the vault of the Fort Knox Bullion Depository located about 50 Today gold is borrowed and lent in just the same way as money. Gold's interest rate is low in comparison with most currencies, which probably reflects the lower long-term risk of inflation in holding gold compared to currency. Interest rates vary within a range of 1–2%. Low interest rates make it attractive for companies in the gold business to finance themselves in gold rather than currency. From the mid-1980s mining companies wishing to raise money to develop new gold mines have commonly borrowed gold. The gold is then sold for cash to start development. When the time comes for repayment, the mine repays its debt in ounces of gold, from the new mine. So their financing is completely safeguarded against movements in the gold price, whereas if they had borrowed in dollars they would have been exposed to movements in the dollar price of gold. Gold has served the human race well as a dependable form of money from the earliest of times right up to the modern day. The historical importance of gold to our civilization is attested by the number of museums devoted exclusively to this metal. There are four Gold Museums in South America and one in Central America preserving gold artifacts from Inca and other ancient civilizations. They are located in Bogota (Columbia), Lima (Peru), La Paz (Bolivia), Sabara (Brazil), and San José (Costa Rica). The Brazilian museum is located in the former palace of the Portuguese governor of the Province of Mina Gerais in a suburb of Belo Horizonte and shows the history of gold in Brazil. A number of gold museums can be found in the other major gold-producing countries, for example, the Ballerat Gold Museum in Australia and the Gold of Africa museum in South Africa.