Nowadays there is a great interest in producing energy through co-gasification of low grade coals and waste blends to increase the use of alternative feedstocks with low prices. The experimental results showed that the viability of co-gasification to process such blends and that by the right manipulation of coal and biomass or waste blends, syngas treatment and upgrading may be simplified and the cost of the overall process may be reduced. Blends of three different coal grades (sub-bituminous coal from Puertollano mines, South African bituminous coal and German brown coal) with two different types of biomass (pine and olive oil bagasse) or polyethylene (PE) were co-gasified. Blend co-gasification showed to be beneficial to reduce the negative characteristics of some coals, such as the high ash and sulphur contents, especially of Puertollano coal. Syngas obtained by these blends was hot cleaned and undesirable syngas components (tar, NH3 and H2S) were measured along the hot treatment tested, which proved to be suitable to treat syngas produced by a wide range of feedstocks. Different routes for syngas cleaning were analysed to reduce unsuitable components to values required by most common end-uses. The results obtained showed that the type of feedstock to be gasified is a key outcome on initial syngas composition, affecting greatly syngas cleaning needs, its application and the economic viability of the overall process.Gasification is an effective process to obtain a synthetic gaseous fuel from carbonaceous materials. This gas is usually named as syngas, because besides being used for energy production, it may also be converted into synthetic fuels either liquids (ethanol, methanol, gasoline, gasoil) or gaseous such as: dimethyl ether and SNG (synthetic natural gas). Gasification may also act as a pre-combustion carbon capture technology, as syngas may be converted into a CO Gasification was first developed for coal and it has also been widely studied for biomass conversion into syngas. The need of using low grade coals and wastes for energy production has led to the study of carbonaceous material co-gasification, especially blends of coal with biomass and wastes, with the aim of using existing installations to process coal with diversified feedstocks. Besides the feedstock diversification, co-gasification of coal and biomass has the advantage of decreasing the use of fossil fuels and of reducing CO The formation of undesirable compounds like: H The use of efficient catalysts inside the gasifier is usually prohibitive, because of the high catalyst cost and its fast deactivation, due to the adverse conditions inside the gasifier. Thus, the best option is to use such catalysts outside the gasifier for syngas cleaning and upgrading. Syngas may be cleaned by cold processes and there are several well-known ones, but though being efficient in contaminant removal and largely employed, they are not environmentally friendly, as large volumes of liquid effluents need to be further treated, which is very expensive. Besides, syngas has to be cooled down, which decreases the overall energy efficiency of the process, whenever syngas needs to be heated afterwards, for its upgrading, for H However, high temperatures and some expensive catalysts are needed for hot syngas cleaning processes to ensure the thermal catalytic decomposition of tar, S and N compounds. Besides syngas desulfurization of organic compounds, such as COS and S-organics, is quite difficult to achieve. The study of hot syngas cleaning processes has shown an increasing interest and several authors have developed and tested different sorbents and/or catalysts for syngas cleaning, focusing on syngas desulphurization, tar and NH Different coal grades with dissimilar compositions were blended with different biomasses (pine and bagasse) or with PE (polyethylene) and co-gasified with oxygen and steam to show the viability of co-gasifying such blends, taking profit of the suitable characteristics of each feedstock that increased syngas yield and decreased its content in undesirable compounds. The amount of coal in the blend was higher than that of other carbonaceous materials, because these materials still face some problems related with limited and seasonal variations of quantities, low energy density, physical properties and chemical composition in opposition with stable and market-ready supplies of coal. Though, the use of renewable energy resources is advisable, coal content in the blend was always higher than that of other carbonaceous materials, as the objective was to integrate these materials in conventional industrial processes. The syngas obtained by fluidized bed co-gasification of coal blends was hot cleaned in two fixed bed reactors, the first one with dolomite for some reduction of undesirable syngas components. The second fixed bed reactor contained a Ni-based catalyst to achieve effective reduction of tar, H This paper aims to confirm previous results and to prove that the hot syngas cleaning process is suitable to treat different syngas compositions obtained by oxy-gasification of a wider range of feedstocks. In the previous papers only silica sand was used in gasification bed. In the present work dolomite was also used inside the gasifier and the results obtained were compared to those obtained in absence of dolomite. The benefits, if any, of using dolomite in the gasification bed when syngas is cleaned with dolomite followed by a Ni-based catalyst were also analysed. The main critical syngas components were monitored and controlled along the syngas cleaning process and different options for syngas cleaning were analysed, considering several applications for the final syngas: heat and power generation, chemical synthesis and hydrogen rich fuel production with CO In Feedstock is fed inside the bed by a continuous feeding system, composed by a screw feeder and a variable speed motor. The feeder is previously calibrated for the mixture to be studied. The raw materials were mixed in the required proportions before being loaded into the hopper. The amount placed inside the hopper was measured before the experiment and after each test the remaining feedstock was also measured and analysed to check the feeding rate and to identify any serious segregation. A nitrogen flow is used to help the fuel feeding and to avoid a back flow of the gas. The feed system is water cooled to prevent clogging, that may be caused by pyrolysis of the feedstock, prior to the entry into the gasifier. The gasifying/fluidising agent was a mixture of steam and oxygen, introduced through a gas distributor located at the base of the reactor. Steam is produced in an electrical generator. Its flow rate was controlled by a system, including: orifice plate, transmitter and measuring unit. The gasification gas (syngas) went through a cyclone to remove particulates. Afterwards, the gas was filtered, before it was injected into CO and CO Gas was also sampled for tar, H Three different coals were gasified, whose elemental and proximate analyses are shown in Both steam and oxygen were used as gasification agents. Gasification operating conditions were the following: reaction temperature — 850 Silica sand was used in the fluidisation system. The average particle size of silica sand used was 350 Each experiment lasted between 90 and 120 Syngas produced in the fluidised bed gasifier passed through a cyclone and then the gas went through two fixed bed reactors, as shown in The first reactor contained calcinated dolomite to promote some tar and gaseous hydrocarbon destruction and to retain sulphur and halogens. Afterwards, the syngas was introduced into another fixed bed reactor with a Ni-based catalyst for tar abatement and NH Syngas was sampled after the gasifier and after each fixed bed reactor for gas cleaning, As shown in Co-gasification of coal blended with biomass and wastes led to further variations in syngas composition. In general the presence of biomass and wastes favoured the release of hydrocarbons and decreased the formation of H Tar content in syngas was quite influenced by feedstock composition, The presence of pine in coal blends allowed decreasing tar release, which agrees with the lower pine tendency for tar formation. On the other hand, the use of PE wastes led to great increases in tar content in syngas, especially for German and South African coals. Co-gasification of German coal blended with 20% of PE more than doubled the amount of tar obtained during coal gasification. This tendency was not observed for Puertollano coal blends, which agrees with the hypothesis that some very fine particles might be included in tar determination. The highest gas yields were obtained for co-gasification of German coal blends, especially when PE was present, consequently and also due to the highest HHV of syngas, the highest energy conversion was also obtained for this coal blends. Due to PE chemical composition its ability for gas formation was higher than that of other carbonaceous materials tested. Hence, higher gas yields and energy conversions were obtained with the rise of PE amount in the blend. The highest energy conversion was around 90%. On the other hand, the lowest gas yields and energy conversions were obtained in the presence of Puertollano coal blends, which agrees with the high ash content of this coal. The amount of the solid residues accumulated in gasification bed depended on the type of coal co-gasified; due to the high ash content of Puertollano coal the highest amount of solid residues was obtained for co-gasification of this coal blends, with values between 30 and 45% of the inlet feedstocks. The lowest values were obtained for German coal blends. However, the size of the material did not depend much on the feedstock, as around 90% of particles were between 500 and 1000 Dolomite is commonly used in gasification reactors, because it is inexpensive, easily available and has proven to be suitable for tar reduction. Bed agglomerate may also be avoided with dolomite addition. Thus, gasification and co-gasification tests were also done in the presence of dolomite mixed with silica sand. The dolomite used showed a great tendency for attrition and thus for the formation of a big amount of fine particles not all of them were retained in the cyclone and thus deposited along the installation till the first fixed bed reactor. Thus, the installation required more frequent cleaning operations when dolomite was used in the gasification bed. This effect was even more important when Puertollano coal was used, due to the tendency of this coal for comminution. Hence, a mixture of 33% of dolomite in silica sand was chosen to be used as fluidisation/gasification bed, to take profit of dolomite beneficial effect and at the same time to control the formation of fine particles. The presence of dolomite led to an increase in H The decrease in tar content in syngas is also quite evident ( Tar abatement is affected by its nature and by gas composition, which are influenced by feedstocks that are gasified and by the gasifying agent used. Corella et al. Most of sulphur released into syngas is in the form of H In The use of dolomite mixed with silica sand was also beneficial for decreasing the amount of H NH The presence of dolomite inside the bed was beneficial for reducing the release of NH Even in the presence of dolomite syngas obtained by co-gasification of coal blends was not suitable for most syngas utilisations. Even for boilers, the less requiring syngas utilisation, syngas did not fulfil the required H Syngas produced by co-gasification of coal blends went through two fixed bed reactors. The syngas was sampled after each of these reactors, as shown in In Another change observed in syngas composition was due to hydrocarbons contents, especially C The results presented in As the same tendencies reported for South African coal blends were also obtained for other coal mixtures, In The results presented for sampling point 1 in Syngas obtained after the Ni-based catalyst showed further reductions of H Syngas NH The highest NH These results agree with those already reported about hot syngas cleaning in the same installation As reported before, after the Ni-based catalyst the presence of tar in syngas was not detected. There was also a great decrease in the total amount of hydrocarbons in syngas, as only CH On the other hand, HHV of final syngas was around 29% lower than the value obtained for initial syngas, which is in agreement with the high CO The analysis of sulphur and nitrogen components in syngas is also important, as most syngas applications require well defined limits for these compounds. In According to In Though the configuration tested, with two catalytic fixed bed reactors, showed to be suitable for a wide range of feedstocks with high contents of undesirable components, the cleaning process may be reduced to one reactor, depending on initial syngas composition, which is also dependent on feedstock composition and on syngas application. The use of only one reactor for syngas cleaning would be enough for treating a syngas with low sulphur and tar contents to be burned for energy production. Hence by reducing the number of steps in syngas cleaning, it is possible to increase the economic viability of the process. This agrees with Corella et al. Co-gasification of different coal grades blended with different types of biomass and wastes showed that feedstock composition was a key issue in syngas composition, thus affecting syngas cleaning, upgrading and end-uses. The integration of these feedstocks in coal conventional industrial processes was beneficial to decrease the negative bearing of some coals, such as the high ash and sulphur contents of Puertollano coal. However, the use of feedstocks with high sulphur or nitrogen contents would favour the release of H Syngas composition is the key factor in syngas cleaning, need of upgrading and final application. The hot syngas treatment tested, with two catalytic fixed bed reactors, showed to be suitable for syngas obtained by co-gasification of a wide range of feedstocks, as unsuitable components initially present in syngas, such as tar, NH Syngas obtained by co-gasification of coal blended with biomass and wastes either in absence or in presence of dolomite in the gasification bed were hot cleaned. Though different initial syngas compositions were obtained no great changes were observed in final syngas after hot cleaning, thus the results obtained showed that the use of dolomite inside the gasifier could be avoided, solving the problems of dust clogging by dolomite erosion, though the downstream bed of dolomite means high costs. On the other hand, the use of dolomite outside the gasifier also helped to retain some particulates that would reach the Ni-based catalyst, reducing its life time. Co-gasification of feedstocks with low contents of undesirable components would simplify syngas cleaning process, affecting the number of cleaning operations and the choice of the catalysts to be used. For syngas with low sulphur contents and medium tar contents, the use of only one reactor would be enough for achieving the requirements for syngas burning to energy production. However, when the initial NH Authors are grateful to the