Long distance ore pipelines are intensive in water and energy use. Although past efforts have been made to identify the best operational points in terms of energy efficiency, an approach to concurrently include water value, representing aspects such as price or scarcity, is lacking. In the present paper, an optimization scheme to look for better operational points considering energy and water utilization is proposed. A scalar function built upon the computation of energy and water consumption including restrictions inherent to hydraulic transport of solids through pipelines is defined. The relative importance of energy and water consumption is parameterized through the inclusion of water and energy unit costs, along with system variables such as throughput, solids concentration and system utilization fraction. The optimization problem is solved for different throughput and hydraulic conditions resembling a long distance copper concentrate pipeline and a range of water and energy costs, using a nonlinear, constrained optimization scheme. Results show the appearance of a low water cost regime for low throughput conditions, with a steep, quasi-linear change on optimal properties with water cost, followed by a nonlinear, high water cost regime, related to a weaker, monotonic change of concentration, flow rate, pipeline utilization and water consumption, respectively. For fixed water costs, increasing the energy cost causes an incentive for an additional use of water, thus appearing a double non-linear dependence of optimal results with energy and water costs.
                  For high enough throughputs, the low water cost regime disappears, and is replaced by constant, minimal optimal flow rate and solids concentrations, related to the maximum possible pipeline utilization constraint. Present results show that an equivalent pipeline oversizing at constant throughput would allow, in addition to the computed optimal conditions, for operation at lower specific energy consumption scenarios. Results, compared with some typical copper concentrate pipeline operational conditions, show that optimal values in the sense of the present hydraulic-cost analysis tend to require higher concentrations and lower pipeline utilization fractions than in typical systems, with differences in costs ranging from 16% to 28%.The hydraulic transportation of solids in turbulent flow using pipelines often requires large amounts of water to keep the solids suspended. Typical designs have more than 70% of the total transported volume in process or fresh water ( Several studies have been made in the past to assess energy efficient operational points, considering the flow regime, particle size and concentration ( In this paper, a hybrid approach, both taking into account the effect of energy and water through their costs as weighting functions, is included as a scalar function. A set of optimal values for some critical operational parameters such as concentration and flow rate, given a throughput goal, has been obtained and shown quantitatively with an example close to some real long distance copper concentrate lines. It is shown here that such optimal conditions are strong and non-trivial functions of the corresponding unit costs. The paper is organized as follows: Consider the case of a pipeline of prescribed length The procedure to compute the minimum transport velocity, For a given pipeline geometry, the energy and water consumption in turbulent slurry pipeline transport is highly sensitive to slurry characteristics, where the concentration is the most important factor. For volume fractions exceeding about 0.3, small variations cause a relatively high impact on the mixture viscosity and pressure losses. This inevitable behavior makes preferable to consider direct measurements of rheology by means of online rheometers rather than only densitometers and flow meters ( The relative importance of water and energy use may be expressed as the linear combination of energy and water use, weighted by cost factors: The water unit cost ( The amount of water is computed from a mass balance starting from the required throughput ( This implies that, given the solids density, only the product In long distance pipelines, singular pressure losses, unless considered by design as chokes to avoid slack flow, are irrelevant compared to frictional ones. Thus, considering the present, flat topography, the computation of the required energy input at the pump station ( Here, A horizontal pipeline was assumed to obtain results without regard to any particular topographic effect on pressure losses. Consequently, in the present study case, computed pressures might be much higher than real ones, given that in many natural routes, including those connecting pump stations in mine plants at mountain sites with ports at sea level, the terrain helps to lower the pressure head in lieu of the local head due to altitude, referred to a datum. This may be seen from the definition of the local value of the piezometric head, At constant The intent of the present work is not to obtain a final engineering solution, but to expose the combined effect of fluctuations of water and energy in a conveniently defined, optimal operation. Therefore, there is no consideration to any particular pipeline thickness profile, intermediate pump station array or maximum pressure scheme. However, the possible inclusion in the optimization scheme of pressure restrictions according to specific engineering codes, a non-flat topography in Eq. The upper bound for An example of the effect of the variables involved in the computation of results is shown in The computation of a large number of cases using a brute force approach to obtain the global minima required for the different energy/water cost scenarios is, in practical terms, computationally unfeasible. Due to its flexibility solving constrained problems when the latter are not necessarily defined by explicit, analytic functions, the optimization problem along with the referred boundary conditions is solved using a sequential quadratic programming algorithm ( It is noted that the choice of the base input parameters is typical of copper concentrates and, except by the specific gravity of solids, is also applicable to iron concentrates, despite the fact that tonnages and consequently pipeline diameters differ significantly among each other. In particular, typical nominal values of throughputs for large scale systems are on the order of 1 and 10   The competition between water and energy increased costs may result in less than obvious optimal operational settings. On the other hand, a strong increase in the energy cost would create an incentive to increase the water content, thus suggesting a somewhat counterintuitive operational point that could even be more favorable from a combined water/carbon footprint and embodied energy standpoint. Given as an example the expensive water cost case referred herein ( In the lower tonnage case, for water costs below about 1 A shared feature of the optimal results presented in Given a fixed diameter, different throughputs modify the shape of the optimal solution curves. Higher throughputs will require higher pipeline utilization ratios, thus narrowing the operational range. In the present example, recalling that in both cases a 6 While in the LWCR it is observed that the optimal concentration, flow rate and water consumption are strongly sensitive to the water cost — and weakly sensitive to the energy cost — in the HWCR range, the function of water cost becomes, albeit monotonical, increasingly insensitive to water cost. This makes a somewhat easier task for the potential development of automatic control systems in terms of weighting functions for energy and water costs. Optimal calculations of the hydraulic gradient,  The different results for the specific energy consumption presented here have a key implication: whereas both for low and high throughputs a maximum value of The result of the proposed optimization scheme is the overall cost output corresponding to the minimum feasible value of the objective function (Eq. It is recognized that a direct, detailed comparison with known, typical operational conditions may be misleading. However, it may bring some order-of-magnitude results to assess how different can the objective function be, compared to the present, optimized case. Consider the same 6 To obtain an explanation to such widely different outcomes in the total cost output, a key element to consider is the relation between pipeline utilization and slurry concentration. The general tendency in the present approach is to obtain higher concentrations and lower utilization fractions. Except for the case of The potential for improvement shown herein is bonded to the challenge of building proper infrastructure for holding and transport, compatible with operations with significant idle times and higher solids concentrations than typical ones. In particular, stopping a line laden with a high concentration slurry in a complex topography (i.e. most likely featuring several local low points) may cause significant operational issues, when not handled properly. Although it is common practice in long distance pipelines of concentrate slurries to define maximum stopping times with the system fully laden (typically a few hours), they are often based on heuristic criteria, without experimental data, to quantitatively assess the combined effects of slurry properties and pipeline route. Presently, research is being conducted to elucidate the spatiotemporal distribution of solids inside pipelines, modeled as the simplified combination of an inclined and a horizontal section, with some preliminary experimental results showing the strong nonlinearity of solids organization for different tube slopes ( In the absence of accurate, quantitative models for the identification of maximum idle times or optimal pipeline routes, a common workaround to avoid the question of safe shutdown times is to push the concentrate out of the line by refilling it with water. In the present work, an optimization problem to find best operational conditions from the energy and water consumption standpoints has been implemented as a proof of concept of the relevance of such variables, not only from the economical point of view, but also as a means of assessing other, more subjective factors, such as water scarcity and possible instabilities on the energy support. In the example referred herein, resembling some aspects of real systems, two distinct regimes, namely low- and high-water cost ones have been found depending on the reference cost of the process water required for hydraulic transport. A comparison with typical, sub-optimal values appear to yield costs between about 16% and 28% higher than in the optimized cases. Given the increasingly higher price of oil and gas and the recurrent necessity to deliver desalinated seawater through several hundred kilometers, sub-optimal costs might significantly enhance the gap with optimal ones in the future, and possibly imply a multi-million dollar yearly additional operational cost, depending on the size of the slurry transport system. The optimal output found here require, in general, operations at higher concentrations than in typical pipeline designs. Given the goal throughput conditions, they may also require to operate a significantly smaller part of the available time, which would also require a different operational logic and engineering criteria in terms of concentrate holding and transport infrastructure.  unit cost of energy, in currency/J solids fraction by weight unit cost of water, in currency/m Rosin–Rammler size parameter (Eq. pipeline diameter energy required for solids hydraulic transport Darcy friction factor magnitude of the gravity acceleration vector piezometric head hydraulic gradient (Eq. pipeline length slurry throughput (dry solids mass flow) penalty factor for minimum velocity (Eq. pressure slurry (volumetric) flow rate specific energy consumption, as in (Wu et al., 2010) time period over which the optimization will be run horizontal component of velocity slurry volumetric flow rate corresponding to minimum velocity minimum velocity (Eq. water volume required for solids hydraulic transport input parameter for Rosin–Rammler distribution (Eq. coordinate normal to the pipe wall overall efficiency of the pumping system pipeline utilization fraction maximum attainable pipeline utilization fraction dynamic viscosity of water slurry dynamic viscosity solids volume fraction (expressed as a percentage in loose packing volume fraction slurry density solids density shear stress wall shear stress yield stress objective (cost) function (Eq. The author gratefully acknowledges support from the This procedure is similar to that described in The laminar–turbulent transition is estimated by means of the hybrid empirical criterion by The deposition velocity, With this procedure, mean flow velocity values exceeding about 1 The friction losses have been computed using the method for homogeneous, (smooth wall) turbulent Herschel–Bulkley fluids proposed in Here, A small additional penalty to the pressure loss computation was included here through a velocity correction in terms of a roughness term, as proposed by The Maron–Pierce model, given by Eq. 