The effect of pH was investigated in a hydrometallurgical method for recycling spent lead-acid batteries with citric acid. The pH in this novel procedure was adjusted with a cheap and conveniently available alkalescent reagent-ammonia. The desulphurization efficiency of spent lead paste could be increased dramatically up to 99wt% at a weaker acidic pH of 5.5, compared with only 20wt% without pH adjustment using a fixed leaching at more acidic pH of 2.1 for the duration time of 180 min. The mechanism of the improvement of desulphurization efficiency at adjusted weaker acidic pH was proposed as the demolition of the core-shell structure. The dissolution of lead citrate (shell) will make the lead sulphate particles (core) released and available to react. The chemical formula of the lead citrate product was either Pb(C6H6O7)·H2O at more acidic pH of 3.3, or Pb3(C6H5O7)2·3H2O at weaker acidic pH of 5.5 and 6.2. The pH value will also notably affect the final concentrations of the main impurities in the obtained lead citrate products. A more acidic pH was more favorable for the elimination of the main impurities such as Fe, Ba, Sb, Cu, Zn and Al, by forming soluble species that remained in the leaching solution, which results in cleaner solid lead citrate products. This study has emphasized the availability of pH as a key factor in a novel hydrometallurgical route for recycling spent lead acid batteries.Spent lead-acid battery has become the dominant resource of secondary lead, generating more than 85 % of the total amount ( Due to the disadvantages in traditional pyrometallurgical method, electrowinning technique was developed as an alternative recycling route several years ago. ( Therefore, a better alternative recycling method was always under exploration. Volpe M ( In our previous study, an environmental favorable acid- citric acid was investigated as leaching reagent for the recycling of spent lead paste, while lead citrate precursors were obtained in this process, followed by calcination of the precursors at a relatively low temperature of 300–400 In order to improve the reaction efficiency of spent lead paste with citric acid, acetate acid was investigated instead of the citric acid in our previous research ( The flow chart of the process followed in this study is schematically illustrated in The raw materials of spent lead paste were provided from Hubei Jinyang Metallurgical Co. Ltd., China. The raw materials were dried and crushed, and then separated through a 120-mesh sieve, and the under size specimen was studied in the following experiments. The XRD pattern of the starting lead paste specimen is shown in Citric acid(C Leaching of spent lead paste (10.0 In the leaching procedure, both the pH and temperature were recorded at various time intervals. At each duration time of 0, 30, 60, 90, 120, 150, 180, 240, 360, 480 and 600 The desulphurization efficiency of the starting spent lead paste specimen, is calculated by using The concentration of lead in the filtrate was determined by Atomic Absorption Spectroscopy (AAS, novAA400, Analytik Jena AG), and the ratio of lead in the filtrate to total starting lead is calculated by using The dissolution ratio of lead citrate versus pH was measured. 10 The lead citrate precursors obtained at different pH conditions were investigated by powder X-ray diffraction (XRD) technique using a X'Pert PRO X-ray diffractometer (Philips, PANalytical B.V., Holland) with Cu Kα radiation (λ Two typical lead citrate precursors obtained at more acidic pH of 3.3 and weaker acidic pH of 6.2 were examined for the crystal structure. Diffraction data of single crystals were collected at 298 0.2 The variations of pH and temperatures of the leaching solution in citric acid system with the addition of ammonia at the duration time of 60  The mechanism of the effect of ammonia on the leaching system could be interpreted by The solubility performance of the solid lead citrate in the citric acid solution with the addition of ammonia at various pHs were investigated. As shown in  The XRD patterns of lead citrate products at various pH are shown in The concentrations of main impurities of Fe, Ba, Sb, Cu, Al, Zn via leaching time are shown in As shown in The concentration of Sb was less than 90 As shown in The concentration of Al was less than 40 As shown in Thusly, it should be noted that more acidic pH would be more favorable for elimination of main impurities. However, the desulphurization efficiency decreased at more acidic pH condition. Thus, the suitable choice of pH is a critical factor in hydrometallurgical route for recycling of spent lead paste. The ammonia, a cheap and conveniently available alkalescent reagent, was investigated as an effective pH adjustment reagent in this citric acid based hydrometallurgical process for the recovery of spent lead paste. Some useful conclusions can be summarized on the effect of pH on the leaching process for the spent lead paste. The desulphurization efficiency of spent lead paste increased up to 99 The pH affects the crystal structure of the lead citrate product. Different crystal structures of lead citrate product of Pb(C The concentrations of main impurities are affected by the leaching pH. In general, the more acidic pH would be more favorable for elimination of the impurities. For Fe and Ba impurities, the concentrations in the precursors would be higher than 500 The authors would like to acknowledge the funding support from the  Supplementary data to this article can be found online at