As participation in sports continues to grow, it is important that primary care physicians become well informed about the management of the most common injuries encountered in their practices. Approximately 30 million young people participate in formal athletic programs in the USA and many millions more throughout the world. Injuries treated in emergency departments are near the top of the ‘injury pyramid’ but the estimate for actual number of injuries sustained by children in sports is thought to be five times the number of emergency department visits with many children seeking care from their primary care physicians. Young athletes are at risk for a number of acute and chronic injuries due to their skeletal maturity, size, developmental stage, coordination, and relative lack of flexibility. Unique to children are injuries to the growth plates. The primary care physician can help the child athlete to heal quickly and resume sport when the physician understands the pathophysiology of the injuries and the necessary treatment regimens.  Ligaments in children are functionally stronger than bone; therefore children are more likely to sustain fractures rather than sprains If a child is tender to palpation over her physis, but the radiograph appears to be negative for fracture, splint the extremity and have the child follow-up with a primary care sports medicine specialist or paediatric orthopaedic surgeon Check for posterior fat pad on the lateral radiograph of a child presenting with a swollen elbow. This would suggest a type I supracondylar fracture. Children with type II or III fractures need immediate referral or transfer to a paediatric orthopaedist As participation in sports continues to grow and with it the rate of injuries, it is important that primary care physicians become well informed about the management of the most common injuries encountered in their practices. Sports and recreation provide many benefits to children and adolescents including physical fitness, enhancement of motor development, improved socialisation, and building of self-esteem. However, there are risks of acute and chronic overuse injuries. The primary care physician can help the child athlete to heal quickly and resume sport when the physician understands the pathophysiology of the injuries and the necessary treatment regimens. Approximately 30 million children and adolescents in the USA participate in athletic programs. Injuries treated in EDs are near the top of the ‘injury pyramid’. The estimate for actual number of injuries sustained by children in sports is thought to be five times the number of ED visits. There may even greater numbers of children and adolescents that seek care in physicians’ offices, bypassing the ED, or who do not seek medical care at all. It is unknown whether these injuries are significant enough to cause loss of time in school or time playing the sport. Young athletes are at risk for a number of unique acute and chronic (overuse) injuries due to their skeletal maturity, size, developmental stage, coordination, and flexibility. Unique to children are injuries to the physes (growth plates for linear growth) and apophyses (growth centres for shape of bones). Although most youth sports injuries are minor, consisting of strains, sprains, and contusions, catastrophic injuries can and do occur especially when the young athlete reaches puberty when muscle mass and size increases and therefore the forces are greater. It is important to recognise not only the common presentations of the most familiar sports injuries in the paediatric population, but also the more uncommon presentations. Injuries are classified as acute (traumatic) or as chronic (overuse). The acute, traumatic injury is typically the result of a single event. This type of injury results in the immediate onset of pain often associated with an obvious deformity with impaired function. Most acute injuries of the upper extremity in children during athletic competition involve the wrist, distal forearm, and hand. AC joint injuries are rare in children under the age of 12 years but become increasingly common in the adolescent population. These injuries occur in athletes involved in collision sports, throwing sports, and overhead activities such as upper-extremity strength training. Clavicle fractures are the most common acute fractures in children. Children and adolescents typically sustain mid-shaft fractures of the clavicle. Both direct trauma and indirect trauma such as landing on an outstretched arm can cause enough forces to fracture the clavicle. Another common acute shoulder injury that occurs in young athletes is ‘burners’ or ‘stingers’. A stinger is caused by injury to the brachial plexus thought to be due to a traction injury to the shoulder. These injuries can be seen in American football players when there is forceful downward tension placed on the shoulder during blocking and tackling. The athlete will present with the complaint of a stinging or burning pain that radiates down the arm, as well as weakness of the shoulder and arm, with or without the association of numbness. This injury is thought to be benign if the symptoms last less than 15 Another shoulder injury encountered in athletes is anterior glenohumeral dislocation. This injury tends to occur in the older adolescent and is as a result of complete separation of the articular surfaces of the glenohumeral joint secondary to a forceful arm extension, abduction and external rotation. The typical history is a fall on an abducted arm or perhaps a direct blow to the posterolateral shoulder. This injury results in excruciating shoulder pain and may involve impingement of the axillary nerve causing numbness or tingling of the arm. The young athlete will present with slight abduction and external rotation of the arm as well as an abnormal contour of the shoulder. There is also an associated inability to completely abduct or internally rotate the shoulder. Children participating in sports are at risk for a number of injuries involving the elbow such as supracondylar fractures, condylar fractures, and olecranon fractures. Supracondylar fractures occur in children who experience a fall onto a hyperextended arm. These fractures are typically seen in children ages 3–11 years and contributing factors include the presence of growth plates at the distal humerus. Condylar fractures occur just above the elbow joint and involve either the lateral condylar physis or the medial condylar physis. Olecranon fractures are high-energy fractures that occur in the young athlete resulting from direct trauma. There is generally a haemorrhagic effusion of the elbow joint which results in pain and swelling over the olecranon. Wrist fractures, including distal radius or ulna fractures and scaphoid fractures are common injuries of the wrist that are encountered in paediatric athletes. A fall on an outstretched arm with focal pain and swelling at the site of the distal radius and ulna are characteristic findings of these fractures. The child may present with a deformity and pain with range of motion activities of the wrist. A scaphoid fracture is less common and usually results from a fall on an extended wrist or any action where the weight of the child is directed on the wrist. There is associated radial wrist pain, point tenderness over the anatomic snuffbox and limited wrist extension. The knee is one of the most commonly injured sites in sports. The knee is made up of the articulation of the femur on the tibia, two intraarticular ligaments (anterior cruciate ligament and the posterior cruciate ligament), two extra articular ligaments, the medial collateral ligament (MCL) and the lateral collateral ligament and the patella. A rare, but catastrophic acute knee injury is the knee dislocation. This is where at least three of the ligaments rupture causing dislocation of the tibia from the femur. Immediate reduction is indicated. Vascular impairment is common. Referral to an orthopaedic surgeon is necessary. Patellar subluxation or dislocation is an injury most commonly seen in the young athlete involved in American football, soccer, and basketball. Valgus stress to the knee with internal rotation either via a direct blow to the knee with non-traumatic cutting or turning activities cause a partial or complete dislocation of the patella. Ligamentous knee injuries in the young athlete are relatively uncommon, as forces sufficient enough to cause serious injury will typically affect the physis, as it is the weakest link in the paediatric skeleton. Acute injuries to the MCL can occur in the paediatric population, but more commonly occurs in the adolescent athlete, especially in soccer and American football players. Acute ankle injuries are common in young athletes. Ankle sprains occur when the foot is plantar flexed and inverted. Other common ankle injuries include lateral and medial ankle sprains, and syndesmosis ligament sprains. A true sprain is a stretching or tearing of the ligaments with the most common type of ankle sprain being caused by an inversion of the foot. This occurs when the plantar surface of the foot rolls inward, resulting in damage to the lateral ligaments, most commonly the anterior talofibular ligament (ATFL). Overuse injuries are non-acute injuries that are a result of repetitive trauma to bones, musculotendinous units, and ligaments. While bones are constantly remodeled by the action of the osteoclasts and osteoblasts, if the degree of repetitive trauma exceeds the ability of the bone to repair itself, a stress fracture occurs. Tendon injuries are secondary to repetitive trauma at the site of tendon attachment to bone. A unique feature of children and early adolescents is the presence of apophyses, a type of growth plate that adds shape and contour to bone as opposed to length. Apophyses are the insertion sites of tendons into the growth plate centre and are the site for unique injuries that are associated with the growing athlete. Apophysis sites include: at the tibial tubericle, at the medial epicondyle of the elbow, at the anterior superior iliac crest and the anterior inferior iliac crest. With repeated contraction of the associated muscle, the apophyses are subjected to traction forces which cause microavulsions at the bone–cartilage joint. ‘Little League elbow’ is a common injury seen in baseball players as a result of repetitive microtrauma to the fusing medial apophysis. The most common apophysitis is Osgood–Schlatter disease, which is caused by traction forces at the insertion of the patellar tendon on the tibial tubercle. Another common overuse injury occurs at the location of the patellar tendon insertion at the inferior portion of the patella is known as ‘jumper's knee’, or patellar tendonitis. This is an injury seen in the older adolescent athlete. Sinding–Larson–Johannson disease is the form encountered in the younger athlete. This injury, like Osgood–Schlatter disease, causes anterior knee pain in the adolescent athlete and is a result of tendonitis of the patellar tendon with possible degeneration of the patellar tendon. Common symptoms include pain at the distal patella, stiffness after exertion, and pain upon contraction of the quadriceps muscle. Initial treatment is conservative: ice, analgesics, relative rest and follow-up with a sports medicine specialist for persistent symptoms. Sever's disease is another common traction apophysitis injury that is caused by osteocondrosis of the os calcis. Stress fractures in the young athlete represent another overuse injury whose incidence increases, as the child gets older. This is a rare injury in healthy children before puberty. This injury is the result of repetitive loading forces that are applied to normal bone, in younger athletes this is most commonly seen in the tibia. Other common sites for stress fractures include the fibula, pars interarticularis, femur, metatarsals, and the calcaneous. With the large number of children and adolescents involved in athletics, many young athletes will sustain an injury sometime during their sports careers. Children and adolescents sustain different types of injuries than adults due to the differences in anatomy, physiology of bone, the presence of growth plates and developmental issues. Many young athletes will present to the emergency department and many more will present to their primary care physician. Therefore primary care practitioners should be able to recognise the most common injuries, to provide initial management and to ensure proper referral.