Rare earth elements (REEs) possess distinctivephysicalandchemical properties and are mainly extracted from several rare earth (RE) and ion-absorbing type RE ores. Traditional RE sources are unable to meet the global demand, making it necessary to explore other resources for the extraction of rare REEs. While this is possible, the recovery of REEs from the leach residue of such resources is uneconomical due to the enormous consumption of mineralacids. H2SO4–H3PO4 mixed acid decomposition is an effective method for leaching tungsten from scheelite and is evaluated in this study for its efficient extraction of tungsten and REEs from the same mineral. The scheelite used in this study contains REEs such as lanthanum, cerium, and neodymium. The properties of the REs in the leaching system are used to evaluate our method. Additionally, the effects of the reaction conditions on the leaching of tungsten and REEs are investigated. The results show that increasing the reaction temperature and H2SO4 concentration favors the leaching process. However, high H2SO4 concentration also promotesthetransformationof gypsumfromCaSO4·2H2OtoCaSO4, which affects the leaching process negatively. Further, excessive H3PO4 concentration increases the viscosity of the leaching solution. Increasing the liquid–solid ratio is beneficial for the dissolution of scheelite. The addition of an appropriate amount of CaSO4·2H2O promotes the leaching of tungsten and REEs but the addition of PEG-400 does not. In terms of the experimental conditions used in this study, the leaching efficiency of W, La, Ce, and Nd can reach approximately 100%, 96.6%, 66.6%, and 57.1%, respectively. After the circulationleaching process, the concentrations of tungsten and the REEs in the leach liquor are increased, which proves these materials can be efficiently leached from scheelite using the H2SO4–H3PO4 mixed acid.Rare earth elements (REEs) are listed as strategic material resources all around China has the largest tungsten reserves in the world ( Zhao developed a novel method for decomposing scheelite using an acid mixture of H Based on previous research results, a recovery Natural scheelite was provided by China Molybdenum Co., Ltd. The contents of tungsten and REs in scheelite were 18 wt% and approximately 0.1 wt%, respectively. The chemical composition of the REs is listed in In order to investigate the effect of the reaction temperature on the leaching process, scheelite was added into the 1 mol/L H To study the effects of the H The experimental conditions were set as: reaction temperature, 90 °C; H To study the effects of CaSO The leach liquor was re-used over the scheelite under the following experimental conditions: reaction temperature, 90 °C; H The experimental results are presented in In the decomposition process of scheelite using a H In the decomposition process of scheelite, H  In order to improve the recovery of REs using wet-process phosphoric acid, the surfactant, PEG-400, was often added to change the morphology of calcium sulfate ( The content of REs in the scheelite was only about 0.1%; this meant that a low concentration of REs was recovered in the leach solution after the leaching process. In addition, the concentration of the remaining acid was still high. Therefore, in order to increase the concentration of REs and improve the utilization of acids, the leaching solution needed to be recycled in order to leach the scheelite. The relationship between the concentrations of tungsten and REs is represented in In this study, the H Raising the reaction temperature was beneficial to the leaching of tungsten and REs. Increasing the H An excessive H Increasing the liquid–solid ratio was beneficial to the dissolution of scheelite. Furthermore, adding an appropriate amount of CaSO Under the experimental conditions, the leaching efficiencies of tungsten, La, Ce, and Nd reach approximately 100%, 96.6%, 66.6%, and 57.1%, respectively. Through circulation The results indicate that tungsten and REs can be leached efficiently using the H Credit author statement We have made substantial contribution to the conception or design of the work; or the acquisition, analysis, or interpretation of data for the work. We have revised it critically for intellectual content; and we have approved the final version to be published; and we agree to be accountable for all aspects of the work in ensuring that questions related to the accuracy or integrity of any part of the work are appropriately investigated and resolved. The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. This research was supported by the