Promising applications in advanced electronics have created a demand for ultra-high purity iron. Anion exchange in chloride solutions may offer an efficient and practical way of purification. Examination of anion-exchange distribution functions revealed a variety of behavior patterns to be exploited. Elution tests in laboratory-scale columns suggested that virtually all the impurities can be separated from the iron chloride solution by anion exchange. The hydrochloric acid concentration and volume of the rinsing and eluent solutions determine the efficiency of the procedure. Separation of certain elements (e.g. copper and molybdenum) requires strict control of redox conditions. The designed procedure consists of two anion-exchange steps. In the first step and during solution preparation, those impurities are separated which can be precipitated by iron, or sorbed in the resin at low HCl solutions under reducing conditions determined by the addition of Fe powder. The remaining impurities are separated from iron, applying a second ion exchange step under oxidizing conditions. Performance characteristics (yield, purification ratio and volume efficiency) of the separation indicate the optimum parameters of the rinsing and eluent solutions and the suitable way of defining the collected volume fraction of the effluent.Ultra-high purity iron has been used in the production of special alloys for electronic purposes and it holds an important prospect in the production of iron disilicide (β-FeSi Ultra-high purification of iron has been less successful in comparison to the purification of many other transition metals for a long time. High values of the residual resistivity ratio (RRR), expressing the ratio of the resistivities at room temperature to that at liquid helium temperature (4.2 K) and indicating global purity, have been reported earlier Purification of iron to achieve semiconductor grade, usually characterized by a purity criterion of about 99.9999%, may rely upon the combination of various methods. The conventional techniques of electrorefining in aqueous solutions, vacuum melting, hydrogen/vacuum annealing and even floating zone melting cannot produce the required purity consistently. The segregation coefficients of common impurities, like cobalt, nickel, chromium, manganese, aluminum, copper and silicon, are close to unity in iron Hydrometallurgical separation is a potentially efficient way of eliminating large amounts of the various impurities. Conventional techniques of precipitation may be combined to purify iron solutions by eliminating the impurity metals either in the hydroxide or sulfide form. The procedure, however, would consist of many steps, implying the addition of various reagents and requiring elaborate solid–liquid separations. Additionally, the chemical similarity of iron and manganese would imply considerable difficulties. Therefore, the efficiency of purification and the exclusion of contamination can be little guaranteed by conventional aqueous separations. Overall solution purification is, however, largely simplified in operation and improved in efficiency by the application of anion exchange for separation. The preferred medium for ultra-high purification is hydrochloric acid, since any traces of residual acid (chlorine) can be efficiently eliminated during melting the extracted metal, which step is indispensable for the production of bulk specimens. On the other hand, hydrochloric acid has been shown The tendencies in complex formation and anion-exchange sorption allow differentiation between the dissolved elements, especially if the oxidation states are varied The earliest applications of the anion-exchange method in chloride media for the purification of iron in the divalent state have been reported by In order to design an anion-exchange procedure for the reliable elimination of virtually all the significant impurities from iron, the characteristics of equilibrium distribution have to be investigated primarily. If the tendencies in chloro-complex formation and sorption are sufficiently different for iron and the impurities, proper control of the hydrochloric acid concentration in the eluent can achieve the desired effect of purification. Optimization of rinsing and elution requires separation experiments in ion exchange columns. In order to expand, correct or confirm available data, the fundamental equilibrium distribution functions were determined by the method of batch equilibration The chloride salt (in the air-stable oxidation state) of the examined element was dissolved to prepare stock solutions of 2000 mg dm Separation tests were carried out in laboratory scale ion exchange columns of 2.5 cm inner diameter, containing an anion-exchange resin bed 25 cm in height. The loaded solution was prepared by dissolving reagent grade chloride salts of iron and the tested impurities in a solution containing the required amount of (analytical grade) hydrochloric acid. The tested impurities were added to ∼100 mg dm The starting solution was reduced by stirring with electrolytic grade iron powder in a reactor flushed with nitrogen gas, or alternatively, it was oxidized by adding H The effect of the solution flow rate on the separations was tested in auxiliary experiments for the cases of the relatively difficult separations. The shapes of the elution peaks were acceptable at a flow rate of approximately 1–2 BV (bed volumes per hour), and separations could not be improved by further reducing the flow rate. Therefore, the results given below refer to this range. Effluent samples of 10 cm Results of the equilibrium experiments clarified the anion-exchange behavior of iron and the possible impurities in the feasible oxidation states. Distribution functions of Fe(II) and Fe(III) are shown in Structural differences of the species representing the two different oxidation states were confirmed by spectrophotometric evidence. Relevant absorption spectra, corresponding to the extreme cases of the curves in Anion-exchange distribution functions of the potential impurity elements, determined by the method of batch equilibration, are summarized in Designing anion-exchange separation procedures in HCl solutions has to be based on the distribution functions of According to It is reasonable to start with a ferrous chloride solution, oxidizing iron after the first elution by the addition of pure H The existence of The starting solution of the combined iron purification procedure can be prepared by dissolving FeCl The feasibility of reducing divalent copper has been estimated by a thermodynamic computation. The model is based on the assumption that the electrode potentials  The computed results also indicate that very little copper may exist in the solution in equilibrium because iron powder—if ideally dispersed—can efficiently reduce it to the metallic state. The kinetic factors of the cementation reaction, however, may not allow the copper concentration to decrease to the equilibrium value. If the starting solution contains an appreciable concentration of copper, the reducing Fe particles may be coated with a precipitated layer. This has been observed when 1.7 g of Fe powder was agitated in a starting solution of 250 cm The most important elution curves referring to the first and second steps of the optimized separation procedure are shown in The second separation step Owing to the high sorbability of Cu(I) under the conditions applied in the first step, the flow rate of the solution could be set to a relatively high level (∼5 BV—bed volumes per hour) without causing any appreciable leakage. Differences in the relevant sorbabilities are also sufficiently high in the second step, which explains that changing the flow rate in the 1–3-BV range showed virtually no effect on the efficiencies of separation. The main performance characteristics of the two anion-exchange separation steps are summarized in Results presented in Referring to the purification ratios for the examined impurities, the first anion-exchange step is not sensitive to the volume of the collected effluent within the examined 2≤ The second anion-exchange step requires more attention in defining the optimum interval for collecting the effluent. The iron yield can be increased up to ∼80% by selecting a wider interval, but a lower collected volume is more suitable to increase the elimination efficiency of cobalt and silicon, which elements are less efficiently separated from iron. The removed fraction is still ∼99% even in these unfavorable cases. Elimination of all the other impurities (except for Ge and Pa, indicated in The equilibrium distribution experiments provided fundamental information, pointing out the feasibility of applying anion exchange for the ultra-high purification of iron. The separation procedure consists of solution preparation, reduction and two consecutive anion-exchange steps. Elimination of copper, an essential impurity causing imperfection of earlier procedures, relies upon an efficient reduction during the solution preparation step by stirring fine iron powder in a closed reactor. This operation was able to remove more than 99% of the initial copper content by cementation. The residual traces of copper—in the highly sorbable monovalent state—were efficiently removed in the first column by applying low HCl concentrations (1.5–2 mol dm In order to convert iron into the Fe(III) state, the first effluent needs oxidation, which is practically carried out by the addition of H According to the anion-exchange distribution functions, elution curves and the computed efficiency characteristics, the proposed procedure is capable of eliminating all the significant impurities to an extremely high degree from the iron chloride solution. The purified effluent obtained finally is suitable for metal extraction by electrolysis or hydrogen reduction after evaporation.