Velocity dispersion is the result of varying phase velocities within a particular wave mode. This phenomenon complicates waveform analysis and must be considered for many types of engineering geophysics applications, e.g. near-surface site investigations, cavity mapping, mechanical damage assessment and lithology determination To characterize velocity dispersion, the waveform must be captured at two different distances along the same ray path from the source. To date, many laboratory studies of dispersion have been done by transmitting waveforms along samples of the same rock type of various lengths The triaxial apparatus used for the development of the experimental technique has been presented in recent literature Phase velocity as a function of frequency The phase velocity may then be determined from the time delay between waveforms as a function of the unwrapped phase as shown below: Verification of this new approach was done by comparing phase velocity results obtained by pulsing waves through material of different lengths as outlined by Molyneux and Schmitt Compressional waveforms were acquired for two sandstone specimens under in situ conditions within the triaxial cell. Axial, confining and pore pressures were ramped to hydrostatic initial conditions, and then pore pressure was decreased to vary the effective stresses. The servo-controlled system was configured for uniaxial strain to simulate in situ pore pressure conditions far from any void spaces such as tunnels, shafts or boreholes. Strength, stiffness and petrophysical parameters for the specimens are presented in  The P-wave phase velocities are presented in To highlight the applications of phase velocity measurements within a triaxial compression cell, data are presented from the test with the more dispersive Portland Sandstone specimen. The axial stress–strain curve associated with the test is shown in The frequency dependence of the waveforms is highlighted when examining their intrinsic attenuation characteristics. Quality factor calculations were done on all of the waveforms using the spectral ratios technique derived from Toksoz et al. A new method for determining phase velocity within triaxial cells has been presented. A calibrated input pulse obtained with an aluminum standard has replaced the initial waveform ( The authors would like to thank Petroleum Research of Atlantic Canada (PRAC), Schlumberger Canada Limited and the Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council (NSERC) for providing funding. Technical assistance from Brian Liekens at the Dalhousie University Petroleum and Geomechanics Lab is also appreciated. Discussions with Ken Winkler at Schlumberger-Doll Research have been very helpful with the preparation of this work.