Fractures of the distal femur are relatively uncommon, accounting for only 6% of femoral fractures, occurring approximately 10 times less frequently than proximal femoral fractures. They afflict two distinct patient groups; low-energy injuries are most often seen in elderly osteoporotic patients and high-energy injuries, are commoner in younger patients, often in the context of polytrauma. Severe functional impairment and permanent disability may result from such injuries, with mal-union and limb shortening compromising functional outcome. The management of patients with distal femoral fractures, regardless of which patient group they belong to, should be standard and adherent to ATLS principles.
                  The treatment options for distal femoral fractures are operative and non-operative. Extra-articular, simple pattern and non-displaced fractures may be treated non-operatively, as well as fractures in patients that carry a significant anaesthetic risk or those with low functional demands. Ultimately, this decision must be weighed against the risks of prolonged immobilization and its complications. Operative fixation for displaced, high-energy, open or intra-articular fractures may utilize intramedullary nailing, plate osteosynthesis or circular external fixators depending on the fracture configuration and other patient related factors.
                  The majority of cases will make an uneventful recovery but severe functional impairment and permanent disability may result from the more severe injuries, with mal-union and limb shortening compromising functional outcome. Hence, specialist care for these patients should always be considered, if this service is available.Fractures of the distal femur are relatively uncommon, accounting for only 6% of femoral fractures, occurring approximately 10 times less frequently than proximal femoral fractures. The management of patients with distal femoral fractures, regardless of which patient group they belong to, should be standard and adherent to ATLS principles. The elderly, osteoporotic, patient admitted with a distal femoral fracture usually suffers an isolated injury and although concomitant injuries may occur, this is infrequent. However, a distal femoral fracture in a young patient is usually indicative of high-energy trauma, and is frequently associated with other injuries. During the acute phase of management, a high index of suspicion for associated injuries should be maintained. A collateral history, in relevant cases, should be sought and a careful multi-system evaluation is carried out and documented carefully. After the initial patient assessment and cardio-respiratory stabilization, adequate analgesia and fracture splinting should be performed before anterior–posterior (A–P) and lateral radiographs of the femur, hip and knee joints are obtained. Further, cross-sectional imaging may be required for pre-operative planning for cases with extensive comminution or intra-articular extension. Magnetic resonance imaging may also be indicated in patients with a suspected associated soft tissue knee injury, in the absence of contra-indications. The AO foundation defines distal femoral fractures as ‘fractures of the femoral shaft involving the distal femoral metaphysis – extending as far proximal as the joint is wide’. The most common classification system of distal femoral fractures is that of the AO–ASIF group. The more recent AO–OTA classification of distal femoral fractures, described below is wholly identical to the previous AO–ASIF classification. ( Distal femur fractures (AO classification) Type 33A: extra-articular fracture A1: simple A2: metaphyseal wedge and/or fragmented wedge A3: metaphyseal complex Type 33B: partial articular fracture B1: lateral condyle, sagittal B2: medial condyle, sagittal B3: frontal Type 33C: complete articular fracture C1: articular simple, metaphyseal simple C2: articular simple, metaphyseal multi-fragmentary C3: articular multi-fragmentary. The treatment options for distal femoral fractures are operative and non-operative. Extra-articular, simple pattern and non-displaced fractures may be treated non-operatively, as well as fractures in patients that carry a significant anaesthetic risk or those with low functional demands. But ultimately, this decision must be weighed against the risks from prolonged immobilization and its complications. A randomized control trial by Butt et al. There are multiple treatment options for operative fixation including: external fixation, intramedullary nailing, and plate osteosynthesis. Choice of treatment is influenced by the nature of the fracture as well as patient-specific factors. Operative treatment is indicated for intra-articular, displaced fractures, open fractures, and fractures associated with vascular injury. The aims of surgery are to restore the mechanical and anatomical axes of the femur, in terms of length, alignment and rotation, in addition to restoring articular congruence in intra-articular fractures. The mainstay of non-operative treatment is fracture splinting with a cast or functional brace. Rarely, distal femoral fractures may need to be reduced in operating theatre under a general anaesthetic before cast application. Post-operatively, these patients, similar to those undertaking operative management, will need to be strictly non-weight bearing on the affected limb. Physiotherapy input at this stage is paramount. These patients will need to be educated on the safe use of walking aids and transfer manoeuvres with minimal loading of the injured limb. Clinical follow-up and the use of thrombo-prophylaxis is mandatory. Radiographs at fixed intervals, initially at 2, 4 and 6 weeks, will help to assess healing and fracture position. Most of these patients can begin building up to full weight bearing after 3 months of immobilization but this decision is made on an individual patient basis after clinical and radiographic considerations. Looking for the most appropriate method of immobilization for these patients, a prospective cohort study by Thomas et al., comparing splinting As with all fractures occurring in the trauma setting, damage control or early total care principles may be applied depending on available facilities and the patient's clinical condition. In terms of definitive stabilization, some general principles may be applied in appropriate cases; Type A fractures may be managed by retrograde nailing or minimally invasive percutaneous plate osteosynthesis (MIPPO). Type B fractures can be treated by closed reduction and percutaneous screw fixation or MIPPO. Type C fractures: C1 fractures can be treated by retrograde nailing or MIPPO techniques. Minimal invasive percutaneous plate osteosynthesis is indicated for type C2, C3 and peri-prosthetic fractures.  Other options for temporary stabilization include a skeletal traction pin inserted either trans-calcaneal, through the proximal tibia or distal femur. This aids fracture reduction Reported benefits of external fixation include decreased surgical time, blood loss and less disruption of the periosteal blood supply to fracture fragments.  For the above reasons definitive external fixation is reserved for patients with very severe open injuries, pre-existing infection or with extremely poor soft tissues. It might be considered for patients with unusual bone geometry making internal fixation difficult such as; mal-unions, skeletal dysplasia, etc. External fixation may be considered for segmental bone loss though other techniques (bone grafting, Masquelet technique) are also viable. The authors have also seen combined techniques with acute shortening and internal fixation to address the distal femoral fracture and application of a limb reconstruction system device for femoral lengthening proximally. For fractures with articular involvement, articular reconstruction is performed first, using either open reduction and limited internal fixation (ORIF) or closed reduction and percutaneous fixation with independent screws and/olive wires. Common complications related to the use of external fixation for distal femur fractures include osteomyelitis and pin tract infection, loss of reduction, delayed or non-union requiring bone grafting, and limited knee motion requiring either manipulation under anaesthesia or quadricepsplasty.   Due to the often limited number of distal fixation options available in antegrade nails and limited amount of distal bone stock in distal femoral fractures, retrograde nails are more commonly used, as they allow easier intra-operative control of small distal fragments and aid fracture reduction ( Several case series have also reported the success of the retrograde nail in low-energy fractures in elderly patients. Complications arising following retrograde nailing include anterior knee pain,  Functional outcomes in patients undergoing antegrade nailing have been shown to correlate with patient age and the severity of the initial injury. Another difficulty encountered when treating these fractures with intramedullary nails is maintaining fracture reduction. Whatever the nail diameter, the nail is smaller than the distal metaphysis of the femur. As such, it does not reduce the fracture, and can only maintain fracture reduction when it is in contact with femoral cortical bone. Therefore, the fracture must first be reduced Post-operatively, authors have recommended limited weight bearing and the selective use of bracing to prevent fixation failure.  Successful treatment with modern plating starts with accurate fracture reduction using indirect techniques as popularized by Mast et al.  Farouk et al. In 2006, Zlowodzki et al. combined and evaluated the outcomes of LISS and Polyaxial locking plates from several case series as part of a systematic literature review ( Several papers have compared outcomes between retrograde nails and plating in the treatment for fractures of the distal femur. One major drawback in the use of locking plates is their relatively high cost. Vallier et al. concluded that locking plates should only be used when conventional fixed-angle devices cannot be placed.   Distal femoral fractures are relatively rare injuries resulting from large forces acting across and disrupting the largest long bone in the human body. Due to the nature and mechanism of the injury, associated injuries are common and the attending medical doctor should perform a thorough trauma assessment and initiate appropriate acute management, which must include immediate stabilization of the fracture in a Thomas Splint or an above knee plaster of Paris backslab. After initial treatment, the clinical and functional outcome of distal femoral fractures is optimized by operative fixation, which generally has a good prognosis. A poorer prognosis is seen in polytrauma patients with multiple associated injuries, whereas excellent results have been reported in minimally displaced fractures and when there is limited, or no extension proximally up the femoral shaft. With an ageing population and increasing rates of road traffic collision, distal femur fractures will continue to increase in incidence and complexity, providing challenges to the orthopaedic surgeon. The problems posed in treating these fractures include a short articular segment, bone loss in open fractures, and osteoporotic bone. As implants and techniques have evolved, the same treatment goals have remained; restoration of limb alignment, anatomic articular reduction and early knee motion. The emphasis on indirect reduction techniques to restore limb alignment has improved the rate of fracture healing and decreased infection rates, fixation failure, and the need for bone grafting when compared to earlier clinical series that used direct reduction techniques. Although the role of locking plates has continued to expand over recent years, clinical studies have yet to demonstrate a significant improvement in outcomes with their use. With that said, the development of locking plates has coincided with the advancement of minimally invasive plating techniques. As these newer implants continue to be used, large clinical trials are needed to justify their increased cost.