 Closed isolated fractures with failed conservative treatment (residual deformity): Refer to Irreducible fractures Unstable fracture patterns: Spiral or long oblique fractures Multiple metacarpal fractures Open fractures Polytrauma patient Athlete requiring early rehabilitation  Refer to  Plain radiographs should be obtained in three views (posteroanterior, oblique, and lateral). Refer to Fracture configuration will directly influence the type of fixation considered. Transverse fractures are typically fixed with compression plating. Long oblique (spiral) fractures are typically fixed with interfragmentary compression screws (lag screws). Short oblique fractures, where there is limited space for interfragmentary screws, may benefit from a combination of these two techniques. Comminuted fractures may require a neutral plate to span the fracture, plus other techniques such as lag screws or cerclage wires.  Distal branches of the superficial radial nerve and the dorsal sensory branch of the ulnar nerve are at risk for injury on the dorsum of the hand ( Juncturae tendinum interlink the extensor tendons at the level of the metacarpal necks and may need to be divided during fracture exposure. Repair may be considered but is probably not necessary in most cases ( Interosseous muscles originate from the metacarpal shafts; the fascia covering these muscles is contiguous with the periosteum on the dorsum of the bones.  Dorsal approach is essentially universal. The skin incision should lie longitudinally along the dorsum of the metacarpal ( Subcutaneous tissue is gently dissected to avoid damage to cutaneous nerves. Extensor tendons are retracted, and periosteum is incised to expose the fracture ( For fixation of adjacent metacarpal fractures, the incision can be made between the metacarpals so that both fractures can be exposed (  Be alert for small subcutaneous veins; they are often paired anatomically with subcutaneous nerves. Nerves tend to lie a little deeper than the veins, in the deep subcutaneous tissue, but superficial to the fascia. Offset or “stagger” the incisions in each layer (skin, subcutaneous tissue, and fascia), to avoid a continuum of scar extending from skin to deeper structures. In other words, do not make the skin incision directly over your incision in the fascia/paratenon, and do not incise paratenon directly over your periosteal incision. This allows for uninjured tissue to be interposed between the layers of scar ( Elevate the periosteum and interosseous fascia as a single unit, preserving this layer for closure over the hardware after fixation is complete.  Avoid making an incision directly over an extensor tendon, to decrease chance of postoperative tendon adhesions. Do not completely strip the extensor tendons of their surrounding fatty areolar tissue (paratenon), as this can also result in tendon adhesions. Do not strip away more periosteum or muscle than is necessary to achieve good reduction/fixation, because this can reduce the blood supply for fracture healing.  Fracture edges need to be cleaned of debris and fracture hematoma to accurately assess the reduction. Reduction can be maintained with a variety of reduction clamps, bone forceps, or temporary Kirschner wires. For most fracture configurations, the Auerbach bone reduction instrument (  Metacarpal fixation is typically performed with 2.0- to 2.4-mm diameter screw sets, although smaller screws (1.5- to 1.7-mm) may be indicated for smaller hands, or for lag screws, where 2.0-mm screws may be too large.  Lag screws provide interfragmentary compression and are ideal for long oblique fractures. The near cortex is drilled with a drill bit that has the same diameter as the Even if reduction appears anatomic, check the posture and alignment of the finger critically before performing fixation. Once the bone has been fixated with plate and/or screws, it is very difficult to revise the reduction. The far cortex is drilled with a drill bit that matches the Some surgeons choose to reverse this process, drilling both cortices with the smaller drill bit first, then overdrilling the near cortex as needed. Measure screw length and insert the screw. The screw will slide through the near cortex, and engage the far cortex with the screw threads. Because most screws designed for this application are self-tapping, a separate tapping step is not required. As the fully threaded screw is tightened in this lag configuration, the fracture site is compressed between the head of the screw and the distal threads ( Three or more lag screws are ideal ( Lag screws may not be appropriate if the fracture length is less than twice the bone diameter, and short oblique fractures may only accommodate two screws.  Compression plates utilize ovoid holes in the plate to direct compression toward the fracture site ( The first screw to be placed should be adjacent to the fracture line. This screw should be tightened with the plate pulled toward the fracture line, such that the screw is positioned eccentrically in the hole. The next screw should be placed immediately on the other side of the fracture line, drilling the hole in the portion of the oval farthest away from the fracture line. Often, instrumentation sets will contain specialized drill guides to facilitate this step. By tightening this second screw, axial compression is generated at the fracture site ( The remaining screws are placed in the remaining holes in a neutral position (not eccentric). These screws serve to reinforce the fixation but do not generate additional compression. Plates should be bent into a slightly exaggerated curve, so that when applied to the dorsal metacarpal, the volar cortex is compressed and a volar bone gap is avoided (  Bridging plate: This refers to a plate that spans an area of comminution. They are useful for maintaining bone length in situations where collapse might otherwise occur. Sometimes bridge plates are used in association with an intercalary bone graft (  Lag screw fixation should include screws with two different orientations: screws perpendicular to the fracture line provide better compression; screws perpendicular to the long axis of the bone resist axial shear better. Plates with staggered holes allow more points of fixation with potentially smaller areas of bone exposed or available ( Tension-band plates: Metacarpal shaft fractures typically displace with an apex-dorsal deformity due to the eccentric loads across the bone at this location. This deformity results in one side of the bone being compressed (volar; “compression side”) and one being distracted (dorsal; “tension side”). By plating the dorsal surface (tension side), the forces that would otherwise cause an apex-dorsal deformity are converted to compression on the volar surface. Neutralization plates: This refers to plates used to reinforce lag screws or other compressive fixation. These plates are applied after the lag screws have been placed and do not add additional compression, but can stabilize the construct, especially in fragile bone.  Lag screws should not be placed within two screw diameters of the edge of a fracture. Doing so may lead to additional comminution of the bone. Compression plates must be bent into a gentle curve, slightly more than the natural dorsal curve of the metacarpal, to avoid volar gapping of the fracture when the plate is secured to bone (  Check the correction of any rotational deformity. Passive motion (tenodesis effect): With passive wrist flexion, the digits should extend due to extrinsic tendon attachments; with passive wrist extension, the digits should flex toward the scaphoid tubercle. This allows the surgeon to evaluate for any residual rotational malalignment. Active motion: An awake patient can demonstrate flexion actively, but this can be simulated in an anesthetized patient by applying pressure to the volar forearm at the musculotendinous junction, which causes the fingers to flex, and allows alignment to be judged ( Repair periosteum/fascia to cover the plate and/or screws. Repair juncturae tendinum if desired. Deflate tourniquet and achieve good hemostasis before skin closure. Close skin in layers. Apply well-padded volar splint to immobilize wrist and metacarpophalangeal (MCP) joints; including interphalangeal (IP) joints is optional, but may be more comfortable and/or more secure for some patients.  Reliable patients with rigid fixation can start early active finger motion of all joints within 1 week to improve tendon gliding and tissue edema. Even in suboptimal conditions, the interphalangeal joints should be mobilized within 1 week to avoid joint contractures. A removable forearm-based orthosis that maintains MCP joint flexion and IP joint extension can be used for protection during the first several weeks. Once fracture healing is evident around 6 weeks, the splint can be weaned and strengthening exercises may begin. Most patients should recover near-normal motion and strength. Beware of the elderly active patient: they will heal fractures slowly and yet have very little fracture pain, which would ordinarily serve to limit excessive activity in younger patients. Occasional failure of fixation is seen in this group. To avoid this problem, consider restricting these patients from heavy lifting and strength training until some evidence of healing is seen on x-ray. 