In this study, recovery of lithium in seawater using a titanium-intercalated lithium manganese oxide composite (LTMO) was investigated along with its adsorption capacity and durability. To minimize manganese dissolution during the extraction of Li+ by acidic treatment, a spinel type of LTMO was synthesized by the high-energy milling of a titania (TiO2), lithium carbonate (Li2CO3), and manganese carbonate (MnCO3) mixture and subsequent heat treatment. X-ray diffraction and thermogravimetric analyzer confirmed that Ti was well intercalated into the spinel structure of lithium manganese oxide (LMO). The effects of calcination temperature and Ti content on LTMO structure, lithium uptake, and adsorbent stability were investigated. Kinetic analysis showed that adsorption by LTMO followed pseudo-second-order kinetics, with a correlation coefficient in excess of 0.99. Adsorption by LTMO fitted the Langmuir isotherm well, with a correlation coefficient higher than 0.99, and LTMO exhibited higher theoretical maximum adsorption capacity than LMO (up to 21.9 mg g−1 vs. 19.6 mg g−1). In addition, LTMO showed high selectivity for lithium ions in the presence of competitive cations.Lithium (Li) compounds are used in a wide range of applications, such as nuclear fusion, batteries, ceramic glass, lubricants, cement, and aircraft products ( Several processes have been devised to recover Li from seawater based on electrodialysis, adsorption, precipitation, and electrochemical techniques ( During Li extraction from LiMn To suppress Mn dissolution, the number of trivalent manganese sites must be minimized in favor of stable tetrahedral sites like those in Li We synthesized a titanium-intercalated lithium manganese oxide (Li Titania (TiO The LTMO adsorbents [Li Crystallinities were determined by X-ray diffraction (XRD, SmartLab, Rigaku) using Cu-Kα radiation (λ = 1.5418 Å). Morphologies and microstructures were obtained by scanning electron microscopy (SEM, Hitachi S-4700) and high-resolution transmission electron microscopy (HR-TEM, Tecnai G2-F30 S). Thermogravimetric analysis (TGA) was performed using a DTA-TG thermal analyzer (DTG-60H, Shimadzu), and Li Li Our approach was to achieve efficient Li recovery by intercalating Ti, which was found to minimize Mn dissolution, into LMO to form a spinel-type LTMO structure. As shown in Based on the XRD results at various calcination temperatures and Ti contents, only LTMO samples with a spinel structure were examined for adsorption performance by Li extraction, Mn dissolution, and Li  Electronic microscopy was used to check for morphological changes of LMO and LTMO prepared at 500 °C for 4 h with x:0.1 before ( The kinetic study of the Li The kinetic experiments were carried out using 1 g of adsorbent in 2 L of 60 mg L The isotherm study on the Li The Freundlich model was developed to describe multi-layer adsorption with several types of adsorption sites on the adsorbent surface ( As shown in The theoretical maximum adsorption capacities of LMO and LTMO were obtained from the calculated slope (1/ To examine Li LTMO adsorbent was prepared by high-energy milling and subsequent calcination and was demonstrated to selectively recover Li in seawater. The intercalation of Ti into the LMO structure was verified by XRD and TGA. The lowest Mn dissolution from LTMO caused by acidic treatment during Li This research was supported by the national research project titled “The Development of Technology for Extraction of Resources Dissolved in Seawater” of the  Supplementary data to this article can be found online at