The objective of this paper is to develop a general pricing model for Turkish Lignite, which is mainly sold to thermal plants. This model will contribute to the development of coal mining within the scope of privatization efforts of the Turkish energy market. The paper consists of two stages. First, data of 10 thermal plants have been evaluated by using hedonic pricing analysis to determine influential price parameters. The results of hedonic regression analysis indicate the effect and importance of calorific value and electricity price on lignite prices. Second, a general coal-pricing model has been developed by taking into account the results of hedonic analysis. Comparison of the coal prices estimated by the developed pricing model and the coal prices obtained from thermal plants indicates an acceptable relation.Oil shocks in the 1970s caused people to realize the danger of depending upon only one energy resource in Turkey as well all over the world. Large increases in oil prices made coal a much more attractive fuel for producing electricity. As a result, the policy of electricity production on the basis of lignite-fired thermal plants was adopted in the 1980s. Although considerable investment has been made on new lignite-fired plants, the share of lignite-fired thermal plants in total electricity production has been gradually decreasing since the beginning of the 1990s. By 2003, 20% of total electricity production is based on lignite-fired thermal plants ( The recent efforts for privatization of the energy sector make clear the need of coal sector having stronger technical and economical structure to compete with the imported fuels since government subsidization will not exist anymore for private companies. One of the most important steps for covering this need will be satisfactory pricing of domestic coal in the contracts between thermal plants and coal producers. By doing so, coal supply will increase depending on development of the private coal sector. Additionally, more funds will be transferred to further exploration and beneficiation works for coal. In this manner, the competition power of domestic coal against imported fuels will rise as a result of increase in coal supply and quality. Within this paper, it is aimed to propose a general-pricing model for Turkish lignite supplied to the electricity market that offers a systematic approach between coal prices and related variables. To reach this aim, the effect of some parameters on lignite prices is examined by using hedonic approach. Obtained results have been then used to develop a general pricing model. Finally, the estimated prices have been compared with the real prices. Coal quality characteristics directly influence coal's ability to perform the function required in the final use of coal. Thus, quality is an essential price determinant of coal and is defined by some beneficial components such as energy content and harmful or useless components such as ash, sulfur and moisture content As is known, metal content is the unit measurement the quality of ore; likewise energy content influences the quality of fuel ( A coal pricing formula, which only takes into account the coal quality parameters, has been used by The price of coal also should be influenced by other factors such as the price of competitive fuels and the price of end products. Therefore, the prices of natural gas and diesel oil as a competitive fuel and the price of electricity as an end product should be taken into account when determining coal prices. To determine whether coal prices are influenced equally and significantly by all parameters mentioned above is an important problem. Recently, the hedonic pricing approach has been utilized to solve this type of problem for coking coal. Some examples are given by The hedonic pricing approach can provide a useful method of evaluating price–quality relations for non-homogeneous products such as coal. This approach is based on the principle that differences in the prices of differentiated or non-homogeneous products largely reflect differences in the characteristics of the related products ( Essentially, the hedonic price is defined as the implicit price of each characteristic and can be estimated econometrically from observed prices and associated characteristics by using regression analysis (Chang, 1995). The estimated coefficient associated with each quality characteristic, which means the implicit price of that characteristic, is given by the partial derivative of price with respect to quality characteristics. It measures the coefficients as the marginal valuation of a unit increase/decrease in the level of the characteristics, while the other things are held constant. The data related to coal used in this paper have been obtained from the different thermal plants. The summary statistics of monthly data are placed in It is evident from the By considering the methodology of coal pricing mentioned in ‘the methodology of coal pricing’ and the contracts between coal producers and thermal plants in Turkey, coal prices are assumed to be a function of several parameters as given below: Theoretically, it is hypothesized that the prices of substituting fuels (natural gas, diesel oil), the price of electricity and calorific value have a positive effect on price while ash, moisture and sulfur content have a negative effect on price. Additionally, the quantity of coal demanded is inversely related to its price because of price discounts for bulk purchases of coal To evaluate the given data on the base of Eq.  Adjusted determination coefficients of models vary between 0.172 and 0.857. Except for Orhaneli and Tuncbilek-B, the determination coefficients of derived models do not explain satisfactorily the relation with the coal prices and involved variables. The reason for the low determination coefficient is based on the fact that the analysis is limited to measure the impact of other related variables such as government arrangements and contractual conditions between buyers and sellers. The number and type of independent variables in each model differs from plant to plant. It means that each thermal plant has its own pricing concept. The sign of coefficients of some variables does not comply with the expectations suggested for Eq. Quality parameters of the coals ( The price of electricity, which has the maximum intensity and appears with a positive coefficient in models, supports the Eq. Although the electricity price has a definite contribution to the majority of the models, the coefficients of this variable that are also the implicit price of Analysis of data of each thermal plant presents clear differences in pricing models. Therefore, the stepwise regression analysis has been carried out again for pooled data. The detailed results are given in In the first step, calorific value the contribution of which is the highest to the pricing model has been involved. Ash content, electricity price and moisture content have been then included in the second, third and fourth steps respectively. The results in the last step show expected relationships between coal price and the parameters, which are calorific value, ash content and electricity price. On the other hand, the relation between moisture content and price does not comply with the expectation given in Eq. The model, given in Eq. The results of hedonic regression analysis indicated that only calorific value and electricity price among parameters given in Eq. As is well known, the prices of metal minerals are based on the reverse calculation backward from the price of end product. This approach could be utilized to propose a coal-pricing model by considering electricity as an end product. Thus, a general coal-pricing model can be defined as follows: The first part of Eq. If the  In this paper, the effect of some parameters on the price of Turkish lignite has been investigated by using hedonic pricing analysis. Main findings of this analysis have been considered to develop a general coal-pricing model, which will help coal-mining industry to adapt the changes in energy market and to develop. On the basis of available data, it is determined that there exists an acceptable relationship between estimated and real prices since correlation coefficient is high. Therefore, the proposed pricing model can be easily applied to contracts. However, in favor of coal producers, The authors wish to thank the personnel of Electricity Generation Co. Inc. and Turkish Coal Enterprise for their valuable help during this study.