The flocculation by compositions, based on synthetic poly-1,2-dimethyl-5-vinylpyridinium methyl sulfate (K1),poly-trimethyl(methacryloyloxyethyl)-ammonium methyl sulfate (K2) and natural polyelectrolyte (chitosan, Cs) using an aqueous kaolin dispersion was studied. Floccule formation parameters and sedimentation rates were determined by optical microscopy, turbidimetry and microelectrophoresis. The synergistic effect is observed using the polyelectrolyte compositions, it appears in 40% increase of the floccule sedimentation rates and promotes the formation of two times more dense floccules compared to using individual flocculants. The synergistic effect of two cationic polyelectrolytes was confirmed by the flocculation research results in aqueous-salt solutions at various NaCl salt concentrations. A study of the behavior of the two polyelectrolytes macromolecules in solution was performed to explain the observed synergistic effect. The decrease of macromolecules hydrodynamic radius in the joint presence of two like-charged polyelectrolytes was revealed by the capillary viscometry, dynamic and static light scattering. It was determined, that the behavior of two cationic polyelectrolytes in the common solution determines the character of their behavior on the dispersed phase surface in the flocculation process.Polyelectrolytes are widely used as flocculants in water purification and wastewater treatment, concentrating, separating and purifying a great variety of colloidal dispersions and sludge dewatering, soil structure improvement, mineral processing, papermaking, biotechnology and food industry. The most widespread flocculants are water-soluble cationic polyelectrolytes with high molecular weight and a high charge density, since the most of dispersed systems are negatively charged. These parameters of macromolecules promote the effective process of floccules formation and significantly intensify the process of the stability regulation of disperse systems. Thus, the results of the research of the flocculation by poly-1,2-dimethyl-5-vinylpyridinium methyl sulfate with high molecular weight (MW The main factors of floccules formation are bridging and neutralization of the surface charge due to simultaneous adsorption of polyelectrolyte macromolecules on the several particles surface. Also flocculation may occur by depletion flocculation or by the combination of these mechanisms However, the issue of improving the water treatment and sludge dewatering processes cannot be considered completely solved. In case of flocculation of complex multicomponent dispersions with a large number of different impurities, it is difficult to achieve a high degree of purification using only individual flocculants. In this regard, lately complex flocculating agents, which include nonionic and ionic polymers The study The synergistic effect of binary mixtures of weakly and moderately charged anionic and cationic polyelectrolyte Flopam by SNF Floerger in Dual polymer systems, containing the like-charged and opposite charged polyelectrolytes, are used in the flocculation and reflocculation of different dispersed systems and the efficiency of these processes depends on the ratio of molecular weight and charges of the polyelectrolytes Along with the synthetic flocculants, which properties (molecular weight, charge density and the macromolecules architecture) can be controlled at the stage of synthesis, the possibility of using natural polymers in the flocculation processes is widely investigated nowadays. Natural polymers, in particular chitosan and its derivatives, are biodegradable and biocompatible Chitosan is used not only as individual flocculent, but also in the complexes. In The literature describes the data, showing the existence of the relationship between the thermodynamic compatibility of the components in the solution, change of the thermodynamic quality “mixed solvent” (polymer In this paper we present the study results of kaolin aqueous dispersion flocculation by binary mixture of cationic polyelectrolytes and report about the influence of the properties and polymer macromolecules behavior in the solution on the floccules formation process and sedimentation characteristics. Cationic polyelectrolytes - poly-1,2-dimethyl-5-vinylpyridinium methyl sulfate (K1) and poly-trimethyl(methacryloyloxyethyl)ammonium methyl sulfate (K2) were synthesized from the appropriate monomers via radical polymerization, with distilled water as the medium and tertbutylperoxipropanol-2 as the initiator. Monomer for K2 was synthesized via the alkylation of freshly distilled (dimethylamino)ethylmethacrylate (Aldrich) with dimethyl sulfate (Aldrich) in acetone. 1,2-dimethyl-5-vinylpyridinium methyl sulfate was provided by a scientific production association “KF”, Ltd. The synthesized monomers were recrystallized from acetone or methanol and dried in vacuum (1.5–2.0 Low molecular weight impurities were removed from aqueous polyelectrolytes solutions by dialysis through semipermeable membranes, MWCO 10000–15000, against distilled water for 3 Kaolin aqueous suspension was used as a model system for the study of the flocculation processes in aqueous and aqueous-salt solutions at various NaCl concentrations (0.001–0.2 Synthetic polyelectrolytes were dissolved in distilled water, and then stirred for 2–4 Chitosan solutions (0.1 Different compositions of polyelectrolytes were prepared by mixing individual polyelectrolyte solutions in various ratios (wt%). The solutions were stirred for 1–2 Kaolin suspension (0.8 Flocculation was investigated by optical microscopy (OM; microphotographs are shown in The main dispersion characteristics such as radius of floccules, the degree of floccules aggregation, polydispersity index and form factor were obtained using a calculation complex based on the stereoscopic microscope MSP-2 (“LOMO”PLC,Russia) by OM. The polydispersity index was calculated according to: The surface average degree of floccules aggregation was calculated according to: Sedimentation rates of flocculation model systems were determined by turbidimetry (measurement of the loss of optical density, D, over time, τ, obtained by spectrophotometer UNICO 1200, Unico Inc., USA) and were calculated according to Stokes’ law: The floccule density was calculated according to the Stokes’ equation: Zeta-potential measurements were performed on the Photocor Compact Z (“Photocor” Ltd, Russia) in quartz cuvettes at the following conditions: a temperature of 25 Polyelectrolyte solutions were studied by viscosimetry as well as dynamic and static light scattering (DLS and SLS, respectively). The intrinsic viscosity [η] and the specific viscosity η DLS and SLS measurements were performed using aqueous-salt solutions (0.05 DLS measurements were carried out at scattering angles of 60°–120°. An ALV-Correlator was used to mathematically process the correlation functions. For the second virial coefficient determination, SLS measurements were performed at scattering angles of 40°–130° for 10–15 Concentration dependencies of sedimentation rates ( As can be seen from the floccule sedimentation rate dependencies ( The synergistic effect of the compositions, based on cationic polyelectrolytes, may be caused by the complicated mechanism of the floccule formation, mostly, electrostatic patch mechanism and bridging. It also depends on the degree of polyelectrolyte macromolecule adsorption on the dispersed phase. The significant difference in molecular weights and the surface charges of K1, K2, and Cs should be noted. Furthermore, competitive polyelectrolyte adsorption is observed due to the complex spatial structure of natural polymers, and a complex flocculation mechanism appears. Synergism of two cationic synthetic polyelectrolytes, due to the thermodynamic incompatibility of the polymers, was proven earlier Electrokinetic potential measurements were performed to confirm the flocculation mechanism, and to assess the contribution of the electrostatic patch mechanism. The results are presented in Quite often the use of flocculants involves the regulation of the dispersions containing electrolytes. Therefore the study of the flocculation of a model kaolin system by two cationic polyelectrolytes composition in aqueous-salt solutions is important. The thermodynamic quality of the solvent is an important factor of the polymer adsorption, it affects the conformation of macromolecules in the solution and the parameters of the polymer chains in the surface layer. Commonly the adsorption of nonionic polymers increases with the deterioration of the thermodynamic quality of the solvent The flocculation of kaolin suspension at various NaCl salt concentrations was studied to determine the effect of salt on the flocculation and to confirm the synergistic effect of cationic polyelectrolytes composition on the flocculation of kaolin. The K1/K2 composition with ratio 40/60, as the most efficient, was used as the flocculation composition in this research. The salt concentration does not affect the sedimentation rates of kaolin particles without flocculant as shown in This is happening due to the changes of cationic polyelectrolyte macromolecules conformation. Macromolecule conformation changes can be confirmed by the electrokinetic potential measurements of the kaolin particles surface charge at various NaCl salt concentrations ( Thus, the inorganic electrolyte (e.g. NaCl) does not improve the flocculation of kaolin, but prevents the effective implementation of the flocculation mechanisms induced by two highly charged cationic polyelectrolytes K1 and K2. This confirms that the synergistic effect of two cationic polyelectrolytes in the flocculation process is caused by their thermodynamic incompatibility. And this is also the reason why weakly charged or nonionic polymers are mainly used for the flocculation of highly mineralized water. A study of the behavior of the two polyelectrolyte macromolecules in solution was performed to explain the observed synergistic effect. The behavior of the macromolecules significantly depends on the solvent quality and ionic strength. These parameters affect the size and shape of macromolecular coils, causing a change in the hydrodynamic properties of the dilute polymer solutions. The specific ( The swelling ratio study ( To confirm the ubiquitous nature of the macromolecular behavior, especially coil compaction, the binary electrolyte solutions were investigated at various ionic strengths ( The two cationic polyelectrolyte solutions were studied by DLS to confirm the viscosimetry data. DLS graphs ( The second virial coefficient for the cationic polyelectrolyte mixture and individual polymers was determined by SLS. It characterizes the effect of the double interactions (collisions) of the particles ( The comparison of the viscosity data of mixed polyelectrolyte solutions with the flocculating parameters suggests an essential role of the changes in the macromolecules conformational state. Floccules obtained using the individual polyelectrolytes are quite loose and contain, along with kaolin particles, large amounts of the dispersion medium. The reason is the presence of adsorbed macromolecules on the particle surface. Large part of these macromolecules units may be unbonded to the surface and located in the surface layer as loops and tails. Therefore, it may be assumed that the conformational state of these fragments determine the structure of floccules and the interparticle bridging through high molecular weight compounds. Polymer molecules are concentrated in floccules as the result of the adsorption and particle aggregation in the system. However, the coexistence of macromolecular loops of different natures in a microvolume may be thermodynamically disadvantageous. Moreover, as macromolecules are bonded to the surface via a system of cooperative salt and physical bonds, they cannot be desorbed and removed from the floccule volume. Under such conditions, the compression of the loops is likely to proceed to minimize the contacts with foreign units. As a result, the size of the floccules is reduced, this accelerates their sedimentation. Hence, it becomes possible to influence the densification of floccule structure by using the polyelectrolytes compositions. The obtained regularities are specific not only to this pair of polyelectrolytes, but can be observed for any thermodynamically incompatible polymer mixture, including natural polyelectrolytes. The efficiency of flocculating compositions based on natural and synthetic polyelectrolytes on kaolin dispersion was shown. The behavior of two cationic polyelectrolytes in the common solution determines the character of their behavior on the dispersed phase surface in the flocculation process. The increase of the floccule sedimentation rates was revealed – for the composition based on two synthetic cationic polyelectrolytes with K1/K2 ratio 40/60 the increase was 40%, and for the composition with Cs at Cs concentrations of 40% the increase was about 60%. The synergistic effect promotes the formation of denser floccules, which do not deform at the sediment compaction stage. The addition of inorganic electrolyte (e.g. NaCl) in case of flocculation by two cationic polyelectrolytes prevents the effective implementation of the flocculation mechanisms. The study of hydrodynamic and molecular weight characteristics of polyelectrolytes solutions showed the decrease of macromolecules hydrodynamic radius in the joint presence of two like-charged polyelectrolytes. This decrease is caused by the thermodynamic incompatibility of cationic polyelectrolytes. This work was financially supported by