The sixth meeting in this series of conferences on “Coal Research and its Applications” was organized by the Coal Research Forum and held at the University of Kent at Canterbury in September, 2006. This latest meeting of what has now become an established biennial event, followed the pattern of the previous meetings, the aim being to bring together the academic community and their industry – based counterparts who carry out coal research or have an interest in the applications of such research. Once again more than 100 delegates attended the three-day meeting and five continents were represented with representatives from the USA, South Africa, Australia, Korea, Japan, India and China adding to those from 11 European Countries. As could be expected for a conference organized by the UK Coal Research Forum and one which originally started as a UK meeting, over 60% of the delegates were from the UK universities and companies. However, once again good support came from our Spanish friends with eight delegates and a similar number of presentations. A first for this meeting was the use of parallel sessions for the oral presentation of 66 papers in 18 sessions which commenced after an opening address, “Coal, Clean Coal and CO The venue proved to be a good choice with excellent facilities for the presentation of the lectures, close proximity of the lecture theatres and a convenient area for the coffee/tea breaks. The kindness of the weather meant that many chose to take these breaks in the open air and many of the animated discussions which ensued had to be broken up by the call back to the lecture theatres. The local organizer, Professor Yan, and his team, in particular Dr. Jiaqing Shao, did yeoman service in making this conference a great success and are to be congratulated on their efforts. The support for this conference by E.ON/UK, RWE npower, Scottish Power, Mitsui Babcock (now Doosan Babcock). BCURA, The IEA Clean Coal Centre and The University of Kent is gratefully acknowledged and finally, as the Chairman of the Organising Committee, I must acknowledge the members of this Committee who performed stirling work in ensuring the undoubted success of the meeting. The success of the meeting has ensured that the 2008 conference will go ahead and it is I already planned to be held in Cardiff, 3rd–5th September, 2008.