In the present study, the wear behavior of as-plated and plasma-nitrided Ni-B-CNT coatings was taken into investigation. Ni-B-CNT composite was deposited on AISI 4140 steel using different concentration of CNTs ranging from 0.2 to 1 g·L−1, in an electroless bath. After the plating process, all samples were plasma nitrided in an atmosphere comprising of 25%N2-75% H2, at 400 °C, for 4 h. The friction and wear behavior of the composite coatings were evaluated using a pin on disk method at an applied load of 10 N. The samples were then characterized by means of XRD, FESEM, microhardness and surface roughness measurements. Worn surfaces were further analyzed by FESEM and EDS spectroscopy. Microhardness results revealed that the maximum hardness of 1550HV was obtained for Ni-B 0.6 g·L−1 CNT plasma-nitrided sample. According to the results, increasing the CNTs concentration caused the as-plated Ni-B amorphous structure to change to semi-crystalline. Furthermore, the crevices formed during the hydrogen evolution reaction were observed to be filled up. Presence of CNTs not only decreased the grain size in the plasma-nitrided samples but also prevented excessive heat generation during the wear test, and thus the friction coefficient was declined during the test. Moreover, image of the worn surface of Ni-B 0.6 g·L−1 CNT plasma-nitrided sample indicated the smoothest wear trace with no apparent cracks and the highest wear resistance among all the samples was achieved. While, in Ni-B-1 g·L−1 CNT sample, agglomeration created asperities as well as large particles weakly bonded to the Ni matrix which ultimately led to an increase in the specific wear rate.Electroless coating is an autocatalytic deposition process which has been widely utilized in the industry due to its cost-effectiveness, uniform coating and less complex process Carbon nanotubes (CNTs) are graphene sheets The high length-to-diameter ratio of CNTs has led to a major drawback which is their poor dispersion in solutions which causes agglomeration and led to an undesirable mechanical and tribological behavior of the coated surface. Mechanical treatments like ball-milling process and chemical treatment, including adding polymers, surfactants and oxidation of the CNTs, are the most common approaches taken to tackle their poor dispersion issue Surfactants are divided into the ionic and non-ionic groups. The ionic category, including anionic and cationic groups, creates repulsion force between the CNTs and therefore, their dispersibility grows. Application of non-ionic surfactants due to their hydrophilic ends is also considered for improving CNTs dispersibility Another effective approach taken to enhance the dispersion of CNTs is their oxidation which is conducted by inserting functional groups like carboxyl, carbonyl, lactonic, phenolic, aldehyde and hydroxyl on their sidewalls. The oxidation can be carried out by immersing CNTs into a solutions containing oxidizing agents such as H The aim of the present study is to understand the effect of plasma nitriding treatment on the wear behavior of Ni-B-CNT electroless deposition. Furthermore, the effects of different concentrations of CNTs on the microhardness, crystallographic structure and wear behavior of the as-plated and plasma-nitrided samples were investigated. In this work, cylindrical samples (20 mm diameter × 10 mm height) made from AISI 4140 steel were used as the substrate. Pristine CVD-grown Multi walled carbon nanotubes (MWCNT) with 95% purity, 10–30 µm in length and 10–20 nm in outside diameter, were purchased from US Research Nanomaterials, Inc. They were ball-milled for 2 h using a planetary ball-mill machine with spherical ZrO Finally, the samples were immersed in HNO The Ni–B coating was deposited on AISI 4140 steel by an electroless plating process. The bath was composed of 25 g·L After the deposition, all samples (Ni-B, Ni-B-0.2 g·L At the end of the treatment, samples were slowly cooled in the chamber to reach the room temperature. The length and structure of CNTs before and after the ball-milling process as well as the thicknesses and morphologies of the composite coatings were studied, using MIRA3 TESCAN field emission scanning electron microscopy (FESEM). The functional group characterization of CNTs after oxidation was also analyzed by attenuated total reflection fourier transform infrared spectrometer (FTIR). To prepare the samples, CNTs were mechanically mixed with KBr powder and then the resultant powder was pressed to form a disc. FT-IR spectrum of CNTs was recorded in the range of 4000–400 cm The microhardness of the surface was measured for each samples using a Shimadzu tester at a load of 50 g. The lap time for each indentation was 15 s. The reported value represents the average and standard deviation of five measurements. Surface roughness measurement was carried out for the coated samples using a Hand-held Roughness Tester TR200 and the average of ten measurements was recorded. Wear tests were performed on a pin-on-disk wear tester device with a horizontal rotating disc and a dead-loaded pin according to ASTM G 99 standard. The device applies a controlled load As indicated in Functionalization of the ball-milled CNTs in an ultrasonic bath would enhance the oxidation rate by providing high local shear force to the nanotube bundle end FTIR spectroscopy of acid treated CNTs in  X-ray diffraction analysis of as-plated Ni-B shows a significantly broad peak around 45° corresponding to (1 1 1) plane of nickel phase, which indicates the amorphous nature of the coating (  The peak observed around 26° in all samples can probably be attributed to hexagonal boron nitride (BN) structure As can be noticed, the relative intensity of Ni (1 1 1)/Ni Due to low incorporation of CNTs, no CNT was detected in the diffractograms. Increasing CNTs concentration caused peak broadening to be observed which is the evidence of grain refinement. By As can be observed in The surface morphology of the as-plated samples is illustrated in According to     The diagrams of friction coefficient of as-plated samples are given in The coefficient of friction was decreased by raising the CNTs concentration up to 0.6 g·L Another factor which might effects samples wear behavior is surface roughness. Higher surface roughness could cause the abrasive interactions between the asperities on the surface of the Ni-B-1 g    Microfractures and particles flaking off from the surface were observed in Ni-B plasma-nitrided sample ( In the present work, the wear behavior of the as-plated and plasma-nitrided Ni-B-CNT coatings was taken into investigation. The results indicated that carbon nanotubes could effectively influence the crystallographic structure of Ni-B electroless through facilitating the Ni nucleation. Increasing the CNTs concentration led to a transition from amorphous to semi-crystalline structure. Homogenous CNTs distribution changed the morphology of the coated surface by filling the crevices and cracks formed during the hydrogen evolution reaction. CNTs restraining crystal and particle growth resulted in the formation of small nodules except for the Ni-B-1 g·L Increasing CNTs concentration in as-plated samples caused the friction coefficient and the specific wear rate to fall which was mainly due to the self-lubricating mechanism of CNTs. In the Ni-B-1 g·L The presence of CNTs decreased the plastic deformation in plasma-nitrided samples, as excessive heat generation was prevented during the wear test. Therefore, the wear resistance was improved. The highest wear resistance belonged to the Ni-B-0.6 g·L Since, only a handful of studies have investigated the heat treatment of nickel-boron coatings using the plasma-nitriding treatment, and also as CNTs have not yet been applied as nanocomposite in nickel-boron coating the present investigation could pave the way to further research.