A method for producing an As(V) solution from an As-bearing material obtained from a nonferrous hydrometallurgical process was investigated. Preparation of the As(V) solution included oxidative leaching of As with a NaOH solution, elimination of As as a calcium arsenate precipitate (johnbaumite: Ca5(AsO4)3(OH)) with a Ca(OH)2 secondary salt, washing the Ca–As compounds, and reaction of the Ca–As precipitate with H2SO4. This process was shown to be industrially applicable. The As ions and Cu ions were effectively separated by oxidative leaching with O2 gas injection under strongly basic conditions. In this system, As dissolved in the NaOH solution and Cu precipitated with the residue. The dissolved As in this highly concentrated NaOH solution was then effectively precipitated from the solution by addition of a surplus amount of CaO, which allowed recycling of the NaOH solution. The addition of surplus Ca precipitated Ca5(AsO4)3(OH) and Ca(OH)2, which inhibited the leaching of As but did leach Ca and Na. When the Ca–As compounds were dissolved with H2SO4, Ca ions precipitated in the form of gypsum from the As-bearing solution. The gypsum produced by this process is likely to give rise to a number of As-related issues and the As level, therefore, needs to be reduced. This process is advantageous for the treatment of As since it is stabilized as scorodite. The production of an As(V) solution could be applied to hydrometallurgical operations as it necessary for the removal of As. This process is shown to be practically useful to As removal in Zn refining and a closed flow circuit is proposed for integration of this process into a Zn hydrometallurgical operation.The treatment of As-containing byproducts from the hydrometallurgical processing of Cu and other nonferrous metals remains a significant challenge for the industry. Methods for fixing As in the form of scorodite while maximizing the recovery of Cu and other valuable metals have been developed. These methods mostly use high-temperature and high-pressure conditions ( This work ( This study investigated which As solutions are suitable as reactants for the synthesis of scorodite. The separation of As and Cu contained in copper arsenide (Cu An As and Cu containing substance obtained from a Zn refinery was used as the starting material. It was first synthesized by All the other chemicals used were industrial grade: NaOH (99%, Tosoh), CaO (95%, Kitakami), H The experimental apparatus used for atmospheric leaching has been described elsewhere ( ICP analysis was performed on the solid and post-reaction filtrate using inductively coupled plasma atomic emission spectroscopy (ICP-AES) (ICAP577, Nippon Jarrell-Ash Co. Ltd., Kyoto, Japan) to determine their chemical compositions. For solids, SEM and EDS analysis was conducted using JEOL JSM-6390LA and XRD measurement was performed on Rigaku RINT-2500. X-ray fluorescence spectrometer of Shimadzu XRF-1700 was used for approximate composition analysis. Particle size was measured using a Horiba LA-500 particle size analyzer; and the median diameter obtained by measurement was taken as the mean particle size. Single-point BET surface area tests were performed using a Monosorb specific surface-measurer manufactured by Yuasa Ionics K. K.  A 100 g/L aqueous NaOH solution was prepared. This alkaline solution was heated to 90 °C and the raw solid material was added at a solid:liquid ratio of 200 g/L. The resulting slurry was stirred vigorously by 2 four-bladed disc turbine impellers at 400 rpm. The electrical energy consumption was approximately 3 W/L. Oxygen gas was injected into the agitated slurry at a flow rate of 0.25 L/min per liter of reaction mixture. Stirring was continued for 4 h. The mixture was then cooled to 70 °C, and the solid was filtered off by pressure filtration. XRD, XRF and SEM-EDS analyses were performed on the leaching residue. Industrial grade quicklime (CaO) was added to the alkaline leachate at a concentration of 73.7 g/L and the mixture was stirred at 500 rpm. The reaction temperature was initially set to 60 °C but increased to 80 °C due to the exothermic reaction. An adequate amount of water was added to compensate for the loss of water caused by the hydration of CaO to form Ca(OH) The isolated solid was repulped and washed with water at a pulp density (PD) of 200 g/L at 60 °C with a stirring speed of 400 rpm for 1 h. The reaction mixture was then filtered through a 3 µm PTFE membrane filter at 0.4 MPa. The filtrate was subjected to pH and electroconductivity (EC) measurements. EC measurements were taken 5 times per sample on a Horiba ES-51 conductivity meter. XRD and SEM-EDS analyses were performed on the 3 times washed solid. The solid was repulped and washed three times and then added to a H A wet cake of gypsum (365 g) produced by the H The concentrations of the elements of interest, in the oxidized alkaline leachate, as well as the degree of precipitation are shown in The elemental concentrations of the filtrate as well as the fraction of these elements precipitated from the Ca–As precipitation reaction mixture is shown in Compositional analysis was also done on the filtered residue. The residue weighed 158 g (dry weight) per liter of the starting solution, with a moisture content of 20% (wet weight basis). The contents of the residue are summarized in the bottom row of the The XRD and SEM-EDS analyses of the obtained solid are shown in The Ca–As compounds were repulped and washed five times with water at a PD (wet basis) of 285 g/L (200 g/L on a dry basis) and the filtrate was collected by filtration of the mixture.  The XRD and SEM-EDS analyses of the Ca–As precipitate after 3 washes are shown in The Ca–As compounds of 342 g (wet weight basis) were added to the 1 L of 200 g/L H The gypsum was repulped and washed five times with pH 1 H Based on the above results, this process has demonstrated selective leaching for As over Cu and Fe under alkaline conditions. A quantitative determination of As(III) using thionalide ( According to the diagram proposed by In a quantitative analysis by Presence of Cu When the reaction took place at pH of 12.5 or lower due to a smaller amount of NaOH added, the reaction likely proceeded as in formula By combining reaction formulas The Ca–As compounds contained 31.65% Ca and 29.48% As. If the Ca–As compounds were pure Ca  The Ca–As compounds contained Na within a small amount of residual solution from the reaction. This Na was not completely removed by available washing and liquid–solid separation methods and thus experiments were repeated to remove them. Because the NaOH solution adhered to the solid, it was repulped and washed with water. No As was leached from the solid, otherwise the leached As would have required additional removal processes. Thus the As-containing solid became Ca-rich and basic. The As was not leached out under these conditions due to the arsenate remaining bound to the plenty of Ca(OH) The dissolution of the Ca–As compounds by H The Ca–As compounds were not soluble in an alkaline aqueous solution but the concentration of As is able to increase to 0.5 mol/L at a pH of 3 or below ( The precipitated gypsum contained As and the amount of impurities remaining in the gypsum was estimated by assuming that the reaction solution constituted the total moisture content of the gypsum. The calculated value of adherent content about gypsum is shown in  The process reported here is experimental and there are a number of problems that need to be resolved. In particular, the following topics require practical solutions: The residues produced by alkaline leaching contained As as high as 3.7% by weight. Washing of these residues could remove the As impurity to some extent but not completely. These residues should be treated in a metallurgical plant, preferably in a Cu refinery, as they contain a significant amount of Cu. This alkaline leach step might be competitive if properly implemented in a Cu refining process and could improve the economic viability of method of As removal by Cu powder which was once regarded as economically impracticable ( The washing solution from the Ca–As material contained As at a concentration below 1 mg/L, the detection limit for ICP. The Japanese maximum allowable As level is 0.1 mg/L for wastewater effluent and 0.01 mg/L for drinking water. The As concentration of the washing solution thus needs to be reduced before discharge. Treatment of As-containing wastewater is likely to benefit from As removal by the addition of Fe at a high molar Fe:As ratio ( The washing of gypsum reported in this work produced a H These hydrometallurgical Zn operations include a neutral leaching step, where the impurities are removed by co-precipitation with Fe while the Zn calcine is leached. The use of an As-loaded acid solution for neutral leaching will offer multiple advantages including the elimination of As and dissolution of Zn. When this gypsum washing step is incorporated into a hydrometallurgical Zn operation, the spent electrolyte could be used for the washing, which will circumvent the water supply issues. The alkaline leachate contained lead at a concentration below the ICP detection limit of 1 mg/L. The gypsum produced in the final step contained 30 ppm lead which was the result that very small amount of lead was leached under minimum limit of detection in alkaline leaching, and it was detected to concentrate in the final dissolution process. Lead should be removed after the alkaline leaching step by a method such as the Zn powder substitution reaction. The gypsum after the fifth wash still contained As at a concentration of 433 ppm which could not be disposed of. The As content may be reduced by creating larger gypsum particles using seed or a continuous reaction system, but the magnitude of the possible reduction is unknown. The reaction of gypsum with H  The washed gypsum, containing 0.2% of the initial As, may provoke environmental concerns. This As fixation process, however, is beneficial because the remainder of the As is immobilized in the form of scorodite or retained within the system. Washing the gypsum does, however, produce a dilute As solution, which may evoke safety issues when discharged in large volumes. The waste washing water should be routed to the Zn processing system to prevent As release. The waste washing water may also be used for dissolving the Ca–As material. The washing process should preferably be done in the counter current decantation circuit. At results of  The use of spent Zn electrolyte for the leaching of As as well as the removal of Fe and As ions in combination with a neutral leaching step should not be considered limited to the hematite process. These processes can also be used at Zn hydrometallurgical plants that use the jarosite and goethite precipitation methods. This study has examined the production of an As(V) solution suitable for use in the synthesis of scorodite. The As ions were considerably leached out of an As-bearing material by oxygen gas injection under strongly alkaline conditions (NaOH Dr. Kazuteru Tozawa, Mr. Taro Aichi and Mr. Hiroyuki Miyano are thanked for helpful discussions and advice.