The application of comminution technology such as the high-pressure grinding rolls (HPGRs), which is able to generate a high density of cracks in the ore particles, is favourable for leaching processes. Extraction of metallic values by the heap leach process, can take place on the particles with partial exposure of mineral grains, if it can provide sufficient surface front for chemical attack by leaching solution. The aim of this study was to assess the benefits of high crack density in the ore particles produced using the HPGR and how it could diminish due to inadequate percolation of the leaching agent.
                  A zinc ore was comminuted using HPGR at three different pressure settings and with a cone crusher for the control experiment. Subsamples from the (+23/−25, +14/−16, +5.25/−6.75mm) size fractions were characterized and packed into leach reactors. The reactors were stopped from time to time to investigate the progress of crack and micro-crack growth and its effect on metal extraction using the X-ray computed tomography (CT). The results are validated with those obtained using traditional techniques such as SEM and QEMSCAN. Investigation of the leach reactors residue indicated significant changes in the particle size distribution (PSD) of initial feed toward the fine size fraction. The residues from the reactors leaching the material prepared using the HPGR product contained more fine particles than the reactors, which were fed by cone crusher product. These differences were up to 10.3%.Heap leaching from low-grade ores has become a major contributor to the total global extraction of economically important metals, notably copper, gold, silver, and uranium ( Heap and dump leaching offer a number of advantages embracing simple equipment, low investment and operation cost ( The ore granular media used for heap leaching are the porous media packed by ore particles with different sizes, whose permeability is one of the critical parameters influencing the recovery ratio and leaching rate of valuable metals. However, during the leaching process, due to the physical, chemical and biologic reactions in ore, granular media under the role of solution could affect permeability. Therefore, the pore structure continues to evolve and has temporal and spatial variability. The permeability has close relationship with pore structure of ore granular media, therefore it also evolves continuously. For the in situ leaching heaps, recovery ratio and leaching rate decrease year after year. Due to larger ore particle sizes encountered in heap leaching, diffusion within the solution filled rock pores always affect extraction rates (  The comminution principle, which is compression as a breakage mechanism utilized in the HPGR, is different from that in conventional crushers or tumbling mills where impact and abrasion breakage mechanism are dominant. In the HPGR, contrary to conventional crushing rolls, the particles are broken by compression in a packed particle bed, and not by direct nipping of the particles between the two rolls. This particle bed is created between two choke-fed, counter-rotating rolls. Between these rolls, a particle bed is pressed to a density of up to roughly 85% of the actual material density ( Following the previous study ( The experiments performed for this work were divided into two categories: the first being the comminution of the ore using the HPGR and cone crusher and the second part were leaching in the eight leach reactors. A bulk sample of sphalerite ore was obtained from the Gamsberg Zinc mine in the Northern Cape Province, South Africa. The sample, after primary crushing by jaw crusher, was split and prepared into 250 3D-dimensional crack distribution in large particles was characterized before and during the leaching process, using the high-resolution X-ray CT system. An HMXST CT scanner at X-Sight X-ray Services in Stellenbosch, South Africa, with 225 Prior to the use of the X-ray CT for investigating the 3-D features of the sphalerite particles, some calibration was needed in order to be able to identify the optimal measurement settings to differentiate between different phases which included the cracks and the various minerals present in the ore particles, given that there is some overlap in the grey level brightness. In practice, density measurement from X-ray tomography data can be obtained either by calibrating the CT machine with objects of known density and obtaining a correlation that relates density with the attenuation coefficient, or by using a dual energy scanning to determine directly the density of the material. In this study, a dual energy scanning method was used for calibration ( The results are validated with those obtained using traditional techniques such as physical gas (with N2) adsorption, mercury intrusion porosimetry, SEM and QEMSCAN ( The aim of these experiments was to compare the effect of comminution devices and breakage mode on metal extraction recovery. The ore samples subjected to leaching tests were comminuted using the HPGR and cone crusher. The details of samples are presented in In this section, the effect of comminution devices on crack density, particle size and leaching process has been described and discussed. It was shown by Ghorbani and co-workers ( The HPGR tests were performed at three different pressure settings of 45, 95 and 120 As  As discussed in introduction, in the HPGR the particles are broken by compression in a packed particle bed; this compression is achieved by applying high pressure, which was allowed to reach 120 The implications of the high crack density, is that the large sphalerite-bearing particles prepared by the HPGR are likely to be more suitable to leaching, since the presence of these micro-cracks provides an additional surface-front of valuable mineral grains for chemical attack by the leaching solution.   In this study, similar size fractions for the ore were selected from the products of the material comminuted using the HPGR and cone crusher and subjected to leaching tests. Differences in particle porosity and crack network distribution will almost certainly have an influence on the efficiency of the leaching process. The micro-fracturing observed in the feed prepared using the HPGR could be the major reason for difference in the zinc extraction in each of the size fractions evaluated. The results obtained in this work showed that a 10–15% additional zinc leach extraction is possible ( The HPGR products for at all pressure settings were finer than that of the cone crusher ( Although the reactors were fed with specific size fractions, the residue had a size distribution containing even some fines. Results presented in However, after leaching, under the coupled action of multiple factors, such as hydraulic power, gravity and chemical reactions, new partial fine particles flow downwards through the pore space among coarse particles and deposited at local areas and an extremely small amount of fine particles are transported out of the reactor by the solution ( The most fundamentally important aspect of heap leaching is permeability of the leach and even percolation of the lixivant solution throughout all the ore. Excessive amounts of the fines generated during the leaching process mostly with the product of HPGR, and their mobilization would result in reduced permeability as the leaching process progresses, which could have a negative effect on percolation especially over long periods of heap leaching operation. It would also prevent a uniform flow of the solution through the heaps. In this study, X-ray CT has been used for investigation of the particles with high crack density produced by HPGR and the results were compared with those particles prepared using cone crusher. The particle size distribution (PSD) of HPGR products from the three pressure settings were finer than the cone crusher product. It was observed that the specific grinding force was measured from 1.42 to 3.79 The crack network in the particles comminuted by the HPGR appeared to increase during the leaching process. This accelerates reagent diffusion into the particles resulting in more metal extraction. However, no significant change was observed in the crack network for the particles comminuted using the cone crusher. The micro-fracturing observed in the feed prepared using the HPGR could be the major reason for the differences in the zinc extraction in each of the size fractions evaluated. The results obtained in this work showed that 10–15% additional zinc leach extraction is possible. Metal extraction for particles prepared using the HPGR operated at the pressure setting of 95 Evaluation of the leach reactors residue indicated significant changes in the PSD compared to the feed. The residues from the reactors leaching the material prepared using the HPGR product contained more fine particles than the reactors, which were fed by cone crusher product. These differences were in the order of 10.3% in large size fraction, 1.7% in the medium size fraction and 5.2% in the small size fraction. If excessive amounts of fines are generated during the leaching process, permeability is reduced as the leaching process progresses, which could have a negative effect on percolation especially over long periods of heap leaching operation. It would also prevent a uniform flow of the solution through the heaps. The authors are grateful to Centre for Bioprocess Engineering Research (CeBER) and Centre for Minerals Research (CMR) (Department of Chemical Engineering, UCT), Bruce van der Nest (Anglo base metals) for organizing the ore sample, Paul Keanly (X-Sight X-ray Services), and Mintek (Minerals Processing Division) for their advice and support. Financial support from the South Africa Research Chair Initiative (SARChI) in Mineral Beneficiation, and a Research Niche Area (RNA) grant from the National Research Foundation (NRF) of South Africa are also acknowledged.