Two-stage countercurrent oxygen pressure acid leaching process was developed to recover valuable metals from Gacun complex copper concentrate. It is unusual that tetrahedrite, whose treatment has been rarely studied, is the primary copper mineral of a concentrate. Most of silver also occurs in the mineral. The optimum operating parameters of the first stage and the second stage were established by conditional tests. Pilot scale tests ran smoothly, and the average overall leaching percentages of copper and zinc were as high as 96.2% and 97.5% respectively while the average overall leaching percentages of Fe, As and Sb as impurities were only 8.5%, 6.5% and 0.8%. Pb and Ag were not dissolved and stayed in the second stage leaching residue.The Gacun multimetal mine lies in Sichuang province of China. The average grades of Cu, Pb, Zn and Ag of the ore is 0.5%, 3%, 5% and 200 The Gacun Cu concentrate contains appreciable arsenic and antimony impurities, so it is not suitable for treatment by traditional pyrometallurgical methods. Fluidized roasting is not an appropriate method either because over 10% lead content of the concentrate will result in its agglomeration ( The Cu concentrate used in this study was taken from Gacun mine. The chemical composition is shown in After Cu concentrate was ground from an as-received 68% to a nominal 80% −45 A 2-L autoclave was used in conditional tests and a 10-L one was used in the pilot scale tests. The mixershafts, paddles and cooling coils of the two autoclaves were all made of titanium. The inner pots for each were titanium-coated. Conditional tests for the two stages leaching were carried out under the fixed operating parameters with stirring speeds of 800 Pilot scale tests for the two-stage leaching were carried out under the optimum operating parameters. The first stage leaching residue was leached again in the second stage to reclaim the remaining valuable metals, and the second stage lixivium was returned to the first stage leaching for utilizing on reacted acid. After recycling the lixivium five times, the average overall Cu and Zn leaching percentages reached 96.2% and 97.5% respectively, while the average overall leaching percentages of Fe, As and Sb were only 8.5%, 6.5% and 0.7%. Reactions A Two-stage countercurrent oxygen pressure acid leaching process was developed in order to recover valuable metals from the Gacun complex copper concentrate. Copper and zinc were extracted efficiently while the dissolutions of iron, arsenic and antimony were limited with a moderate temperature in the first stage and a low acid concentration in the second stage. Lead and silver were transformed into sulfate precipitates and stayed in the second stage leaching residue. The valuable metals such as Cu and Zn in lixivium and Pb and Ag in leaching residue can be reclaimed by further treatment. This process is not only environmental friendly because it does not release sulfur dioxide, but it is also energy efficient because it utilizes the heat generated by the oxidation of sulfide sulfur in the concentrate. However, because there is relatively no industrial experience of pressure leaching in China, the investment of equipment is expensive, making it necessary to test and economically evaluate its industrial application. The authors are thankful to the 11th Five-year Plan of national scientific and technological program of China (2007 BAB22B01).