The two compositions Al70Co15Ni15 and Al65Cu20Co15 forming decagonal phases in both as-cast and rapid solidification conditions display subtle differences in their diffraction patterns. We present here the structural investigation of a series of alloys in Al–Co–Cu–Ni system under rapid solidification conditions. Many interesting structural features giving rise to subtle differences in the nature of streaking and also diffuse intensity will be discussed. An attempt will be made to correlate these effects with the chemistry of the alloy. The observation of diffuse intensity leading to the change in symmetry from P105/mcm to 10/mmm will be considered in terms of statistical occupancy of various components constituting the above systems.Decagonal quasicrystals assume special significance in the structural investigation owing to the combination of two-dimensional (2D) quasiperiodicity and one-dimensional (1D) periodicity perpendicular to that. The decagonal phase was first reported in rapidly solidified Al–Mn alloys by Chattopadhyay et al. Alloys were melted in alumina crucible by an induction furnace in inert atmosphere by flowing high purity of argon gas at around 1500°C. The coupling was provided by putting alumina crucible into a graphite sussceptor. Subsequently it is slowly cooled down to 900°C followed by natural cooling by switching-off power to the induction furnace. The purity level of all constituent elements was of 99.99%. Rapid solidification of the alloy was done by planar flow casting. This was achieved by melting the alloy in a silica crucible with a nozzle in argon atmosphere and ejecting it at a pressure of ∼4  We have presented the basis of stabilization of decagonal phase in Al–Co–Cu–Ni systems based on The diffraction patterns in selected areas of the rapidly solidified melt spun ribbons displayed the presence of streaking around some of the spots and also diffuse intensity in some of the reciprocal rows. The presence of diffuse rows in the P patterns of the above systems show enhancement of symmetry from P10 The authors thank Professor S. Lele, Professor S. Ranganathan, Professor K. Chattopadhyay, Professor K. Urban, Germany and Dr. N.K. Mukhopadhyay for their interest in the present investigation.