In recent years, there has been an increasing interest in a novel approach to evaluate dental bone grafts by means of synchrotron radiation (SR)-based advanced physical techniques. Using synchrotron facilities, bone regeneration subsequent to grafting hosting sites with different types of biomaterials (with or without stem cells seeding) was recently explored. Three-dimensional analyzing methods such as X-ray microdiffraction and microtomography explore the dynamics and spatial distribution of regenerative phenomena in such complex anatomic structures.
               In this chapter, the most recent breakthroughs are explored, demonstrating the unique capabilities of the SR techniques in offering not only an advanced characterization of different biomaterials (used as bone substitutes) but also to investigate the growth kinetics of regenerated bone in different dental bone grafts retrieved from humans.The majority of the research presented here is the result of collaborations created within the MPNS Action COST MP1005 “From nano to macrobiomaterials (design, processing, characterization, modeling) and applications to stem cells regenerative orthopedic and dental medicine (NAMABIO)” and/or was financed by the Program PRIN funds of the Italian Ministero dell’Istruzione, Università e Ricerca (Prot. 20102ZLNJ5). The choice of a natural or a synthetized scaffold represents a key issue in bone tissue engineering because it is going to act as a template for cell interactions and bone extracellular matrix formation, providing structural support to the newly formed tissue Regarding biomaterials for bone grafts, several approaches have been shown to be effective in stimulating bone regeneration, and ceramics perhaps showed the best results Although the stimulatory effect of ceramics on bone tissue formation was proved, innovative alternative solutions are actually under investigation to find ideal constructs for bone tissue engineering, with special reference to dental districts. One possible alternative is given by the heterologous natural bone. It is constituted by collagenized bone-substitute biomaterials of porcine origin Although these natural biomaterials are characterized by useful properties such as osteoconduction, osteoinduction, no adverse reactions, and no inflammatory infiltration, they also exhibit some limitations: in particular, the porcine bone particles present Furthermore, in the recent years, dental bone grafts are oriented toward constructs where materials, cells, and biologically active molecules are combined. This is a crucial issue, since cells and growth factors are the two key elements when discussing bone biology/healing, their interaction being fundamental for an effective regeneration process. Thus, there is evidence that, although continuous progress is being made in understanding osseous healing process, the recent research approaches combining biomaterials, cells, and biologically active molecules need to be further investigated before they will find their way into effective use in clinical practice. In this direction, the bone response to dental bone grafts is conventionally investigated by microscopy techniques, such as light, fluorescence, scanning, and transmission electron microscopy. In Furthermore, conventional and digital X-ray radiology are imaging methods that present several important limitations linked, also in this case, to their 2D nature: anatomical structures may superimpose causing anatomical or background noises, possibly leading to misinterpretations of radiographs and preventing the revelation of soft-tissue to hard-tissue relationships In this scenario, the impact of the micro-CT technique has been revolutionary, enabling the observation of internal sample details with unprecedented precision, high resolution, and in a nondestructive way Furthermore, even if there are several X-ray diffraction studies of the hierarchical structure of bone, the lowest hierarchical level, within the nanometer scale, is mostly still unexplored. It is indeed necessary to gain information also at this level in case of dental bone grafts because the distribution of organic collagen fibers and mineralized extracellular matrix has a major influence on the mechanical performances of the newly formed bone and of the whole graft. In this direction, new possibilities can be offered by the third-generation synchrotron light sources. These large-scale facilities produce brilliant photon beams of spatial and temporal coherence properties at the sample stage, opening new solutions for advanced characterizations. Because of that, to efficiently study the dental bone grafts during mineralization process, the imaging quality and the quantitative analysis can be enhanced through the use of several synchrotron-based experimental methods, some of them described in the following paragraphs. The researches carried out at synchrotron facilities have revolutionized, over the last 20 Three successive generations of synchrotron radiation (SR) facilities have resulted in beam brilliances 12 orders of magnitude greater than the standard laboratory X-ray tubes; for this reason, the use of these beamlines by a continually growing community of users was the basis of the most advanced researches in a large number of scientific areas, including chemistry, physics, structural biology, medicine, earth sciences, materials sciences, and engineering, with a current interest in nanoscience. SR produces X-rays of high energy, hard X-rays, with energies in the range 10–120 The following sections are focused on some peculiarities and applications of SR sources. They illustrate some experiences and results of SR applications related to research problems dealing with bone tissue engineering with special reference to dental bone grafts studies. In particular, three techniques will be approached, namely microdiffraction, microtomography, and the innovative in-line holotomography (HT). X-ray diffraction is one of the most powerful techniques used to study the hierarchical structure of the bone. In particular, it plays a crucial role in studying the lowest hierarchical level, within the nanometer scale, where the distribution of organic fibers (collagen) and crystalline mineral nanoparticles (hydroxyapatite) has a major influence on the mechanical optimization of bone, especially in the case of newly formed bone in adhesion to different types of scaffolds. The standard diffraction presents, however, some limitations due to the low spatial resolution imposed by the X-ray beam cross-section in the range between hundreds and several microns. Technological advances in X-ray optics, especially studied for SR, have recently and strongly improved the performances of this technique thanks to the new possibilities to focus the beam in the submicrometer range The X-ray microdiffraction combines the standard X-ray diffraction with X-ray focusing optics to highly improve the spatial resolution. This combination results in particularly interesting nonhomogeneous materials where the structural properties can change on a micrometer scale, as it is the case of dental bone grafts at the interface between scaffold and newly formed bone. X-ray diffraction, being a scattering phenomenon, is characterized by a reciprocal law, with an inverse relationship between particle size and scattering angle WAXS of a polycrystalline material illuminated by a monochromatic X-ray beam appears with the typical ring pattern (Debye–Scherrer's rings—as shown in On the other hand, SAXS analysis In this direction, it has been demonstrated However, bone grafts and bone itself are nonhomogeneous composites where local characteristics change at the micrometer level; in such systems, the nanostructure has to be investigated by a position-sensitive method since it is necessary to relate the measurement to the exact position For these reasons an innovative X-ray focusing optics, delivering micrometer and even submicrometer-sized beams, was recently developed for combined scanning SAXS and WAXS setups. Indeed, acquisition of SAXS patterns usually requires dedicated experimental conditions, different from those used for WAXS experiments. However, the innovative setup  The WAXS analysis, achieving to investigate the orientation of the crystallographic c-axis of the HA, also allowed to compare the growth model of the engineering bone to that of the natural bone. It was found that the c-axis orientation always remains parallel to the scaffold internal pore surface. Furthermore, derived from the SAXS signal, it was found that a pronounced anisotropic intensity distribution is evident. The integral intensity of the black lobes, caused by X-ray scattered by the mineral bone crystals and adjacent to the white central shadow, is proportional to the density of the mineral bone (expressed in g/cm The microdiffraction technique, combining SAXS and WAXS signals, was also applied to resorbable porous ceramic scaffolds based on Si-tricalcium phosphate (Si-TCP), namely Skelite For the investigated sample, nanocrystalline HA and amorphous represented the highest signals, whereas the crystalline components of the original scaffold were vanishing almost everywhere. A quantitative characterization of the analyzed tissue was provided for each pixel, providing the spatial evolution of the materials belonging to the original scaffold and to the new bone tissue. This allowed the monitoring of the mineralization process with respect to the selective resorption of the original scaffold phases across any direction at the interface between the newly formed bone and the scaffold. The obtained data confirmed that at the interface between scaffold and newly formed bone the TCP component of the ceramic decreases much faster than the HA component. The introduction of the CT in medical imaging has revolutionized and strongly improved not only diagnosis but also research, with special reference to bone districts. CT avoids misinterpretations due to the superimposition inherent to radiographic Micro-CT is similar to conventional CT usually used in medical diagnosis but, unlike CT systems, which typically reach the spatial resolution of about 0.5 In this context, SR offers the possibility to select X-rays with a small energy bandwidth from the wide and continuous energy spectrum and, at the same time, it guarantees a high enough photon flux for efficient imaging. Moreover, the use of SR allows tuning of the selected photon energy, with the aim to optimize the contrast between phases with different density in the investigated sample. This possibility is of great interest for micro-CT since it allows high spatial resolution images to be generated with high signal-to-noise ratio, permitting also to perform density measurements after several standard calibration measurements. In this direction, allowing an accurate 3D examination of samples, SR-based micro-CT was first employed to reconstruct at high resolution the complex architecture of bone tissue In this context, interesting micro-CT studies have been performed on different biomaterials that have previously been indicated as bone-substitute optimal candidates in dental districts. In particular, successful bone regeneration using biphasic calcium phosphate materials has been reported in the recent literature in some clinical applications for maxillary sinus elevation In this context, there are several other studies in literature Another example of ceramic material known for its ability to bond and to stimulate bone regeneration is the coralline-derived calcium phosphate In any case, the sample referred to the Biocoral scaffold ( As a general conclusion, micro-CT supported the finding that the implant success rate seems strictly dependent not only on biochemical properties but also on the morphology of the biomaterial In this context, the micro-CT capability of extracting morphometric parameters at the 3D level becomes of fundamental importance because, if on one hand, the histological results are greatly reproduced by micro-CT investigations. In this way, it is possible to overcome the histology limitation of not properly resolving the 3D structural information. Confirmation of the congruence between histological and micro-CT data is shown in However, it has to be stressed that third-generation synchrotron sources, such as ESRF or ELETTRA, produce brilliant photon beams with high spatial coherence properties, which are also suitable for application of phase-sensitive X-ray imaging methods. In particular, 3D imaging techniques based on phase-contrast detection offer an improved sensitivity compared to conventional attenuation-based techniques. The phase-contrast approach differs from conventional X-ray imaging because the resulting images are not based solely on attenuation contrast. In fact, the effect of the X-ray beam going through the sample is usually described by the refractive index As This gain in sensitivity can be several orders of magnitude for soft materials, which makes the phase-contrast micro-CT appealing for imaging of biological tissues, with special reference to dental bone grafts where we find osteocytes, bone under regeneration and remodeling, and the newly formed vascularization net. Unfortunately, the simplest phase-contrast imaging arrangements do not automatically provide quantitative information, making the application of phase retrieval algorithms necessary. Satisfactory phase retrieval from a single-distance set of projections in free-space propagation in combination with the small exposure times due to large photon fluxes at synchrotron beamlines enable the quantitative analysis of these samples, thanks to the improvement in the segmentation of the different phases compared with conventional setups. Typically, the phase retrieval implies the reconstruction of two different real-valued 3D distributions, This experimental protocol was used in a recent study of the early stages of in vitro bone formation in collagenated porcine scaffolds cultured with human periodontal ligament stem cells (hPDLSCs) Looking at scaffold changes over time is still a challenging subject and needs a statistically consistent sample size with even more powerful detection systems (possibly increasing the spatial resolution and the signal-to-noise ratio) The researches described in the previous paragraphs referred to SR-based microdiffraction and microtomography studies of bone grafts; they clearly indicate how both techniques complement each other in providing useful structural information on the newly formed bone at different hierarchical levels. However, to do a reliable prevision on the life in service of a specific dental bone graft, it is not sufficient anymore to exclusively investigate the properties of mineralized tissues (such as the residual scaffold and the regenerated bone) but it is also fundamental to assess the presence, the distribution, and quantify unmineralized tissues (osteocytes, extracellular matrix, blood vessels, nerves, bone marrow, etc.) within the investigated specimens. In this direction, a growing interest is focused on the vascularization of the regenerated district In this context, a new SR-based physical technique was recently explored, namely the HT. HT physical principles are the same as those described for phase-contrast tomography in The imaging process, leading to the 2D phase radiographs, can be described as simple propagation, defocusing, or in-line holography and is done in two steps: in the first, the 2D distribution of the beam phase shift is retrieved; in the second, the 2D phase maps previously obtained are converted into a stack of 2D slices with the filtered back projection algorithm. Thus, tomographic slices show the different physical densities of the analyzed samples. From these differences, we can evaluate the degree of mineralization. Furthermore, in the 3D reconstructions it is possible to observe also the presence of new vessels and extracellular matrix (ECM), which are transparent in conventional attenuation-based tomographic reconstructions because of their low attenuation coefficients. Hence, HT is helpful when the material of interest has very small variations in attenuation coefficients, which lead to unsatisfactory imaging results even with phase-contrast techniques based on a single distance between sample and detector. This is the case, as experienced and shown in Refs. The first application of HT to study the angio- and microvasculogenesis process in a tissue engineered biological system (without any contrast agents to identify the microvasculature) was referred to Komlev In a second work Besides the specific results previously described, HT method is expected to be of much more general interest when considering dental bone graft engineering and stem cells therapeutic approach. In particular, the progress associated to this technique could be extrapolated to angiogenesis and microvasculogenesis studies in pathologies characterized by inflammation and tissue damage such as diabetes and osteoporosis. This is of paramount importance and demonstrates that SR-based techniques, with special reference to HT, appear to be important ways to investigate the cellular events involved in bone regeneration and represent promising tools for future clinical investigations of the craniofacial tissues.