Bubble–particle encounter during flotation is governed by liquid flow relative to the rising bubble, which is a function of the adsorbed frothers, collectors, and other surfactants and surface contaminants. Due to surface contamination, the bubble surface in flotation has been considered as immobile (rigid). However, surface contamination can be swept to the backside of the rising bubble due to the relative liquid flow, leaving the front surface of the rising bubble mobile with a non-zero tangential component of the liquid velocity. The bubble with a mobile surface was considered by Sutherland who applied the potential flow condition and analyzed the bubble–particle encounter using a simplified particle motion equation without inertia. The Sutherland model was found to over-predict the encounter efficiency and has been improved by incorporating inertial forces which are amplified at the mobile surface with a non-zero tangential velocity component of the liquid phase. An analytical solution was obtained for the encounter efficiency using approximate equations and is called the Generalized Sutherland Equation (GSE). In this paper, the bubble–particle encounter interaction with the potential flow condition has been analyzed by solving the full motion equation for the particle employing a numerical computational approach. The GSE model was compared with the exact numerical results for the encounter efficiency. The comparison only shows good agreement between the GSE prediction and the numerical data for ultrafine particles (<10 μm in diameter), the inertial forces of which are vanishingly small. For non-ultrafine particles, a significant deviation of the GSE model from the numerical data has been observed. Details of the numerical methodology and solutions for the (collision) angle of tangency and encounter efficiency are described.Flotation involves interaction between particles and bubbles of various character, including the hydrodynamic interaction, the gravitational interaction, the surface force interaction, and the capillary interaction. Due to the nature of governing effects, the particle–bubble interaction is divided into collision, attachment and detachment ( Collision is the approach of a particle to encounter a bubble and is governed by the fluid mechanics of the particle in the hydrodynamic force field around the bubble. The limit of the collision process is determined by the zonal boundary between the long-range hydrodynamic and interfacial force interactions ( The hydrodynamics of bubble–particle collision has been focused on the regime where the bubble surface is strongly retarded (immobile), caused by adsorption of surfactants, particles and other impurities from the solution ( The first model of bubble–particle interaction with a mobile bubble surface was published by Sutherland ( In Eqs. In this paper, the Sutherland theory and its modification and generalization will be analyzed and compared with the exact computational results. The aim of the analysis and comparison is to validate the GSE and associated theories by computational simulation. In particular, the paper aims to establish the particle size range for which one can apply the theories. The bubble–particle encounter interaction in flotation is schematically shown in Eq. The liquid velocity components contained in the above motion equation can be determined from the potential flow used in deriving the Generalized Sutherland Equation ( The partial derivatives of the velocity components are described as The minus sign before the brackets on the right hand side of Eq. To solve the differential equations for particle motion, the initial conditions are required. The conditions can be determined using the fact that the particle velocity far away from the bubble surface is equal to the liquid velocity, giving at Numerical computation has to be employed to accurately solve Eqs. Eqs. The grazing trajectory for particle motion can be computationally found using the condition that there exists only one contact point between the bubble surface and the particle on the grazing trajectory. In this paper, this condition was computationally satisfied by trial-and-error, varying the initial particle position ( The error in the computational determination of the encounter efficiency was found to be about ± The initial position ( Comparison between the computational solutions and analytical solutions for the angle of tangency, If the approximate solution given by Eq. Encounter efficiency comparison between the computational solution and the modified Dukhin's analytical solution is shown in Comparisons between the computational solution and the GSE Eq. In this paper, the full equations for particle motion around an air bubble with a mobile surface have been computationally analyzed. The computational results have been used to validate Sutherland's theory on the bubble–particle collision interaction and its modification and generalization to include the centrifugal (inertial) effect. It was found and shown in the paper that the generalized Sutherland theory only agreed with the computational simulation for ultrafine particles (< The authors gratefully acknowledge the Australian Research Council, the National Science Foundation (Grant No. INT-0227583), and the Department of Energy (Grant No. DE-FG-02-93-ER14315) for financial support, and Mr. Ben Hogg for assistance in the CFD modeling.