The effect of ZrB2-Si3N4 particle reinforcement on the tribological behavior and microstructure of AA8011 alloy has been studied. ZrB2-Si3N4 particles were varied from 0 wt% to 20 wt% with an interval of 5 wt%. Dry sliding pin-on-disc tests at a room temperature condition were conducted to investigate the wear performances of the aluminium alloy/ ZrB2-Si3N4 composites. The tests were conducted at varying loads, from 20 to 40 N. The results depicted that the wear rates of the AA8011 alloy/ZrB2-Si3N4 composites are lower than that of the AA8011 and further decreases with increasing ZrB2-Si3N4 content, Also, the friction coefficient of the matrix alloy is higher than that of the composites and decreases with increasing ZrB2-Si3N4 content. This established the unique efficacy of ZrB2-Si3N4 effect on performance characteristics of aluminium series in application.Over the last few decades, aluminium alloy has distinguished itself to be the major primary material for most industrial and engineering applications due to its excellent intrinsic properties There are various alloys of aluminium ranging from 1xxx to 8xxx depending on the alloying constituents, these alloys possess different properties with diverse industrial applications. Recently, AA8011 containing Al-Fe alloys has emerged as a basic structural material in modern engineering applications which cut across transportation, construction, and the building where improved tensile strength, higher hardness, and good wear resistance materials are extremely required However, poor tribology, low hardness, and tensile strength are some of the challenges that militate against its wide range of applications To cub the above limitations, researchers all over the world have successfully employed the use of discontinuous second phase material which gives rise to matrix composites. These reinforcement materials include bio-waste such as (coconut shell ash, rice husk, bamboo ash, melon ash) etc. Metal matrix composites (MMCs) are characterized with significantly enhanced properties because of the combinations between two or more chemically and physically distinct phases (continuous and discontinuous phases) The timely progression in industrial activities recently has amounted in an increased interest in composites containing low density and low cost of production. According to Sokoluk et al Several methods of developing AMMCs such as stir casting, powder metallurgy, squeeze casting, molten salt stirring method as stated by Pan et al. Research shows that the addition of hard ceramic reinforcement in the form of particles, fibres, or whiskers into the monolithic alloy invariably enhanced the mechanical and tribological behavior of composite materials. Series of research works on the wear performances of the AMMCs materials have been undertaken by several authors, Raju et al. From the above literature survey, it was observed that a lot of experimental works has been carried out with ceramic particles such as silicon carbide, alumina and tungsten carbide as reinforcements. Research done with AA8011 alloy with hybrid silicon nitride and zirconium diboride reinforcement is still very novel. Hence an attempt is made to develop AA8011/ZrB Commercial aluminium AA8011 alloy pellet of purity 97.86% were obtained from aluminium rolling company ota, Nigeria with composition shown in The two steps stir casting route with the optimum process parameter was in place to develop the composite materials for this study. The proportion of the Si The Si The tribological performances of the as-cast unreinforced and different hybrid reinforced aluminium composites were analyzed under dry sliding condition using Universal Tribometer S/N: RTEC 2441, USA. The pin-on-disc tribometer makes use of ball 250″ (6,350 mm), E52100 Alloy steel, Grade 25. The machined composite samples of 15 mm diameter and 15 mm length were grinded and polished to obtain smooth surfaces. The composite samples were weighed to obtain the initial weight of the samples before commencing the test against hard steel alloy of 350 mm diameter. The tribological analysis was conducted at varying applied loads of 20 N, 30 N and 40 N keeping other parameters constant such as the sliding distance of 5000 m, constant time of the 60 s and velocity of 3 mm/s. In this experiment, the coefficient of friction, wear loss, wear volume, wear rate, wear resistance has been determined by the relationship below. The worn-out surfaces were examined using OPM. m = mass loss (Initial mass – Final mass) in (g) D = Sliding distance, in m ρ = density, g/ mm The worn-out surfaces of the composite samples were exposed to microstructural analysis using an OPM to reveal the wear tracks that was obtained under the tribometer.  The continuous reduction in wear rate of AA8011/Si  The result of the wear volume of AA8011/Si In general, the volume loss of the composite material increases as the applied load increases. However, in each of the applied load, the present of the reinforcement decrease the volume loss. It can be inferred from  In general, the overall decrease in the coefficient of friction as a function of the applied load and percentage composition of the reinforcement could be attributed to the surface roughing that arises because of the increasing applied load resulting in a larger amount of wear debris     Generally, abrasive wear is observed to be the main wear mechanism that occurs in this study. It is worthy of note that the plowing action of the asperites on the surface of the (AA8011/ Si The hybrid composite of AA8011/Si The rate of wear of the AA8011/Si The wear rate increases with increase in applied load due to the frictional heat generated at high pressure of load. Addition of Si The friction coefficient was observed to be high in unreinforced alloy and decreases with an increase in percent reinforcement of Si The evaluation of the worn-out surface microstructure reveals abrasive, micro-cracks, plastic deformation, and slight delamination wear mechanisms. The authors immensely appreciate the support from the Department of Chemical, Metallurgical and Materials Engineering,