The study was part of a long-term CO2 enrichment field experiment (FACE: free air CO2 enrichment), using isotopically labelled CO2, at the Federal Research Institute for Rural Areas, Forestry and Fisheries (vTI) in Braunschweig (Germany). Impacts of elevated atmospheric CO2 concentration (550ppm) on nematode abundance, feeding type composition and the stable C-isotopic signatures (δ13C) of feeding types were analysed in an arable soil of a luvisol soil type and a loamy sand texture under cultivation of sugar beet and winter wheat. Two different crop growth stages were considered. The total nematode abundance was significantly higher under winter wheat compared to sugar beet cultivation and tended to increase under CO2-enriched conditions. The feeding type composition of nematodes significantly differed between crops and their growth stages. CO2 enrichment increased the relative abundance of fungivorous nematodes under winter wheat, and the relative abundance of bacterivores under sugar beet cultivation. Accordingly, under FACE conditions, the nematode channel ratio (NCR) indicated a shift towards a more fungal-based food chain under winter wheat, but towards a more bacterial-based energy pathway under sugar beet cultivation. The stable C-isotopic signatures of nematodes confirmed the ingestion of labelled C used for atmospheric CO2 enrichment. The δ13C values indicated significant FACE effects on all nematode feeding types. CO2 impacts depended on either crop type or crop growth stage, or on the combination of both. According to their food specificity, nematode feeding types were specifically affected by atmospheric CO2 enrichment due to different food qualities and quantities in the rhizosphere. The present results indicate that fungivores benefit from CO2 enrichment in arable soils under winter wheat, and bacterivores under sugar beet cultivation. Due to these changes, the soil C-cycle and decomposition processes might change as well. Generally, FACE effects differed strongly between crops and their growth stages, revealing the need to introduce more than one plant type and sampling date when CO2 enrichment effects on soil faunal communities are studied.Soils, the major organic carbon (C)-pools in terrestrial ecosystems, are directly and indirectly connected to atmospheric CO Nematodes are very abundant, and represent the major below-ground herbivores in agricultural soils ( Studies on CO These contradictory findings, and the fact that, to date, studies dealing with CO The Braunschweig free air CO The aim of the present study was to investigate CO A free air CO The experimental FACE design included four circular plots (rings) of 20 More detailed information about the experimental design, the ventilation system, and the performance of FACE techniques were outlined by Samples for the present study were taken twice every growing season during sugar beet (2004) and winter wheat (2005) cultivation. The first sampling took place during the period of main plant growth (Growth Phase) (sugar beet: 21 July 2004, plant principal growth stage 1: leaf development (BBCH15 according to the BBCH scale for describing the phenological growth stages of mono- and dicotyledonous plants ( Each of the two FACE and control rings was subdivided into four quadrants. Twenty soil cores (2 Stable carbon isotope ratios ( Aliquots of 0.005–0.03 In the interpretation of the stable C-isotopic signatures of nematode feeding types one must consider, that, due to the preparation process, observed δ The nematode channel ratio (NCR=B/(B+F), with B and F being the relative contributions of bacterial- and fungal-feeding nematodes to the total nematode abundance) was assessed according to Due to the division of the rings into quadrants, the use of arithmetic means calculated from each aliquot, and the normal distribution of the data, effects of CO A general statistical problem in FACE experiments is the low number of replicate rings due to high running costs. To avoid pseudo-replication problems, the trade-off between statistical power and experimental expenses has already been discussed in the literature several times (e.g., The total nematode abundance varied between 1513 The feeding type composition of nematodes significantly differed between crops (Growth Phase, control: Under control conditions, the relative contribution of bacterivorous nematodes to the whole community was significantly higher under winter wheat (Growth Phase: 44%; Mature Crop: 36%) compared to sugar beet cultivation (Growth Phase: 30%; Mature Crop: 25%) during both sampling dates (Growth Phase: Under sugar beet, the contribution of fungivores to the whole community significantly increased (+9%; CO When wheat was cultivated, the relative proportion of fungivores increased under FACE conditions (Growth Phase: +7%; The nematode channel ratio varied between 0.521 and 0.743. During the Growth Phase, the NCR was higher under sugar beet (NCR>0.66) compared to winter wheat cultivation (NCR<0.61), reflecting significant crop effects in the control ( The stable C-isotopic signatures of herbivorous, bacterivorous, fungivorous and omnivorous nematodes are presented in The stable C-isotopic signature (δ The stable C-isotopic signatures of herbivores significantly depended on plant growth stage ( The stable-C isotopic signatures of bacterivorous nematodes were more negative under winter wheat compared to sugar beet cultivation ( Fungivores showed significantly more negative stable C-isotopic signatures under winter wheat compared to sugar beet cultivation when atmospheric CO Omnivorous nematodes reflected crop and crop-growth-stage-specific FACE effects ( Generally, all feeding types showed more negative δ The present results indicate that nematode communities generally differ between root and cereal crops, in terms of total individual densities and feeding type composition. Under wheat plants, which produce large and highly branched root systems ( Comparing the feeding type composition of nematodes under both crops, it becomes obvious that wheat plants, which have high root exudation rates, and, consequently, show a broad range of root-associated microorganisms including mycorrhiza (e.g., Moreover, root growth of both crops was affected differently under FACE conditions. Results from the first crop rotation cycle in the FACE experiment indicate that the root production of winter wheat was enhanced by elevated CO In the present study, atmospheric CO The remarkably low abundances of carnivorous nematodes detected in the present study could be attributed to the cotton-wool filter technique, which might have excluded these relatively large nematodes. In general, the use of various extraction methods should be taken into account when analysing nematode community composition. Using the stable C-isotopic signatures, the labelled C derived from that fixed by plants in photosynthesis under FACE conditions could be traced in all nematode feeding types. The δ Under sugar beet cultivation, herbivorous and bacterivorous nematodes showed the strongest impact from atmospheric CO Under winter wheat cultivation, the stable C-isotopic signatures and the relative abundances indicate that fungivorous nematodes are the primary beneficiaries of atmospheric CO In contrast to the results of The present results indicate that CO We thank Martina Heuer and Sabine El Sayed for technical assistance in the field and the lab, and Dagmar Söndgerath for helpful advice concerning statistical applications. Furthermore, we are grateful to the technical staff of the experimental station of the Johann Heinrich von Thünen-Institute for all of the field management. The FACE-experiment was financed by the Federal Ministry of Food, Agriculture and Consumer Protection (BMELV). Christine Sticht received a personal grant from the state of Lower Saxony.