In current bone tissue engineering strategies the achievement of sufficient angiogenesis during tissue regeneration is still a major limitation in order to attain full functionality. Several strategies have been described to tackle this problem, mainly by the use of angiogenic factors or endothelial progenitor cells. However, when facing a clinical scenario these approaches are inherently complex and present a high cost. As such, more cost effective alternatives are awaited. Here, we demonstrate the potential of electrospun poly(lactic acid) (PLA) fiber-based membranes, containing calcium phosphate ormoglass (CaP) particles, to elicit angiogenesis in vivo, in a subcutaneous model in mice. We show that the current approach elicited the local expression of angiogenic factors, associated to a chemotactic effect on macrophages, and sustained angiogenesis into the biomaterial. As both PLA and CaP are currently accepted for clinical application these off-the-shelf novel membranes have great potential for guided bone regeneration applications.
               
                  Statement of significance
                  In current bone tissue engineering approaches the achievement of sufficient angiogenesis, during tissue regeneration, is a major limitation in order to attain full tissue functionality. Recently, our group has found that calcium ions released by the degradation of calcium phosphate ormoglasses (CaP) are effective angiogenic promoters. Based on this, in this work we successfully produced hybrid fibrous mats with different contents of CaP nanoparticles and thus with different calcium ion release rates, using an ormoglass – poly(lactic acid) blend approach. We show that these matrices, upon implantation in a subcutaneous site, could elicit the local expression of angiogenic factors, associated to a chemotactic effect on macrophages, and sustained angiogenesis into the biomaterial, in a CaP dose dependent manner. This off-the-shelf cost effective approach presents great potential to translate to the clinics.Currently, bone regeneration strategies still face major limitations, exacerbated by the increased incidence of bone pathologies linked to the general population aging profile. Present regeneration approaches focus on the following main strategies: (A) the use of autologous bone grafts, having as main limitations the insufficient availability of healthy bone tissue at the donor site, the complexity of the surgery and associated morbidity In the context of bone tissue engineering, it has been shown that angiogenesis and osteogenesis are closely linked, where both processes have to be tightly regulated in order to achieve successful bone tissue regeneration Following this rational, here we explored the formation of a composite membrane, based on electrospun PLA containing Ca phosphate (CaP) ormoglass (organic modified glass) nanoparticles (NP), in order to achieve improved bone angiogenesis. Indeed, in another approach and using different material conformation (i.e. solvent casting) we could show that this composite could elicit proangiogenic and chemotactic properties on endothelial precursor cells, As such, we developed different formulations of PLA-electrospun composite membranes, containing different percentages of CaP ormoglass NPs and with different calcium release profiles and tested their subsequent impact on angiogenesis, using a pre-clinical subcutaneous model Unless mentioned otherwise, all reagents were obtained from Sigma–Aldrich and were of analytical grade. CaP ormoglass NPs were prepared by a partial hydrolyzed alkoxides sol–gel method with a composition of 44.5:44.5:6:5 CaO:P 10%, 20% and 30% w/w loaded PLA nanofibers (NP10, NP20 and NP30) were prepared by ultrasonic dispersion of the nanoparticles in a 4% PLA (Purasorb PLDL 7038, inherent viscosity midpoint 3.8 Calcium release measurement was performed by preparing three square samples of 1.7 Micro- and Nano-morphology was measured using an Ultra-High Resolution Field Emission Scanning Electron Microscopy (Nova Nano SEM-230; FEI Co., Netherlands), operating at 5.00 Human progenitor-derived endothelial cells (PDECs) were obtained as previously described Before cell seeding, electrospun scaffolds (24 In order to assess the capacity of the different materials to induce the secretion of vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF), the cell culture medium of PDECs cultured on the different materials for 1 and 3 Metabolic activity of PDECs cultured in 2D conditions or over the different materials (i.e. PLA, PLA NP 10, PLA NP 20 and PLA NP 30) was evaluated at 1, 3 and 7 PDECs cultured on 2D or over the matrices for 3 and 7 The procedures and mice handling were based on the principles of Laboratory Animal Care formulated by the National Society for Medical Research and approved by the Animal Care and Experiment Committee of University of Bordeaux, Bordeaux, France. Experiments were carried out in accredited animal facilities following European recommendations for laboratory animal care (directive 86/609 CEE of 24/11/86). One-centimeter diameter disks were cut from elecropsun membranes and sterilized by UV for 30 At 1 or 4 Haematoxylin and eosin staining was performed under standard conditions, slides were then mounted using Clearmount® medium (Invitrogen, USA). Immunohistochemistry for CD31 was performed as follows. Samples were hydrated in PBS for 5 For the evaluation of macrophage infiltration and profile, sections from the tissues explanted 7 At 1, 3, 7 and 21 Calcium sensing receptor protein expression was evaluated at 1, 3 and 7 post implantation, using an ELISA assay (E-EL-M0219, Elabscience, China), following manufacturer’s instructions. Four independent samples were used for each time point and condition. The evaluation of the angiogenic-specific protein markers was performed at 21 Using the Graphpad Prism 5.0 software, a D’Agostino and Pearson omnibus normality test was used in order to test if data obeyed to a Gaussian distribution. Statistically significant differences between several groups were analyzed by the non-parametric Kruskal–Wallis test, followed by a Dunns post-test. The non-parametric Mann–Whitney test was used to compare two groups. A p value lower than 0.05 was considered to be statistically significant. Electrospun fiber membranes were characterized by SEM and as observed in As observed in In view of the application of these matrices to bone tissue regeneration and to support angiogenesis we initially tested the capacity of human PDECs to attach and proliferate over these materials. As observed in As means to assess the impact of membrane formulation over the expression of VEGF we performed an ELISA assay to determine the VEGF secretion at 1 and 3 As an initial model to assess the Based on the strong staining eosin by red blood cells and on the morphology of the capillaries we could observe the existence of capillaries inside the materials at both 1 and 4 The corresponding quantification ( In view of elucidating the mechanism of action for an increased angiogenesis of these matrices Extracellular calcium has shown important roles both on proliferation, chemotaxis and differentiation of cells. In this sense and as calcium sensing receptor (CaSR) has been shown to play a pivotal role in some of these processes Due to the recognized function drawn by macrophages during the initial inflammatory process, on tissue repair and on the modulation of angiogenesis we focused on the evaluation of these key cells upon As observed in As means to further uncover the role of these materials in supporting a proangiogenic profile we performed a protein array for 24 angiogenic markers and compared sham operated, PLA alone and PLA with 20% CaP NPs at a later time point. 1 milligram of total protein obtained for the tissue formed inside and attached to the matrices was used for each assay. An internal control from the kit allowed the normalization of the results. As observed in Currently, the transplantation of autologous bone is still considered the gold standard for bone regeneration clinical approaches. Nonetheless, it bears considerable drawbacks, including limited graft availability and significant morbidity at the donor site Following this concept, here we focused on the development of an off-the-shelf biomaterial for guided bone regeneration. We have recently demonstrated that the release of calcium ions induces the migration, maturation and organization of endothelial progenitors From a material perspective, the electrospinning technique allowed us to attain aligned fiber membranes with controlled architecture, while accommodating a high percentage of CaP particles, up to 30% (w/w), without compromising the matrix structure. Additionally, these electrospun matrices provide an attractive extracellular matrix that favors the anchorage, migration We have recently shown that when rat bone marrow-derived endothelial progenitors were cultivated on solvent-casted PLA composite materials, containing similar CaP phosphate particles, a promotion on cell mobilisation, differentiation and angiogenesis could be observed In order to evaluate the By the quantification of the density of microvessels by CD31 immunohistochemistry we could establish a dose dependent effect on vessel formation, although from 20 to 30% (w/w) CaP NPs, no significant improvement could be observed. Previous works, from our group and others, have shown that bioactive glasses can induce the production of proangiogenic cytokines and indirectly induce angiogenesis Following the previous rational we hypothesized that the angiogenic augmentation observed in the membranes containing higher amounts of CaP was driven by the local increase of calcium (in the mM range) that would translate in a chemotactic effect to cells, via CaSR. One could then hypothesize that, linked to the increased chemotaxis, increased CaSR could be observed. However, the CaSR levels were not different between groups at the time points tested. This can be associated to a dilution effect due to the heterogeneity of cells that migrated into the material. Further studies need to be conducted in order to clarify this mechanism. Besides its presence in the parathyroid gland, kidney and bone, CaSR was also shown to be expressed by human peripheral blood monocytes In spite of the lack of a clear polarization for M1 or M2 phenotypes we could demonstrate that a chemotactic effect towards macrophage cells was achieved for the membranes containing PLA NP 20. Indeed, recently the study of Spiller and colleagues In view of determining if the PLA with 20% CaP NPs membrane was indeed favoring a proangiogenic profile, in relation to sham operated or PLA alone, we performed a protein array for 24 angiogenic markers. 7 different proangiogenic factors could be identified, namely VEGF, IGF-2, Fas ligand, GM-CSF, IL-1 beta, IL-6 and IL-12p70. VEGF is a potent stimulator of angiogenesis Altogether, one can assume that local elevated calcium levels may induce the recruitment of macrophages, which can then trigger the development of a proangiogenic milieu and orchestrate the development of new vasculature into the biomaterial. The proangiogenic factors secreted by local macrophages could then sustain the chemotaxis and proliferation of endothelial cells and coordinate the angiogenesis process, leading to functional blood vessels. Although in this work we have mainly focused on the angiogenic aspect drawn by the developed composite biomaterial, ultimately it is their evaluation in a bone repair scenario that will assert for their regenerative potential. As we have recently shown that extracellular calcium signaling mediated by CaSR can also modulate the osteoinduction of mesenchymal stem cells We have developed electrospun PLA fiber-based membranes, containing different ratios of calcium phosphate ormoglass (CaP) particles, able to elicit angiogenesis This work was supported by funding from the Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at 