Increasing the controllability of particle trajectories is a crucial issue in the development of new industrial applications of plate-type electrostatic separators. The relative position of the electrodes and the applied high-voltage are the two factors that influence the magnitude of the electric force exerted on the particles composing a given granular mixture. The aim of the paper is to model the particle behaviour after lift-off from the plate electrode. A program based on the boundary element method was employed for the computation of the electric field in the active zone of the separator. This enabled the evaluation of the charge acquired by a conducting particle in contact with the plate electrode and the electric force exerted on it before and after detachment. An algorithm is proposed for the computation of particle trajectories for various electrode configurations, as a step towards complete feasibility studies concerning new industry applications of electrostatic sorting or classifying techniques.Simple and reliable the plate-type electrostatic separators are used in mineral beneficiation and seed conditioning The particular spot on the collecting plane were a given particle falls depends on its nature (i.e., conducting or insulating), dimension, shape, mass density, as well as on the electric field strength at the surface of the plate and in the separation zone. The larger is the distance between the places where two different particles are collected, the more efficient is the separation process. This is why, the optimum operation can be achieved only by a study of particle movement in the non-uniform electric field of the plate separator. The aim of the paper is to propose an algorithm for the computation of a conducting particle trajectory in the specific conditions of a plate-type electrostatic separator. At the first step, the electric field strength at the surface of the plate electrode was evaluated with a program based on the boundary element method. Secondly, the point where the particle detaches from the plate electrode was calculated. Finally, the computed electric field strength in the active zone of the separator was used for solving the differential equations of the particle trajectory in the air, after detachment. The analysis of the charge-free electric field described by Laplace equation was carried out with the “Charge Simulation Program” (CSP), elaborated by Prof. Levin and his group The electrode arrangement that was modelled is presented in There are many parameters which influence the particle trajectory. In order to model the particle movement it is assumed that: (i) the particle is a perfect conducting sphere with radius The trajectory of any particle has two parts: (A) (B)  There is no analytical solution for this system of differential equations because of the non-uniformity of the electric field ( The parametric equations for one of these segments are The electric field strength in the initial point ( The final point of the particle trajectory is the intersection point of the trajectory with the collecting plane, which has the equation The output data of the program implementing the above-described algorithm for the particle trajectories enable the prediction of the electrostatic separation feasibility for a given granular mixture. This prediction implies the computation of the co-ordinates of the points where the particles are collected. The efficiency of the electrostatic separation process could be increased by optimising the distance between the characteristic collecting points of the components in the considered mixture. The intersection of particle trajectories with the high-voltage electrode is another problem which can be solved by using the proposed algorithm. The particles in the composition of a granular material have different sizes, which means that, even if having the same properties, their trajectories will be different. If it is impossible to find a configuration in which all the particles having the same properties lift off from the plate and none of their trajectories intersect the active electrode, then it is necessary to reduce the range of particle size for that granular material, in order to make the separation possible. The algorithm can be extended to the S-shaped plate electrodes, which are most common in the industrial electrostatic separators. It can also be employed for the study of other electrostatic processes Numerical and analytical methods can be jointly used for the analysis of particle trajectories in electrostatic devices. The algorithm proposed in this paper can be straightforwardly employed for the study of conductive particle motion in plate-type electrostatic separators. Work is in progress for the investigation of the influence of various technological parameters of the electrostatic separation process on particle trajectories, in an attempt to guide the laboratory experiments required for the validation of new industry applications.