Organic-inorganic composite microcapsules made of sodium poly(styrenesulfonate) (PSS), poly(dimethyl diallyl ammonium chloride) (PDADMAC), and biomimetic silica were successfully fabricated via a combination of layer-by-layer self-assembly and biomimetic mineralization. The morphologies and chemical compositions of the microcapsules (denoted by (PSS/PDADMAC)2-SiO2) were characterized using scanning electron microscopy, Fourier-transform infrared spectroscopy, and thermogravimetric analysis. The composite microcapsules were used as carrier for the immobilization of glucose oxidase (GOD). GOD encapsulated in (PSS/PDADMAC)2-SiO2 (denoted by GOD@(PSS/PDADMAC)2-SiO2) displayed improved thermal, pH, and operational stabilities. The activity recovery of the immobilized GOD reached 72.85% under the optimized conditions. GOD@(PSS/PDADMAC)2-SiO2 showed a 2.21-fold increase in the Michaelis constant (K
                     m) compared with free GOD. The composite microcapsules have the potential for a range of applications in chemical/biological catalysis and drug/gene delivery systems, and as biosensors.Micro-sized polyelectrolyte capsules, which are prepared using layer-by-layer (LbL) self-assembly, have emerged as attractive materials in the fields of enzyme immobilization and controlled drug delivery [ Recently, a novel approach to prepare organic-inorganic composite microcapsules, combining LbL self-assembly and biomimetic mineralization, was proposed by Jiang et al. [ In recent years, an approach combining LbL self-assembly with biomimetic mineralization has been used to prepare a variety of organic-inorganic composite materials. For example, Sandhage and his coworkers [ Glucose oxidase (GOD), a dimeric enzyme with a molecular weight of 160 kDa, is commonly used in biosensors and biocatalysis. Many methods have been used to immobilize GOD [ PSS (20 wt%), PDADMAC, GOD, and horse radish peroxidase (HRP) were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich. All reagents were of analytical grade and used without further purification. CaCO In the preparation of the (PSS/PDADMAC) Hydrolyzed tetramethyl orthosilicate (TMOS) was used as the silica precursor for the preparation of (PSS/PDADMAC) The (PSS/PDADMAC) To examine the leakage of GOD from the microcapsules, GOD-encapsulated microcapsules with different numbers of bilayers were added to 5 ml of Tris-HCl buffer solution (0.05 mol/L, pH 7.0) and incubated for a period of time at room temperature. The mixture was then centrifuged, and the GOD content of the supernatant was determined by the micro-Bradford method [ For SEM images, samples were prepared by dropping a microcapsule suspension onto a clean glass slide, air drying, and sputtering with gold. The images were obtained using a JEOL JSM-6700F (Japan) instrument. FT-IR spectra of the microcapsules were obtained using a Bruker Vector-22 (Germany) spectrometer. TGA using a NETZSCH STA 409 PC/PG analyzer (Germany) was performed to confirm the contents and decomposition behavior of the microcapsules. The temperature was increased from 34 to 800 °C at a rate of 10 °C/min, and data were collected in an air atmosphere. A colorimetric method based on Trinder's reaction was used for the determination of GOD activity and stability [ The thermal and pH stabilities were determined by measuring the activities of GOD exposed to different temperatures (25–60 °C) and PBS (pH 4.0–8.0) for 1.5 h. The operational stabilities of the encapsulated GOD were tested by measuring the enzyme activity in each successive reaction cycle and were expressed as the recycling operational stability. The encapsulated GOD was allowed to react with 1.5 ml of A and 1.5 ml of B for 2 min at the optimum pH and temperature. The encapsulated GOD was filtered off and rinsed with distilled water, and then redispersed in fresh reaction medium for the next reaction cycle. The process was repeated six times. The relative operational stability was calculated by (residual enzyme activity in the Free and encapsulated GOD were stored at 4 °C for 33 d. Every third day, the activities of free and encapsulated GOD were measured. The relative storage stability was calculated by (residual enzyme activity after  FT-IR spectra of the microcapsules are shown in The TGA curves of the microcapsules are shown in The GOD leakage profiles for (PSS/PDADMAC) SEM images of (PSS/PDADMA)  It can be seen from Operational stability is a critical issue for immobilized enzymes.  From all the above results, it was reasonable to believe that GOD@(PSS/PDADMAC) The effect of immobilization on the kinetic parameters was studied by measuring the initial reaction rates of the consumption of glucose catalyzed by free and encapsulated GOD at various glucose concentrations [ The data in GOD was successfully immobilized in organic-inorganic composite microcapsules using a combination of layer-by-layer (LbL) assembly and biomimetic mineralization. The LbL self-assembly and biomimetic mineralization took place under mild reaction conditions and provided an excellent support for enzyme immobilization. Compared with free GOD and GOD@(PSS/PDADMAC)