The extraction of grease from deliberately comminuted cancellous bone is a low-return activity that has important evolutionary ramifications because it potentially constitutes an early form of resource intensification. From an archaeological standpoint, bone grease extraction is also of significance because it can substantially modify anatomical profiles. Whether this practice is a relatively recent phenomenon or has deep roots reaching back into the Paleolithic, however, remains controversial. The goal of this paper is to cast broader light on the emergence of bone grease procurement by briefly revisiting three French Middle Paleolithic sites (Roc de Marsal, les Pradelles and Grotte du Noisetier) that have been interpreted as potentially early evidence for human processing of cancellous bone for food. To determine whether the published patterns are consistent with this practice, faunal trends at these sites are compared here with recently acquired experimental and ethnographic data on bone comminution activities.
                  The results presented in this paper emphasize the importance of considering human consumption of bone meal as a viable alternative when evaluating competing hypotheses to account for the frequent lack of articular ends in European Paleolithic sites, including many assemblages that show little evidence of carnivore intervention and density-mediated attrition. The analysis also highlights the significance of other activities such as soup making, the use of bone as fuel, ritual disposal of fragments, site cleaning and feeding dogs with pounded bones, which are possible sources of variation when interpreting highly fragmented faunal assemblages. These observations are integrated into a general model focused on the interpretation of bone processing in the archaeological record. As exemplified by the above quotes, an apparently universal trait among human foragers is the dietary focus on animal sources of fat. This focus is easily understood given that fat is highly palatable, has a high energy content and is perceived in areas of the cortex associated with chemosensory perception and sensory pleasure ( While human foragers have little difficulty in obtaining the fat from the large hollow cavities from skeletal elements—a substance known as marrow—extracting fat from tiny cancellous bone pores is usually far more challenging. A strategy that is well described in the ethnohistorical and ethnographic record consists in pounding the articular ends of long bones on a stone anvil with a hammer stone and boiling the resulting fragments (e.g., Returning to bone grease rendering, both ethnographic ( The Middle Paleolithic assemblages that are examined here are compared with two published experimental samples that simulate bone grease rendering ( Studying the potential impact of differential preservation is critical when evaluating patterns in Paleolithic assemblages. However, large species (e.g., caribou, horse, bison) pose a problem for the analysis of these patterns because differential transport may account for the absence of certain elements at a site. In these cases, statistically comparing skeletal abundances with mineral density values is problematic because the tests implicitly assume the presence of entire carcasses at a site ( In the analyses presented below, the equality of percentages was tested using The earliest potential evidence for bone grease utilization dates to the Middle Paleolithic, and more specifically, to Marine Isotope Stages 4–3. Three sites that were meticulously excavated—Roc de Marsal, Grotte du Noisetier and les Pradelles (Marillac), all in France—provide the best evidence for this time period ( Of particular interest to the present analysis is the reindeer ( Because the taphonomic analyses performed by Castel, Costamagno, Soulier and their collaborators seem to rule out carnivores as significant agents of fragmentation in the three cervid assemblages, a first issue consists in determining whether the percentage of articular ends observed at these sites is compatible with experimental data on bone grease rendering. The low values recorded in the three Paleolithic assemblages (3.5–6.2%, If not the product of bone grease manufacture, can the faunal patterns simply result from differential preservation? According to Another possibility is that epiphyses were selectively used as fuel at these sites. Although well-attested at some Paleolithic sites (e.g.,  The cross-cultural analysis offers ample support for human consumption of fish bones, usually involving small- (e.g., capelin) to moderate-sized (e.g., salmon) species (e.g., With respect to land animals and amphibians, the literature hints at the frequent consumption of pounded rabbit carcasses, including bones, particularly by edentulous people ( Statements concerning larger animals are comparatively few and mostly limited to Australia, Africa and the arid regions of North America. In Australia, species that are cited include the kangaroo ( With respect to the types of bones that are consumed, most mentions for large animals concern vertebrae, variably eaten raw, dried or roasted. However, two statements refer specifically to the consumption of limb bone fragments. Speaking of the Eastern Cree and Northern Saulteux (groups now known as Cree, Anishinaabe and Innu) of Eastern Canada, Overall, the ethnographic survey reveals a clear bias in bone consumption that scales inversely with animal body size. Because humans are not obligate bone crunchers like hyenas, examining what are the potential physiological consequences of frequent bone consumption may provide insights into this scaling pattern. The current medical consensus is that most objects <3 cm in diameter, including bones, should pass through the gastrointestinal tract without complications, unless they are pointed, which is commonly the case with fish bones ( Chewing bone fragments to reduce their size is adaptive because consuming large and/or pointed bone specimens may have undesirable health consequences. In Southern China, where aquatic resources are regularly consumed, fish bones are the most frequent foreign bodies causing obstruction in the gastrointestinal and upper digestive tracts ( These ethnographic observations provide a useful framework against which the Paleolithic assemblages can be evaluated. The fact that not a single human, bone-rich coprolite (see The cross-cultural analysis hints at other possible explanations for the Paleolithic configuration. Dogs may have been fed bones that were deliberately comminuted for them or been offered the residues of bone grease manufacture and bone soups, as historically documented in Northeastern Asia ( The experimental and ethnographic information presented here can be integrated into a general interpretive model of bone processing. Note that this model excludes samples with unusually complex taphonomic histories (e.g., natural fire charring specimens shortly after camp abandonment). The flow chart in  In Although seemingly reasonable, the argument that bone grease rendering necessarily entails the formation of unburned faunal samples is incomplete because it ignores ritual behavior. The vast majority of sources on bone grease manufacture do not mention ritual discard as being part of the Could ritual behavior be a valid explanation for the Paleolithic pattern? The fact that the observed configuration is documented at a large number of sites spanning tens of millennia over a wide geographical area seems to conflict with ritual practices as the main causal factor, as these would be expected to vary over time. However, a ritual explanation may hold at The comparisons made here between the experimental and ethnographic data and the Paleolithic observations raise several issues of wider resonance. Despite its high costs, bone grease manufacture has become somewhat of a fixation in prehistoric archaeology, particularly in North America where many highly fragmented assemblages have, sometimes uncritically, been attributed to this activity. Other perfectly viable explanations—bone soup production, consumption of bone meal by humans or dogs, use of bone as fuel, ritual disposal, site cleaning, discard of greasy parts that could attract scavengers—are rarely mentioned or even considered. Part of this bias stems from the nature of the ethnographic record. The quasi industrial production of pemmican—a food product that may contain as much 40.5% of grease ( A third factor, change in mobility, deserves attention as well. As pointed out by The fact that bone grease rendering is virtually unknown outside of North America and Northeastern Asia—one exception relates to the boiling of elephant cancellous bones by Southern African natives ( These patterns must be contrasted with those for bone soup making, an activity frequently mentioned in the ethnohistorical and ethnographic record but rarely afforded attention in the literature on bone grease rendering. At low-latitudes, pounding bones for soup would have represented a more economical strategy than bone grease manufacture because it requires less work and smaller volumes of bones. Indeed, bone soup can be made using expediently smashed bones ( An alternative to boiling is eating unboiled bone fragments. The cross-cultural analysis showed that human ingestion of bone meal was, and sometimes still is, a regular practice in several small-scale societies across the globe. In most cases, the pounded animals are of small body size (<1kg). However, this practice suffers from very low ethnographic visibility, perhaps because it was judged repulsive by early writers. It is interesting to note that in several ethnographic contexts, bone consumption seems to have fell in disfavor Despite being a rich source of analogies, the ethnographic record is severely biased and can, to some extent, occult our understanding of the past ( The examination of faunal trends at the Middle Paleolithic sites of Roc de Marsal, les Pradelles and Grotte du Noisetier indicate that these samples are poorly compatible with bone grease manufacture. Viable alternative explanations for these patterns include bone consumption and selective disposal of grease-rich bones to reduce nuisance. Currently, the lack of preserved human, bone-rich coprolites in the European Paleolithic record constitutes a substantial hurdle for the viability of the first of these hypotheses. However a newer look at the coprolite evidence may reveal previously unsuspected examples of bone consumption by prehistoric humans. The author declares that he has no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. The author would like to express his gratitude to Jean-Christophe Castel, Emmanuel Discamps, Tiina Manne and two anonymous reviewers for helpful comments made on a previous version of this paper. Likewise, numerous exchanges with John Speth considerably aided in shaping several of the arguments developed here. Lastly, the author would like to thank the many ethnologists and researchers who provided valuable first-hand ethnographic and medical information on the issues evaluated in this paper. This research was funded by the