The use of external fixation for intra-articular calcaneal fractures is increasing in popularity. Studies have shown fine wire and monoaxial external fixation to be a viable surgical alternative to more invasive methods of open reduction and internal fixation of the calcaneus. However, there is an absence of literature that quantifies the risk of pin insertion for monoaxial fixation.
                  This study aimed to determine the safety of inserting monoaxial pins within the calcaneus to house the Orthofix Calcaneal Mini-Fixator. Five formalin embalmed cadaveric ankle and lower leg specimens were inserted with six monoaxial pins. Careful dissection then revealed the presence of the tendons of peroneus longus and brevis, the sural nerve and the small saphenous vein in relation to these pins. Measurements from each pin to each of these structures were made as the structures transected lines drawn from each pin to two palpable bony landmarks: the inferior tip of the lateral malleolus and the posterosuperior calcaneus. In doing this, the risk posed by each pin could be evaluated. We found that two particular pins, those used to hold the articular surface of the subtalar joint in a reduced position, posed a larger risk of injury to surrounding structures than the remaining pins. These findings therefore suggest that monoaxial fixation of the calcaneus using a six pin approach is a relatively safe method of rectifying calcaneal fractures and thus may serve as a welcome alternative to other methods of calcaneal fixation.Calcaneal fractures constitute 1–2% of all fractures Fine wire external fixation is one such method whereby the calcaneus can be effectively reduced without the need for open surgery A more contemporary method utilizing monoaxial external fixation involves placing pins, instead of wires, only into the lateral side avoiding penetration through the calcaneus to the medial side The aim of this study was to determine which structures, if any, have been impinged by the pins and also to determine how close these pins are to structures of interest. By doing this, the safety of the Orthofix Calcaneal Mini-Fixator in rectifying intra-articular calcaneal fractures could be evaluated. Five formaldehyde embalmed ankle and lower leg cadaveric specimens were obtained from the regular stock in the Laboratory of Human Anatomy, University of Glasgow. All dissections were carried out under the Anatomy Act 1984 and the Human Tissue (Scotland) Act 2006. These specimens were from four different male individuals (four left specimens and one right specimen), with a mean age of 79 years (range 74–87). Six monoaxial pins were inserted into the lateral side of each of these specimens by an orthopaedic surgeon in line with the surgical technique for the Orthofix Calcaneal External Fixator An incision was made down the midline anteriorly at the level approximately four finger breadths above the most inferior part of the lateral malleolus to the level of the base of the fifth metatarsal. This incision was continued laterally both proximally and distally to allow the skin to be carefully reflected to expose the area surrounding the pins. The subcutaneous fat was carefully removed so as not to damage any superficial structures. The sural nerve and small saphenous vein were first identified proximally and their course and distributions were revealed through blunt dissection. Care was taken not to disturb any soft tissue attachments of these structures to ensure their true anatomical positions were maintained. The tendons of peroneus brevis and peroneus longus muscles were then identified in close proximity to the lateral malleolus. Three easily palpable landmarks, the most inferior tip of the lateral malleolus, the posterosuperior tip of the calcaneus and the base of the fifth metatarsal were then revealed by dissection down to the level of bone. A photograph taken of one fully dissected specimen can be seen in All measurements were taken using Clarke CM145 digital Vernier calipers in millimetres and repeated four times by two independent observers at different times. These calipers are accurate to within ±0.03 The mean distances between all of the established palpable bony landmarks as well as the mean distances of each pin to structure measurement were calculated from the four independent measurements. The standard deviations between the four measurements of each distance were also calculated to assess inter/intra observer reliability. To combine data from all five specimens, an overall mean and standard deviation was calculated for each distance using the calculated mean distances from each specimen. In four out of the five specimens, the tendon of the peroneus longus muscle was impinged by pin 3. A calcaneal branch of the sural nerve was also impinged in one specimen by pin 5. The remaining pins; 1, 2, 4 and 6 did not impinge any structures in any of the specimens. Both the smallest mean distances obtained from individual specimens and the smallest combined mean measurements from all five specimens are given in   This study aimed to determine the risk of impingement upon anatomical structures when placing pins for the Orthofix Calcaneal Mini-Fixator. This was achieved by finding the smallest distances from each of the six pins to surrounding neurological, vascular and tendinous structures as they transected straight lines connecting each pin to two palpable bony landmarks. The results of this current study show that in five specimens inserted with six monoaxial pins, the tendon of the peroneus longus muscle was impinged in four out of the five specimens and a calcaneal branch of the sural nerve in one of the specimens. In clinical practice, a small incision is made over the subtalar joint and the tendons of peroneus longus and brevis are be retracted hence these tendons are not at risk Percutaneous reduction and external fixation was used to treat 52 patients with closed articular displaced calcaneal fractures in a study by Magnan et al. A six pin Orthofix Calcaneal Mini-fixator was used in a study by Corina et al. The use of fine wire or monoaxial external fixation has been shown to result in minimal wound complications in comparison to ORIF. Benirschke et al. reported that following ORIF of the calcaneus in 80 patients, 16% experienced wound complications and deep infection was observed in two patients The results of our study in combination with the studies discussed above suggest that monoaxial external fixation of the calcaneus is a relatively safe method of reconstructing calcaneal fractures. The largest risk of damage to vulnerable structures appear to be via pins 3 and 4. Several limitations of this study are recognised. The cadaveric specimens used were embalmed in formalin. Fresh frozen cadavers would have provided a superior life-like representation of tissue in comparison. No female specimens were used and so it was not possible in this study to determine variations in measurements between male and female subjects. Furthermore, only five specimens within a narrow age range were investigated, a study which included a greater number of subjects, within a wider age range, would perhaps provide more reproducible results. Larger standard deviations were observed with mean measurements in comparison to individual specimen measurements. This is likely to be due to a large variance in foot size used for the study in conjunction with a small number of specimens investigated; this is a noted limitation of the study. Cadaveric specimens that had no prior or existing calcaneal trauma were used in this study however, in subjects with trauma involving the calcaneus, the anatomical location of structures such as the sural nerve and small saphenous vein may become distorted. Additional study which further investigates the safety of monoaxial fixation of the calcaneus is advised. Studies which look at a greater number of both male and female specimens may be beneficial and help to delineate differences, if any, in anatomy between sexes. A study which perhaps investigates the safety of monoaxial pins inserted into specimens with existing trauma such as type II, III and IV Sander’s type fractures of the calcaneus would help overcome the limitation of unpredictable anatomical variation that may occur after trauma, although it is understood that it may be difficult to obtain specimens to this specification. Despite these limitations, our results show that pins 3 and 4 pose a much greater risk of damage than the remaining pins. The use of a small incision centred over the subtalar joint combined with appropriate dissection and retraction eliminates the risk of injury to these tendons. Monoaxial external fixation of the calcaneus using the Orthofix Calcaneal Mini-Fixator appears to be a safe method of fixation of the calcaneus. This study aimed to use cadaveric dissection to evaluate the risk of injury to anatomical structures with the use of monoaxial external fixation. The tendon of peroneus longus and the calcaneal branches of the sural nerve appear to be most at risk of impingement by monoaxial pins when a six pin approach is employed. However, as the tendons of the peroneus longus and peroneus brevis are retracted during surgery, these structures will not be injured. Pins 3 and 4 should be inserted under direct vision to avoid pernennial tendon injury. The morphology of the calcaneal branches of the sural nerve were noticeably variable in the specimens studied. This therefore makes defining areas of the calcaneus which eliminate the risk of damage to these structures extremely difficult. Pin 5 can damage branches of the sural nerve but this is unlikely to be of great clinical significance given the limited distribution of these nerves. We would be honored in being considered for the journal Injury based on our cadaveric-based anatomical study. The use of external fixation for intra-articular calcaneal fractures is increasing in popularity. Studies have shown fine wire and monoaxial external fixation to be a viable surgical alternative to more invasive methods of open reduction and internal fixation of the calcaneus. However, there is an absence of literature that quantifies the risk of pin insertion for monoaxial fixation. This study aimed to determine the safety of inserting monoaxial pins within the calcaneus to house the Orthofix Calcaneal Mini-Fixator. Five formalin embalmed cadaveric ankle and lower leg specimens were inserted with six monoaxial pins. Careful dissection then revealed the presence of the tendons of peroneus longus and brevis, the sural nerve and the small saphenous vein in relation to these pins. Measurements from each pin to each of these structures were made as the structures transected lines drawn from each pin to two palpable bony landmarks: the inferior tip of the lateral malleolus and the posterosuperior calcaneus. In doing this, the risk posed by each pin could be evaluated. We found that two particular pins, those used to hold the articular surface of the subtalar joint in a reduced position, posed a larger risk of injury to surrounding structures than the remaining pins. These findings therefore suggest that monoaxial fixation of the calcaneus using a six pin approach is a relatively safe method of rectifying calcaneal fractures and thus may serve as a welcome alternative to other methods of calcaneal fixation. There is no conflict of interest in this study.