A two-stage mechanical activation (MA) method by combining the dry milling with subsequent wet milling was applied on processing boron concentrate. The properties of samples were characterized by Particle size analysis, Brunauer-Emmet-Teller, Scanning Electron Microscope, X-ray Diffraction, and Fourier Transform Infrared analyses, respectively. In addition, the wettability was measured and the surface free energy was calculated, by the measurement of contact angles, the dispersion in ethanol and water was determined according to the difference of sedimentation rate of different particles in water using spectrophotometry, and the B2O3 activity was determined by alkaline leaching. The two-stage MA exhibits an obvious advantage for refining particles—the particles were refined rapidly and the specific surface area increased to 33.587 m2/g in 30 min milling, higher than that of products obtained by wet milling or dry milling alone. The damaged crystal structure and chemical bonds makes the chemical reaction easier. The surface free energy and Lewis acid component were enhanced, promoting an increase in absorption of solvent and OH−. Thereby, the B2O3 activity increased greatly from 67.52% of the untreated boron concentrate to 89.15% only in 30 min milling.Boron resources are abundant in China, but there are few high-grade boron-containing ores with industrial value ( Increasing the B Wet milling was introduced after dry milling, and the combination of these two milling methods was researched. With the aims of optimization the milling method for modifying the surface properties of boron concentrate and increasing the B Boron concentrate used in this study comes from the Liaoning province in China. And it was pretreated by drying, crushing, sieving to a particle size of below 150 μm and stored in dry conditions. The properties of boron concentrate has been reported in the early studies ( MA was conducted by grinding the sample of 24.0 g with 8 mm zirconia milling balls of 288.0 g in a zirconia chamber, using a planetary ball mill (Fritsch Pulverisette-4, Germany). This milling process were divided into two steps, for each milling step, the rotational speed was 250 rpm. Dry milling is grinding the sample in the air atmosphere, and wet milling is grinding the sample in the elthanol medium. The two-stage MA was subjected to dry milling prior to wet milling. This was achieved by adding 24.0 g elthanol to the milling chamber after the preset duration of dry milling had been reached. After dry milling for The B The B Particle size distribution of boron concentrate and milled products were measured by means of a Malvern Mastersizer 2000 particle size analyzer. Brunauer-Emmet-Teller (BET) method was applied to determine the specific surface area ( The phase compositions and crystallinity of the samples were obtained from X-ray diffraction (XRD) patterns analysis using an X-ray diffractometer (X’PERT PRO MPD/PW3040, PANalytical B.V. Corporation, Netherlands) with a 2θ angle ranging from 5 to 80°. The relative fraction of crystalline phase ( Here, The wettability was determined by the contact angle with ethanol using surface tension and contact angle measuring instruments (DCAT21, Dataphysics Corporation, Germany). The contact angles could be obtained according to Washburn theory using Eq. Here, In order to calculate their surface free energy of boron concentrate, the contact angle of samples to probe liquids were measured. In this research, diiodomethane, ultrapure water, and ethylene glycol were used as probe liquids, and The surface free energies of boron concentrate and the milled products could not be measured directly but were obtained through the calculation of contact angles of the probe liquids according to Young’s equation (Eq. Here, According to Oss-Chaudry-Good model proposed by Here, Hence, the equation for calculation the surface free energy can be changed to Eq. In this equation, In general, the better the dispersion of the particles in the liquid, the more stable the particles are in the liquid, which means that the particles are less susceptible to precipitation in the liquid. 0.100 g of the sample was added to 50 mL of the liquid, shaken and subjected to ultrasonic treatment for 10 min to make the particles as uniformly dispersed as possible in the liquid, and the absorbance at this time was measured using an UV spectrophotometer (UV-2550, Shimadzu Corporation, Japan). Then, standing for different time intervals 10, 20, 30, 60 min and measuring the absorbance separately. The dispersion of boron concentrate samples in liquid, Here, The main results of the specific surface area  SEM images of The structure changes during the MA process mainly show both changes in crystal structure and chemical bonds. The surface chemical bonds was characterized by the FTIR analysis, and the results are shown in Wettability of boron concentrate was adjusted using the contact angle to ethanol, and the results are shown in  The contact angles of samples to different probe liquids are shown in MA seems to be a favorable process for the treatment of minerals prior to leaching with significantly enhanced metal recoveries reported ( MA of the sample brings about a reduction of the particle size and an enhancement of Besides of the better crushing effect, the two-stage MA also introduces the crystal defect and unstable chemical bonds. Commonly, dry milling will damage the structure to a higher extent because of the larger mechanical forces on the sample, as a result, with the increasing of the proportion of dry milling time, the crystallinity decreases and the amorphization extent increases. Although the chemical bonds just have a little changes after milling, the decrease in chemical band area and intensity shows an advantage for the enhancement of activity of products. It should be noted that, the chemical band of absorption water at 1633 cm The surface free energy and Lewis acid component of the sample bear a close relation to its The B In the present study, combining the dry milling with subsequent wet willing was shown to have a great impact on the surface properties and the B The particle size of boron concentrate was drastically reduced to 2.849 μm ( Dry milling could crush the particles rapidly and damage their crystal structure and chemical bonds, but generated agglomeration easier, while the subsequent wet milling would break up these aggregates and increase the opportunity of reaction between the activated surface and alkaline solution. After a combination of 15 min dry milling and 15 min wet milling, the surface free energy and Lewis acid component of milled product could be enhanced from 26.88 to 39.61 mJ/m The two-stage MA could increase the B The authors declare no competing financial interest. This research was financially supported by the Programs of the