The interactions between the water-soluble polyelectrolytes poly(acrylic acid) (PAA) and poly(vinyl sulfonic acid) (PVS), and Cu(II) and Ni(II) are studied by the liquid-phase polymer-based retention (LPR) technique. Assuming a Ni(II)–PVS interaction of electrostatic nature, the nature of the Ni(II)–PAA interaction is found to be electrostatic, while Cu(II)–PAA interactions imply the formation of coordinative bonds. The charge related formation constants for the systems Ni(II)–PAA, Ni(II)–PVS, and Cu(II)–PVS are found to be 57.57×102, 43.4×102, and 60.5×102 M−1, respectively in a 0.010 M NaNO3 aqueous solution at pH 5, and 1.4×102 for both systems containing Ni(II) and 1.3×102
                     M−1 for the system Cu(II)–PVS in a 0.10 M NaNO3 aqueous solution at pH 5.Polyelectrolytes (PEs), polymers with a high concentration of ionic groups or ionogenes, have the ability to chelate or exchange metal ions The polyelectrolyte–metal ion interaction can be only electrostatic or include the formation of coordination bonds. The type of interaction depends on the chemical nature (ionization potential and electronic affinity) of the functional groups. The variables that affect the polyion–metal ion interaction are classified in two groups: intrinsic and extrinsic to the polymer. The former includes the polymer structure in terms of composition and geometry, which affects the flexibility of the chains in solution: branches of the chain, chemical nature of the functional groups, and their distribution at the polymer chain, etc. The second group includes the charge and type of the metal ion, pH of the solution, ionic strength, temperature, and dielectric constant of the medium The study of the polyelectrolyte–metal ion interaction can be carried out by different techniques such as potentiometry The LPR technique has demonstrated to be an excellent tool to quantitatively study the polymer–metal ion interaction Despite the advance in the study of the polyelectrolyte–metal ion interaction through the LPR technique, there are still non-solved questions such as how to differentiate purely electrostatic interactions from others involving coordinative bonds. In this paper, we analyze the nature of the interactions of polyelectrolytes bearing carboxylate and sulfonate groups on their structure with Cu(II) and Ni(II) by means of the LPR technique. The commercial polymers poly(acrylic acid) (PAA) and poly(vinylsulfonic acid) (PVS), (both Aldrich) were purified and fractionated by ultrafiltration. PAA has, according to Aldrich, The ultrafiltration equipment has been previously described 50.0 mL of a solution containing 5.0×10 The polyelectrolytes PAA and PVS are high flexible linear polymers whose functional groups are linked directly to the backbone; they show good chemical and physical stability, very good solubility in water, and a high capacity to incorporate metal ions due to the high local concentration of functional groups. They also exhibit specific properties: PVS is a strong polyelectrolyte, and is deprotonated in a wide range of pH, while PAA is a weak polyelectrolyte that deprotonates from pH 3.5 to pH higher than 6. In terms of the Pearson's concept of hard- and soft-acids and bases, the carboxylate groups are soft ‘bases’, while sulfonate groups are relative hard ‘bases’. On the other hand Cu In By increasing the 1:1 electrolyte concentration in one order of magnitude (see In order to find out which is the nature of the Ni Copolymerization of acrylic acid (AA) with vinylsulfonate (VS) yields macromolecules whose charge densities are higher than that of PAA. For these P(AA- We define the charge related formation constant ( The interactions between the water-soluble polyelectrolytes, poly(acrylic acid), PAA and poly(vinyl sulfonic acid), PVS, and Cu(II) and Ni(II) were studied by ultrafiltration. On the basis of the differences in charge densities of the polyelectrolytes and in the concentration of single salt present in solution, it was pointed out that the interaction PAA–Ni(II) is basically electrostatic, and charge related formation constants for the systems Ni(II)–PAA, Ni(II)–PVS, and Cu(II)–PVS were found to be 57.57×10 The authors thank FONDECYT (Grant No. 1030669 and No. 1020198) and the Dirección de Investigación of the Universidad Austral de Chile (Grant No. S-200126) for their financial support. N.Sch. thanks CONICYT for providing PhD fellowship.