The following paper outlines the development of empirically fitted and pseudo-physically derived compartment models of a flighted rotary dryer with counter current airflow processing solid material. Underloaded, overloaded and design-loaded dryers are considered. Four key parameters are estimated to fit the empirical model to industrial residence time distribution data and common empirical mean residence time/holdup correlations. Utilising the fundamental structure of the empirical model and physical and mechanical properties such as the dryer and flight geometry as well as solids material properties, the number of estimated parameters in the pseudo-physical model was reduced to 2. The experimental data required to characterise and validate the models is discussed. Optimisations to determine the model parameters were undertaken by comparison with an experimental residence time distribution curve for an industrial dryer processing sugar. Simulation of the model using gPROMS
                        
                           
                           
                              ®
                           
                        
                      illustrates model performance. The potential to integrate the solids transport model and a full heat and mass transfer model is also discussed.Rotary dryers are used across a wide range of industries because of their simplicity, low cost of operation and their flexibility to handle a wider range of throughputs than other dryer types. They are particularly suited to the processing of coarse and cohesive particles. One example of their use is the sugar industry, where they are required to dry and cool raw sugar to within tight specifications. They are commonly used in the minerals processing industries for product and ore drying operations. However, these units represent a significant capital cost to industry. The scale-up of rotary dryers from pilot scale and the control of product quality during processing disturbances remain complex and poorly described. This paper describes the solids transport within flighted rotary dryers and the estimation of the solids available for drying in order to better describe flighted rotary dryer performance. In many cases, the pattern of solids movement and intimate contact with a gas stream within the rotary dryer (RD) are used to achieve both drying and cooling objectives for a material. The dryer set up consists of a long, low-angled cylinder rotated at low rpm (typically 2–6 The material cascading from the flights undergoes cooling and drying via direct contact with the gas stream. This material is denoted the There are three possible modes of operation in flighted rotary drying: when the flights are not at their full capacity the dryer is underloaded; when there is just enough solids in the base of the dryer to completely fill the flights the dryer is design-loaded; when there is more solids than required to fill the flights the dryer is overloaded (kilning). The point at which a dryer becomes overloaded is therefore known as the kilning point. A fuller geometric description of the transport modes in flighted rotary dryers can be found in At this stage it is worthwhile to examine a specific example of the industrial use of flighted RD's. The Australian sugar industry universally uses large flighted RD's in the final stage of raw sugar manufacture. A premium scheme is currently in place to drive continuous improvements in sugar quality (final temperature and moisture) and manufacturing performance. The scheme rewards in-specification sugar and penalises the producers of off-specification sugar. Furthermore, the marketplace forces the industry to continuously strive for increased dryer throughput. These demands force the industry to rely on effective control schemes for RD stations and thorough assessment of the capacity limitations of RD's. Unfortunately, sugar drying and sugar cooling are strongly coupled and the control of these processes is not intuitive. This has led to an emphasis on the development of model based control schemes and dryer simulation as effective management tools. There is a significant body of work in the literature describing models for rotary drying operations. More complete reviews of dryer modelling in the literature can be found elsewhere ( Many of the dryer modelling examples in the literature have used empirical correlations to determine the mean residence time of solids. The most commonly referred empirical relation used to determine Common ways to incorporate axial solids dispersion into RD models is through the use of probabilistic techniques ( One of the early compartment models for reproducing the RTD of a flighted RD was derived by In this paper the authors will present recent enhancements that have been made to the compartment model (Model 1) presented by Two compartment models are proposed in this paper (Models 1 and 2). Both models split the dryer into a series of twin tanks. In both models the authors have followed the usual convention ( Separation of the transported solids into two phases is important in two regards. As well as bulk transport being different in the two phases (for example the active phase is subject to drag from the passing gas stream), it is only the active phase that undergoes drying. Defining the mass of solids in the active phase enables appropriate surface area relations within heat and mass transfer functions to be defined. This is important given the large variations in the magnitudes of heat and mass transfer quoted in drying literature ( The first model presented in this paper is predominately statistical with limited reference to material properties, dryer geometry and physical transport behaviour. However, the simple structure of the model is shown to be valid in that the solids transport coefficients controlling the flows of solids within the model can be optimised to reproduce an experimental RTD. The model has been extended via the introduction of an overload kilning flow, and air flowrate constant, such that the model is capable of predicting the change in the mean residence time, as per the Friedman and Marshall equation. Model 1 illustrates the statistical or empirical approach to modelling RTDs in flighted rotary dryers. Given key experimental characteristics of a RD it demonstrates the necessary compartment structure that is required to reproduce the base case RTD and parameter values necessary to reproduce common empirical relations for the effect on dryer mean residence times of operational variables. It is presented to illustrate that while the statistical approach is simple and capable of achieving match to empirical data, the model does not actually reproduce the Model 2 retains the original tank pairs-in-series arrangement of Model 1. However, each tank pair is more physically representative of a discrete slice of the RD. In each slice the local moisture content of the solids is responsible for dictating the design hold-up in the tanks, the flow between active and passive tanks in each tank pair, and the relative effect of air phase drag on the active solids. The solids flow paths are restructured to better reflect the physics of flighted rotary transport and to enable the key model parameters to be defined in terms of physical properties and transport behaviour. Before describing the dryer transport models in detail it is worthwhile to briefly outline the experimental characterisation of an industrial flighted rotary dryer processing raw sugar, for which these models were based apon. Experimental data were collected for the test dryer, a large flighted RD operated by CSR sugar at Invicta Mill in North Queensland. Data were collected in an attempt to fully characterise the RTD of a design-loaded dryer as this forms the basis for the model parameter estimation. Unfortunately, the collection of RTD's and identification of the design loaded conditions in industrial sugar drying is a time consuming and challenging task, particularly given the competitive nature of the sugar industry. A tracer test was undertaken to determine the steady-state RTD during standard dryer operation (100 This model was chosen for its known ability to reproduce an industrial dryer RTD ( The flow between each set of tanks is given by the product of the tank mass and a corresponding transport coefficient. The transport coefficients for flow from passive to passive tanks; active to passive tanks; and passive to active tanks are: As a dryer becomes overloaded the mass of solids contained in the discharging flights reaches a maximum (the design load). Thus past the design load or kilning point the active phase masses must remain constant (ignoring effects of moisture content on flight holding capacity). The additional flow of solids forms a kilning bed on the floor of the dryer and introduces an additional mode of transport (kilning flow), reducing the residence time within the dryer. To account for kilning flow, an extra stream flowing between successive passive tanks was included in the model. The magnitude of the kilning flow leaving the passive tank of differential cell This infers that the rate of kilning is proportional to the mass of solids that undergo kilning. At the point of kilning (defined by the maximum mass of solids in the active phase or the design load in the passive phase) the flow of solids from the passive phase to the active phase is fixed at its current value. That is, when Consider the general case of a design loaded RD with solids throughput Based on the experimentally determined design-loaded RTD and feed rate for any RD, the total holdup within the dryer can be calculated as Given that In order to calibrate Model 1 with the available RTD data, parameter estimation was implemented using standard process modelling software, The total (active plus passive) and passive phase design holdup for the dryer were determined from the Friedmann and Marshall correlation (Eq. To determine the proportionality constant for kilning flow ( In this section, the match to the experimental RTD is presented, and the functionality and limitations of the model are discussed. Unfortunately the true physical nature of flighted rotary drying does not correlate well with the flows of solids between the passive and active phases in Model 1. As well as material properties and transport coefficients being constant along the dryer length, there is no facility in Model 1 for direct adjustment of RD operating parameters, such as the rotational speed, dryer inclination and solids feed properties. The only means of incorporating such variables is to evaluate the airflow constant Closer inspection of the model parameters reveals further physical inconsistencies concerning the nature of the transport between the active and passive phases. The optimised value of It is worth noting that the axial solids flow path and the influence of airflow in the RD in Model 1 are also unrealistic. Taking into consideration the physics of flighted rotary transport, it would be more reasonable to assume that axial transport occurs predominately via the cascading of solids through a vertical plane within the dryer (the forward step). It is also reasonable to assume that the kilning flow moves axially via the rolling of solids on the base of the dryer. Hence the model would be more physically realistic if the axial transport were predominately from active to passive cells and only the kilning flow moved from passive to passive cells. Furthermore, the influence of drag from counter current or co current airflow would be expected to only affect the rate of axial transport of the cascading or active solids. Following on from the identified deficiencies and advantages of Model 1, Model 2 includes more suitable material flow paths within the same fundamental tank structure as Model 1. The layout of Model 2 is shown in The flow between each set of tanks is again given by the product of the tank mass and a corresponding transport coefficient. The transport coefficients were localised (i.e., different in each set of tanks) to reflect changes in material properties along the dryer length. It is worth noting that by localising the transport coefficients the ability to derive an entirely statistical model (where each coefficient is estimated through optimisation) becomes a formidable task. Physical descriptions of the parameters are thus able to reduce the problem complexity to a reasonable level. The transport coefficients for flow from passive to passive tanks (kilning) and passive to active tanks (flight discharge) are Without resorting to comprehensive drag flow considerations Differential mass balances were derived for each tank ( The mass balance on solids in the passive tank of a differential cell A moisture (or other trace component) balance in the active tank of a differential cell In order to develop a more physical compartment model, it is first necessary to define the solids moisture content profile along the RD. This is of fundamental importance, as the flow properties (cohesion and dynamic repose angle) of some particulates can change significantly over small, critical ranges in moisture content ( The dynamic repose angle is of fundamental importance in estimating both the maximum flight capacity and the split of material into active and passive tanks for a given differential cell in the compartment model. A collection of geometric equations was employed ( In defining the Model 2 solids flow streams it is worthwhile stating the assumptions relating the physics of RD transport to the compartment model. Following Under- and design-loaded RD: In order to calibrate Model 2 with the available RTD data, constant variance parameter estimation was implemented using Drag force on curtaining particles lies between the extremes of flow past a sphere and flow past a flat plate ( In this section, a collection of Model 2 results is presented to illustrate the increased functionality of the new model structure. The effect of the solids feed rate on the total RD holdup is illustrated in The effect of the counter-current airflow rate on the solids RTD is shown in The distribution of solids along the length of the test RD is shown in Although the transport model is derived for the test case RD and is fitted to the experimentally determined RTD, the model is considered capable of predicting the effects of changes in operational and design variables. For the test case RD the results presented match well the expected effects of airflow and feedrate on dispersion, mean RT and dryer holdup. The change in solids transport from underloaded to overloaded conditions is also well described by the model. The inclusion of geometric arguments for transport coefficients and the use of expressions relating flows between the tanks that are moderated by the masses in the active and passive phases ensure that the model structure and transport coefficients within the model are generalisable to other RD's. However, it is necessary to determine values for both In previous compartment models of RDs the parameters moderating flows were all statistically estimated and were set to these fixed values ( Whilst Model 2 provides a sound basis on which to include energy balance relations and develop a full rotary dryer model, some facets of the model require additional validation and characterisation. In particular, the impact of moisture content on the dynamic angle of repose and characterisation of the flow properties of solids across a range of moisture contents are considered important. A more comprehensive description of cohesive solid flows and clumping behaviour would enable improved correlations for air drag to be developed. The simple statistical RD transport model (Model 1) described in this paper is capable of fitting well RTD data for the industrial test dryer. It can also be modified to fit well-known empirical relationships describing the effects of operational parameters on holdup and mean residence time. Although capable of approximating the distribution of mass between the two phases, close examination of model results (particularly the resulting RTD's) and flow paths reveal inconsistencies with respect to intuition and qualitative observations of industrial units. It stands to reason that by utilising the fundamental structure of Model 1 (i.e., two tanks in each cell) to derive a more physically realistic model (Model 2) the distribution of mass between the phases can be preserved. Alternate flow paths and physically derived model parameters can then be used to improve the models response to operational changes. Model 2 illustrates the improved performance with respect to airflow changes and predicts more realistically the change in holdup along the length of the dryer whilst decreasing the complexity of the model parameter estimation. In fact the number of estimated parameters is reduced from 4 to 2 by introducing physical descriptions of the model parameters. The model includes the advantages of geometric analysis and its dependence on dryer operational parameters, whilst remaining able to predict residence time distributions/holdup across a range of RD operations, from under to overloaded conditions. It is also expected that with minimal changes to the model parameters this model could be used under both co current and counter current airflow conditions. In this context, the solids moisture content becomes an important parameter in the determination of the solids transport in RD's. This inclusion provides a direct link between the solids transport and energy balance models used to determine drying and cooling rates in RD's. Furthermore, the solids actually available for heat and mass transfer (the active phase) can be predicted with greater confidence.  The authors would like to thank Dr. Stephen Vigh for his input and valuable observations of rotary dryer solids transport.