There has been an extensive abuse of Gy's Formula during the entire history of applied TOS (Theory of Sampling), it being applied too liberally to almost any aggregate material conceivable for many material classes of extremely different compositions with significant (to large, or extreme) fragment size distribution heterogeneity, for example many types of municipal and industrial waste materials. This abuse regimen is for the most part characterized by lack of fundamental TOS competence and the historical context of Gy's formula. The present paper addresses important theoretical details of TOS, which become important as sampling rates increase at the conclusion of the full ‘lot-to-analysis sampling pathway regarding finer details behind TOS’ central equations linking sampling conditions to material heterogeneity characteristics allowing the estimation of Total Sampling Error (TSE) manifestations. We derive a new, complementary understanding of the two conceptual factors, y the grouping factor and, z, the segregation factor, intended to represent the local (increment scale) and long-range (increment to lot-scale) heterogeneity aspects of lot materials, respectively. We contrast the standard TOS exposé with the new formulation. While the phenomenological meaning and content of the new proposed factors (y and z) remains the same, their numerical values and bracketing limits are different with z now representing more realistic effects of liberation and segregation combined. This new formulation makes it easier to get a first comprehensive grasp of TOS′ dealings with sampling of significantly heterogeneous materials. We believe this may present a slightly easier path into the core issues in TOS when sampling and sub-sampling gets closer to the final aliquot scale.The strings shown in In all four lots all analyte particles are liberated, but only the results for heterogeneity pattern 1 follow Gy's equation In case of segregation, it is impossible to estimate how changing increment size will affect the sampling variance (in order to do that, extensive (expensive) experiments have to be carried out using several increment sizes). Independent of segregation pattern, when the increment size approaches the liberation size, the sampling variance approaches the theoretical Gy equation curve. While in simulations to it is possible to ‘analyze’ every fragment and increment as was done above, in practical sampling it is only possible to analyze a limited number of increments. Segregation is discussed below in more detail. In simulations it is possible to ‘analyze’ every fragment and increment, in practical sampling it possible to analyze only a limited number of increments. Theory of Sampling (TOS) distinguishes two classes of sampling errors, termed incorrect and correct sampling errors respectively. Incorrect sampling errors ( The present paper addresses some important issues of heterogeneity, notably a re-evaluation of the theoretical derivations behind TOS′ equations linking sampling conditions to the inherent material heterogeneity characteristics, allowing the estimation of Total Sampling Error ( Perfect homogeneity, i.e., a spatially ‘randomly distributed lot’, is an ideal non-existing property. Heterogeneity is the rule - all naturally occurring and manufactured materials are heterogeneous; it is only a matter of degree. Heterogeneity is manifested at all scales of interest in a lot; as grouping and segregation phenomena. Material heterogeneity is the source of the correct sampling errors (CSE) and will influence the quantitative expression of the incorrect sampling errors (ISE) (preparation error being the only exception, see further below). Gy [ Here we proceed largely without this deep mathematical-statistical background. However, it was necessary to present TOS' unifying and sufficient minimum of Governing Principles (GP) and Sampling Unit Operations (SUO), which are sufficient for a practical understanding allowing the present objective to be fully understood (see For the treatment below we only need to remind of another of Gy's inspirations, that of calling all original lot units (think of grains, particles etc.) as well as the resulting cascade of fragments hereof produced by accidental fragmentation as part of the impact from the sample preparation process itself, as In deriving the complete theoretical foundation for TOS, which took Pierre Gy 25 years, everything starts with developing a comprehensive understanding, in full mathematical statistical dressing, of the phenomenon of The heterogeneity contribution is a quantity that can be assigned to - in fact it The general definition is as follows (for fragments, index In which By formulating all further theoretical developments in TOS on this basis, a simplification was obtained that allowed Gy to finish the comprehensive theoretical work in essentially just one more year. Gy himself spoke about the fulfillment of the Theory of Sampling in the year 1975. This year thus marks the divides into TOS' gestation period (1950–1975) and the subsequent period of equal length 1975–2000, broadly speaking, the latter period mainly devoted to disseminating TOS to as many scientific and technological fields and industrial sectors as possible. There exist a bewildering number of different classes and types of materials with their individual and common aspects of In all material lots, individual The power of TOS is related to three scales only, fragment scale, increment scale and the scale (size) of the whole lot, which is viewed as made up by the totality of the heterogeneity contributions from either of these smaller-scaled units. At the end of this theoretical development, Gy was able to encapsulate the central aspects of the key relationships between practical sampling conditions and the material heterogeneity in just three master equations presented below: “Gy's formula” for the variance of the Fundamental Sampling Error, originally published 1955 [ The central relationship between distribution ( Another, slightly more complicated relationship: It is possible to derive three of the four practical Sampling Unit Operations (SUO) from just two of these equations and indeed several of the Governing Principles as well, see e.g. Esbensen & Wagner [ Gy's insight regarding how to describe all aspects of heterogeneity necessary for dealing with sampling (via the heterogeneity contribution concept), is that only the fragment scale and the group scale are needed. He realized that there are only two  In keeping with this two-scale approach, Gy defined the sum-total heterogeneity impact from all fragments, and from all virtual groups in the lot, (see below), by the  The essential feature is that Regarding  Again, the whole can also be viewed as being made up of all groups. TOS now further derives a key interrelationship between The definition and meaning of  After a series of attempts at reducing the heterogeneity characterizing equations with various ‘simplifying expressions’, Gy succeeded with the following definition of In TOS, For the general case of sampling a lot which is This latter expression opens up for a powerful understanding. Physically [ Below the new formulation is similarly focused on the increment size, but now in relation to the general lot size, particularly in the case where the lot no longer can be considered as large, which lies behind all the standard assumptions outlined above.  A key theoretical development was derived in Gy [ Gy [ The other key equation to come out of Gy's detailed formulations relates to the sampling variance stemming from From this equation it appears that in order to reduce the sampling variance contribution from This latter approach means that the material in question is now in a completely different status, it is in fact for all sampling purposes a completely new material, the parameters of which (used in Gy's formula) must all be estimated anew – hence the sometimes significantly increased workload. When sampling significantly heterogeneous materials, the size of the increment plays a critical role. For clarity, this is here illustrated with a few 1-D lot examples without loss of generality. Below four principally different types of heterogeneity patterns are presented. 1-  The four heterogeneous lot types (  The principal advantage of using a larger increment size is obvious as evidenced by the clear sampling variance reductions revealed ( In  In case the concentration, Similarly, if the increment size, However, equation Segregation affects both the estimate of the sampling variance of the lot mean and the between-increment variance estimated by sampling only a fraction of the lot in a principally In these simulated sampling runs all strings consisted of 9000 particles with zero concentration and 1000 particles with concentration If the particles are regarded individually, the variance of a string consisting of 9000 zeros and one thousand ones The following general conclusions can be drawn from the simulations shown in  If the lot to be sampled is In case of segregation, if it is possible to collect a composite sample or samples by randomly picking individual fragments (ideal sampling), this process can be regarded as a virtual mixing of the lot and, consequently, the expected result again follows the random distribution. However, this approach is seldom a feasible procedure in practice, either because the fragments are too small and too many to be picked and analyzed individually, or some part(s) of the lot are not accessible, thus preventing truly random (equiprobabilistic) sampling.  When increments consist of local  Experiments carried out using only one single increment size, cannot be used to predict how changing the increment size will affect the At extreme segregation, i.e., extreme clustering (heterogeneity pattern 4), Segregation is always the cause of auto-correlation at The modified theoretical analysis below relates to the scale of fragments. Let us assume that a lot consists of elementary fragments, each having a mass The true mean concentration of the lot is the It is important that the lot average is calculated as the weighted mean of all fragments. Especially if the analyte concentration The mean of the heterogeneity contributions is always zero: The variance of It is of course very seldom possible, or practical, or interesting, to analyze every fragment of a large lot. Instead, it may be possible to collect a sample of If the sample is small in comparison to the lot (  Both these principal cases, crushing and aggregation, corresponds to a fundamentally new material system, new lots, with completely new heterogeneity characteristics. All features pertaining to the previous system, e.g. estimated heterogeneities, estimated sampling error variances etc. have to be re-estimated. There are no characteristics that are transferable to such a new system. Multiplying Eq. Usually it is not possible, or practical, to analyze all fragments of a lot. However, in that special case, if the fragments/particles are large enough to be analyzed individually,  For a particular lot from which Eq. If an estimate, Any type of segregation in a stationary lot, or drift of the process mean with time (dynamic, flowing lots), which breaks the randomness of the analyte distribution, will generate The The much more realistic situation, which dominates in practice over the ideal cases treated above, is that there is distinct non-randomness in the lot. In natural lots there is practically always Gy [ The theoretical analysis of practical sampling of realistic lot heterogeneities now proceeds at the scale of groups-of-fragments (i.e. the practical increment sampling scale), but derivation of the pertinent heterogeneity characteristics follows the exact same formalism as for the fragment scale. If the lot is divided into Just like the mean of the constitution heterogeneities of fragments, also the mean of the increment heterogeneities is always zero The If the increment distribution is fully and completely random (or randomized by picking individual increments randomly from the lot), If a lot has any type of non-isotropic characteristic; segregation, clustering or location- or time-dependent The short-range variance Thus, for a If, as above for Of these quantities Both However mixing of the lot before sampling will Eqs. For a first approximation to estimate of The details of the formula need careful attention: Here The shape factor  Composition factor  Many attempts have been made to model the liberation factor with simple empirical equations, e.g. Gy's equation has received much more focus in the sampling community and literature than Gy himself intended. It has been vastly misused, but also unduly criticized, forgetting the purpose and the assumptions made in deriving it (the authors humbly confess to having been guilty of the same sin, earlier in their careers – this is not an easy matter to master). This equation was originally derived specifically to allow an approximate estimation to an order-of-magnitude only, of the sampling variance Thus the There is practically no limit to the number of materials in the literature, which (very often If Given the special assumptions of  Thus before Gy's formula As mentioned, normally it is not possible to analyze all, or a large enough number of individual particles or fragments of any real (large) lots. Only in simulations, or if a small lot is However,   If increments consisting of liberated particles are analyzed individually, the manifestation of both long-range and the short range-variance depends on increment size. The sampling variance of a If analyte particles within a The short-range variance ( The situation is slightly more complicated because of potential If this F-test is significant, then the subtraction Unlike the constitution heterogeneity Lastly, in the case of the distributional heterogeneity, the variance of the mean of several increments However, the effect of sampling mode can be estimated by analyzing the results of a variographic experiment [ The data analyzed in the example below are part from a study published by Pitard [ Finally, these 60 g samples were divided into two 30 g halves, which were all analyzed by fire assay for gold. In total number of fire assays was 128. It pays to be attentive of the design for this experiment, From each of the final duplicate analysis results, the mean and variance were calculated. These variance estimates have just one degree of freedom, but Of these The significance of the segregation can now be tested: If From these calculations, we get the total variance of single analysis of the 60 g samples The laboratory that carried out the analyses made public its own estimate of the relative standard deviation of the fire assay as 2% ( The analytical results and the estimation of When the material was ground to nominal particle size If the nuggets were randomly distributed in the matrix, the expected number of Au nuggets/increment would be the same in case the increment sizes are equal as in this experiment (60 g), i.e. the expected number of nuggets randomly distributed in the matrix depends only on the increment size. As this is not the case, this is a clear indication of The nugget particle size in a binary liberated mixtures, where gold nuggets and matrix particles have similar masses and where the sampling variance is equal with this mineral mixture used in the experiments, where estimated by using Gy's equation (Eq. The following values were used: The variance of a random particle mixture is inversely proportional to the expected number of particles of interest in the sample. Therefore, if the sample size is kept constant, the expected variance should not change whether the analyte particles are embedded in the fragments or liberated Minkkinen [ There are important lessons to be learned from the present re-analysis of the data from the Pitard [ Segregation, whether within-fragment (short-range) or long-range variation of concentration or within the original sampling target, will affect the between increments variance. Consequently, it is impossible to estimate without extensive experiments how changing the fragment and increment size will affect the segregation manifestations. Full characterization of the heterogeneity pattern in 2-D and 2-D targets is expensive. However, when fragment size is close to liberation size, the predicted particle using Gy's equation is close to the liberation size of the analyte-containing particle. The so-called heterogeneity tests (HT) are popular in the mineral processing arena. However very great care has to be taken in interpreting and utilizing HT results in planning subsequent sampling plans. The reason is that standard HT's do not give information as to the When increments are taken from a lot, every removed increment in principle changes the average concentration of the remaining part of the lot, the more the larger the removed increments are in comparison to the whole lot. This effect is of course not significantly influential as long as the extracted increment mass is However, if size of the increments removed are significant in comparison to the lot size (small lots on the laboratory bench, e.g., in connection with sample preparation or bona fide riffle, where the resulting sub sample is half of the lot splitting; in the pharmaceutical industry example exist, where the entire product lot of a highly specialized, extremely expensive compound was of the order of seven grams) this effect has to be taken into account when the short-range grouping effect is estimated, Sommer [ If the analyte distribution in the lot is From this the definition of our proposed The average fragment mass is If The following approximations can be made from Eq. If the whole lot is taken as the sample, If In If the lot is The results given in But when laboratory sub-samples are made, especially at the end of the full ‘lot-to-aliquot’ pathway, typical mass reduction is carried out splitting contemporary sub-samples into 2–10 parts only (lower part of If the heterogeneity invariant for a particular material to be sampled can be estimated, the theoretical variance of an increment is  Following the formalism laid down in standard TOS (outlined above), by multiplying the grouping factor with the From this follows an If we compare Eq. If the increments sampled are larger than single analyte particles, Gy's equation gives a general equation of the distribution heterogeneity that can be written for If the particles are fully liberated, and there is no segregation, In case there is any type of segregation, In the gold experiment example above If the distribution of gold nuggets in the matrix rock is random, the predicted sampling variance due to pure grouping effect is In standard statistics, the variance of the lot mean of This relationship holds If the lot material is segregated, the experimental variance estimate, e.g., The increment size is identical to that used in estimating the measurement variance, and The lot was Another point to remember is that when there is segregation there is also auto-correlation If the analyte distribution is random however, the variance of the increments can be explained by the grouping effect alone (there is no segregation), i.e. With respect to TOS' original Between these extreme end values, the new segregation factor The grouping factor While However, in sampling small lots like in preparing analytical samples from the primary samples If segregation, due clustering, linear drift and/or cyclic variations within the lot is a significant component of the sampling variance, that is a clear indication of auto-correlation in the lot, at least within some time interval or distance range. In auto-correlated series, the measurement uncertainty, the variance of the mean, As always, it is strongly advisable first to reduce, or eliminate fully, all Incorrect Sampling Error (ISE) effects so that the critical sampling variance estimates can become valid and reliable, lest the effects of the In a recent “refutation” of Esbensen & Wagner [  There is complete command over all sampling errors only for an ideal lot with a There has been an ill-reflected, often unrecognized, extensive abuse of Gy's Formula during the entire history of applied TOS, it being all too liberally applied to almost any aggregate material conceivable (many material classes of widely different compositions with significant (to large, or extreme) fragment size distribution heterogeneity. This abuse regimen is for the most part characterized by the lack of fundamental TOS understanding and competence; the most recent misconstruction of TOS is in Ref. [ In any type of a realistic lot, non-randomness (segregation, grouping, linear drift and/or cyclic variations) will produce significant effects stemming from the complementary For significantly heterogeneously lots (all the world's realistic sampling targets) only empirical For sampling in which the intended sample mass is The modified None. P M wants to express his gratitude to Lappeenranta University of Technology for allowing to use the facilities of the university in his research at Professor emeritus status. The authors thank profusely the estate Holm Moelle, Denmark for support on so many levels – all hail to Dorthe and Niels Kjaer.