An alkali pug bake-leach process was studied for the decomposition of monazite and extraction of rare earth elements (REEs), uranium, and thorium. Under the conditions studied, 4h bake time and 210°C with an alkali to concentrate ratio (A/C) of 4:1 allowed for relatively high REEs extraction while maintaining relatively low thorium and uranium extraction, which may allow for at least partial separation of REEs from thorium and uranium. At this level, and with an average particle size of 81µm, more than 90% of REEs were extracted, uranium extraction dropped to ∼38% by partly reporting to the water leach solution, and thorium extraction was consistently low at ∼25%. Baking temperature (180–250°C) was found to have a pronounced effect on the extraction of REEs, uranium, and thorium. The maximum extraction of REEs was achieved during the 210°C, 3h bake time test. Thorium extraction was greater than 90% in the 2h bake time at 210°C, then dropped drastically to 50% or less for the 3 and 4h bake times. Uranium extraction preferred the 250°C level, but remained fairly low for the vast majority of the levels tested. The effect of particle size (48–137μm) was studied at 210°C and was found to have some effect on the extraction in the 1 and 2h tests. However, in the 3 and 4h tests, extractions were of similar magnitude for all three particle sizes studied. Thorium extraction peaked during the 2h test and then dropped in 3 and 4h tests. Alkali consumption was calculated and found to increase with increasing temperature and decreasing particle size (0.01–0.22g alkali/g concentrate). Alkali consumption was increased with increasing extraction. The drop off in extraction is attributed to the dehydration of the hydroxides produced and the formation of insoluble phosphate phases.In the ongoing development of new technologies, the world is becoming more dependent on rare earth elements (REEs) to provide solutions for an ever-increasing population. The development of high strength magnets, lasers, superconductors, and fiber optics will ensure an increasing demand for REEs. Currently, world REE production is dominated by China, which supplies over 90% of the demand. The United States, Australia, and India also produce small amounts of REEs. Monazite sands were at one time the primary source of REEs until the development of bastnäsite resources, and remain a valuable resource for REEs. Monazite may once again become the primary source of REEs, as it is distributed throughout many countries around the world, most notably in heavy sand deposits. These heavy sand deposits also hold other minerals of economic importance, namely ilmenite, zircon, and rutile. Because the sand deposits are of so much importance, monazite extraction methods may need to be developed and improved upon quickly. Monazite is made up of approximately 20–30% Ce, 10–40% La, and appreciable amounts of heavy REEs, with REE oxides all-together accounting for approximately 70% of monazite’s weight ( Because monazite is a phosphate mineral, it is difficult to decompose by direct acid leaching. A suitable ligand is required to form complexes with the rare earth metals present. Sulfuric acid treatment, where the sulfate ion acts as the ligand forming REE sulfates, and phosphoric acid have been commonly utilized in the past. However, sulfuric acid process does not yield pure products and is no longer in use ( Monazite is most often decomposed by the sodium hydroxide process where finely ground (−325   Several studies have been carried out investigating high temperature pretreatment of monazite with calcium carbonate, sodium carbonate, and sodium bicarbonate ( A high temperature process was studied by Mechanical milling methods using calcium oxide and calcium chloride were studied by In a study by This paper reports on a non-autoclave method for the decomposition of monazite and recovery of REEs. Alkali pugging process is a liquid-solid reaction that is adaptable to a rotary furnace, which would allow for continuous operation as opposed to the batch process in use today. In this study, the effects of experimental parameters including alkali to concentrate weight ratio, baking time, baking temperature, and particle size were investigated on REE extraction. The REE hydroxide cake that was formed was then leached in nitric acid solution for further processing. In this study, sodium hydroxide was used as the lixiviant to solubilize and remove the phosphate. The chemical reactions for the alkali decomposition of monazite at elevated temperatures (reactions The REE phosphates are converted to REE hydroxides and trisodium phosphate. The trisodium phosphate is washed from the bake residue along with the excess sodium hydroxide, while the REE hydroxides are insoluble and left in the leach residue. The water leach residue is then dissolved in either hydrochloric acid or nitric acid for further processing, depending on the subsequent operations or process goals. Reactions The monazite concentrate, provided by Korea Institute of Geoscience and Mineral Resources (KIGAM), was first split using a Jones riffler and then milled using ceramic balls to generate finer particle size. After 90 To determine the moisture content of the monazite concentrate, approximately 40 Certified ACS sodium hydroxide pellets (99% purity) and 69% pure nitric acid, both provided by Fischer Scientific, were used in the experiments. Deionized (DI) water was used in water leaching experiments. The baking experiments were performed in a muffle furnace (Lindberg Blue Model BF 51732) with mild steel crucibles (top diameter For shorter baking times and lower baking temperatures, the contents of the crucible remained wet after baking, allowing them to be easily transferred for the water leaching step. This was generally the case when bake time was kept at 2 Water leaching was performed using 1000 The acid leaching of the water leach residue was performed in 500 After vacuum filtration, the volume of the acid leach solution was measured using a graduated cylinder, and pH and oxidation-reduction potential (ORP) measurements were taken using an Ag/AgCl electrode. Oxidation-reduction potential values were converted to E The effects of alkali to concentrate (A/C) weight ratio on the extraction of REEs, uranium, and thorium was studied at four A/C weight ratios: 1:1, 2:1, 3:1 and 4:1. For these experiments, the temperature was fixed at 210 Alkali consumption, shown in Laser particle size analysis (Microtrac S3000) was carried out on the water leach residue and acid leach residue for the A/C ratios of 1:1, 3:1, and 4:1. The results can be found below in To determine the effect of baking temperature on the extraction of REEs, three different temperatures (180 Increasing temperature from 180 Behaving similar to the REEs, uranium extraction was found to increase with increasing temperature, with the highest extraction at the 3 The effect of temperature and baking time on alkali consumption is shown in The 4 SEM images of the feed, alkali baked residue, water leach residue, and acid leach residue are shown in The effect of particle size on REEs, uranium, and thorium extraction was examined. A/C weight ratio was kept constant as 3:1, and temperature was kept constant at 210 For the 1 Uranium extraction is shown in The effect of particle size and time on alkali consumption is shown in Several of the water leach solutions from experiments in Sections Using the thorium diagram along with the E At pH of ∼12 and E The water leach solution for the upper temperature limit of 250 Deciding which process to use is dependent on a number of factors. First and foremost is the purity of the feed. High grade monazite sand will favor the sulfuric acid method. Sulfation of monazite sand is highly effective at moderate temperatures. In another study by the authors, it was found that by baking monazite at a 2:1 ratio of sulfuric acid to monazite feed at 180 The alkali approach is a proven method for the recovery of the phosphate fraction contained in the monazite feed. However, this method is dependent on the recovery and sale of the phosphate to cover the cost of the alkali. The alkali approach also allows for the resulting REE hydroxides to be dissolved in either nitric or hydrochloric acid in preparation for solvent extraction. Currently, this method is used in industry to recover REEs and phosphate, as it has been proven effective. The drawbacks to this method are that fine grinding is necessary for a good recovery because the decomposition products form an impervious reaction layer. The reaction takes place at 140 Alkali pug baking of monazite concentrate in sodium hydroxide was investigated. Experimental parameters included alkali to concentrate ratio, baking time, temperature, and particle size. By increasing the alkali to concentrate ratio from 1:1 to 4:1, the REEs extraction increased from ∼45% to ∼88%. Uranium reached a maximum recovery of ∼75% in the 2:1 A/C ratio test, which then declined to ∼38% in the 4:1 A/C ratio test. Analysis of water leach solutions revealed that not much U and Th were leached into water, which is consistent with the observations from E Out of the four parameters investigated in this study, baking time and baking temperature were found to have the most significant effects on uranium, thorium, and REEs extraction. By increasing the baking time from 1 For the two higher temperatures investigated (210 The smaller particle sizes showed an increased extraction of REEs for both the 1 This research was sponsored by