In the present study, we report graphene quantum dots (GQDs), an enzyme mimetic of horse radish peroxidase (HRP), for unprecedented detection of free cholesterol. Synthesized directly from graphite using simple and quick one step wet chemical method, these GQDs in the presence of H2O2 exhibit highly efficient catalytic activity toward the oxidation of peroxidase substrate 3,3,5,5-tetramethylbenzidine (TMB) to produce a blue colored product. The proposed detection system based on GQDs allows wide range (0.02–0.6mM) of cholesterol sensing with a detection limit as low as 0.006mM. Further, higher V
                     
                        max
                      (7.3×10−6
                     Ms−1) along with lower K
                     
                        m
                      (0.01mM) attest enhanced peroxidase like catalytic activity and better binding affinity of cholesterol oxidase (ChOx) to cholesterol resulting in good biosensor stability and resistance to environmental interferences. The proposed method without the use of sophisticated instruments perceives the cholesterol using naked eye with blue color compound formation. The potential of the method to be applied on field is shown by the proposed cholesterol measuring color wheel, where the shades of color are related to actual levels of cholesterol in the sample.Cholesterol is an important part of animal cell membranes, since it is required to maintain membrane structural integrity and fluidity over the range of physiological temperatures. Apart from its importance within cells, it also acts as a precursor for the biosynthesis of steroid hormones, bile acids, and vitamin D. Because of its essentiality for animals, all cells can synthesize cholesterol from simpler molecules. Desirable amount of cholesterol in healthy human serum is 200 Horse radish peroxidase (HRP) are a large class of enzyme that catalyzes the oxidation-reduction reaction in analytical diagnosis In order to overcome such challenges, recent research endeavors are committed to search or synthesize efficient HRP enzyme mimetic with strong catalytic activity and stability in both physical and physiological conditions for numerous biological applications. By way of examples for naturally occurring enzyme mimetics, hemin Graphene quantum dots (GQDs), a class of carbon nanomaterials containing one or few layered sheets with lateral dimension less than 100 To best of our knowledge the detection of free cholesterol in a complex system like human serum using peroxidase (HRP) like of GQDs has not been reported till date. Hence, for the first time we report GQDs synthesized by a simple wet chemical method, as horse radish peroxidase (HRP) enzyme mimetic for enhanced free cholesterol detection. The synthesis route using simple instruments is not only cost effective due to the usage of graphite powder as the starting material, but is also fast and facile owing to one step synthesis of large scale graphene quantum dots (GQDs) with highly functionalized periphery carboxylic groups attached through acidic treatment of graphite powder. These as synthesized GQDs show efficient catalytic activity toward the oxidation of peroxidase substrate 3,3,5,5-tetramethylbenzidine (TMB) in the presence of H Graphite powder (purity ≥99.99%), cholesterol oxidase and cholesterol were purchased from Sigma Aldrich, New Delhi, India. H The UV–vis absorption spectra were collected using a Perkin Elmer UV–Visible-Lambda 25 spectrophotometer. The morphological changes were observed employing using FEI Tecnai-G2 transmission electron microscopy (TEM). Fourier transform infrared (FT-IR) spectroscopy (Perkin Elmer Spectrum 65, FT-IR spectrometer) was employed for the identification of molecular structures. Atomic force microscope (AFM) images were acquired using Bruker Mutliomode 8 AFM. The specimen was prepared by casting the aqueous suspensions of GQDs on freshly cleaved mica surface and dried in air. GQDs were synthesized using graphite powder via wet chemical oxidation method. In brief, 0.20 Stock solution of TMB (5 Cholesterol detection was done as follows: (a) 5 The optical properties of the source material i.e. graphite powder and synthesized GQDs were characterized using UV–vis absorption spectroscopy [(Fig. S1, Electronic Supplementary Information (ESI)]. The absorption peak of graphite powder as shown in Fig. S1(a) occurred at The Fourier-transform infrared (FT-IR) spectra were used to identify the surface groups of the GQDs (Fig. S2, ESI). The presence of various several peaks confirmed the presence of various oxygen-containing groups, including carbonyl, carboxyl, hydroxyl, and epoxy groups that were introduced to the edges and onto the basal plane. In the FT-IR spectra of GQDs (Fig. S2), the peak at 1640 Transmission electron microscopy (TEM) and HRTEM ( Further, AFM study was also carried out to confirm the mostly average thickness of GQDs and was ascertained to be ∼2 The GQDs catalyzed peroxidase substrate (TMB) in the presence of H A small absorbance change of the system [ GQDs were expected to be more stable than natural enzymes. It is known that the catalytic activity of HRP is largely inhibited after incubation at lower or higher pH and high temperatures (above 60 GQDs in contrast to HRP efficiently showed its catalytic activity even the concentration of H To investigate the kinetic mechanism of the peroxidase-like activity of the GQDs, apparent steady-state kinetic parameters for the peroxidase-like color changing reaction were determined by changing the concentrations of TMB and H The comparison of the kinetic parameters of different nanomaterials and HRP using TMB as a substrate is shown in It was inferred from Apart from these advantages, GQDs can detect H H To confirm the capability of the described cholesterol sensor, the absorbance of the system with different concentrations of cholesterol was analyzed. By considering the time efficiency and the signal to noise level, we chose 5 From the absorbance graph, we concluded that the as the concentration rose, the absorbance also increased indicating the increased rate of interaction between the reactants [ The proposed GQDs based system also shows high selectivity for cholesterol detection. The selectivity described here was tested with cholesterol and other interference like uric acid, urea, ascorbic acid, cysteine and glucose which is generally present in blood, each at 1 The concentration was 0.6 Using this method, we detected cholesterol in complex systems (blood samples).  Furthermore, because the color change from colorless to blue when the system meets cholesterol is observable by the naked eyes, it is easy to realize visual detection without any instrumentation or complicated design. Although the actual quantification of the cholesterol level requires the absorption study as discussed above, but the most acknowledgeable point here is that the shades of blue color obtained are in direct relation with the amount of cholesterol in the analyte. Hence in By the way of conclusion, we report cost effective, quick, facile single-step large scale synthesis of graphene quantum dots (GQDs) as an enzyme mimetic of horse radish peroxidases (HRP), for unprecedented application of free cholesterol detection. The results attest our system to be simple, inexpensive, highly sensitive and selective enough to work successfully when used to detect free cholesterol in a complex system of human serum. Typically, these GQDs show cholesterol detection limit as low as 0.006 NRN acknowledges the financial assistance from Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at The following are the supplementary data to this article: