A novel method to incorporate silica on a polyethersulfone (PES) membrane surface was successfully developed. An in situ hydrolysis/condensation of tetraethylorthosilicate (TEOS) precursor was carried out, followed by coating as thin film composite (TFC) via interfacial polymerization. PES membranes casted from 20 and 23wt.% PES in N-methyl-pyrrolidone (NMP) solutions were prepared by phase inversion. The membrane surfaces were modified by TEOS silica precursors, dispersed in ethanol at different concentrations (0.1, 0.3 and 0.5w/v%) and catalyzed by a NH3/H2O mixture. Immobilization of the prepared silica on the membrane surface was obtained by adding a polyamide coating. The modified membranes were characterized by FTIR, SEM, AFM, and TGA, which confirmed the successful embedding of silica particles by the in situ sol gel process. In the best conditions, rejection of MgSO4 and Na2SO4 reached 85 and 94.2% respectively. This was consolidated by a proportionally high water flux of 62.2 and 64.15Lm−2
                     h−1 for MgSO4 and Na2SO4 salt solutions, respectively, at an operational pressure of 5bar.Pressure-driven membrane processes have become gradually more and more popular. Nanofiltration has attracted attention since it was first developed in the early 1980’s. It combines the advantage of a high flux and low operational pressure with 0.5–2 Silica (SiO Jullok et al. prepared silica nanoparticles based on the Stöber method, and incorporated these silica nanoparticles in polyphenylsulfone (PPSU). They obtained a higher flux for mixtures of acetic acid/H Lin et al. have prepared a PES membrane doped with monodispersed Stöber silica; by this modification, the membrane hydrophilicity increased with the SiO Mesoporous silica incorporated in polymer blends has been considered in several studies as well, for example the use of mesoporous silica SBA-15 in membrane synthesis The layer-by-layer process was used to introduce silica in the membrane morphology by Escobar et al., who performed a layer-by-layer deposition of silica nanoparticles layers atop Microfiltration (MF) and Ultrafiltration (UF) membranes. A good water permeability was observed with a good potential for an improved Nanofiltration (NF) performance The concept of thin film nanocomposites is a new and recent method of introducing silica in the membrane morphology. Silica nanoparticles Silica was successfully prepared by sol gel polycondensation of tetraethylorthosilicate (TEOS) in a mixture of H In this paper, a new method to incorporate silica on the membrane surface is presented. An The silica modified membranes were applied for water treatment: MgSO Polyethersulfone (PES), type Radel 3100 p, with an average molecular weight of 35000 Tetraethylorthosilicate (TEOS, 98%) as a silica precursor was purchased from Acros Organics (Geel, Belgium); Ethanol (99.9% purity) was obtained from VWR Chemicals (France). Ammonia 30% was purchased from Carlo Erba (France). In order to perform the synthesis of a thin film top layer, piperazine (99%) and trimesoyl chloride 98% (supplied by Acros Organics, Belgium) were used as monomers for the interfacial polymerization process. Hexane (+99%) was purchased from Chem-Lab NV (Belgium), and used as solvent for TMC. MgSO Synthesis of PES membranes was performed by non-solvent induced phase separation (NIPS). PES was dissolved in two different concentrations in N-methyl-pyrrolidone (NMP), The immobilization of the as-prepared silica was carried out by polyamide coating; a thin film composite (TFC) structure was obtained by adding a thin layer on top of the membrane structure by means of interfacial polymerization. An aqueous solution of 2% piperazine (PIP) was poured on the membrane surface during 2 The chemical composition of the membrane was investigated by Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy (FTIR), using an ATR-FTIR spectrometer Perkin-Elmer Spectrum 100 (Germany), provided with platinum diamond for single reflection. The spectra range was fixed at 400–4000 Contact angles of water on different membranes were carried out using kruss device (DSA 10-MK2, Germany). A small flat sheet of each membrane was dried at 55 The morphology of the membranes was studied by SEM analysis using a Philips Scanning Electron Microscope XL30 FEG (the Netherlands). The samples were cut in liquid nitrogen, and dried in a vacuum oven. After that the samples were sputter-coated with gold nanoparticles. The surface topography was investigated by atomic force microscopy (AFM) analysis, applied at ambient conditions using an Agilent Technologies 5500 Scanning Probe Microscope (PicoPlus-Atomic Force Microscopy Series 5500, USA) with scan area of 1 The thermal properties of neat and modified membrane were tested by thermogravimetric analysis (TGA) using a TGA–DSC thermobalance (STA 409 PC Luxx, Netzsch, Germany), applied in the temperature range of 30–800 The wettability of the membranes or equilibrium water content (EWC) was measured according to eq.(1). Each membrane was dried at 50 The water flux was tested using a batch type, dead-end, Sterlitech HP 4750 stirred cell. The effective membrane area was 14.6 The pure water permeability The membrane porosity (ε) was determined by the wet-dry weighing method In order to investigate the membrane potential for the removal of salts in aqueous solution, MgSO The rejection of heavy metals was calculated based on the conductivity of the permeate In order to confirm the presence of new compounds in PES membranes, an FTIR-ATR analysis was carried out for all synthetic membranes. All membranes showed the characteristic peaks of a PES membrane Compared with the pristine PES membranes (PES-A Apart from these new peaks, two more bands appeared in the spectra of PES-A The successful incorporation of silica on the membrane surface after TFC coating is confirmed by the energy-dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDX) shown in The EDX analysis is presented in The cross-section of unmodified and modified membranes using a TEOS silica precursor are shown in The experimental parameters were inspired by the Stöber method, leading to form monodispersed spherical silica particles compared to the acid-catalyzed system, which usually results Accurate measurement of the film thicknesses is not feasible for the most silica-polyamide films because of the macro-scale (centimeter-length-scale) heterogeneity The thermal properties of unmodified and modified PES membranes were investigated by thermogravimetric analysis, shown in The degradation of membranes composition followed three steps. The first stage ranges from 30 to 380 The first decomposition temperature T The char yield of modified membranes at 800 The contact angle reveals the affinity of water molecules to wet the solid surface; a lower contact angle represents a greater wettability and a higher hydrophilicity. A more hydrophylic surface is expected to have a higher resistance against fouling The contact angle gradually decreased with increasing concentration of TEOS silica precursor for the two polymer concentrations (PES 20 and 23 It was found that the topography of the polyamide membranes is characterized by the formation of a ridge-and-valley structure, resulting from the cross-linking between the two monomers The 3-D surface roughness of the modified membranes is shown in The increasing amount of silica in the polyamide membrane increased the surface roughness It is important to note that at first the The correlation between the hydrophilicity and the surface roughness can be highlighted: the lower the contact angle, the larger the surface roughness The pure water permeability (PWP) of different membranes is shown in The silica loading could lead to a pore constriction and plugging, causing a larger water transfer resistance, and a decline of the permeability. The same concept was reported in the literature unless a high concentration of nanoparticles is used All of silica-polyamide films were made in the same conditions as: monomer concentrations (PIP 2% and TMC 0.1%), time of polymerization (1mn), and room temperature, except that, in situ prepared silica (at low concentrations) was previously deposed in the top layer for the silica-polyamide membranes. the same for the thickness of silica layer, which could not be evaluated since it was entrapped in surface pore, therefore, the flux is governed mainly by the hindrance effect applied in preferential flow paths, while the thickness of the ultra-thin layer seem to be steady according to the low TEOS concentrations (0.1,0.3 and 0.5%). Otherwise, the water content and porosity of modified membranes increased with the concentration of TEOS, where more hydrophilic silica particles were formed. This enhanced the water content and porosity. Thus, the PWP is inversely related to the water content and porosity ( Other researchers used photografting, and obtained a reduction of pore size and an increase in membrane porosity after surface modification. Garcia et al. In order to test the membrane rejection performance, feed salt solutions of MgSO The rejection of MgSO The MgSO As can be seen in the EDX mapping image shown in The rejection of Na The salt rejection of nanofiltration membranes is directed by the combination of Donnan, steric and concentration polarization effects In general, the silica material has a very low IEP (pH 2.0) As the membrane is negatively charged, the Donnan exclusion mechanism suggests that the counter-ions (Mg The solute flux of salts as well as the water flux seems to be promising, compared to previous studies ( A novel The silica loading increased with increasing TEOS concentration, and the hydrophilicity of modified membranes improved with increasing silica loading, reaching to 38.40 Higher rejections of salts were observed in the case of the modification of PES 23 Since the membrane performances can be tuned by the TEOS-silica precursor concentration, this method of