In this work, the first use of electrospun nanofibrous materials as highly responsive fluorescence quenching-based optical silver sensors is reported. Poly(methyl methacrylate) and ethyl cellulose were used as polymeric support materials. Silver sensing materials were fabricated by electrospinning technique. A fiber-optic bundle was used for measurements. Sensors were based on the change in the fluorescence signal intensity of methoxy azomethine ionophore (M-AZM). The preliminary results of Stern–Volmer analysis show that the sensitivities of electrospun nanofibrous membranes to detect silver ions are 10–100-fold higher than those of the thin film based sensors. The extraordinary sensitivities can be attributed to the high surface area of the nanofibrous membrane structures. It was found that the stability of the sensing agent in the employed matrix materials was excellent and when stored in the ambient air of the laboratory there was no significant drift in signal intensity after 5 months. Our stability tests are still in progress.The silver content of environmental samples has increased day by day with increasing use of silver compounds in industry, medicine and technology. Silver is widely used in medicine because of its wide-spectrum antimicrobial activity which arises from the chemical properties of its ionized form, Ag (I). Different forms of silver are found in functional products for water purification, biofilms, dental treatment water, bandages, pool water, integrated into fabric for medicinal benefits and numerous others. Today exposure to silver compounds is widespread owing to the use of soluble silver formulations In optical chemical sensing approach, sensitivity varies inversely proportional with dimensions. Miniaturization attempts and nanotechnology applications allowed improvements in functionality, sensitivity and response time of the sensors. Consequently, nano-scale structures should be combined with optical chemical sensing approaches In this study, matrix materials of poly(methyl methacrylate) (PMMA) and ethyl cellulose (EC) were used to produce nanofibrous and continuous “silver sensing thin films”. Optical nano-fibrous membrane chemical sensors were fabricated by electrospinning technique. The methoxy azomethine ionophore, 1,2-bis(4-methoxybenzylidene)hydrazine (M-AZM) was chosen as the fluorescent indicator due to the strong absorbance, high quantum yield, large Stoke's shift and excellent photostability. The electrospun nano-fibers were characterized using scanning electron microscopy (SEM) and their average diameters were evaluated. To our knowledge this is the first attempt using the fluoroionophore-doped electrospun nano-fibrous materials for silver sensing at femtomolar level. The silver sensitive fluorescent ionophore, 1,2-bis(4-methoxybenzylidene)hydrazine was synthesized in our laboratories according to the well known literature method and characterized with Mp: 165 The polymers ethyl cellulose and poly(methyl methacrylate) were purchased from Acros and Aldrich companies, respectively. The plasticizer, dioctyl phthalate (DOP) was supplied from Aldrich. The ionic liquid, 1-ethyl-3-methylimidazolium tetrafluoroborate (EMIMBF The homogeneous PMMA or EC solutions were placed in a 10 Steady state fluorescence emission and excitation spectra were measured using Varian Cary Eclipse Spectrofluorometer with a xenon flash lamp as the light source. Metal response measurements were carried out with fiber optic probe (2 In this study, electrospinning was used as a novel fast and simple method to fabricate optical chemical sensing materials. The electrospinning conditions were optimized in order to form bead-free PMMA or EC based continuous nanofibers by varying the concentrations of plasticizer, PMMA or EC and RTILs in the composites. The concentration of RTIL was varied from 5% up to 50% w/w, with respect to the content of PMMA or EC. It was found that the presence of the RTILs in the PMMA solutions facilitates the electrospinning of bead-free nanofibers from the lower polymer concentrations. This behavior can be attributed to the high conductivity and proper viscosity of the RTIL doped precursor polymer solutions. The resulting composites were prepared by mixing 240 When the high voltage applied, the charged polymer solution overcame the surface tension of the liquid and a stream of polymer jet was produced. The solvent evaporated and very fine fibers were completely coated on the clean aluminum foil. The surface morphology of the nanofibers was studied using SEM instrument (6060-JEOL JSM). The nanofibers either on aluminum substrate or in bulk form were fixed in the flow cell and the excitation or emission spectra were recorded. The thin films were prepared employing the same composition for electrospun nanofibers. The resulting composites were spread onto a 125 At the initial stage of the electrospinning process, the polymer solution is hanged by its surface tension at the end of the syringe needle (see In this report, we have demonstrated that it is possible to electrospin the EC and PMMA based composite fibers in presence of non-volatile room temperature ionic liquid (RTIL); EMIMBF Additionally, the IL also enhances photostability of the M-AZM ionophore in the polymer matrix acting as a sink for acidic or basic species from the ambient air of the laboratory Absorption spectra of the compound were acquired in dilute solutions of THF, toluene–ethanol, DCM, DMF, and in polymers of EC and PMMA in thin film form. In the survey of matrix effects, it was apparent that the immobilization of the ionophore in polymers produced dramatic spectral changes (see The ionophore exhibited very efficient absorbance and high molar extinction coefficients around 330 The similar solvent and solid phase studies were repeated for fluorescence measurements. The emission peaks of M-AZM were acquired in optically dilute solutions around 390 The pH dependence of the dye doped thin films and electrospun nanofibers was investigated in the pH range of 2.0–7.0 in silver free and silver containing solutions. Buffer solutions were prepared with 0.01 Distribution of the chemical species in the working conditions was theoretically checked with chemical equilibrium software programme (Visual MINTEQ) at pH 4.5 in presence of acetate ions (CH When doped into modified PMMA and EC matrices along with the anionic additive, potassium tetrakis-(4-chlorophenyl) borate, the M-AZM dye becomes a Ag (I) selective probe. In this system, silver ions are selectively extracted into the nanofibers (or thin films) by the anionic additive meanwhile potassium ions diffuse from the membrane into the aqueous phase due to the mechanism of ion-exchange. Physical aspect of the response mechanism of M-AZM dye can be explained by the following ion-exchange pathway shown in Eq.  The intensity decrease is known to be due to the quenching of the M-AZM by Ag (I) ions. In many instances the fluorophore can be quenched both by collisions and by complex formation. The intensity based data ( In a solution, the quantitative measure of fluorescence quenching is described by the Stern–Volmer constant, In Eq. The data obtained by gathering Stern–Volmer analysis for each electrospun and continuous thin film are shown in The M-AZM doped electrospun nanofibers demonstrated a linear response over range of 1.0 The detection limit was determined as the concentration of Ag (I) that would give a signal three times the standard deviation of the blank signal which corresponded to 0.46 and 0.34 For 10 successive determinations of 0.46 and 0.36 Measuring Ag (I) concentrations in drinking water, groundwater or environmental samples with indicators may be difficult due to the competitive binding of Ca Electrospinning resembles a promising, simple, and an effective method for fabricating polymer based chemosensors. With respect to continuous thin films, electrospun films, provided enhanced sensitivity and reactivity in emission based silver sensing. Further efforts will focus on exploring new sensing materials and polymer compositions, controlling the nano-scale size of the electrospun membranes, and optimizing the sensitivities for the detection of a variety of analytes. Funding for this research was provided by