Gypsum supersaturated process water has been shown to have an adverse effect on the flotation of sphalerite minerals. This study probes the mechanism of such effect by determining the uptake of copper and xanthate on sphalerite in gypsum supersaturated water using zeta potential distribution measurement, atomic absorption spectroscopy, UV–visible spectroscopy and quartz crystal microbalance with dissipation. Our results indicate that the supersaturation of water by gypsum retards the adsorption of copper and hence the sequence xanthate adsorption on sphalerite. The retardation of copper and xanthate adsorption on sphalerite is also observed by the addition of 800ppm calcium. The adsorption of calcium is identified to compete with copper species for the reactive surface sites of the sphalerite, resulting in the reduction in copper and xanthate uptake and hence flotation recovery of sphalerite.In mineral flotation plants it is a common practice to treat the tailings water and recycle back to the flotation process. The recycle of water can change the quality of process water by accumulating and building up the dissolved ions and flotation chemical additives. Certain ions and residual flotation chemicals in the recycle water could have either positive or negative effect on the flotation process depending on the nature and concentrations of chemicals and mineral systems. Zinc ions from the recycle water, for instance, are beneficial for selective separation of galena from sphalerite in the lead–zinc flotation separation. On the other hand, some ions and chemical additives accumulated in the recycle water can be detrimental to flotation separation ( It has been speculated that gypsum might precipitate out from the gypsum saturated or supersaturated solution and coat on the mineral surface, which might be responsible for the reduced flotation recovery and selectivity. However, our previous study on silica and sphalerite minerals in the gypsum supersaturated solution system suggested the absence of gypsum coating on mineral surfaces. Despite the presence of needle-shaped gypsum precipitates in the gypsum supersaturated solution system, the gypsum precipitates neither grew on sphalerite mineral surface nor heterocoagulated with sphalerite minerals under the typical flotation chemistry conditions. Our current study focuses on the impact of gypsum supersaturated recycle water on the interactions between flotation reagents and sphalerite mineral. It is well known that sphalerite mineral responses poorly to thiol collectors due to the relative low stability of zinc-xanthate complexes as compared to other heavy metal xanthates ( In order to avoid the depression action of gypsum supersaturation in recycle water on sphalerite flotation, it is important to understand the impact of gypsum supersaturation in recycle water on the interactions between flotation reagents (copper and xanthate) and sphalerite mineral. In this study, we used a gypsum supersaturated solution to represent the gypsum supersaturated recycle water. The calcium and sulphate concentrations of the gypsum supersaturated solution are similar to those in the recycle water. The purpose of this study is to learn a better understanding of the impact of gypsum supersaturation in recycle water on sphalerite flotation. The sphalerite mineral sample was obtained from Ward’s Natural Science Establishment. The sample was crushed to −4.75 Suspensions of sphalerite and gypsum were prepared for zeta potential distribution measurements. A sphalerite stock suspension was prepared by grinding 1 Laboratory gypsum supersaturated solution was prepared using calcium sulphate hemihydrate, following procedures described elsewhere. The calcium and sulphate concentrations of the gypsum supersaturated solution were determined to be 845 Zeta potential distributions were measured using a SEPHY/CAD Zetaphorometer III equipped with a rectangular quartz electrophoresis cell. Suspensions of sphalerite were analyzed in a supporting electrolyte solution (10 For each zeta potential distribution measurement, the stock suspension was diluted to an optimal concentration of 0.01–0.1% so that between 20 and 150 particles could be tracked by imaging analysis software during a mobility measurement. At least five mobility measurements in each direction were recorded for each sample. All zeta potential distributions were measured at pH 6.5 and room temperature. AAS (VARIAN 220FS) and UV–Vis-NIR Spectrophotometer (Shimadzu UV-3600) were used to determine the solution concentration of copper and SIPX, respectively. The sphalerite mineral samples (1 The adsorption kinetics of copper and SIPX on sphalerite was studied using a QCM-D (Q-Sense AB, Göteborg, Sweden). The QCM-D measures the adsorption mass (Δ Meanwhile, the energy dissipation ( ZnS coated quartz crystal sensor (Q-sense) was used to represent the sphalerite mineral. XRD analysis showed similar diffraction patterns of the ZnS coated quartz sensor to that of natural sphalerite. Details about the ZnS coated quartz sensor can be found elsewhere ( A custom built microflotation cell was used in this study. The detailed information on the cell can be found elsewhere ( The zeta potential distributions of sphalerite in 10 In KCl solution. For comparison, the effect of copper and SIPX on the zeta potential distributions of sphalerite mineral in 10 In 800 ppm calcium solution. The zeta potential distributions of sphalerite in 800 In gypsum supersaturated solution. The effect of copper and SIPX on the zeta potential distributions of sphalerite in the gypsum supersaturated solutions are similar to that in the 800 The AAS results further confirm that the uptake of copper on sphalerite is retarded in 800 It has also been speculated that calcium ions and gypsum precipitates would react with xanthate and form insoluble product. To exclude this possibility, the xanthate (SIPX) was also added to different concentrations of calcium solutions, gypsum supersaturated solution, and gypsum supersaturated solution with 1 QCM-D is a powerful technique to study the adsorption kinetics of molecular at solid–liquid interfaces. It enables real-time measurements of molecular adsorption and/or interactions on various solid surfaces in solution. In general, the changes in resonance frequency of the quartz crystal are related to the changes in mass on the crystal surface. An increase in mass induces a proportional decrease in resonance frequency. In this study the effect of calcium on the adsorption kinetics of copper and xanthate on a ZnS coated quartz sensor surface is monitored using QCM-D.  The adsorption kinetic of SIPX on the copper activated ZnS sensor surface is shown in It has to be noted that even though trivial change in frequency is observed in the activation of ZnS with copper in the presence of 800 The results presented above have clearly indicated that the presence of calcium or gypsum supersaturated solution significantly impacted the copper activation of sphalerite and hence the sequence adsorption of xanthate. The reduced copper and xanthate uptake could impact the flotation behavior of sphalerite. As shown in Though many activation mechanisms and kinetics have been proposed for the sphalerite activation at neutral and alkaline pHs, the activation of sphalerite process with copper generally involves the following two steps: (1) the surface adsorption of copper species from solution onto minerals surface; (2) activation the surface for collector attachment. Calcium has been reported to be able to adsorb at the ZnS–H Supersaturated of gypsum in recycle water has a significant impact on the interactions between flotation reagents (Cu and SIPX) and sphalerite. The uptake of copper and SIPX is retarded in 800 Authors would like to thank the financial support from