Recently, a short composite column consisting of dual steel tubes (external and internal stainless and carbon steel tubes, respectively) with concrete filled in the entire tubular section has been introduced. This column, called as the concrete-filled dual steel tubular (CFDST) column, proved that a lower cost as well as weight can be achieved compared with the concrete-filled stainless steel tubular column (CFSST). This is mainly attributed to the increased strength of the concrete fill, inside the internal tube, that is surrounded by both the external and internal steel tubes. Based on the fact that the columns are generally slender in practice, this paper investigates numerically, by means of finite element (FE) analyses, the axial compressive behaviour of the CFDST slender columns, which has been rarely investigated in literature. The external tubes are currently made of the lean duplex stainless steel material recently attracted the structural community because of its relatively lower cost. The FE models carefully consider the compressive and tensile nonlinear behaviour of the concrete. The FE models are verified for their different material models. This is followed by examining the accurate overall buckling behaviour of the slender columns. This has been made through FE comparisons with tested columns of different cross-section types existing in literature. The fundamental behaviour of the CFDST slender columns under the effect of the slenderness ratio, the concrete confinement effect and the concrete compressive strength is then investigated. The study additionally addresses the differences in behaviour between the intermediate length and long CFDST columns. Moreover, the comparison between the design strengths calculated by Eurocode 4 from one side and the FE and experimental ultimate strengths from the other side shows generally that Eurocode 4 gives unsafe predictions. Accordingly, a modified European design model is suggested at the end to predict accurately the resistance of the CFDST slender columns under axial compression.Diameter of the external stainless steel tube Diameter of the internal carbon steel tube Thickness of the external tube Thickness of the internal tube The column strength The slenderness ratio of the column Effective buckling length of the column Moment of inertia of the CFDST section Cross-sectional area of the CFDST column The limiting slenderness ratio differentiating between intermediate length and long CFDST columns Yield stress of the carbon steel tube The unconfined concrete cylindrical compressive strength The short column strength The limiting slenderness ratio delineating between short and intermediate length CFDST columns Physical length of the column 0.2% proof stress of the stainless steel material Young's modulus of the stainless steel tube Ultimate strength of the carbon steel tube Young's modulus of the carbon steel tube Stress of the concrete material Strain of the concrete material The ratio of the second stress invariant on the tensile meridian to that on the compressive meridian, which is used in defining the "Concrete Damaged Plasticity" model in the FE models using Abaqus The confined concrete strength of the concrete core Lateral confining pressure provided by the carbon steel tube on the concrete core Confinement amplification factor for the concrete strength taken as 4.1 Lateral confining pressure provided by the stainless steel tube on the sandwiched concrete A factor reflecting the confinement effect on the concrete ductility Confined concrete strength The tensile strength of concrete A strength reduction factor for the concrete strength Strain at the confined concrete strength ( Mid-height deflection of the columns Column strength predicted by the experimental testing Column strength predicted by the current FE modelling Elastic critical normal force for the flexural buckling mode Plastic resistance to compression Cross-sectional area of the sandwiched concrete Cross-sectional area of the concrete core Moment of inertia of the outer stainless steel tube Moment of inertia of the inner carbon steel tube Moment of inertia of the sandwiched concrete Moment of inertia of the concrete core Young's modulus of the sandwiched concrete Young's modulus of the concrete core Average strain calculated as the end shortening divided by the column length Longitudinal strain value measured at the external surfaces of the tubes at the mid-height sections Non-dimensional slenderness, given as the square root of the characteristic value of the plastic resistance to compression to the elastic critical normal force for the flexural buckling mode Factor used to account for the effect of strain hardening on the strength of stainless steel tube Factor used to account for the effect of strain hardening on the strength of carbon steel tube Cross-section strength suggested by Hassanein, et al. The hoop strains of the stainless steel tube in the compression zone The longitudinal strains of the stainless steel tube in the compression zone The unconfined concrete strength of the sandwiched concrete The unconfined concrete strength of the concrete core Axial load applied to the column Reduction factor for the relevant buckling curve Global initial sway imperfection An imperfection factor corresponding to the appropriate flexural buckling curve The limiting non-dimensional slenderness of the member to avoid flexural buckling (i.e. Design strength according to EC4 Currently modified EC4 strength Original ( Yield stress of the external carbon steel tube of the columns tested by Romero, et al. A composite column is a type of column that incorporates two different materials or elements – in this paper the structural steel and concrete. The concrete encased structural steel shapes and the concrete-filled steel sections are the main cross-sectional types of the composite columns Both circular and rectangular (including square) CFST columns are the most shapes used in modern construction. Examples of circular- and square-shaped CFST columns Different buckling behaviours of CFST columns have comprehensively been studied for decades, with more emphasis has been given to the local. The first mechanical behaviour of short CFST columns was described first by Richard, et al. On the other hand, for the large cross-sections of the CFST columns in high-rise buildings The typical strength The paper checks the ratio The paper explores the confinement effect in the CFDST slender columns. The differences in the confinement effect between the intermediate length and long columns are clearly addressed. The paper examines the effect of the slenderness ratio The paper extends to examine the effect of the cylindrical strength of the concrete fill The FE strength Finally, the paper suggests a modified design model that provides accurate results compared to the available European model. While the CFDST short columns have been suggested and investigated recently in different references Currently, ABAQUS/Standard software package  An initial geometrical imperfection, in the parametric study of this paper, having a value of The “Tie” constraint The stress-strain curves utilised in the current investigation are shown in On the other hand, steel grade S235 was used for internal carbon steel tubes. This is because it was found that no benefit is gained by upgrading the steel grade of the internal tubes in the double-skin CFST short columns The stress-strain The novelty of the current columns that results in getting reduced cross-sections is the high increase in the confined concrete core strength. This is because this concrete core (inside carbon steel tube) is confined not only by the carbon steel tube, but it is also confined by the external stainless steel tube To properly define the concrete in slender columns, the tensile strength of concrete should be included in the FE models. This was taken as Overall buckling behaviour of the slender columns was successfully modelled by the author in a previous investigation The fundamental behaviour of the CFDST slender columns is investigated in this section by using external and internal steel tubes made of lean duplex stainless steel and carbon steel, respectively. By using the slenderness limit proposed by Bradford, et al. Two groups of models (G1 and G2), as given in The Non-dimensional slenderness In the following subsections, the columns’ load-average strain ( The column slenderness ratio (  From The results of the current FE modelling showed that the current pin-ended CFDST The longitudinal strains were recorded from the FE results at the mid-height section of both tubes in the compression and tension sides ( By varying the concrete material properties of columns C4 and C10, additional columns were generated, in this sub-section, to explore the effect of the compressive strength of the sandwiched concrete (  Up to date, there is no design model presented for estimating the axial strength of the CFDST slender columns. According to the results of Romero, et al. On the other hand, the reduction factor ( According to EC3  The accuracy of the original and modified EC4 The fundamental behaviour and strength of the circular concrete-filled dual steel tubular (CFDST) slender columns have been presented in this paper under axial compression. This column is composed of an external stainless steel tube and an internal carbon steel tube with concrete filling the whole tubular section. The relatively cheap lean duplex stainless steel was used to reduce the cost of the columns. Finite element (FE) models were developed and verified against the test results available in the published literature. Parametric studies on CFDST pinned-ended columns were performed. These studies indicated that the intermediate length CFDST columns fail by elastic-plastic buckling and long CFDST columns fail by elastic buckling, and the slenderness limit (