Introduction
                  In this study, we aimed to explore the expressions of α-smooth muscle actin, collagen type I, collagen type III, and osteocalcin in the periodontal ligament (PDL) under orthodontic loading, and to investigate the effect of myofibroblasts on collagen synthesis and osteocalcin production.
               
                  Methods
                  The teeth in the right maxillae of the rats were orthodontically loaded while the contralateral teeth remained unloaded as controls. The total 30 rats were divided into 5 groups, with each group corresponding to a treatment duration (0, 3, 5, 7, or 14 days, respectively). The expressions of α-smooth muscle actin, collagen type I, collagen type III, and osteocalcin in the tension area of the PDL over time were analyzed by immunochemistry staining. For the in-vitro study, the expressions of α-smooth muscle actin, collagen type I, collagen type III, and osteocalcin in the myofibroblasts and human osteoblast-like cells (MG63) coculture and PDL cells-MG63 coculture systems were examined by Western blot and real-time polymerase chain reaction.
               
                  Results
                  Enhanced expression of α-smooth muscle actin, collagen type I, collagen type III, and osteocalcin in the tension area of the PDL under orthodontic loading were observed in vivo, and increased expressions of α-smooth muscle actin, collagen type I, collagen type III, and osteocalcin in the myofibroblasts-MG63 coculture system were observed compared with the controls.
               
                  Conclusions
                  Expressions of α-smooth muscle actin, collagen type I, collagen type III, and osteocalcin are up-regulated in the PDL under orthodontic tensile loading. Myofibroblasts have a more positive effect on collagen synthesis and osteocalcin expression than do PDL cells.Orthodontic tooth movement is the result of biologic responses to interference in the physiologic equilibrium of the tooth-alveolus complex by an externally applied force, during which mechanical-load transduction into bone response is of particular concern. In our recent study, myofibroblasts were demonstrated to reside in the PDL under orthodontic loading and to have phenotypic features with the capacity to participate in orthodontic force transmission and periodontal tissue remodeling. Myofibroblasts are mechanically active and are characterized by enhanced cellular contractile force generation due to the expression of α-smooth muscle actin (α-SMA)-containing stress fibers, which are also the myofibroblast phenotypic markers. To date, little is known about the significance of myofibroblast differentiation during orthodontic tooth movement. Both PDL cells and osteoblasts reside in the PDL. Osteoblasts line the alveolar bone surfaces close to the PDL cells. However, α-SMA and osteocalcin would not act as phenotypic markers for cell types when the cells are under stimulation. It was reported that cells with a pericyte-myofibroblast phenotype have the potential to differentiate into functional osteoblasts Mechanical strain in combination with transforming growth factor (TGF)-β is recognized as a prerequisite for myofibroblast differentiation, with TGF-β1 as the most potent inducer. Human osteoblast-like cell MG63 is a well-characterized cell line exhibiting many osteoblastic traits characteristic of bone-forming cells and has frequently been used in vitro for determining cell differentiation and cell activity. Cellular fibronectin, synthesized by fibroblasts and osteoblasts, A total of 30 male Sprague Dawley rats (age, 8 weeks; weight, 200 ± 20 g) were divided into 5 groups. Animal interventions were approved by the institutional committee for animal care of Sichuan University, Chengdu, China. An animal model for orthodontic tooth movement was established as described in a previous study. The preparation of human PDL cells was performed according to the method previously described by Palmon et al. Myofibroblast-MG63 coculture and PDL cell-MG63 coculture models were established to compare the effect of myofibroblast (induced by TGF-β1 in vitro) on collagen and osteocalcin production with that of the PDL cells. First, human PDL cells were seeded in 6-well plates and incubated in DMEM and 10% FBS for 24 hours at 37°C under 5% carbons dioxide, at a density of 4 × 10 Immunochemistry staining was performed as described previously using monoclonal antibodies to α-SMA (1:50 dilution, CB4 0FL; Abcam, Cambridge, United Kingdom), monoclonal antibodies to Col-I (1:200; Abcam), polyclonal antibodies to Col-III (1:100; Abcam), and monoclonal antibodies to osteocalcin (1:100; Santa Cruz Biotechnology, Santa Cruz, Calif). Manually selected study areas were viewed with a microscope (E600; Nikon, Tokyo, Japan). The study areas were selected in the PDL distal to the cervical third of the roots of the maxillary first molars, at a constant distance from the root surfaces. These selected areas were definitely tension regions no matter what pattern of tooth movement (tilting or bodily) was created. The size of the study area and the integrated optical density of the positive stains were measured by Image-Pro Plus (5.0; Media Cybernetics, Bethesda, Md). Protein expressions were measured by the mean optical density (mean optical density = integrated optical density per unit of study area). Each sample was analyzed in triplicate. Immunofiuorescence staining was performed as described previously using monoclonal antibodies to α-SMA (1:100; Abcam), and 4′,6-diamidino-2-phenylindole (DAPI; 1:500; Invitrogen, Paisley, United Kingdom) was used to demonstrate nuclear localization. RT-PCR analysis was performed according to the manufacturer's instructions. Total RNA was extracted from the cocultured cells using Trizol (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, Calif). The RNA samples used in the analysis were high quality (with the A260/280 ratios from 1.92-1.99, and the RNA Integrity Number values from 7.14-9.65). cDNA was reverse transcribed from 2 μL of total cellular RNA using an RT-PCR kit (Takara, Tokyo, Japan). We subjected 5 μL of the cDNA mixture to PCR amplification. Oligonucleotide primers and TaqMan probes for α-SMA, Col-I, Col-III, and osteocalcin were designed from the GenBank data bases. The primer sets were 5′-AAGATGACCCAGATCATGTT-3′ (forward) and 5′-CACAATGTCCCCATCTATGA-3′ (reverse) for α-SMA, 5′-GTGCTAAGGGTGAAGCTGGT-3′ (forward) and 5′-CATCAGCACCAGGGTTTCCAG-3′ (reverse) for Col-I, 5′- CAGGGGCCCCAGGACTTAGAG-3′ (forward) and 5′-GGGCCAGGAGGACCAATAGGA-3′ (reverse) for Col-III, and 5′-GTGCAGCCTTTGTGTCCAAG-3′ (forward) and 5′-GTCAGCCAACTCGTCACAGT-3′ (reverse) for osteocalcin. Target genes were all normalized against glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase (GAPDH). For the Western blot analysis, total cellular protein was extracted in a lysis buffer and separated by 10% sodium dodecyl sulfate polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (SDS-PAGE) and then transferred onto a polyvinylidene fluoride membrane (Roche, Grenzach-Wyhlen, Germany). Membranes were blocked with 5% bovine serum albumin for 1 hour at room temperature and subsequently incubated overnight at 4°C with the primary antibodies of α-SMA, Col-I, Col-III, osteocalcin, and GAPDH (all from Abcam), respectively, as well as the horseradish peroxidase-conjugated secondary antibodies (1:5000 dilution; Millipore, Billerica, Mass). The immunoreactive bands were visualized by enhanced chemiluminescence (Santa Cruz Biotechnology) and analyzed by Quantity One 1-D software (Bio-Rad); all protein expression was normalized to GAPDH. Statistical analyses were performed by 1-way analysis of variance. Least significant difference test and Student-Newman-Keuls test were used for multiple comparisons between pairs. Statistical significance of the correlations was determined using the Pearson product-moment method; The effect of orthodontic loading on the expressions of α-SMA, Col-I, Col-III, and osteocalcin in the tension area of the PDL over time was semiquantitively analyzed by immunochemistry staining and image analysis ( Statistical analysis of the mean optical density values for the 4 types of proteins showed a highly correlated relationship of α-SMA with Col-I, Col-III, and osteocalcin expression. There were high correlations between the expression levels of α-SMA and Col-I (n = 13, r = 0.927, A relatively stable myofibroblastic phenotype was induced by TGF-β1 in vitro until 72 hours after its removal. Stimulation of PDL cells with 5 ng per milliliter of TGF-β1 or 4000 μstrains of tensile stress resulted in a phenotypic alteration characterized by increased expression of α-SMA ( There were increased expression levels of myofibroblastic phenotype, collagen, and osteocalcin in the myofibroblast-MG63 coculture compared with the controls. Expression levels of α-SMA, Col-I, Col-III, and osteocalcin in cocultured myofibroblast-MG63 or PDL cells-MG63 cells (control) up to 72 hours were assessed by RT-PCR ( Both myofibroblasts-MG63 cell coculture and PDL cell-MG63 cell coculture were positive for fibronectin visualized by immunochemistry staining ( Enhanced expression of α-SMA, Col-I, Col-III, and osteocalcin in the tension areas of the PDL indicated active remodeling of the periodontal tissues under orthodontic loading. The finding that α-SMA production was highly correlated with Col-I, Col-III, and osteocalcin expression in the tension areas of the PDL under orthodontic loading led to the speculation that myofibroblasts might have an effect on collagen and osteocalcin production. However, we could not determine in vivo the cellular origin of the α-SMA expression. We therefore conducted PDL cell cultures in vitro and observed definite differentiation of myofibroblasts induced by mechanical tensile stress application or TGF-β1 treatment alone. We tested this speculation by focusing on specific cell types using the myofibroblast-MG63 coculture system in vitro, which permits decoupling and direct examination of specific biochemical alterations that cannot be studied in vivo. In this study, enhanced osteocalcin and collagen production in myofibroblast-MG63 coculture compared with PDL cell-MG63 might be derived from both types of cells, through more promoted biosynthetic activity of a certain cell type or more synergistic interactions of both cell types. Whatever the interpretation is, it was apparent that myofibroblasts had a more favorable effect on matrix synthesis and osteocalcin expression than PDL cells did when cocultured with osteoblast-like cells. The differences in osteocalcin expression and matrix synthesis between the 2 coculture systems could be attributed to differences in cell-to-cell interactions. The more positively influenced synthetic ability of cells in the myofibroblast-MG63 coculture might result from more synergistic interactions of myofibroblasts and MG63 cells. Cell-to-cell communication can be divided at least into 2 essentially different styles: through diffusible signals and through cell-to-cell direct contact. Interestingly, positive staining for fibronectin was observed in cocultured myofibroblasts and MG63 cells; interconnected cell processes constituted multicellular networks involving the 2 types of cells. The evidence of direct contact between myofibroblasts and MG63 cells suggested that the direct contact might be 1 way in which myofibroblasts and MG63 cells interact. It has been well recognized that cell recognition and adhesion precede and control cell-to-cell communication. Osteocalcin, the most abundant noncollagenous protein in bone, is secreted selectively by mature osteoblasts. Similar results were found in other studies that a strong expression of osteocalcin was detectable at the tension side in the PDL during orthodontic tooth movement. Our results in vivo were the total effects of numbers of interacting factors derived from different types of cells and the extracellular matrix in the PDL. A limitation in this study is that the in-vitro experiments cannot reproduce the multitude of factors in vivo; thus, comparisons could not be drawn from the results from the 2 experimental systems. As 2 relatively independent findings, our results indicated that expressions of α-SMA, Col-I, Col-III, and osteocalcin were up-regulated in the PDL under orthodontic tensile loading, and that myofibroblasts had a more favorable effect on osteocalcin expression and matrix synthesis than PDL cells did. Interconnected cell processes of myofibroblasts and MG63 cells were observed, and the positive staining for fibronectin elicited a possible (though yet undefined) mechanism of communications between the 2 types of cells. Further investigations into the mechanism by which myofibroblasts influence matrix synthesis and osteogenic marker expression are warranted. Expressions of α-SMA, Col-I, Col-III, and osteocalcin are up-regulated in the PDL under orthodontic tensile loading. Compared with PDL cells, myofibroblasts have a more favorable effect on collagen synthesis and osteocalcin expression.