In this chapter, four patterns of reductive coupling reactions are described. The first reaction is the McMurry-type olefin synthesis by deoxygenative coupling of carbonyl compounds, which is described in Section 11.02.2. For this transformation, low-valent titanium reagents are generally used. Prominent advancements in the McMurry-type olefin synthesis over the past decade are also described. The second topic is the olefination of carbonyl compounds. Because this may be described elsewhere, only several important features are given in Section 11.02.3. The third topic is a pinacol-type coupling of aldehydes or ketones leading to 1,2-diols, which is described in Section 11.02.4. Low-valent titanium and samarium(ii) reagents have been usually employed for this transformation. Recently, however, low-valent group 5 and 6 metals have been employed for the coupling. Although the pinacol coupling reaction of carbonyl compounds proceeds with strong reducing agents such as magnesium, it is difficult to achieve high chemoselectivity and/or stereoselectivity using traditional methods. Enantioselective coupling reactions have been studied during the past decade. Synthesis of 1,2-diamines by reductive coupling of imines is described in Section 11.02.5.Main group metals such as sodium, magnesium, and aluminum have a strong reducing potential, and thus, can be utilized in the synthesis of 1,2-diols by reductive dimerization of aldehydes or ketones. Due to space limitations, vinylogous reactions of pinacol coupling and reductive coupling using nitriles are not described. Also, reductive coupling reactions between compounds having carbon–carbon multiple bonds and carbonyl compounds are not covered. Deoxygenative coupling reactions of carbonyl compounds with low-valent titanium are usually called McMurry coupling reactions. A number of excellent reviews have been published to date, including McMurry. For the McMurry coupling, McMurry first proposed a combination of TiCl Fürstner has discovered that a low-valent titanium generated by pretreatment of titanium powder with Me Many natural products and non-natural compounds of interesting structure are synthesized using the McMurry reaction as a key cyclization step. Several features are of particular interest: (i) Small, medium, and large ring skeletons are constructed using the McMurry coupling in good to excellent yields. Even strained double bonds can be constructed. (ii) The coupling is applicable to highly oxygenated natural products. Oxygen functionalities such as esters, carbonates, acetals, and silyl ethers remain unchanged under the McMurry coupling reaction conditions ( The McMurry coupling can be applied to intramolecular coupling of keto esters. One of the major advancements in the application of the McMurry coupling over the past decade is the synthesis of heterocycles, especially indoles by intramolecular coupling of keto amides. Low-valent titanium reagents prepared by reduction of TiCl The McMurry reagent can also be applied for the synthesis of polymers connected by olefinic double bonds ( It is difficult to obtain cross-coupling products of two different carbonyl compounds by an intermolecular version of the McMurry reaction. Examples that use excess amounts of one carbonyl component are few. First, when 1,1-dihaloalkanes are reduced with low-valent titanium derived from TiCl Second, titanium-based reagents are suitable for methylenation or alkylidenation of carbonyl groups of carboxylic acid derivatives such as esters and amides ( Third, chromium-based reagents prepared by reduction of 1,1-dihalo compounds with CrCl Coupling reactions of aldehydes or ketones to 1,2-diols proceed with low-valent metals such as magnesium, zinc, and aluminum. Low-valent titanium is effective for pinacol coupling reactions of carbonyl compounds. Low-valent titanium reagents are produced by reduction of titanium chlorides (TiCl In 1973, Mukaiyama Titanium( In several pinacol coupling reactions, the “titanium( Pinacol coupling reactions of aromatic aldehydes occur with a titanocene( Intramolecular McMurry olefination was realized by Fürstner Diastereoselectivity of the pinacol coupling reaction of aromatic aldehydes (or ketones) with a combination of TiCl Treatment of benzaldehyde with TiCl Pinacol coupling reactions of aromatic aldehydes with commercially available TiCl Diastereoselectivity of a catalytic pinacol coupling using TiCl The pinacol coupling reaction of aromatic aldehydes mediated by a titanocene( In the case of catalytic coupling reactions of aromatic aldehydes using a combination of Cp Aliphatic carbonyl compounds are less reactive than aromatic ones. To accelerate the pinacol coupling, addition of a Lewis base or proton source to the titanium reagents has been examined. However, there have been only a few methods of intermolecular dimerization having wide applicability. In addition, the diastereoselectivities of the reported methods are not high. For example, addition of Among them, a combination of a stoichiometric amount of TiI Aliphatic ketones reductively dimerize upon treatment with TiCl Although there are many reports on the utilization of McMurry pinacol coupling reactions with a low-valent titanium, only a few mechanistic details are known. It has been long believed that the highly dispersed Ti(0) particles are initially formed and that the carbonyl coupling proceeds heterogeneously on the particle surface via ketyl radical intermediates (radical mechanism). For pinacol coupling reactions with a catalytic amount of Cp Asymmetric pinacol coupling reactions with a stoichiometric amount of titanium salts have been observed using a combination of TiCl A catalytic version of the asymmetric pinacol coupling was first accomplished with chiral titanocene Treatment of alkanedials with the reagent for pinacol coupling causes intramolecular cyclization leading to 1,2-cycloalkanes. The diastereoselectivity depends on the ring size formed ( By choosing an appropriate titanium complex, a The first example of a titanium-based intramolecular pinacol coupling in a total synthesis is the construction of the D ring of gibberellic acid, as reported by Corey Because titanium-based reagents can bring the two carbonyl groups close to each other, vicinal diols of not only five- Mukaiyama, Shiina and co-workers used a reagent generated by LiAlH Vicinal diols of 10-membered ring enynes are also generated by a low-valent titanium derived from TiCl In 1983, Kagan reported the first pinacol coupling mediated by samarium( A samarium( Samarium( Samarium( A combination of cerium and iodine is also effective for pinacol coupling of aromatic and alicyclic carbonyl compounds. In order to design a catalytic version of the coupling, it is important to find an appropriate reductant for samarium( Mischmetall is a cheap alloy of the light lanthanides and is used in large amounts for industrial applications. Electrochemical properties of samarium( Addition of HMPA to SmI Addition of LiBr or LiCl to a solution of SmI Treatment of a mixture of 1-iodododecane and 2-octanone with SmI Some additives accelerate the pinacol coupling reactions. Addition of Me NiI Because of a strong one-electron reductant, the first step of the pinacol coupling with samarium( There are several possible pathways from the generated ketyl radical to pinacols, as shown in Several observations which provide mechanistic information have been reported recently (see Diastereomeric ratios of pinacol dimers obtained by coupling of benzaldehyde and acetophenone with samarium reagents are summarized in There are several important stereochemical features in the coupling reaction of benzaldehyde with samarium( The The effects of polyethylene glycols on the diastereoselectivity of samarium( Although addition of a Lewis acid such as Me Keto amides couple with samarium( The pinacol coupling reactions of keto amides with samarium( Aromatic carbonyl compounds whose benzene π-electrons coordinate to chromium(0) tricarbonyl also undergo pinacol coupling reactions with samarium( Pinacol coupling of 2-substituted ferrocene carboxaldehydes with samarium( Although yields and diastereoselectivities are moderate, a cross-pinacol coupling reaction between a 1,2-diketone and an aldehyde is accomplished with SmI Samarium( Diastereoselectivities in complex systems are determined by conformation of the transition states which are affected by chelation and steric effects of substituents and reaction conditions. For example, the stereochemistry of a hydroxyl group derived from a ketone is determined by coordination of hydroxyl and other functional groups, and depends on the presence or absence of HMPA ( Not only 5- and 6-membered rings, but also 4-, Sugars and inositols are synthesized by the samarium( Intramolecular pinacol coupling of 2,2′-biaryldicarbaldehyde with samarium( Intramolecular pinacol coupling of planar chiral mono-Cr(CO) A monoprotected pinacol can be obtained in 81% yield by intramolecular coupling of 2,2′-biaryldicarbaldehyde mono-dibenzyloxy acetal, using samarium( Vanadium( Homocoupling of ( The 10- to 20-membered ring diols have also been obtained by intramolecular cyclization with [V Homocoupling of aromatic and aliphatic aldehydes occurs with a catalytic amount of Cp Low-valent niobium and tantalum are also effective for homocoupling of aldehydes leading to 1,2-diols. Chromium( Asymmetric homocoupling of aromatic aldehydes is achieved in a high yield with high diastereo- ( In DMF, which dissolves CrCl The amount of CrCl Because vicinal diamines and 2-aminoalcohols are important components of natural products and medicinal agents, and used as ligands for metal-catalyzed reactions, especially in asymmetric synthesis, efficient methods for the compounds have been extensively investigated over the past decade. Metals such as zinc, Unsymmetrical 1,2-diarylethane diamines, the formal cross-coupling products of two different imines, are produced by intramolecular reactions of dibenzylidene sulfamides with a combination of zinc and Me Although TiCl The following combinations have also been reported of titanium-mediated reductive coupling of imines: TiCl Reductive coupling of aromatic aldimines leading to vicinal diamines proceeds with SmI Sm[N(SiMe Treatment of an In a manner similar to the SmI Optically active chiral vicinal diamines are produced by SmI Reductive coupling of benzalimines with a ytterbium metal occurs in a mixture of THF and HMPA at room temperature ( In 1987, Pedersen reported that reductive coupling of A combination of Cp In 1991, Inanaga achieved SmI Intermolecular reactions between Aldehyde-oxime Intramolecular coupling of substrates having both carbonyl and diphenyldiazenyl groups proceeds with SmI Inter- and intramolecular cross-coupling reactions of wide applicability are achieved by using a nitrone ( Unsymmetrical vicinal diamines are prepared by reductive cross-coupling between nitrones and Enantioselective synthesis of β-amino alcohols by SmI Low-valent niobium and tantalum react with imines to give the corresponding imine–niobium or –tantalum complexes. Some of these are isolated, and structures of the complexes are confirmed by X-ray analyses. These imine complexes react with aldehydes to give β-hydroxyamines in good to excellent yields ( Reductive coupling reactions such as the McMurry coupling reaction and pinacol coupling reaction are a powerful and straightforward method for combining two different (or identical) carbon skeletons. Because low-valent early transition metals have high reducing potential and the resulting metal ions have strong oxophilicity, namely, high Lewis-acidic nature, to bring two reactive carbonyl groups close to each other, they are employed as strong tools for intramolecular coupling. In contrast, an intermolecular pinacol coupling remains yet to be improved for the level of synthetic meaning. The present problems are as follows: (i) In contrast to the homocoupling reactions of aromatic carbonyl compounds, those of aliphatic compounds having wide applicability and high diastereoselectivity are not established. (ii) It is still difficult to obtain cross-coupling products selectively from two different carbonyl compounds in both aromatic and aliphatic cases. This is because most of the reactions are performed all at once, namely, the Barbier-type conditions rather than the Grignard-type conditions, possibly due to the instability of intermediates. (iii) It is difficult to obtain one enantiomer of In view of the historical perspective and future requirements, it is important to reduce the amount of reductants for the coupling reactions. In the future, molecular hydrogen or electricity should be used in lieu of zinc in stoichiometric amounts for the reductive coupling reactions. In addition, catalytic transformations should be developed that may include oxidation of the resulting reductive coupling products so as to adjust the oxidation state.