A nanocrystalline layer with an average grain size of 75 nm was formed on the top surface layer of 321 stainless steel (321SS) alloy via severe shot peening (SSP). Grazing incidence X-ray diffraction (GI-XRD) and transmission electron microscopy (TEM) were applied to characterize the grain size changes, phase compositions and microstructure evolution after vacuum annealing at temperatures ranging from 200 °C to 1000 °C. The results revealed that nanograins slowly grow to ≈411 nm as the temperature increases to 600 °C. Dislocation annihilation is shown to be responsible for the changes in grain size up to 600 °C. However, an abnormal grain growth is observed at annealing temperatures of 800 °C and 1000 °C in which grains grow to ≈1267 nm and ≈2012 nm, respectively. This abnormal grain growth is attributed to the synergistic effect of dislocation annihilation in grain boundaries and triple points, re-arrangement of dislocations, and formation of middle angle (13°–17°) grain boundaries. Transformation of stress induced martensite (α′) to austenite (γ) and microhardness evolution in the nanocrystalline top surface layer during annealing are also discussed.In recent decades, surface nanocrystallization (SNC) of austenitic stainless steels (ASSs) has been recognized as a unique way to achieve extraordinary surface properties, namely, surface reactivity As a matter of fact, nano-sized grains or nanocrystallites are inherently unstable due to excess energy stored in the grain boundaries which provide great potential driving force for grain growth The aim of present study is to expand our previous work The investigated material was 321 ASS, provided by STOOSS company (Switzerland) as 80 mm-diameter bars. The chemical composition of the material was determined by vacuum spark emission spectrometer and is given in TEM observations at the topmost surface of treated and annealed samples were carried out using a Tecnai G2 operating at 200 kV. TEM foils of the surface layer of treated and annealed samples were prepared by mechanically grinding of samples from the non-treated side to obtain thin foils with a thickness of ≈50 μm. Afterwards, the prepared foils were perforated by dimpling and finally ion-milled on the non-treated side until a thin section with a thickness between tens of nanometers to hundreds of nanometers was achieved. To determine the grain size, at least four dark-field TEM images were processed in microstructural image processing (MIP) software and after that the mean grain size was reported. The overall error associated with the grain size measurements is due to inaccuracies in delineating the grain boundaries as a result of contrast variations. Based on the D and ε values, dislocation density ( Microhardness measurements (≈10 μm below the top surface) were done by a Buehler microhardness tester at a load of 20 g and dwell time of 10 s. Microstructure characteristics of the as-received 321 ASS and the surface treated one were reported in detail elsewhere     In the first phase (≈200 °C), the imparted heat energy is reflected in the GBs dissociation by emission of dislocations as well as by dislocation annihilation. Rittner et al. In the second phase (≈400 °C), increase of input heat energy results in more GBs dissociation and dislocation annihilation, so that nanograins completely are dissociated to dense dislocation tangles with curved boundaries. Latter morphology significantly promotes the transfer of atoms to and from grains which are adjacent to the GBs A further increase in temperature results in more dislocation annihilation and their adsorption by GBs. Under these conditions, dislocation walls are formed inside the grains, as can be seen in In the fourth phase (≈800 and 1000 °C), ultrafine recrystallized grains with middle angle boundaries (misorientation angle between 13° and 17°) are formed in the whole microstructure. Due to the high rate of dislocation annihilation and their absorption by GBs, dislocation density severely drops at such high temperatures (  TEM and GI-XRD were applied to investigate the microstructural evolution of nanocrystalline surface layer of 321 ASS in the temperature range of 200–1000 °C. The main results are summarized as follows: At 200 °C: nanograined structure remains stable for 10 h of annealing. However, nanograin boundaries start to dissociate by emission of dislocations. At 400 °C: due to dislocation annihilation and growth of nanograins, large dislocation tangles and no nanograins are observed in the whole microstructure. In addition, V At 600 °C: density of dislocations is decreased so that the dislocation walls are formed inside the γ grains instead of dense dislocation tangles. V At 800 and 1000 °C: middle angle boundaries (between 13° and 17°) are formed and stable ultrafine grains are distributed in the whole microstructure. Due to enhanced dislocation annihilation and absorption of dislocations by grain boundaries and triple points, the density of dislocations severely decreased at 800 °C temperature. Complete α′ → γ phase transformation takes place at temperatures higher than 800 °C. In line with the considerable decrease in dislocation density from room temperature (≈1.10 × 10 The authors would like to appreciate the supports from the