In this paper, the thermoluminescence (TL) dosimetric characteristics of MgO doped natural amethyst samples (Mg-NA) are presented. The morphologies and chemical structures of the powder form samples were identified using XRD, FTIR, SEM, SEM mapping and EDX. Comparison of the TL intensities showed that 10wt% Mg-NA was nearly 150 times more sensitive than undoped amethyst and the main dosimetric properties proved that 10wt% Mg-NA may be a promising phosphor for clinical and radiotherapy purposes.Natural materials have great attention in the dosimetric application since most of them have excellent luminescence properties. Amethyst quartz is one of the most famous natural materials and extensive researches have been done regarding its thermoluminescence (TL) properties for dosimetric applications. Depending on the ore deposition type, natural amethyst quartz contains various type of minerals which affect the TL properties ( Recently, TL properties of seven Brazilian natural quartzes, named the blue, the green, the red, the pink, the black, the sulfurous and the milky quartz, have been investigated by Over the last decade, researches have been focused on metal oxide doping process to improve and investigate the TL properties of quartz and natural amethyst. Natural amethyst samples have been doped some activators such as copper, cobalt, lithium, aluminum to investigate color center and luminescence properties ( Natural amethyst quartz samples as a crystal form were collected from Dursunbey, Balıkesir, Turkey. The MgO was doped into the natural amethyst sample by high temperature solid state method. The natural amethyst samples were ground using Retsch PM 100 planetary ball mill and sieved with 45 Phase compositions and crystallinity of the samples were analyzed by X-ray powder diffraction and the patterns were recorded using Rigaku Miniflex 600 with Cu Kα (40 All TL readouts have been performed with a Riso TL/OSL reader DA20 model. The irradiation unit assembled in the system is a In the all experiments except for the reusability text, at least three fresh samples (multiple aliquots) were used to prevent the mistake on the sensitivity depending on inhomogeneities. The powder XRD pattern of undoped (U-NA) and 10 The infrared spectra of undoped and 10 SEM image are presented in According to SEM images ( The natural amethyst quartz samples have specific numbers of TL peaks in the range of 100 Our preliminary investigation showed that the peak temperature lower than 150 In this study, the TL glow curves of the natural amethyst samples doped with different concentrations (0.01%, 1%, 5%, 10% and 12.5%) of MgO were also obtained and the maximum peak heights of the main dosimetric peak (at around 210 Undoped and 10% wt MgO doped natural amethyst samples were irradiated with 10 In the present study, The TL sensitivity of the 10 Literature survey shows that TL sensitivity of quartz can be changed after the high dose level irradiation followed by annealing procedure. The pre-dose radiation application enhances the TL sensitivity, considering in dosimetric application ( The 10 The pre-dose application enhanced 19 times of the TL sensitivity due to the probability of photon emission per thermally released charge, showing that the number of activated luminescence centers participating in the TL emission was increased ( One of the most important factors for dosimetric materials is reusability property. The TL sensitivity of phosphors may be changed and adversely affected after repeatedly usage, since the electrons might be trapped and accumulated into deep trap after each treatment causing the non-constant TL sensitivity over the usage time ( The samples in the first group were irradiated with 5 The samples in the second group were sensitized by pre-dose procedure. These sensitized samples were exposed by 5 Dose response of phosphors should be known to determine the linearity range which is very important for dosimetric applications and ideal phosphors having linear curve for all dose range are preferred. However, lots of dosimetric materials show different non-linear effects depending on a chemical composition of host material, dopants type and dopant concentration. In the literature, TL glow curves of natural quartz samples show three different kind of dose response, linearity (up to about 100 In order to examine the dose response property of the 10 It is generally expected that the count of trapped electrons in a host matrix should not be changed depending on storage condition and duration time. If it changes, this situation is called as fading. TL signal should be stable at ambient room temperature in a storage time to supply the compatibility between the light emitted resultant and the dose exposed ( The fifteen 10 To examine the variation of the TL intensity of 210 This paper describes the dosimetric properties of the MgO doped natural amethyst quartz sample collected from Dursunbey, Balikesir (Turkey). The characterization studies showed that the dopant concentration and procedure did not cause any change into the host structure. The TL studies of undoped natural amethyst and MgO doped natural amethyst samples indicated similar glow curve structures. The 10 This project has been supported by