This contribution aims at understanding how magmatism, hydrothermal alteration, and deformation may have interacted to localize a detachment (a low-angle normal fault) in a basaltic volcano. Piton des Neiges, an inactive volcano of La Réunion Island, has been deeply cut by erosion, allowing its inner structure to be investigated. The deepest unit observed in the edifice is a kilometer-scale plutonic complex, the top of which is intruded by multiple sills. This zone of repeated sill intrusions has been interpreted as a detachment because it displays evidence of hydrothermal alteration in the greenschist facies linked to a brittle-ductile shear deformation. Deformation begins with cataclasis and is followed by mylonitization and chlorite crystallization, then by hydrofracturing and pumpellyite crystallization. Subsequent and post-deformation calcite crystallization occurs in voids such as fractures and vacuoles. Aluminium substitutions in chlorite suggest that the syn-deformation hydrothermal alteration did not exceed 250°C and peaked in the deformation zone. Comparison of bulk-rock major element analyses of fresh, altered and deformed rocks shows that the zone of sill intrusion and deformation localized increased concentrations of P and K otherwise depleted in the footwall and hangingwall rocks, suggesting that the detachment acted as a trap for fluids.
                  In contradiction with proposed models of volcano spreading, it is apparent that the portion of Piton des Neiges accessible to observation did not deform by creep of a large hydrothermal system or a plutonic complex below its solidus. Instead, the interface between the already cooled plutonic complex and the host rock acted as a brittle failure zone and was repeatedly intruded by magma injections. This localized heat source promoted hydrothermal alteration and low temperature creep in and around the discontinuity. The same process of magmatism-related weakening might occur on active volcanoes; it may, for instance, explain the slow post-eruptive deformation of the eastern flank of Piton de La Fournaise (the active volcano of La Réunion) observed since the April 2007 eruption.Volcano slope stability has gained much attention since the discovery of extensive landslides deposits offshore of the ocean volcanoes of the Canary, Cape Verde and Hawaiian islands ( Proposed explanations to the deformation of basaltic volcanoes may be classified into two categories. The first category of deformation processes is related to magmatic activity. In this category, it was initially proposed that the SE flanks of Mauna Loa and Kilauea were spreading as a result of the push force of dyke intrusions into rift zones ( The objective of this article is to explore the relative contributions of magmatic activity and hydrothermal alteration in the deformation of a basaltic volcano, by direct observation of its altered and deformed magmatic products. The selected target is Piton des Neiges, the inactive volcano of La Réunion Island. Piton des Neiges has undergone an internal deformation, dominated by extension, from its shield building stage (i.e. emersion and rapid growth) to its degenerative final stage ( Piton des Neiges’ activity is classically divided into four phases ( The morphology of Piton des Neiges is characterized by three major depressions, the cirques of Cilaos, Mafate and Salazie. These depressions have been successively interpreted as scars of massive destabilizations ( The deformed and altered gabbroic footwall is separated from the hangingwall by a 50-m-thick sill zone (Figs. The hangingwall of the detachment is an undated unit of breccia (Breccia I in The joint analysis of fault-slip data and intrusion orientations at regional scale revealed that Piton des Neiges’ brittle tectonics was and is still dominated by a SSW-NNE extension ( By prolonging the slopes of the oldest parts of the edifice, the depth of this detachment has been estimated to range between 1.25 and 3.5 Standard polished thin sections (30 Precipitation of secondary minerals is not restricted to deformation microstructures and is observed in all rocks from Piton des Neiges’ Phase I. Chlorite also occurs in association with talc, serpentine and oxides on the rims of olivine crystals in olivine basalts and dunites. Zeolites, and later calcite, are also found filling magmatic vacuoles in the intrusions. The composition of chlorites was analyzed in four samples ( High-resolution analyses of 11 major element concentrations in minerals were performed on thin sections using a CAMECA SX100 electron probe micro analyser (EPMA) at Paris VI University. The EPMA was tuned at 15 Paleotemperatures were calculated from chlorite compositions using the Cathelineau and Nieva empirical geothermometer based on the Al Averaged chlorite compositions and temperature estimates are reported in Major element concentration analyses were performed on 99 bulk rock samples to compare the compositions of unaltered rocks from Piton des Neiges and their hydrothermally altered and deformed analogues. Analyses were made in two laboratories, at the SARM-CRPG of Nancy with a Thermo Fischer ICap 6500 ICP-OES, and at La Réunion University with a Panalytical AXIOS XRF. In both cases, rock samples were grinded and melted into glass beads. The spectrometers were calibrated using a set of international basic rock standards (NCS standards DC71301, DC72301, DC72302, DC71304, DC73303; CRPG-CNRS standard BE-N and USGS standards BCR-2 and BIR-1). The total error on analyses was then checked against the BHVO-2 USGS basalt standard and found to lie within the uncertainty of the standard. The total uncertainty on concentration measurements is therefore better than 2% on highly concentrated oxides (>5 Major element analyses of Piton des Neiges rocks are provided in Microscopic observation allows us to reconstruct the relative chronology of deformation and hydrothermal alteration in the detachment. The oldest deformation microstructure is cataclasis in the gabbro as well as in the detachment. This cataclasis is then overprinted by the This succession of deformation and mineralization processes suggests that the detachment at the top of the pluton initiated as a brittle deformation zone. Cataclasis likely increased the permeability of gabbro and basalt, and favored fluid infiltration and chlorite-producing reactions. This replacement of primary strong primary minerals by weak chlorite provides an explanation to the evolution of brittle deformation into ductile simple shear. In turns, ductile deformation may have induced a negative feedback on fluid infiltration, as it likely resulted in the disconnection of pores in the detachment. The end of ductile deformation appears to have coincided with an elevated fluid pressure, possibly caused by the permeability loss. The elevated fluid pressure resulted in the reactivation of C’ planes as opening veins and the formation of hydraulic fractures both filled with pumpellyite. Opened veins and voids were then sealed with calcite precipitation. According to the above observations, chlorite crystallization appears to be synchronous with deformation. Hence, the chlorite geothermometer may provide an estimate of the temperature of deformation. The four analyzed samples yield temperatures in the range 150–250 An interesting result is the significant Si enrichment of chlorites from the two footwall samples compared to chlorites from the two samples collected in the sill zone, which implies lower temperatures in the footwall (∼150 The ∼75 We compared the major element composition of deformed and hydrothermally altered rocks with that of their unaltered protoliths within, below and above the detachment. Because of the variable nature of magmatic products, we had to determine the likeliest protoliths matching the different kinds of deformed and altered rocks. The most representative protoliths were chosen as those having (1) the same magmatic minerals as the altered rocks, (2) similar concentrations of low-mobility elements likes Al, Ti, Fe, and (3) the lowest possible LOI values. We then compared altered/deformed rocks and their average protolith with mass balance calculation using the isocon method ( Averaged major element compositions of intact and deformed/altered rocks, and corresponding mass balance calculations, are provided in These comparisons suggest that the hydrothermal alteration of rocks resulted in a volatile gain at the regional scale. The patterns of concentration changes in basalts from the footwall and the hanging wall suggests that the two sides of the detachment experienced similar alterations. Phosphorus and to a lesser extent K, Si, Al, and Ca seem to have been leached from the country rocks, but redistributed at the 10–100 The chronology of microstructures indicates that the deformation at the top of the plutonic complex initiated as a brittle failure, and evolved as a localized ductile shear toward the north in the detachment. Ductile deformation occurred in low greenschist facies at a maximum temperature of ∼250 We also showed that hydrothermal alteration resulted in chemical changes. This hydrothermal alteration occurred at the regional scale, but the detachment appears to have focused fluid input. Sodium seems to have been the most mobile element, as it was leached from the gabbros and the detachment and not re-deposited nearby. Increased concentrations in P, K, Si, Al, and Ca in deformed rocks and their corresponding depletion in the footwall and/or hangingwall suggest that these species migrated from the country rocks to the detachment. Because P and K are mobile elements, they would be depleted if the fluid solutions had escaped the detachment. Therefore, the P and K enrichment, and the relatively low mobility of other elements like Si and Ca, suggest that the detachment was not a zone of massive fluid circulation as crustal detachments (e.g. The observed paragenetic sequence of hydrothermal alteration indicates that the fluids responsible for the regional metamorphism, as well as the fluids in presence during cataclasis and ductile deformation, were essentially aqueous solutions. These aqueous solutions may have been either supplied by a downward infiltration of meteoric fluids or by the degassing of cooling magma reservoirs. Because degassing basaltic magmas usually emit S and CO Compared to data in the gabbro, the ≥70 An important implication of our study is that the observed or drilled portions of Piton des Neiges’ plutonic complex did not undergo any significant deformation from the solidus to 250 Instead, the interface between the plutonic complex and the host rocks localized deformation in the lower greenschist facies below 250 The internal deformation at Piton des Neiges may be used to draw inferences on the behavior of active volcanoes like Piton de la Fournaise, the other volcano of La Réunion Island. Recent studies evidenced up to 1.4 Our study of an exposed plutonic complex at Piton des Neiges volcano shows that the top of this pluton acted as a detachment, by localizing repeated injections of sills, hydrothermal alteration, and shear deformation toward the sea in the discontinuity. Deformation in this detachment initiated as a cataclasis, evolved into a ductile flow, and ended up as vein opening due to fluid overpressure. The temperature of hydrothermal alteration and deformation in the detachment (∼250 Our results suggest that the localization of ductile deformation was a low-temperature process, possibly resulting from the transformation of magmatic minerals into weak phyllosilicates such as chlorite. We propose that these localized reactions of hydrothermal alteration were activated and sustained by the heat of cooling sills repeatedly injected at the top of the plutonic complex. Episodic pressurization of heated fluids around the sills may have also participated to the localization of deformation. This study implies that the upper ∼4000 This research was funded by grants from