A significant amount of metal inventory can reside in a leach pad due to unfavorable metallurgical and hydraulic conditions. Continued leaching using surface irrigation will likely be unsuccessful at recovery in any reasonable time frame. In this work, we investigate how subsurface leaching (SSL), using wells to facilitate the delivery of barren solution, could potentially increase recovery and drawdown the inventory in a shorter period of time. An initial characterization campaign of the leach pad using drilling and assaying along with geophysical methods showed that inventory was high because the ore remained dry from compaction. Other areas were also shown to have preferential flow paths as a means to drain solution out of the leach pad. Assaying results taken from sonic coring and auger cuttings, and extrapolated across the leach pad, revealed a potential of 37×106
                     kg of acid soluble copper.
                  Our investigation covers the first 1000days of SSL, with 110 PVC wells distributed across five main areas. During this time, we estimate production at 2.26×106
                     kg of copper based on the amount of solution introduced through the wells multiplied by the average copper grade from a number of sources, including monitoring wells and newly formed side slope seeps. Some areas performed better than others, especially where assays revealed that acid soluble copper was greater than 50% of total copper. The SSL program is expected to continue for at least another 1000days, and we expect an additional 7×106 to 15×106
                     kg will be withdrawn from inventory.Low hydraulic conductivity within heap leach pads can cause difficulty for extraction of metal through a surface leach operation. For a homogeneous ore with uniform hydraulic properties, a significant amount of time is needed for the lixiviant to percolate through the pile. Studies have shown, however, that the lixiviant typically does not percolate uniformly through the ore (e.g., Increasing the metal recovery from low permeability heaps has been the focus of many published studies; these studies span the design, operational, and post-operational periods. At the design phase, investigations have been motivated to understand parameters that are easily controllable, such as heap height ( To date, much of the study and application of SSL methods has been within gold leach operations (e.g., A pilot study of SSL in a copper heap showed success for delivering lixiviant to underleached material in the deeper reaches of the pile. Over the operational period of the mine, surface geophysics had been conducted to map the locations of these underleached areas ( The SSL project was conducted at the Carlota Mine, located within the Globe-Miami mining district of central Arizona. The mine is an open-pit comprising two nearby deposits that include the Carlota and Cactus; these deposits straddle the Pinto Creek with the Cactus on the east side and Carlota on the west side. The two deposits are hosted in a landslide breccia of Pinal schist ( Copper mineralization mainly occurs in the breccia, the overlying dacite, and along the clay-rich southern bounding fault. Chrysocolla is persistent across the site, with malachite found locally abundant in the eastern portion of the Cactus deposit and sporadically along the fault. Chalcocite is the only significant copper sulfide mineral present and is restricted to the lower parts of the deposits. Chalcocite is commonly found rimming or partially to totally replacing pyrite, which is often found as veinlets or individual grains within brecciated clasts. Secondary sulfide mineralization is generally quite uniform and consistent, often grading about 0.70% copper. The oxide ore is more erratic in distribution and grade. A single valley fill heap, divided into two phases, is created from a run-of-mine process through blasting, loading, and truck haulage of ore, followed by SX/EW processing to produce cathode copper. The ore has high levels of fines in the ore matrix and relatively low compressive strength in-situ. The friable character of the ore has resulted in reduced percolation rates. Midway through the heap creation, however, operations switched from truck dumping to retreat conveyed stacking. Another change to improve percolation through the upper material was pre-wetting the ore prior to stacking, which increases the hydraulic conductivity of the material. Slow percolation was observed early in the heap's creation and much effort was expended in characterizing the degree of nonuniformity in lixiviant coverage. The main characterization methods included 1) drilling accompanied by assaying for metal content and moisture and 2) electrical resistivity imaging. Drilling was mostly conducted by sonic to allow for intact cores. Electrical resistivity was conducted along the surface using the Schlumberger array ( The initial electrical resistivity was collected in 2009 and spanned large areas of the Phase 1 leach pad. The purpose of the survey was to help pinpoint areas within the heap that were causing ponding. Profile A-A′ shows a wide range of resistivity, spanning nearly four orders of magnitude. The beginning of the profile exhibits lower resistivity values, especially at the surface where fresh ore under leach is highly saturated and of high acid strength. The center of the profile shows relative homogeneity. The end of the profile is much more resistive as new ore was just placed and was not under leach. Profile B-B′ reveals ore that is significantly drier, with what appears to be preferential flow channels located at 150 Sonic drilling occurred sporadically before SSL and did not coincide directly with the timing of electrical resistivity acquisition. The second pair of sonic data occurred in the area of the resistivity profile that was more heterogeneous in nature. LPD-37 shows the same indirect correlation between moisture and total copper and a very wet zone at a depth of 1177 After the SSL program started, periodic electrical resistivity profiles were taken before drilling commenced for each new well field. Profile C-C′ ( Most recently, electrical resistivity Profile D-D′ ( From the assay data, a resource model was created for the heap to calculate the remaining copper after surface irrigation had ceased. The Phase 1 heap was distributed into four groups ( To obtain the total copper, heap density and copper grade were needed from the drilling data. Sonic drilling provided information with regards to density. From 155 core samples, the average density was approximately 1.46 Lastly, the copper grades were multiplied by the heap mass to get an estimate of the total copper and acid soluble copper mass in the pad's inventory. The data reveal a significant reserve of metal, with 37,000,000 Using the results from the pilot test ( The first SSL area after the pilot test was located at the north end of the leach pad, near Group α. Four pods of five to six wells per pod were installed within the 4.3 Metallurgically, this area proved to be difficult to leach due to the higher percentage of sulfide copper, likely in the form similar to covellite, and low acid soluble oxide copper in the ore ( During the course of the injection period, several low-flow seeps formed on the side slopes below the injection area. The flow rates were on the order of 1–2 Due to the difficult drainage conditions in the heap, local perched aquifers have developed. The perched aquifers are mainly above the interface between the more permeable retreat stacked ore and the compacted truck dumped ore. These aquifers appear compartmentalized in that they are at different elevations and discontinuous across the pad. For example, At first glance, the increase in water levels appears to approach dangerous levels. Well MT6 rose 10 A financial model, based on the mass of copper liberated, is needed to justify use of the SSL method. In For the continuation of the SSL program across the entire heap, flow meters at each well head are used to accurately account for the raffinate input. The raffinate generally had 3 The concentration of copper and other metallurgical parameters were tracked by extracting solution samples from monitoring wells in the immediate vicinity of the injection wells and from low flow seeps on the side slopes. The data from many of these sources were used to establish an average grade representative of SSL copper liberation. The results of total copper production are shown in Finally, The resource recovery model presented for the SSL program is difficult to verify by other means. Hypothetically, verification could come from using the flow rates and copper grades in the reclaim pond to calculate the total copper produced, similar to the work in An SSL program is underway at the Carlota mine. The program has been in operation for about 1000 Now, under full operations, some methodologies have been amended to allow for different metallurgical and hydraulic properties than were encountered in the pilot scale test areas. Sulfide-rich ore, for example, has slower kinetics for copper liberation and the injection timing was altered so that the pregnant leach solution was not overly dilute. Characterization and monitoring of the SSL program has been key to making these adjustments as well as developing realistic inventory extraction models. Over time, the models have become more conservative to account for a range of unknown conditions encountered in the leach pad. The SSL program is expected to run at least another 1000  Supplementary data to this article can be found online at