The chemical and morphological changes induced on the surface of millerite by mechanical activation have been studied by means of X-ray diffraction, electron microprobe, scanning electron microscopy and infrared spectra. Leaching tests in water, dilute nitric and hydrochloric acids have been carried out. The mechanical activation of millerite grains due to their disintegration is accompanied by an increase in the number of particles and generation of fresh previously unexposed surface. The agglomeration of grains and a partial oxidation of sulphide to sulphate ions were observed. The increase in leachability of the activated millerite may well be due to the combination of mechanically induced structural defects and chemical modification of millerite surface.In many cases, the rate of a leaching reaction can be controlled by the diffusion of reagent from solution through a layer of solid product covering the reacting solid, or the diffusion of ions from reacting solid through a layer of product to the solid–liquid interface at which reaction occurs. The diffusion coefficient will be sensitive to the degree of lattice perfection. Electrochemical study of anodic dissolution of millerite shows the presence of the sulphur-rich sulphide layer passivating the surface of the nickel sulphide within the potential range from 0 to 0.8 V Mechanical activation involving intensive grinding produces changes in the composition and microstructure of solids. Several investigators have reported the positive influence of mechanical activation on the rate of metal sulphide leaching The aim of this work was to study the chemical and morphological changes of mechanically activated millerite by means of chemical analysis, X-ray diffraction, electron microprobe, scanning electron microscopy, infrared spectra, as well as leaching tests in water and in dilute nitric and hydrochloric acids. The investigations were carried out with synthetic millerite. It was obtained by melting stoichiometric amounts of nickel powder and elemental sulphur in evacuated silica tubes at 900 °C. The product was homogenized at 360 °C for 72 h, then ground, and the fraction with grains of size<60 μm was sieved out and used in mechanical activation. The mechanical activation of samples was accomplished in planetary mill activator URF-AGO-2 (USSR) under the following conditions: loading of mill with 110 balls of 5-mm diameter; material of balls is a hard steel, rotation speed of the planet carrier: 11.7 rpm; centrifugal acceleration of thimble axes: 1000 ms The surface structure was studied by scanning electron microscope of type JEOL JSM 580 LV coupled with the link JSJS 300 X-ray microanalysis system from Oxford Instrument. The phase composition of nonactivated and activated millerite samples was examined by X-ray analysis (Philips X'PERT with CuK Nickel in millerite and in the solution during the leaching was determined by atomic absorption method. Sulphur content as sulphide and sulphate ions in nonactivated and activated samples was established gravimetrically. Infrared spectra were recorded in Perkin-Elmer 1600 FTIR spectrophotometer in the range 400–1600 cm The intensive grinding of sulphide minerals generates changes both in their surface area and bulk properties In addition to the disintegration effect of particles, the formation of agglomerates can also be observed. These may have dimensions comparable to those of nonactivated particles. The complexity of millerite surface transformation due to mechanical activation is also documented by microprobe analysis The phase composition of nonactivated as well as activated samples are presented in Results of chemical analysis of the millerite before and after grinding process are summed up in Based on One of the interesting conclusions of our previous studies The constant dissolution rate seems to indicate that the reaction area remains unchanged during the leaching time. Similar results have been obtained in catalytic action of cupric and ferric ions in nitric acid leaching of NiS and Ni The increase in leachability of the activated millerite in water, nitric and hydrochloric acids may be due to the combination of mechanically induced structural defects and chemical modification of mineral surface. The millerite particles disintegration due to mechanical activation is accompanied by an increase in the number of particles and generation of fresh previously unexposed surface. The agglomeration of grains is evident and amorphization is also observed. Mechanical activation of millerite particles causes a partial oxidizing of sulphide ions to sulphate ones. Moreover, the content of sulphate ions rises with increase in the grinding time. A sample of mechanically activated millerite for 10 min yields a recovery of 44% Ni after 1-h leaching time in 2.0 M HNO The increase in leachibility of the activated millerite may well be due to the combination of mechanically induced structural defects and chemical modification of mineral surface. The thorough understanding of the kinetics and mechanism of the activated millerite requires further investigations.