This is a collective work by 16 US authors, 2 Canadians, 1 Australian, and only one European from Bulgaria—a total of 20. So it can be said that the book reflects the North American English Speaking expertise. It covers particle characterization, size reduction and liberation, size separation, movement of solids in liquids, gravity concentration, magnetic and electrostatic separation, flotation, liquid–solid separation, metallurgical balances and efficiency, bulk solids handling, hydrometallurgy and solution kinetics, mineral processing wastes and their remediation, and economics of the minerals industry. Thus it covers all areas of mineral processing in a systematic way. According to the editors in their introduction to the work, the book is meant to be a textbook for students and a reference work for professionals in industry. This goal was certainly fulfilled. I would even add that it is an advanced textbook for graduate students and for senior professionals in industry. Each of the fourteen chapters is well documented by a long list of literature citations with full title of the references, and the index is well prepared in 13 pages. Figures and diagrams are clear and the book in general is very well produced. It would have been a good idea if the authors had referred to the The number of pages per chapter is usually about 50, and a few about 20. While the chapter devoted to hydrometallurgy is the largest in 76 pages. Traditionally hydrometallurgy and aqueous electrometallurgy are considered a part of mineral processing although the domains are now very well established as independent fields. While chapter 8 (Flotation) is comprehensive and up to date, chapter 4 (Size Separation) is very well presented but the latest reference cited in 1986. Similarly chapter 5 (Movement of Solids in Liquids) the latest reference cited is 1984. The chapter entitled Hydrometallurgy and Solution Kinetics (chapter 12) includes a good summary of the work by Han and co-workers published in the 1990s but also suffers from the absence of recent publications in the field by other authors. Further it is based heavily on chemical engineering books, e.g. Bird et al. (1962), Smith (1970), Levenspiel (1972), Geiger and Poirier (1973), Sherwood et al. (1975), as well as standard works on thermodynamics such as Kubaschewski and Evans (1979). The book is an excellent present to the mineral beneficiation community and is highly recommended. The editors and authors are to be congratulated for this magnificent effort.