A sensor for froth acoustic emission detection, capable of isolating the external noise produced by machinery in the concentrator, has been recently developed and tested. The froth acoustic emission technique involves the use of ultrasonic sensors to measure the elastic energy released by film rupture during bubble coalescence in industrial flotation cells. The signal emitted by the sensor has been proven to respond to changes in froth conditions. This signal, the acoustic emission activity of the froth phase, provides an alternative method to measure the stability of the froth. This device has been recently tested in industrial size flotation cells, measurements were performed in different cells along a flotation bank where differences in the froth phase between cells can be appreciated in steady state. The sensor has also been tested in a pilot cell (3m3), operating with different frothers and concentrations. The response of the sensor to changes in metallurgical performance are shown in this paper and compared with other instrumentation outputs.Froth stability has been recognised as an important factor in the performance of the froth phase of a flotation cell. A very stable froth, one in which there is low coalescence and collapse rates, produces high recoveries as particles remain strongly attached to stable bubbles. However, stable froths also result in lower grades due to entrainment and low drainage. They may also cause problems in pumping. On the other hand, a very unstable froth often yields undesirably low recoveries due to high particle detachment and drainage. Because of these problems at the extremes of froth stability, it has been shown by several researchers that there is a relationship between froth stability and flotation performance as well as ranges of froth stability for optimum flotation results ( In order to determine the optimum range of froth stability for a given cell requires froth stability to be able to be measured. However, froth stability measurement is challenging because of the transient nature of the froth and the lack of appropriate instrumentation. Current methods provide both direct and indirect indicators of froth stability. Indirect indicators can be obtained from manipulation of output variables provided by froth vision systems such as froth speed and froth surface bursting ( This paper describes a novel method that overcomes this difficulty by using a sensor which takes advantage of acoustic events emitted by the froth phase. When bubbles coalesce their junction film ruptures, producing an instantaneous and short oscillation in acoustic pressure. This acoustic pressure is mainly concentrated in the audible frequency range; however, because coalescence events last a short time (less than 20 The JK-FAED system consists of a probe which is immersed in the froth phase and a PC for signal processing. The probe contains a piezo-electric ultrasonic transducer and specialist embedded electronics for signal amplification. The amplified signal is then sent to a pc and digitised by means of a National Instruments acquisition card. The digitised signal is further processed using a simple program designed in Lab View. The program filters the signal with a band-pass filter and then extracts the root mean square (RMS) values in 1 The JK-FAED was tested at two sites, namely Zinifex’s Century lead–zinc concentrator in Australia and at an Anglo Platinum concentrator in South Africa. At the Anglo Platinum concentrator, the sensor was tested in several cells in different parts of the circuit where cameras of a froth vision system were also in place. This site has clear differences in stability of the froth between the rougher and the slow cleaner banks. The froth of the rougher bank has bubbles that are more mineralised than the later sections of the circuit; in contrast, the froth of the slow cleaner bank shows bubbles with transparent windows, an indication of a lower amount of solids in the froth. The rougher bank operates with deep froth levels (around 50 The sensor was also tested along the secondary rougher bank in order to observe differences in the acoustic signals down the bank. For these measurements the sensor was positioned 20 At Century, a variety of experiments were performed, including surveying a bank with the JK-FAED, data acquisition in a single cell for a 12 Since it was unknown how the probe would cope immersed in the froth phase for longer periods of measurement, the JK-FAED was left for a 12 Finally, a series of experiments was carried out in a 3 The cells selected for froth monitoring were the first rougher cell (receiving the plant feed) and the fifth cell of the slow cleaner bank (which processes slow floating material).  Froth velocity is also different for the two cells of interest. The first rougher cell has a constant and higher velocity than the slow cleaner cell. The acoustic emission and froth velocity signals seem to provide a similar diagnosis, that is at higher froth velocities the acoustic emission signal is lower (probably there is less coalescence); on the other hand slower froth produced a higher acoustic emission signal (probably caused by higher coalescence due to increase in drainage and reduction of the froth overflow). However, there are other factors that have not been analysed and might affect froth velocity such as air rate and froth structure. It is proposed that the stability of the froth is not just inversely proportional to the acoustic emission signals (represented by the average) but also to its erratic behaviour (represented by the standard deviation). Therefore, these two values, average and standard deviation, are chosen as the main outputs of the JK-FAED system. Further experiments, not presented in this paper, are being carried out to confirm the relationship between froth acoustic emission and froth stability. The JK-FAED was also tested down the secondary rougher bank as shown in This bank does not show a trend (upwards or downwards) in acoustic emissions down the bank. Generally, it is expected that the stability of the froth decreases down the bank as a response to the decreasing amount of solids entering the froth phase. This trend is not present, possibly because the location of the sensor was fixed at 20 As in the previous site, the JK-FAED was also tested down a flotation bank, in this case the zinc scavenger bank. In cells 7, 8 and 9 two measurements at different vertical positions were performed. The nomenclature used in It is interesting to note that the trend is maintained for measurements at different vertical locations in the froth; however, the acoustic emission activity decreases closer to the surface. It is important to note that the JK-FAED only reacts to activity occurring immediately in front of the probe, and this could give an indication of where exactly most of the material is being released due to bubble coalescence along the froth. As indicated earlier, the JK-FAED was tested overnight in the first zinc scavenger cell and its data compared to other instrumentation on site. According to In In order to provide an output proportional to froth stability, the original JK-FAED signal has been inverted and scaled, this new output signal is plotted simultaneously with the SIPX dosage signal in Finally, tests in a 3  As expected, increasing the concentration for all frothers results in a lower FAE signal or a higher stability of the froth. There are however differences in the amplitude of the signals between frothers that seem to be related to water carrying capacity, as shown in It is interesting to note that at lower frother concentrations there is an oscillation in the sensor signal. The period of this oscillation is approximately 1 The oscillatory coalescence process in the froth phase with the presence of particles could be explained as follows. As bubbles rise and coalesce, solids are detached and enter the plateau borders in a downward flow; this is the period of high coalescence or high JK-FAED values. Accumulation of previously detached solids in the bottom of the froth phase consequently stabilises this part of the froth, which results in a reduction of coalescence and increasing the upward froth flow, corresponding to the period of low coalescence or low JK-FAED values. At this point more solids are leaving than entering the froth; therefore coalescence is promoted again until it reaches a peak with solids being liberated into the plateau borders, starting a new cycle. Increasing frother concentration reduces coalescence in the high period, thus reducing the amplitude of the cycle. When higher amounts of frother are introduced the coalescence process becomes more constant in time. The cycle previously described is also visible at the concentrate overflow, and is characterised by a wave like behaviour. Overall, increasing frother concentration increases frother stability by reducing its coalescence. This results in higher recovery but at the same time higher entrainment, due to increased water recovery, which ultimately reduces the concentrate grade. This trend is clearly shown in There is a clear correlation between the JK-FAED signal and water recovery which is dependant on froth coalescence. The JK-FAED offers a new method for on-line measurement of froth stability by giving a signal which is directly caused by coalescence in the froth phase. The amplitude of the JK-FAED and its variability (standard deviation) are inversely proportional to the stability of the froth. The JK-FAED responds well to changes in the froth, showing froth stability can be increased by increasing the frother concentration and the amount of solids entering the froth, as is well established in the literature. Thanks to its small size the JK-FAED can provide a localised measurement in cells of any size which makes it ideal for froth mapping, and potentially useful in cell design. In order to allow for comparisons between different cells, it is proposed to perform measurements at the same location in the froth measured from the pulp froth interface. As the JK-FAED measurements are made inside the froth, the instrument offers complementary information to froth vision systems that can only track superficial changes. In this paper it has been shown that the JK-FAED is particularly useful in case studies in plants wishing to characterise the froth phase of its flotation cells. The authors wish to gratefully acknowledge Anglo Platinum and Zinifex (Century Concentrator) for the support offered by their operations, UCT researchers for the coordination of the Anglo Platinum’s concentrator field trip, Stone Three for providing froth velocity data from their SmartFroth system, and the AMIRA P541B project for the trials with different frothers in Century, especially Dong Tang for providing the mass balance and metallurgical data.