Owing to increased human reliance on electronic products, the fast charging and high-rate discharge of such products are becoming increasingly important. In this work, Li4Ti5O12 (LTO) and polyethylene glycol (PEG)-LTO battery materials were successfully synthesized using the sol–gel method. P2-LTO was found to exhibit excellent electrochemical rate performance. XRD results showed that the crystallinity of PEG-LTO is higher than that of LTO, and that the spinel structure of LTO is retained in PEG-LTO. SEM results showed that P2-LTO had a more uniform and finer morphology than did LTO. The charge and discharge data revealed that PEG-LTO has excellent high-rate performance. The capacity of P2-LTO at 0.2, 0.5, 1, 2, 5, and 10 C was noticeably higher than that of pure LTO and the theoretical specific capacity of LTO. P2-LTO showed good resilience. EIS results showed that the electrochemical impedance of P2-LTO was smaller than that of LTO. The results show that this method is a simple and effective method for preparing high-rate performance LTO anode materials.In recent decades, non-renewable fossil energy has been consumed in large quantities. With improvements in human living standards, human consumption of energy is increasing, exacerbating the energy crisis. Lithium-ion batteries are considered the most promising chemical power source According to the stoichiometry of XPEG-LTO (X = 0, 0.3, 0.4), the precursors of all samples were synthesized by the sol–gel method. The corresponding materials obtained were denoted as LTO, P1-LTO, and P2-LTO. The raw materials (CH Take out the prepared material (LTO, P0-LTO and P2-LTO), acetylene black and PVDF at a mass ratio of 8:1:1 and thoroughly mixed; then NMP was added and mixed well. Preparing a clean copper foil, coating the evenly mixed slurry on it, and then dry it in a vacuum drying oven at 110 °C for 12 h and then sliced. The dry pole slices were assembled into coin half-cells in a vacuum glove box. A battery test system (LAND-CT2001A, China) was used to conduct a constant current charge and discharge test. EIS was measured using a CHI650E electrochemical workstation with a scan rate of 0.1 mVs The XRD Patterns of LTO, P1-LTO, and P2-LTO are shown in    Due to the excellent electrochemical performance of P2-LTO at high rates, further tests were carried out on this material. In order to further study the electrochemical behavior of the comparative samples, the LTO, P1-LTO and P2-LTO samples were tested by cyclic voltammetry (CV) at a scan rate of 0.1 mV•s  The Li PEG exhibits good dispersion properties. In this study, the sol–gel method was used to add an appropriate amount of PEG to prepare a LTO anode material. XRD results showed that the obtained material did not change the spinel structure of LTO, and the crystallinity and purity of the material were good. SEM results show that P2-LTO had a more uniform and finer morphology than did LTO, and this morphology was conducive to improving the electrochemical performance of the material. The rate performance graph showed that P2-LTO had a capacity of 355.1 mAgh Owing to increased human reliance on electronic products, the fast charging and high-rate discharge of such products are becoming increasingly important. In this work, Li The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. The study was supported by a grant from the Fund Projects: