The present investigation focuses on the production of synthetic wollastonitic glass ceramics (WGCs) through vitrification of medical wastes incinerator fly ash (MFA) with soda lime recycled glass (SLRG) at 1300 °C, followed by re-crystallization in the range of 950 °C. The sintering process was carried out at the final temperature, previously determined by differential thermal analysis (DTA). The raw materials as well as the produced WGCs were characterized by chemical mineralogical and microstructural analyses. Their leaching behaviour was evaluated using the EN 12457-2 compliance leaching test. Re-crystallization led to the development of glass ceramics with two major crystalline phases: monoclinic wollastonite (b-CaSiO3) and gehlenite (Ca2Al2SiO7). The compressive and bending strength values varied from 190 to 194 MPa and 79–82 MPa, respectively. Although MFA exhibited high metals leaching values, indicating a hazardous waste, no trace elements were detected in the leachates of the WGCs.Wollastonite, a white calcium inosilicate mineral (CaSiO Wollastonite in cement mixtures can moderately improve final compressive strengths and significantly refine flexural toughness, thus enhancing ductility and crack growth resistance [ Wollastonite exhibits a variety of applications in the field of ceramic materials development (ceramic enamels, sanitary porcelain, tiles, earthenware etc). It can reduce gas evolution during firing, due to its very low loss of ignition (<1 wt%), leading to lower shrinkage. Its presence in the raw meal allows higher rates temperature increment during sintering, simultaneously reducing defects such as spalling, cracking or crazing, thus increasing the final strengths [ It has been also used in the production of glass ceramics, also referred as vitrocerams, pyrocerams or vitroceramic. Glass ceramics are produced by controlled crystallization of specific mixtures of glasses, which is favoured by the presence of nuclei-promoting additives. This inhibits the spontaneous surface crystallization, which is usually occurred although it is undesirable during the production of glasses. Glass ceramics always contain a certain amount of vitreous phase, lying between the crystalline grains of the material. The controlled process of ceramization (i.e. crystallization) leads to a wide range of materials with very attractive properties, such as high mechanical strength, toughness, biocompatibility, chemical stability etc. Typical production of glass ceramics includes two main stages. The first stage is the glass generation, which is carried out according to the classic methods of glass melting. In the second stage, the glass samples are molded, cooled and heated to temperatures higher than the glass transition point, but below the softening point. In some cases, the second stage is repeated as a third step. In the later stages, the glass specimen is partially crystallized. An alternative method is based on the partial crystallization during controlled cooling of the molten glass [ Although there are few studies focusing on the development of glass ceramics from various types of fly ashes (municipal waste incinerator, thermal power plant) in conjunction with recycled glass [ The waste gases produced during the incineration process usually exhibit temperatures of about 1200 °C. Many components of the charge (including heavy metals) that are entered in the vapour phase, are fumed off and, in turn, are suitably collected in the form of fly ash. As a result, one of the most important sub-unit operations of the incineration process is the “de-dusting” of the gas stream. The removal of the particles from the waste gases is usually carried out by using fabric baghouse filters, wherein the particle recovery efficiency can reach up to 99.9%, for most types of dusts, regardless of the particle size (from submicron to several hundred microns). MFA has been classified as hazardous waste and it is usually handled separately from the ashes of the combustion chamber. The present investigation focuses on the development of wollastonitic glass ceramics (WGCs) using vitrified precursors produced from medical waste incinerator fly ash. According to the proposed production process, MFA was initially vitrified at 1300 °C along with recycled glass and then was subjected to re-crystallization process at the final temperature, previously determined by DTA. The raw materials as well as the produced glass ceramics were analytically characterized through chemical analysis, X-ray diffraction (XRD), scanning electron microscopy (SEM) and Transmission Electron Microscopy (TEM), while their leachability was evaluated by applying the BS EN 12457-2 compliance leaching test. The fly ash used in the present investigation derives from the waste gases de-dusting system (fabric baghouse filter) of a medical wastes rotary kiln incinerator, which operates in the temperature range of 1100–1200 °C, with excess of air (about 70 wt%). The MFA particles have been captured during the waste gases passage through the installed fabric filter, which operates at around 250 °C, presenting almost absolute final efficiency (≈99.9 wt%). MFA was then vitrified by using a mixture of green and brown/amber soda lime recycled glass (SLRG) collected from a recycling plant in Athens (Greece) that handles municipal wastes. Due to the nature of the MFA particles (from submicron to several tens of microns), its particle size distribution was determined by a laser scattering particle size distribution analyzer (Mastersizer 2000, Malvern) after dispersion treatment through ulltrasonic homogenizer. The chemical analyses of both raw materials were carried out with X-ray Fluorescence (XRF, Spectro–Xepos), Atomic Absorption Spectrophotometry (AAS, Perkin Elmer 4100) and Inductively Coupled Plasma Mass Spectrometry (ICP-MS, X Series II, Thermo Scientific). Their mineralogical analyses were determined by XRD analysis, using a Bruker D8-Focus diffractometer with nickel-filtered CuKa radiation (λ = 1.5406 Å), at 40 kV and 40 mA. The morphology of MFA was examined by SEM using a Jeol 6380 L V Scanning Electron Microscope, equipped with an Oxford INCA Energy Dispersive Spectrometer (EDS), for spot chemical analysis. TEM analysis was conducted with a high resolution JEOL JEM-2100, operating at 200 kV, equipped with an Oxford X-Max 100 EDS detector. Three different vitreous precursors were produced, by replacing the original MFA with SLRG by 45, 50 and 55 wt%, in order to produce a vitrified outgrowth with a SiO The produced glass precursors, after being quenched, were crushed and ground in a laboratory ball mill until sieved to -90 μm. In order to determine the glass transition temperature and the corresponding of crystallization, the vitrified powders were subjected to differential thermal analysis (DTA), using an Setaram-Labsys thermal analyzer. The samples were placed in ceramic crucibles and heated from room temperature to 1000 °C at a heating rate of 10 °C/min, using air under static conditions. Pellets of the homogenized glass powders with a diameter of 20 mm and a thickness of approximately 10 mm, were prepared using an uniaxial pressure of 60 MPa. The produced disks were then sintered under air atmosphere at the crystallization temperatures, previously determined for each glass by the DTA (main exothermic peak). The heating rate was set at 10 °C/min. The samples were sintered at the final temperature for 2 h and allowed to cool inside the furnace. The produced glass ceramics were also characterized by means of chemical analysis and XRD. Their microstructure examination was carried out by SEM in polished sections embedded in epoxy resin (vacuum impregnation) of low viscosity. Their final compressive and 3-point bending strengths were determined using an Instron 4482 device at a crosshead speed of 0.5 mm/min. In order to determine the leachability of the heavy metals, the as-received MFA and the produced WGC were subjected to the batch test EN 12457-2 leaching procedure [ The determination of the relative contribution of each fraction of the as-received MFA was carried out by an laser scattering size analyzer and the results are presented in It exhibited a relatively heterogeneous distribution comprised of three size fractions: a very fine-grained portion (0.15–1.0 μm) and two coarser ones (≈1.0–10 μm and 20–100 μm). The finer fraction was relatively low in quantity, estimated at about 1 wt%. The larger fraction has been generated not only because of agglomeration phenomena of the finer particles, but also due the addition of Ca(OH) The chemical analyses of the as-received raw materials (MFA and SLRG), along with the corresponding vitreous outgrowths, prepared by replacing MFA by 45, 50 and 55 wt% with SLRG, are presented in Ca(OH) Regarding heavy metals content (usually exist in medicines, photographic materials and several medical tools), elements or phases with relatively low sublimation point presented high concentration in the as-received MFA, as a result of their volatilization during incineration. After flue gas cooling, they have been re-condensed, thus forming finer particles of mixed oxides, which were entrapped in the bag filters installation. The heavy metals concentrations followed the decreasing order of: Zn > Cu > Pb > Ba > Ce > La > Ni > Co > Mo > As > Y>Ag > Cd>Hg. Nickel, chromium and molybdenum are typical of medical equipment and tools manufactured from stainless steel, rare earths originate from ceramics and semiconductors, while Ba mainly derives from contrast agents used in radiology techniques. The results of the mineralogical analysis by XRD are shown in the corresponding pattern of the The above results were also confirmed under the SEM, with the obtained micrographs presented in The results of TEM analysis in the MFA samples are shown in The glass transition and crystallization transformation temperatures were determined through means of differential thermal analysis (DTA) and the results are presented in The re-crystallization of the final WGC was based on the DTA results and the corresponding transformation temperatures. Pellets of the homogenized glass powders, pressed uniaxially at 60 MPa, were sintered under air atmosphere, at temperatures, where the crystallization transformations have been completed (T The observation of the produced WGCs under SEM ( The observed amorphous colorless matrix was characterized by chemical homogeneity, mainly consisting of Si, Ca and Na and to a lesser extent by Mg and Al. Wollastonite (b-CaSiO The results of the mechanical tests are presented in The potential toxicity of both as-received MFA and produced WGC was evaluated through the application of the EN 12457-2 standard leaching test [ During the leaching procedure, no precipitates were observed and the final pH was measured in the range of 6.5-7.0. MFA exhibited high metals leaching values. More specifically, metals such as lead, barium, chromium, zinc, molybdenum, and copper were found significantly higher than the accepted limits for inert wastes, according to the 2003/33/EC directive [ Vitrified precursors produced from medical waste incinerator fly ash together with soda-lime recycled glass were utilized as raw material for the preparation of WGCs. Three different vitreous outgrowths were prepared at 1300 °C, by replacing MFA with SLRG by 45, 50, and 35 wt%. WGC were developed by sintering (re-crystallization) process, carried out at the final temperatures (900–950 °C), previously determined by differential thermal analysis (DTA) for each case. The re-crystallization process led to the development of WGCs with two major crystalline phases: monoclinic wollastonite (b-CaSiO