The hydrophobicity of bituminous coal surface has a significant effect on the separation of coal and mineral matter during flotation process. In this paper, the thermodynamic characterization of the two kinds of liberated fine middling bituminous coal measured by Washburn dynamic method and its influence on flotation have been investigated. Wetting rate and Lipophilic Hydrophilic Ratio (LHR) was calculated by linear regression analysis method according to the wetting process of different density fractions of coal samples wetted by n-hexane, α-bromonaphthalene, formamide and water. Washburn equation and Van Oss–Chaudhury–Good theory were used to estimate the surface free energy components of samples. The LHR value of Xiqu (XQ) coal is higher than that of Qianjiaying (QJY) coal, and it decreases with the density level. Density fraction of 1.5–1.6g·cm−3 and 1.6–1.8g·cm−3 for XQ coal is hydrophobic with similar wetting rate and LHR (7.18 and 6.58), which is consistent with its poor selectivity from the regressive release flotation test. Disperse part of surface free energy reduces slightly with the coal density increase; the base part of coal is increased and all lower than that of the hydrophobic kaolinite (58.27mN·m
                     −1). Furthermore, there is a corresponding relationship between the base part and LHR. Results of elemental analysis and FTIR coincide well with the coal surface property.High ash content of the clean coal and poor selectivity are the prominent issues of the fine coal flotation. Wettability of mineral surfaces is paramount, which affects the separation efficiency of flotation. Coal is intrinsically hydrophobic because of its chemical composition (surface aromatic and aliphatic groups) Washburn equation relates the capillary rise height or weight of a liquid through a compact vertical bed. The bed was composited by many capillary clusters and wetted by the liquid of laminar flow through particle bed The total surface free energy of solid is composed of the non-polar part (i.e., Lifshitz-van der Waals) and polar part (i.e., Lewis acid–base) according to the Van Oss–Chaudhury–Good theory. The former consists of the sum of the terms heretofore ascribed to London, Debye, and Keesom forces. The latter contains acid part and base part, which was due to H-bonds In this paper, the wetting process and components of surface free energy, namely, thermodynamic characteristics of density fractions of the two kinds of fine liberated middling bituminous coal particles were investigated. These results have been related to performance of the coal in regressive release flotation test and particle characterization. The relationship between wettability of particles and its component of the surface free energy was also studied. One of the coal samples was middling of heavy medium coal preparation of Xiqu (XQ) coking coal preparation plant in Shanxi Province of China, and the other one was middling of the two stage flotation process from Qianjiaying (QJY) coking coal preparation plant in Hebei Province of China. Middling of XQ coal sample was dry ground first in a jaw crusher to − Kaolinite and chemical reagents, including KRUSS Tensiometer K100 with range of 1–1000 As seen in Size distribution of coal samples and kaolinite was tested by Microtrac S3500 laser particle size analyzer. Elemental analysis of the XQ and QJY coal was conducted with Vario MACRO cube. Thermo Nicolet 380 of the Nicolet was used. FTIR is an important and widely used analytical tool for determining the structure of coal material and functional groups. Density fractions stored in bottles of 2 Effective capillary radius of each density grade was close to each other as the particle size of the two kinds of coal sample was concentrated in the + The density analysis indicated that the liberation of coal samples was improved by grinding. For XQ coal sample, yield of density fractions of − Elemental analysis and FTIR of XQ and QJY coal were employed to elucidate the differences in surface chemistry responsible for the observed wetting rates, LHR values and calculated components of surface free energy. The sulfur of XQ coal sample (0.92%) was more than that of QJY coal (0.68%). The hydrophobic pyrite (FeS FTIR spectra demonstrated the concentration, type and distribution of functional groups on the surface of coal. XQ coal samples contained more hydrophobic groups on their surfaces than QJY coal as seen in According to Poiseuille law, the Washburn equation would be expressed as follows If the geometric factor of the packed bed c The slope of The geometric factor c (cm As an example, According to Van Oss–Chaudhury–Good theory, there is: The interfacial free energy of solid and liquid is expressed: Young equation is as follows: Where the  For XQ coal sample, the polar part XQ coal was floated with poorer selectivity than QJY coal from the regressive release flotation test as seen in Wetting process of each density fraction of two liberated middling bituminous coals and kaolinite by probe liquid was investigated based on Washburn dynamic method. XQ density fractions were found to have a relatively lower surface energy estimated by Washburn equation and Van Oss–Chaudhury–Good theory, and poorer selectivity of the regressive release flotation test, which was reflected in its LHR and the base part of surface free energy. Results of elemental analysis and FTIR coincide well with the coal sample surface properties. The authors gratefully acknowledge the financial supports by the