Investigation using rapid quenching (RQ) and mechanical alloying (MA) were conducted to produce Ti68Fe26Si6 icosahedral quasicrystals. Subsequent heat treatment was performed on both rapidly quenched ribbons and mechanically alloyed powders in a vacuum furnace under various heat treatment conditions of temperature ranging from 440 to 900°C with a constant heating rate of 10°C/min and holding time up to 30h. The amorphous phase of Ti68Fe26Si6 ribbon was successively achieved by RQ for the first time from the present investigation. During the heat treatment, the icosahedral quasicrystalline phase was transformed from the melt-spun amorphous ribbon at the glass transition temperature of 430°C and remained up to approximately 520°C. The quasicrystalline phase, however, was somewhat difficult to be obtained from heat treatment of the Ti68Fe26Si6 powder milled for 5h under the present experimental conditions.Rapid quenching (RQ) and mechanical alloying (MA) techniques have played important roles in producing quasicrystalline phases. Since the first investigation on Ti–Fe icosahedral quasicrystals by Dong et al. The two technical processes, RQ and MA, were used for the present research. The constituent elements (99.98% pure) with a composition of 68Ti:26Si:6Ti were arc-melted and the master alloy was then rapidly quenched by the melt spinning on a copper wheel (23 Subsequent heat treatment experiments were conducted on the RQ ribbons and MA powder for solid-state reaction in a vacuum furnace with an intention to form nano-scaled Ti The microstructure of melt-spun Ti The melt-spun ribbons were then heat-treated at the temperature range 440–750°C with a 10°C/min constant heating rate for solid-state reaction in a vacuum furnace and the phases were identified by the XRD and TEM analysis. The glass transition temperature of the RQ Ti    The Ti Finally, in comparison with MA powder to RQ ribbon, the grain growth effect of MA powders are different from that of RQ amorphous ribbons. The quasicrystalline grains in the ribbon grew from 120 to 250 Amorphous phase Ti The nano-sized α-Ti, TiFe and Ti The financial support from the Creative Research Initiative of the Korean Ministry of Science and Technology is greatly acknowledged.