In this paper, the reduction roasting of laterite ore in the absence or presence of sodium sulfate was carried out for nickel beneficiation by wet magnetic separation. Sodium sulfate is found to be capable of enhancing the reduction of laterite ore through liberating iron and nickel from Ni/Fe substituted-lizardite, as well as increasing the size of ferronickel particles considerably. When the laterite pellets were reduced at 1100°C for 60min, the average particle size of ferronickel grains was approximately 50μm in the presence of sodium sulfate, which far exceeded the size of 5–10μm in the absence of sodium sulfate. Compared with those reduced without sodium sulfate, the Ni grade of ferronickel concentrate increased from 2.33% to 9.48%, and the magnetic separation recovery of Ni increased from 56.97% to 83.01% with the addition of 20wt.% sodium sulfate. Experimental evidence showed that troilite (FeS) serves as an activating agent to accelerate melt phase formation via a low melting point (985°C) Fe–FeS eutectic. This markedly facilitated the aggregation of ferronickel particles during reduction, along with the selective enrichment of Ni by suppressing the complete metallization of Fe.Nickel is an important strategic metal as an alloying component of stainless steels and special steels, where it is mainly used in the form of pure nickel metal or as a ferronickel alloy with variable iron content ( Nickeliferous laterite ores are produced by weathering of ultrabasic rocks containing ferro-magnesian silicate minerals ( The RKEF process is considered to be energy intensive for producing ferronickel from laterite ores as it involves several high-temperature steps, such as calcination and pre-reduction at 850–1000 Due to the high cost of stainless steel production as a result of the high nickel prices ( Sodium sulfate used in the study was of chemical grade. The laterite ore was from Sulawesi Island, Indonesia, and the sample has a high magnesia and silica content ( Lignite was used as the reductant. The proximate analysis of the reducing coal and chemical composition of its ash are presented in The laterite ore was crushed and ground to 80 The content of nickel was determined by atomic absorption spectrometry (AAS, HITACHI 180/80, Japan). The sequential extraction steps for nickel distribution of laterite ore are described below (  A sample of 1.000  The residue from step 1 was extracted with a solution of 100  The residue from step 2 was extracted with 100  The residue from step 3 was transferred into an alumina crucible and heated at 600  A sample of 0.2000 TG–DSC analysis was performed using a thermal analyzer (Netzsch STA 449 C, Germany) in the temperature range of 30–1400 The magnetic separation results of laterite pellets reduced with variable dosage of sodium sulfate (ranging between 0% and 20%) are shown in In an attempt to improve the beneficiation of nickel as well as iron in the recovered magnetic product, laterite ore was reduced with the addition of sodium sulfate. In respect to Ni, the separation results continuously improved with the increase of sodium sulfate dosage. Compared with those in the absence of sodium sulfate, Ni content increases significantly from 2.33% to 9.48% and also Ni recovery from 56.97% to 83.02% in the presence of 20 The descending Fe metallization ratio indicates that sodium sulfate is able to suppress the complete metallization of Fe, and achieve a greater selective enrichment of Ni. The inconsistent changes between Fe metallization ratio and its recovery as sodium sulfate dosage varies from 0% to 5%, shows that the magnetic separation of ferronickel from gangue is more effective in the presence of sodium sulfate. The different magnetic separation efficiency of reduced laterite pellets in the absence or presence of sodium sulfate can be explained by In the absence of sodium sulfate, the reduction roasting-magnetic separation results of laterite ore pellets reduced at 800–1200 When the laterite ore was reduced at variable temperature from 800 Commercially existing pyrometallurgical processes for nickel recovery from saprolitic laterite ores mainly include RKEF process and Oheyama process. Smelting is necessary for saprolite processing due to the need for the destruction of magnesium-silicate lattice to recover nickel (   Fine dissemination of the minerals responds very poorly to physical separation methods ( In order to reveal the effects of sodium sulfate on the reduction and beneficiation of laterite ore, the samples were examined by XRD and ESEM–EDS analysis. The phase transformations accompanying the reduction of laterite in the presence of sodium sulfate were investigated, and then compared with that in the absence of sodium sulfate. As can be seen from the XRD patterns of reduced laterite in the absence of sodium sulfate in Clinoenstatite (MgSiO In the work of carbothermic reduction of nickeliferous laterites for understanding their reducibility ( In this study, it was found that the reduction of iron in the presence of sodium sulfate was not inhibited by the formation of fayalite or forsterite, and the majority of iron is liberated from silicates. The decrease of iron metallization seen in A ferronickel alloy with 9.48% Ni and 79.3% Fe was prepared by reduction roasting at 1100 During the reduction of nickeliferous laterite in the presence of sodium sulfate at temperature higher than 800 Troilite (FeS) serves as an activating agent for facilitating melting phase formation and then improves the transport rate to accelerate ferronickel particles aggregation. Consequently, the magnetic separation of ferronickel from gangue is enhanced. Moreover, the operating temperature can be lowered to the range of 1050–1100 Special thanks are due to Dr. Yinghe He (School of Engineering and Physical Sciences, James Cook University, Australia) for providing helpful comments. The authors also wish to thank the National Science Fund for Distinguished Young Scholars (50725416), the Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities and Hunan Provincial Innovation Foundation for Postgraduate (CX2011B124) for the financial support of this research.