Introduction
                  The physeal fractures represent the 20–30% of all fractures of the child. The distal tibial physis is the third most frequently injured. The most important complication is the premature physeal closure (PPC). Aim of this study is to evaluate risk factors that can influence the outcome like fracture pattern, fracture displacement, mechanism of injury and treatment method.
               
                  Material and Methods
                  The records of 46 patients treated for distal tibia physeal fractures between 2003 and 2013 were reviewed. Initial injury radiographs were categorized according to Salter-Harris and Dias-Tachdjian classifications and the initial and post-treatment fracture displacementwas measured. Any complex fractures had preoperative CT for additional assessment. Three different types of treatment were compared: closed reduction and casting versus closed reduction and percutaneous pinning versus ORIF.
               
                  Results
                  Therewas significantly less residual displacement in patients who had ORIF versus those who had closed reduction and percutaneous Kirschner wires or plaster only. In fractures with an intact fibula, we found significantly less initial and residual displacement. The Dias-Tachdjian classification is significantly correlated with the displacement. Patients studied with CT show a less degree of post reduction displacement. At the final follow-up we found only one PPC as complication.
               
                  Conclusion
                  The physeal fractures are very common in children and the main goal is to avoid any complications. It is clear that the development of complications after distal tibial fractures is due to multiple contributing factors like skeletal maturity, severity of injury, fracture type, degree of comminution and displacement aswell as adequacy of reduction. A premature physeal closure is the most common complication. The fibula fracture can play an important role in initial displacement. The presence of an intact fibula and a good anatomical reduction have a significant positive influence on fracture outcome.The physeal fractures are typical of childhood and are the 20–30% of all fractures of the child. The distal tibial physis is the third most frequently injured physis and constitutes 11% of all physeal injuries Aim of this study is to evaluate risk factors that can influence the outcome like fracture pattern, fracture displacement, mechanism of injury and treatment method. We retrospectively analyzed 46 patients with diagnosis of distal tibial physeal fracture from 2003 to 2013. Data recorded included gender, age and the external cause of injury. Thirty-four patients (73.9%) were male and twelve (26.1%) females; the average age at the time of the trauma was 11 years (range 2–16 years). The peak incidence occurred at the age of 14 years for males and at the age of 12 for females. Twenty fractures were left-sided and twenty-six were right-sided. The more common causes of injury were non-specific falls (45%), playing soccer (15%), motor vehicle accidents (12%), biking (8%), playing basketball (5%) and others (15%). There was a seasonal variation in the incidence of tibial fractures with peaks during summer months. Initial X-ray were categorized according to Salter-Harris (SH) According to Dias and Tachdjian’s classification, based on the injured mechanism, we identified: 11 fracture in supination-inversion (23.9%), 10 in supination-plantar flexion (21.7%), 9 in supination-external rotation (19.6%), 14 in pronation-eversion-external rotation (30.4%), 1 Tillaux’s fracture (2.2%) and 1 tri-planar fracture (2.2%). Fracture displacement was also recorded in millimeters, measuring the largest displacement between the epiphysis and metaphysis on the anteroposterior or lateral X-ray. The association with a concomitant fibula fracture was observed in 25 cases (54.3%). Two cases (4.3%) were open fractures. In 12 cases (26.1%) a CT study was made for additional assessment and better definition of the fracture lines in order to plan the correct treatment ( The methods of treatment were closed reduction and casting, closed reduction and percutaneous pinning or ORIF. Reduction was made if the displacement was greater than 2 At follow-up evaluations, patients underwent anterior/posterior and lateral X-ray to check any complications such as premature or asymmetrical physeal closure, leg length difference, angular deformity and joint discrepancy. All the X-rays were evaluated by two observers not involved during surgery. The minimum follow up was 48 months. We performed a statistical analysis of the value of displacement and the following factors: type of fracture according to SH and DT classifications, CT, fracture of fibula and type of treatment. The data were statistically analyzed using the R software with the Kruskal-Wallis test. The level of significance was set at Eight patients were treated with closed reduction under anesthesia and protected in a femoral-podalic cast, 3 with reduction and percutaneous pinning with Kirshner wires and 35 with ORIF. In the ORIF group, according to SH classification, we treated: one type 1, twenty-five type II, five type III and four type IV fractures. In fractures with an intact fibula, we found significantly less preoperative displacement (2.6 The PPC was diagnosed at 12 months after injury ( The physeal fractures are very common in children and the main goal is to avoid any complications in the management of these fractures, with attention to the risk factors associated. A premature physeal closure, partial or complete, is the most common complication after a distal tibial physeal injury. The arrest is caused by injury to the germinal layer of the physis Risk factors are high-energy injuries, significant initial displacement, mechanism of injury and multiple attempts at closed reduction. A physeal arrest can appear even after two years from trauma; therefore, extended follow-up is important. If an arrest is suspected, the plain radiographs may show a bony bar. Comparative X-rays of the contralateral ankle may be helpful. CT or magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) can be used to evaluate the extent of a bony bar Spiegel et al. suggested that fractures could be associated to high, low and unpredictable risk of complications considering skeletal maturity, severity of injury, fracture type, degree of comminution and displacement as well as adequacy of reduction Kling et al. reviewed 65 distal tibia physeal fractures and showed that medial malleolar fractures (SH III and IV) and “perhaps type II” fractures, commonly result in higher incidence of growth disturbances. Anatomic physeal reduction by open or closed methods can decrease the incidence of these complication The indications to perform a CT derived from observation of the abnormalities on the X-ray (intraarticular or comminuted fracture, complex injury pattern, indistinct plain images) and also included patient factors such as mechanism and energy of injury. The idea of CT scanning all intrarticular fractures to assess displacement and fracture configuration to aid anatomical fixation is supported by Cutler et al. Rohmiller consider multifactorial causes for complication citing the mechanism of injury, type of treatment and post reduction displacement as important contributing factors. These results show a high proportion of PPC in SH II which may be due to the higher mean residual displacement of 1.82 Initial displacement has also been shown to have a prognostic use in development of complications, as well as residual displacement and thus treatment methods should be defined in respect to the distance of fracture displacement: we decided to obtain an appropriate reduction if fracture displacement was greater than 2 These results appear to be in contrast with previous ones reported several years ago by Spiegel et al., who found that the incidence of complications were correlated with the type of fracture according to the SH classification, the severity of displacement or comminution and the adequacy of reduction, but regardless the association of fibular fracture Analysis of treatment methods showed that the minimal displaced fractures tend to be treated into plaster meanwhile the most displaced fractures were treated with ORIF. All treatments gave a mean residual displacement of less than 2 Actually, it is still under discussion whether surgical management reduce the risk of premature physeal closure. In fact, Russo et al. have demonstrated, in SH type II fractures occurred in 96 patients with a mean age of 12.6 years at presentation, that surgical fixation with anatomic reduction and removal of interposed tissue, although it may be necessary, does not reduce the incidence of PPC. They report the PPC rates after four different treatments: 55% in 38 patients with >4 The development of complications after distal tibial fractures is due to multiple factors. Investigation with CT improves fracture analysis, treatment planning and fracture reduction in high SH grades or intraarticular fractures. Good anatomical reduction with or without ORIF is one of the most important factors in reducing complication rates, and we suggest that ORIF is indicated in fractures with a residual displacement of 2 The authors declare no conflict of interest.