In hydrogen fuel cells, the sluggish oxygen reduction reaction (ORR) requires the catalysts used. Unfortunately, the precious platinum based catalysts still exhibit the best ORR activity in the commercial hydrogen fuel cells. Therefore, developing non-precious metal catalysts ORR become an important aspect for the utilization of hydrogen energy by using hydrogen fuel cells to develop non-precious catalysts and understand their active sites of ORR, herein the cobalt and nitrogen co-doped CNTs, nitrogen-doped CNTs and cobalt doped CNTs were prepared, respectively, and their catalytic properties toward ORR were tested and compared. The surface composition, microstructure and ORR performance of the samples were examined by X-ray diffraction (XRD), X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS), pore/specific surface analyzer and electrochemical methods. The results demonstrate that as the catalyst, the cobalt and nitrogen co-doped CNTs owns the highest ORR limiting current density, the most positive ORR onset potential and the largest transfer electron number close to four, and thus exhibits the better ORR catalytic performance compared to the other two samples of the nitrogen-doped CNTs and the cobalt doped CNTs. The good ORR performance of cobalt and nitrogen co-doped CNTs can be attributed to its active sites of nitrogen containing functional groups, cobalt or cobalt oxides, Co-Nx structure, and the synergistic effect of these sites on ORR.Hydrogen fuel cells can convert chemical energy into electricity through the electrochemical oxidation of hydrogen and the electrochemical reduction of oxygen in the separated electrodes and are considered as one of the ideal power sources for automotive and stationary applications due to their high energy efficiency, high power density, as well as low/zero emissions One of the most promising non-precious metal catalysts in hydrogen fuel cells is carbon-supported transition metals or their compounds, which have gained increasing attention due to their promising activity towards ORR, along with the utilization of abundant and inexpensive raw materials Carbon nanomaterials are attractive materials for catalyst support in fuel cells due to their microstructure and novel properties such as nanometer size, high accessible surface area, good electronic conductivity and corrosion resistance. Since Gong et al., reported the high ORR activity of nitrogen-doped CNTs in 2009 However, the real catalytically active sites of these transition metal based catalysts are still on the controversy. Using the carbide-derived carbons as a template to prepare the ORR catalysts with and without transition metal elements, Jaouen et al., gave their evidence that the true ORR activity is from the nitrogen-carbon structure in the outer surface of the nitrided carbon layer In the studies on ORR catalysts, much more attentions have been paid on the active sites of ORR, which are either oriented to metal and metal compounds sites or nitrogen-containing sites In this work, three kinds of catalysts of the cobalt and nitrogen co-doped CNTs, the cobalt doped CNTs and the nitrogen-doped CNTs were prepared, respectively. These catalysts have a common characteristic experiencing the heating treatment in high pure nitrogen gas at 800 °C. The ORR properties of catalysts were examined and compared. The results demonstrate that the catalyst of nitrogen and cobalt co-doped CNTs combines the active sites of the nitrogen containing functional groups, cobalt and cobalt oxides and Co-N Pyrrole (C The catalysts were synthesized through the routes as shown in The powder X-ray diffraction device (XRD, X'pret Powder, Rigaku D/MAX-2500X, Cu Kα), micro-Raman spectrometer (HORIBA Xplora Plus, excited by 532 nm lase) and the specific surface area (SSA) and pore structure analyzer (Micromeritics, ASAP2020) was used to characterize the composition and structure of samples. The SSA of samples was determined according to the Brunauer Emmett Teller (BET) method. The chemical states of samples were analyzed by X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS). The XPS was recorded with an ESCALAB250 surface analysis system using Al Kα radiation. The deconvolutions of the C 1s, N 1s and Co 2p spectra were performed using a non-linear least squares fitting program with a symmetric Gaussian function. Electrochemical measurements were carried out in a conventional three-electrode cell filled with 0.1 M KOH solution at room temperature. A glassy carbon electrode (GCE) coated with the catalyst ink was used as the working electrode. A platinum plate with surface area (1 cm Cyclic voltammogram (CV) and linear scan voltammetry (LSV) measurements were performed with an electrochemical analysis system of Reference 3000 workstation (Gamry Instruments, USA). The rotating disk electrode (RDE, RDE710 Rotating Electrode, Gamry Instruments, USA) coated with the catalysts was used for LSV tests. All potentials reported in this work were referenced to the reversible hydrogen electrode (RHE)，E The XRD patterns of samples are shown in The N X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) is a useful tool to study the surface composition of materials. The Co 2p spectrum of Co-CNT800 and Co-NCNT800 are shown in The catalytic properties of samples toward ORR were analyzed by the electrochemical methods. Cyclic voltammograms (CV) of samples in 01.M KOH solution are shown in To further understand the ORR kinetics of the catalysts we prepared, the linear scan voltammetry (LSV) of samples in O The ORR mechanism based on electron transfer number was analyzed by using K-L equations In the equations, Among the samples of the NCNTs, the cobalt doped CNTs and the cobalt and nitrogen co-doped CNTs we prepared, the Co-NCNT800 exhibits the best catalytic property toward ORR as the results demonstrated above. It can be concluded that the ORR activity of Co-NCNT800 is not only from the active species of cobalt oxides, nitrogen containing functional groups and Co-N The financial supports from