Introduction
                  Treatment of displaced heel fractures is controversial; however, ORIF is widely described in the literature to be the gold-standard. Percutaneous reduction and monolateral external fixation is gaining increasing attention because it provides a good and stable reduction, and minimises soft tissue complications due to open surgery, such as deep infections and delays in wound healing. The aim of this study was to show that the new Orthofix Calcaneal Minifixator (six pins) provides a greater stability than the four-pin version to enable a better and more stable reduction, an earlier weight-bearing (30 days) and improved functional outcomes.
               
                  Methods
                  A series of 69 consecutive closed heel intraarticular displaced fractures treated with the new Orthofix Calcaneal Minifixator were evaluated. Patients were assessed clinically with the Maryland Foot Score and radiologically with standard radiographs.
               
                  Results
                  The clinical results at follow-up were excellent in 37 cases (53.6%), good in 27 (39.2%), fair in two (2.9%) and poor in three (4.3%). The mean preoperative Böhler's angle was 5.2˚ (range 0–18˚) and the mean postoperative value was 28.5˚ (range 16–38˚).
               
                  Conclusion
                  The excellent functional outcomes were despite some radiological images of imperfect posterior facet anatomical reduction and seemed to correlate with the use of a good and stable minimally-invasive surgical technique. This technique enabled early weight-bearing, minimised complications, respected the delicate biology of this anatomical site and restored the good heel volume and Böhler angle.Calcaneal fracture is the most common injury of the tarsal bones and accounts for 1–2% of all fractures in the human body The ideal management of patients with calcaneal fractures is controversial. Clinical evidence to support surgical treatment for selected patient groups is limited, whereas long-term complications and adverse outcomes are well documented The most common treatment for calcaneal fracture has been ORIF via a lateral extensile approach, but this technique is not without complications. Conventional techniques for ORIF can be hazardous in certain situations, such as fractures with soft tissue compromise and severely comminuted fractures. ORIF of these fractures is technically demanding and is associated with a high incidence (16–33%) of complications, including wound-healing problems like skin sloughing and deep infection. There is a limited ability to restore anatomical reduction; combined medial and lateral approaches are often required and these are associated with a high risk of wound-healing problems (26%) According to Howard and Buckley, 60% of intraarticular calcaneal fractures of Sanders type lV were associated with one or more major complications The main aim of the procedure is to restore the length, width and height of the calcaneus and to re-establish a congruent subtalar joint. Less extensive dissection and less flap retraction compared with conventional techniques for ORIF are required to achieve reduction, and are associated with a reduced chance for soft tissue complications and wound-healing problems. External fixation with closed or percutaneous reduction, following a preoperative CT scan, is a minimally-invasive technique that achieves reduction and stable fixation of most displaced articular fractures while greatly reducing the risks of open surgery. There are many preliminary studies Recent results with external fixation are better than those observed in the past, and are now comparable with treatment by ORIF Magnan et al. The aim of this study was to show that the new Orthofix mini calcaneal fixator (evolved from the 4-pin external fixator) provides a greater stability to enable a better and more stable reduction in displaced Sanders type fracture, decreasing the risk of complications of ORIF and enabling every patient to achieve early active and passive range of motion and early partial weight-bearing compared with ORIF after 8 weeks. This was a multicentre, prospective study conducted between May 2009 and November 2012 in patients presenting to the outpatient or emergency department of six different trauma centres with displaced intraarticular fractures of the calcaneum, who were treated with percutaneous reduction and external fixation with Orthofix, the new (6 screws) mini-calcaneal external fixator. Patients of either sex with closed, displaced intraarticular fractures of the calcaneum were included in the study. Patients with open fracture of the calcaneum, other fractures of ipsilateral or contralateral limb, and/or other conditions that might affect their gait (paraplegia, quadriplegia, cerebrovascular accidents) were excluded from the study. Any comorbid disorders such as diabetes mellitus, peripheral vascular disease and osteoporosis were not considered to be a contraindication for surgery. Following application of inclusion and exclusion criteria, 164 consecutive closed articular calcaneal fractures (128 patients; 36 bilateral cases) were included in the study. Preoperative assessment included radiographs (lateral, axial and Broden's view) of both ankles and CT imaging of the affected ankle. Lateral radiographs were used to assess the Böhler's angle and angle of Gissane, loss of height of the calcaneum and displacement of the posterior facet. Axial radiographs were used to assess the increase in width of the calcaneum and angulation of the tuberosity fragment. Broden's view was used to evaluate the articular surfaces of the posterior facet of the calcaneum. Pre- and post-operative CT scans were assessed to evaluate the length, width, height, subtalar joint congruency and position of the sustentaculum tali; to quantify those parameters we used the Score Analysis of Verona (SAVE). Fractures were subdivided based on Sanders classification. Four fractures were classified as Sanders type I, 81 as type II, 58 as type III and 21 as type IV ( Surgery was performed at a mean of 4 days (range 0–14 days) after trauma. This was possible because minimally-invasive percutaneous external fixation enables early treatment and factors such as swelling and poor soft-tissue injury do not represent an absolute contraindication to surgery. The operation was performed under image intensifier control. The new Orthofix Mini-Calcaneal 6 pins Fixator comprises two arms connected by a central clamp. The major horizontal arm lay almost parallel to the longitudinal axis of the foot, while the second arm could be moved along the central clamp to find the best and appropriate position according to the foot size and the posterior facet position. Both arms were supported by a small slide system to enable the frame to be lengthened or shortened. The pins were self-drilling and self-tapping, with a diameter of 4 The patient was placed in the lateral decubitus position, exposing the lateral surface of the heel. The first step was to control and adjust the varus–valgus deformity through an additional screw or Steiman wire as described in the literature ( After locking clamps, the inclination of the posterior facet joint could be adjusted before locking the central screw. After the fixator has been applied, further reduction and elevation of the thalamic fragment may be carried out by elongating the clamps on the slide using the appropriate key in the distraction mechanism. Oral antibiotics were administered for 7 days postoperatively; low-molecular-weight heparin (LMWH) was given for a period of 30 days. The operated leg was kept elevated for a few days to help the swelling subside. Sutures, when applied, were removed 12 days postoperatively. Pin care was crucial: patients were instructed to clean the area twice a day with saline and local antiseptic. Postoperatively, weight-bearing was not permitted for 8 weeks. Passive and active mobilisation of the ankle and peritalar joints was started immediately. Patients were followed up clinically and radiologically at 4, 8 and 12 weeks, and 6 and 12 months postoperatively, and then once each year. The mean follow up was 21 months. The fixator was removed after 12 weeks in an outpatient clinic without any need for anaesthetics. When the fixator was removed, active and passive mobilisation continued for 2–3 months to enforce ankle and leg muscles and to improve lymphatic drain (use of surgical stockings at this stage was recommended). The Maryland foot score was used for clinical assessment at follow-up. This is a validated scoring system that ranges from a minimum of 0 to a maximum of 100 (excellent, 90 to 100; good, 75 to 89; fair, 50 to 74; failure <50). It evaluates subjective and objective elements, such as pain (maximum score 45), function (maximum score 40, subdivided into gait, stability, use of walking aids, limp, type of shoes required, walking distance), cosmesis (maximum score 10), and movement of the ankle, subtalar, midfoot and metatarsophalangeal joints (maximum score 5). Preoperative anteroposterior, lateral and tangential radiographs measuring the Böhler's angle and CT scans of the calcaneum were taken of all fractures treated in this study. CT images were used to classify the type of fracture according to the Sanders classification. Patients were assessed with standard radiographs every four weeks for 6 months, then every 6 months; they were assessed with a CT scan in the immediate postoperative period to evaluate length, width, height, subtalar joint congruency and position of the sustentaculum tali using the SAVE. STATA MP 11 software was used for statistical analysis. Statistical tests used were: two-sample A total of 98 men and 30 women were included in the study. The mean age of the patients was 53.6 years (range 19–84 years). The fracture healing time, which was defined as the time between the intervention and removal of the implant, was a mean of 2.17 months for type I fractures; 3.06 months for type II fractures; 3.02 months for type III fractures; and 2.67 months for type IV fractures ( The radiographic controls showed fracture healing in almost all patients. Only 12 patients had delayed consolidations, including five in the type II fracture group. Six patients suffered a malunion of the fracture. The mean Maryland foot score was: for type I fractures, 86 (good; range 84–90); for type II fractures, 81.03 (good; range 65–91); for type III fractures, 84.08 (good; range 55–99); and for type IV fractures, 86.1 (good; 34–99) ( The mean preoperative Böhler's angle was 5.2° (range 0–18°) and the mean postoperative value was 25.5° (range 0–44°). In 15 cases, Böhler's angle was not improved over 20° and these were the cases of poor clinical results according to the Maryland Foot Score. SAVE was used to correlate postoperative CT images and functional outcome. Five CT parameters were considered and associated to a numerical value: vertical alignment, longitudinal alignment, calcaneal height, position of the sustentaculum tali and congruity of the subtalar joint. The score was excellent in 104 of 164 cases (63.5%), good in 44 (26.8%), fair in 10 (6.1%), and poor in six (3.6%) ( Regarding complications, reflex sympathetic dystrophy occurred in 19 cases at the final follow-up; eight pin track infections were observed and treated with local dressing and oral antibiotics. No deep infections were observed. No early frame removal was required because of any complication. No cases were complicated with hypoaesthesia of the sural nerve. At the latest follow-up, there was one case of symptomatic post-traumatic arthritis in a Sander type IV fracture, which needed a subtalar arthrodesis. There was a statistically significant difference between all the groups in healing time ( Analysis of the radiographic results shows there was a complete radiographic healing of the fracture in most patients. The cases of non-union or malunion were higher in the type II fractures group (5/81 cases); however, analysis using the Chi square test showed there was no statistically significant difference in the incidence of non-union or malunion in the type II fracture group compared with the other groups ( There was a significant difference in the postoperative Böhler's angle ( The results of the Maryland Foot Score show that good clinical results were achieved in all different groups of fracture. Excluding type I group of fractures, the best result was obtained in patients with type IV fractures, in which there was a greater relative percentage of high clinical score but also the patients with the worst clinical outcome. One of these patients suffered persistent algodystrophy and subtalar arthritic changes and needed subsequent subtalar arthrodesis. Algodystrophy was observed in another 15 patients but none of them needed any additional surgery. In the statistical study we performed a multiple regression analysis to identify possible correlations between clinical outcome, expressed as Maryland Foot Score, and some clinical variables, such as age, sex, smoking status, and presence or absence of comorbid disorders. Overall, there was no statistical significance ( Finally, analysis of the behaviour of the four fracture groups in terms of the return to daily activities that were conducted prior to trauma showed no significant differences or significant changes in the working ability of patients (Pearson's chi-squared test: 4.35; Although there is no clear evidence to determine the best management for intraarticular calcaneal fractures, many authors advocate surgical treatment over conservative treatment as these fractures are associated with poor outcome and a high incidence of complications, such as malunion with widened heel, loss of calcaneal height and arches of the foot, horizontal talus, peroneal tendon impingement, subtalar joint stiffness and arthritis. Prolonged non-weight-bearing may also lead to high sensitivity of the plantar heel pad with subsequent plantar heel pain Results of a meta-analysis by Jiang et al., Anatomic restoration of the articular surfaces was traditionally considered to be of great importance. Several biomechanical studies show that as little as 1–2 Multiple studies have shown excellent results following ORIF through a lateral extensile exposure, with fixation using a laterally-based, periarticular Plate Surgical management of these fractures is not without complication There is a limited ability to restore anatomical reduction; combined medial and lateral approaches are often required and these are associated with a high risk of wound-healing problems (26%) ORIF may be unfeasible in certain cases associated with severe comminution and/or soft-tissue compromise; it has also proven to be a technically difficult procedure, with limited ability to reproduce anatomically the alignment of the subtalar joint and the shape of the calcaneus Moreover, recent studies identify that the main goal of treatment for displaced fractures of the calcaneum should be the restoration of the three-dimensional structure, with emphasis on correct alignment in the coronal and axial planes, and the height of the calcaneal body Emara and Alam Results of the current study confirm those by Magnan et al. Vladimir and Roman The current series showed eight cases with superficial pin tract infection, but there was no case of deep infection. Zwipp et al. Jain et al. Thermann et al. The results of our series indicate that subtalar mobility and clinical outcome are not significantly affected by obtaining congruency of the subtalar facet compared with results reported with open forms of treatment that specifically aim to reduce anatomically the articular fragments Unlike ORIF followed by plaster cast, external fixator permits early partial-to-full mobilisation of ankle and subtalar joint without the risk of wound problems; partial weight-bearing could be allowed in some patients depending on the healing process. This may help desensitise the heel fat pad and thus prevent chronic heel pad pain and dystrophy as demonstrated by Houghton Results of this study are in agreement with Levine and Helfet To reduce the specific complications related to external fixation, such as loose screws, infection and loss of reduction, we agree with Magnan's consideration about the importance of monitoring patients strictly, with weekly observations until the fixator is removed. In our series, this regimen prevented early removal of the fixator prior to consolidation of the fracture Percutaneous reduction and external fixation proved to be a reliable technique for obtaining stable reconstruction of fractures of the os calcis. The clinical results appear to be comparable with those observed following ORIF The results of this study confirm that external fixation is a valid alternative treatment for all types of intraarticular calcaneal fractures. Although the results are comparable with those observed following ORIF in terms of good outcome No funding source was involved. The authors certify that they have no affiliations with or involvement in any organisation or entity with any financial interest or non-financial interest in the subject matter or materials discussed in this manuscript.