A subsurface irrigation test, using a series of four rinse wells, was conducted on a copper oxide heap leach pad over a three week period. The pad has been significantly underperforming due to difficult drainage conditions imposed by a high degree of fine-grained material. The test was to determine whether it would be feasible to conduct the directed leaching method across the entire pad assuming that enough copper is liberated to pay for the upscaled well field installation. The rinse wells were connected directly to an existing raffinate line. Validation of the test included 1) hydraulic monitoring to ensure sufficient solution flow and coverage in the formation and 2) metallurgical monitoring of solution samples extracted from nearby monitoring wells to ensure copper liberation. The results showed that the mean flow rates to each rinse well exceeded expectations by a factor of at least 1.5 for an extended period of time, that radial solution coverage for optimal operating conditions was approximately 17m, and copper grade was upwards of three times the anticipated grade. The test was then extended for an additional two months on a single well, where the copper grade remained approximately two times higher than that from surface irrigation. By the end of the testing, it was calculated that at least 191,000kg of copper was liberated. The upscaled program is to include 170 additional wells spaced 31m apart and the potential for 12 wells to be rinsed simultaneously, which would allow the program to be completed in less than three years.It appears rather clear that processing of low grade metallic ore in a surface-irrigated heap leach facility is a mature technology ( More recently, a significant focus has been on improving or optimizing the heap leach process, with a mindful eye towards economic forces that include market prices, recovery time, and expenses, balanced with mining constraints as related to heap height, particle size, irrigation rate, curing, and other factors ( Despite all of the best efforts to optimize engineering parameters at the onset of heap design and to make adjustments to the process through implementation, there is still a great potential for metal to be left behind. Using a simple example of a 0.25% acid soluble copper grade in a 50 While the hydraulics of this new pressurized solution delivery method has been investigated in some detail ( Copper extraction from the leach pad has consistently fallen short of forecasts due to the difficult drainage conditions imposed by fine grained material. It is estimated that copper recovery is near 40% for the 40 million ton heap with average acid soluble copper grades of 0.25%. After an extensive drilling campaign to characterize the pad, it was discovered that fines, as defined by those particle sizes passing the 200 Chrysocolla generally fills the clay-rich matrix of the brecciated deposit, the fault, and open fractures within the schist and diabase immediately in the footwall zone of the fault, dacite, and larger clasts of the breccia. Malachite is locally abundant in the deposit and sporadically along the fault. Chalcocite is the only significant copper sulfide mineral present and is restricted to the lower parts of the deposit. Chalcocite is commonly found rimming or partially to totally replacing pyrite, which is often found as veinlets or individual grains within breccia clasts. Acid consumption is the highest for material within the fault zones, and particularly from the low lying fault which establishes the bottom of the pit area. Here, precipitation of elements such as calcium, magnesium, zinc, aluminum, etc. during the formative events of copper mineralization, give rise to sulfuric consumption on the order of 50 After blasting, the ore is trucked to the heap for placement and surface leaching. Surface leaching occurs at an approximate rate of 6 Given the low recovery, a secondary recovery method using subsurface irrigation was chosen. This type of solution delivery can be applied in a number of ways that include adjusting variables associated with application pressure, number of injection zones per well, consideration of extraction wells, drilling method, well casing, and well screening materials. For the injection examples presented for gold mines ( In the present application, a hollow stem auger was used for drilling the rinse wells, using PVC casing that was lowered into the hole, and backfill comprising fine-grained material. Since no high pressure booster pump was to be used for the experiment, it was thought that the well design would accommodate the lower pressures with no blowout. Additionally, the open hole allowed for monitoring sensors to be placed deeply within the heap along the well annulus. The wells had a single application zone at the bottom of the well. At the top of each casing was a valve and a port for monitoring pressure. All wells were plumbed back to an existing irrigation line which had an inline flow meter and totalizer that recorded solution delivery solely to the rinse wells. The monitoring wells were installed in the same manner, but were placed deeper than the rinse wells.  Operating objectives were initially developed for the rinsing test that included a minimum flow of 90,000 Hydraulic monitoring of the rinse test included measuring flow and pressure parameters in-situ. Both the flow meter and pressure gage recorded data every 10   The second level of in-situ monitoring included the use of time lapse electrical resistivity to observe the volumetric changes associated with fluid saturation, porosity, and ionic constituents of the raffinate. General information about the time lapse electrical resistivity method applied to subsurface injections can be found in  The rendered three-dimensional bodies for each rinse test was developed by calculating a percent difference for the final snapshot, just prior to well shut-in, to the baseline prior to the test start. A representative percent difference value was chosen, equal to 5% for each test. Smaller values of percent change would have produced a larger body. The 5% percent change was ultimately chosen based on secondary information regarding the benchmarking of solution location from the change in electrical current output from the boreholes electrodes, as described in During the course of the rinsing, samples were drawn from the bottom of each monitoring well, two interlift drains located at the edge of the pad (approximately 80  Time series data showing copper, free acid, and pH are presented in One sign that new leaching is occurring as opposed to simple flushing of previously liberated copper can be observed in the free acid data. Free acid of the interlift drains, which drains solution from surface irrigation, is near 3.5 Another view of enhanced leaching associated with the rinse wells compared to surface leaching can be gained by looking at the gangue chemistry. As a last test, a steady rinse period of approximately 60 As a final means of determining the effects of deep well rinsing on the heap leach pad, a drilling and assaying campaign was conducted, whereby a location near a rinse well was drilled immediately before rinsing initiated and approximately four months after rinsing ceased.  A pilot-scale subsurface irrigation test to enhance the recovery of copper was demonstrated on a copper oxide heap. The test was designed with four rinse wells, with each well outfitted with a 3 A large effort was expended to validate the effectiveness of the method and ensure that initial test objectives were met. The test objectives were designed to offset drilling costs and included a minimum flow of 90,000 By all measures, the pilot enhanced recovery test was a success. Maximum flow rates were at least double the objective and the mean flow rate was about 1.5 times the objective. The high flow rate also provided a means to washout the fine grained material near the wellbore and expose new surfaces to the raffinate. Electrical resistivity geophysics was conducted to observe volumetric changes to the formation during rinsing. The resistivity parameter is sensitive to a number of phenomena occurring simultaneously, including saturation, porosity, and solution conductivity. The time lapse models showed a low resistivity body increasing outward from the well screen. When the well was shut in at the end of the day, the size of the body shrank until rinsing resumed the following day. The final position of the body at the end of each individual rinse test was used to infer the lateral solution coverage. Solution coverage was shown to be the largest in S1 and S2 (radial distance of approximately 17 Monitoring the metallurgical data from solution samples near the rinse wells showed that the potential for recovery of copper from underleached ore is significant. The copper grades exceeded the copper grade test objective by a factor of three in many cases and upwards to a factor of five for a short period in a single monitoring well. Additionally, the high grades were sustained for an extended period of time. Actual leaching was confirmed by the lowered free acid, which was significantly lower than those samples that represented surface irrigation. In fact, it appears that the acid consumption is about three times greater during rinsing than surface irrigation, which could be attributed to the greater surface area exposed during the hydraulic alteration of the pore space and fluidization of small particles and possibly from breakdown of diabase. If this is the case, then the hydraulics and kinetics are inextricably linked, which has implications for future detailed phenomenological models that wish to incorporate more heterogeneity in model parameters to understand localized processes. That is, it will be necessary to obtain site specific hydraulic data associated with the particle size distribution, which was shown to vary widely in this heap. Using upscaled design parameters from the analysis of S1, the entire heap leach pad could accommodate approximately 170 wells spaced 31 Lastly, the economics of this operation can be shown to be highly profitable, even at low grades, if conducted at the end of the mine's life prior to closure. At this point, a minimal crew and equipment are needed to continue the rinsing and the costs per pound of copper to produce reduces by almost $1 USD compared to full mine operation with blasting, hauling, and stacking, in conjunction with surface irrigation. Copper liberation from the injection test was calculated from the S1 injection well by integrating the time series of copper grade from wells M1, M2, M4, and M5. The grade from each well was integrated separately and an average grade was calculated by dividing by the time period over which the test was performed. The same procedure was performed for the raffinate grade, which was subsequently subtracted from the total grade to produce a net grade. The average net copper grade (in mass per volume) from each well was then multiplied by the volume of injected raffinate to calculate the mass of copper liberated during the test as follows: Copper liberated Copper liberated Copper liberated