Hydrolysates from sweet sorghum bagasse pretreatment normally contains hexose and pentose sugars, and this complex mixture of sugars presents a challenge for a single microorganism to effectively ferment all sugars to ethanol. In this study, synergistic effects on the co-fermentation of the hydrolysates using Sacchromyces cerevisiae and Zymomonas mobilis ATCC31825 at different ratios were studied. An inoculum of mixed cultures (1:3 and 5:10 g/L, Z. mobilis to S. cerevisiae ratios) was investigated. Each mixed culture was added to the hydrolysates at pH 4.8 and incubated 32 °C for 24 h. The mixture of Z. mobilis to S. cerevisiae at 5:10 g/L showed the highest synergistic effect with ethanol yields of 0.5 g/g. Since the yield for co-culture was significantly higher than the sum of yields from each microorganism, the improvements can be directly related to co-fermentation of hydrolysate by S. cerevisiae and Z. mobilis.Lignocellulose-based feedstock in the production of biofuels and speciality chemicals provides several potential benefits and is a seemingly better alternative to the use of fossil fuels. Utilisation of bio-based fuels and chemicals is renewable and stimulates practises that are synonymous with environmentally friendliness and energy sustainability. Currently, with the expansion in knowledge and techniques on pretreatment methods, microbial transformations and fermentation, a number of precursors and fuels can be produced with potential industrial applications Sweet sorghum bagasse (SSB), a lignocellulosic fraction of the sweet sorghum plant after the juice is extracted, has inherent fermentable sugars whose composition may vary depending on the cultivar type and climatic conditions. However, on average 34–45% is cellulose, which is a linear polymer of hexose sugar (glucose); 25–27% is hemicellulose, a branched heteropolymer consisting of pentoses (xylose and arabinose) and hexoses (such as glucose, galactose and mannose); and 18–21% is lignin, a heteropolymer of Efforts to improve fermentation xylose/glucose mixtures have seen the utilisation of genetic manipulation of wild-type strain such as Simultaneous saccharification and co-fermentation (SSCF) have been carried out to circumvent these difficulties and to improve the fermentation efficiency In the present study, the combined effect of  Commercial The medium with nutrient contents for both Prior to fermentation, microwave-acid/alkali pretreatment was done according to The microwave pretreated (described according to All sugar and ethanol analyses were done using high performance liquid chromatography (HPLC). An Agilent series 1200 HPLC fitted with a Shodex SP0810 column and RI detector was used. The samples were filtered through a 0.2 μm micro pore size syringe filter after microwave pretreatment and fermentation for analyses. The different sugars (glucose, sucrose, xylose, mannose, arabinose, galactose), and ethanol were quantified using a set of standard calibration curves. Sugars and ethanol for standard calibrations were obtained from Sigma Aldrich and Rochelle Chemicals with 98–99 and 99.9% purity, respectively. The mobile phase used was water at a flow rate of 1 mL min Spectrometer (SHIMADZU) at a wavelength of 600 nm was used to quantify cell growth during fermentation. The absorbances for each sample at different fermentation times were recorded The values of sugar concentration derived from SSB pretreatment experiments were calculated by applying Equations Fermentation by This means that there was a need to use a strain that would be able to ferment both xylose and glucose. The concentration of ethanol produced during the course of fermentation of the broth by  These results ( After fermentation of sugars to ethanol using the different microorganisms ( A combination of the two microorganisms in the same sugar mixture was also investigated in this study. It was found that The microbial co-cultures of To evaluate the optimum ratio of The concentration of initial sugar (0.82 g/g) decreased rapidly to 0.31 g/g while producing the highest amount of ethanol (0.32 g ethanol/g of total sugar) within 12 h. Thereafter, concentrations of total sugar and ethanol did not change until 24 h fermentation. The results show incomplete fermentation since there was still about 0.3 g/g of the sugar substrate that remained at the end of the fermentation period. This residual sugar would be attributed to xylose that could not be taken up by both The concentration of  Hydrolysate from SSB pretreated at 300 W was fermented by adding 3 g/L of An initial reducing sugar concentration 0.27 g/g was obtained and used in the co-fermentation. The results show a gradual drop in the total sugar concentration in the first 3 h due to the lag phase. A maximum ethanol yield (0.18 g/g) was produced after 12 h of fermentation and the yields did not improve despite continuing the fermentation for another 12 h. The lower ethanol yields were due to a low concentration of total reducing sugar that was used in the fermentation. The low yields of ethanol in this experiment were expected, since the hydrolysate had a low total sugar concentration obtained from alkaline pretreatment. Moreover, other possible explanations could be the presence of inhibitors during fermentation, which may have resulted from microwave-assisted alkaline pretreatment of lignocellulose. In this fermentation, higher concentrations of  The low ethanol yield could be attributed to the increased inhibitors in the fermentation media. The results are consistent with findings by other researchers   This work showed that combination of We would like to express our sincere gratitude to the Agricol Research Company (Potchefstroom) for supplying sweet sorghum bagasse, and the Department of Microbiology for allowing us to work in their laboratory. We also thank the School of Chemical and Minerals Engineering for letting this research a success.