New methods for microstructural analysis of fault rocks (new shape descriptors for convexity/concavity and angularity) and visualization (D-mapping) were developed and tested on experimentally deformed granites. The samples were deformed at 300 °C, 500 MPa confining pressure, and 10−4 s−1 strain rate. SEM micrographs of the resulting fault rocks were used for digital image analysis.
                  Cracked fragments and mature gouges can be differentiated on the basis of the slope D on a log–log plot of the grain size distribution. Both types of fault rocks exhibit two slopes: for grain sizes < 2 μm, D
                     ≈1.0 for both types; for grain sizes > 2 μm, cracked material shows D
                     ≈1.6 while gouge has D
                     ≥2.0. In the case of the gouge, the fractal nature of the grain size distribution is questioned. The D-mapping technique was introduced to visualize the spatial distribution and connectivity of gouge and cracked material in fault rocks.
                  Grain shape analyses show clear differences between cracked minerals and fault gouges and between quartz and K-feldspar grains. The aspect ratio is measured as L/S (longest/shortest diameter): L/S of cracked quartz (range: 1.0–8.0, average 2.9) is higher than that of K-feldspar (range: 1.0–4.0, average 2.1). L/S of gouge is always low (range: 1.0–3.0, average 1.5). From the difference between a shape and its convex envelope, two shape descriptors are derived: the paris factor and the area difference deltA. Both show decreasing values from cracked to gouge material, and the values of cracked K-feldspar (range: 0–100%, average: 15%) are higher than those for quartz (range: 0–100%, average: 5%). Gouge always shows low paris factors (range: 0–20%, average: 2.5%). From the histogram of vertex angles, the Ω-value (fraction of angles <0°) is derived: Ω of cracked material is significantly higher (30–40%) than that of gouge (10–20%). Automatic digitization enhances the distinction between cracked and gouge material.Fault rocks predominantly result from brittle deformation processes. Throughout geological time fault rocks have been produced in the shallow crust, under relatively low pressure-temperature conditions and at relatively fast strain rates. Fault rocks are intimately associated with earthquakes, and have been studied in boreholes that traverse active faults, such as the Nojima Fault in Japan (e.g. Fault rocks typically occur along fault surfaces. They are composed of gouge and mineral and rock fragments of all sizes and shapes ( In the course of fracturing and continued deformation of the fault rocks, the originally angular fragments may be rounded by abrasion, re-fracturing and deformation. The analysis of the shape and shape changes during faulting (and afterwards during healing), and the study of the spatial (re-)arrangement of the particles are therefore of great importance ( The mechanical properties of fault rocks depend on their microstructural characteristics, which is why the quantification of fault rock microstructures is important. Fault rocks are commonly described by their grain size distribution (GSD), by the shape of the fragments, and the spatial distribution or arrangement of the fragments (e.g., The paper is restricted to the analysis of a small number of samples obtained from experimental deformation and the development of suitable analytical tools. The focus is on differentiating the deformational behaviour of quartz and K-feldspar. The samples analyzed in this study were obtained by experimental deformation of granite rock. The granite was collected in the Val Verzasca, Switzerland, and consists of 35% quartz, 29% plagioclase, 27% K-feldspar and 7% mica (mainly biotite). For the experiments, cylinders of 10.44 to 12.33 mm length and 6.39 mm diameter were cored. The samples were dried during 26 h at 110 °C and atmospheric pressure and wrapped in a Cu- or Ni-foil. After adding 0.2 wt.% water they were sealed in a 0.15 mm thick gold jacket. The axial compression experiments were performed in a Griggs type solid medium apparatus (a detailed description is given by Two samples (38nk and 64nk) were deformed under controlled conditions at After deformation, the samples were vacuum impregnated with epoxy, cut along the cylinder axis from where doubly polished thin sections were prepared. Backscatter SEM images were recorded on a Philips XL30 ESEM (ZMB Basel) using increasing magnifications from 100× to 20,000×. The investigated grain sizes span approximately 2.5 orders of magnitude. The SEM images were processed using Adobe Photoshop and ImageSXM (developed from NIH Image, for MacOSX; public domain: The terminology used here is illustrated in Based on previous analyses, we expect the GSD of both cracked material and gouge to be different; in comparison with published data we would expect different fractal dimensions. In this paper, however, we will not refer to the slope of the GSD (on a log–log plot) as “fractal dimension”; rather we will use the more neutral terms “slope In this section the analytical tools will be developed and applied to two types of microstructures, “cracked” and “gouge”, from sample 12nk as shown in The bitmap ( The aim of this technique is to show the spatial distribution of gouge and cracked material. The gouge is shown as a distinct but homogeneous phase, whereas the cracked material is further differentiated (colour-coded or contoured) according to local variations of the From the bitmaps of the cracked and gouge microstructures, the area percentages of matrix (white in To explain the relation between matrix density and To obtain the reverse dependence of  A number of shape factors have been described in the literature (e.g., We used an expanded version of the program “ishapes” (Fortran; download from To describe the shape of grains and fragments in fault rocks we used the following measures: The aspect ratio ( The “paris factor” is defined as the relative difference between the length of the outline of a shape ( The shape factor “deltA” measures the relative differences between the area of a shape (A) and the area of its convex envelope (AE) (see On the histogram of angles, the indicator “ Four simple shapes shown in With a view towards practical applications, we wanted to make sure that the “ishapes” program can be used with automatically digitized outlines, thus avoiding the effort of manual digitization and the associated bias. To test this, we used ImageSXM and we exported the coordinates of outlines of a number of fragments (shown in It is well known that the orientation distribution function of lines that connect points on a square grid is far from being homogeneous ( by prescribing a minimum relative distance between digitized points defined with respect to the size of the particle (see by prescribing a minimum absolute pixel distance between coordinates points (see The effect of the minimum distance between digitized points along the outline, i.e., of the minimum length of the segments, on the result of the analysis of angles is evident in the histograms of For the test analysis of the four shapes ( For the analysis of our type microstructures (“cracked” and “gouge”, shown in We now discuss the application of our new methods of analysis to experimentally produce fault rocks. We have selected two sequences of SEM images taken at increasing magnifications (    It has become a standard procedure to characterize fault rocks by their GSD. The measurements are done either in two dimensions on images ( In a comparison of image analysis and sieving it has been shown that the shape of the grains is an important parameter influencing the sieving size distribution of fractured objects ( Our data consistently show that the GSDs of cracked material and of gouge have two separate slopes, The process of self-similar cataclasis has been invoked to explain the fractal dimension of the GSD of fault gouges ( Self-similar fragmentation processes cannot explain fractal dimensions in excess of 3, and therefore the interpretation of the slope In a general way, the GSD and the area percentage of what appears as matrix on a given image (   The white arrow (in Assuming that the portion visible in The program “ishapes” calculates a number of shape descriptors, of which we use the aspect ratio ( Both the paris factor and the deltA values display considerable scatter ( Automatic digitization (as in At low magnifications, i.e., for larger grain sizes, the shapes of cracked feldspar and quartz are quite different, while the gouges are similar, as has been discussed above. At the highest magnifications, however, gouge and cracked grains are virtually indiscernable ( The vertex angles histograms of cracked and gouge materials are significantly different ( We used the public domains software “ImageSXM”, a number of macros (“Lazy D-map”), and an improved version of the image analysis program “ishapes” to quantify the microstructures of granitoid fault rock, in particular to distinguish cracked material and gouge through grain size distributions (GSDs) and grain shapes. The GSDs of fault rocks have been measured and the slopes, The results comply with a self-similar process of fragmentation for the cracked material, but the alleged fractal nature of gouge is questioned. D-mapping (spatial visualization of the slope The aspect ratio of particles ( The paris factors and deltA values of cracked material display a wide scatter. Average values of the paris factor are ∼ The histogram of vertex angles discriminates cracked materials from gouges: Automatic digitization lowers the bias and improves the distinction between cracked material and gouges. Discussions with Anne-Marie Boullier, Grenoble, Thomas Walmann, PGP Oslo, and Holger Stünitz, Basel, have been very stimulating and helpful. Financial support through the Swiss National Science Foundation (Project 200020-100616 and 200020-108082) is gratefully acknowledged. We also wish to thank Karen Mair and Akito Tsutsumi for careful reviews, and, last but not least, Karsten Kunze for excellent editorial comments. The fragmentation of a cube (size The fractal dimension, In 2 dimensions, the probability of sectioning a fragment is proportional to its size. Therefore, The volume density is given by: Transposing the spread sheet that was used to calculate the cumulative volume as function of To convert area percentages to volume densities we use the simple stereological relation: