Mineral carbon dioxide sequestration binds carbon dioxide by reacting it with magnesium silicate minerals to form solid magnesium carbonates that are ready for disposal. Research on mineral sequestration has focused on enhancing process kinetics in aqueous processing schemes. High costs of these processes are associated with mineral processing, such as ultrafine grinding, or the consumption of acids and bases, which are required to speed up silicate mineral dissolution kinetics. Neutral organic salts such as sodium oxalate, and citrate enhance dissolution kinetics of serpentine in the circum-neutral pH range appropriate for mineral carbonate precipitation and have potential for use in an enhanced carbonation process. Concentration and temperature dependencies for the dissolution of antigorite serpentine in the presence of the citrate ion are experimentally derived under weakly acidic conditions. Rates are shown to be several orders of magnitude higher in the presence of citrate than in the weakly acidic solution alone.Mineral carbon dioxide sequestration is a proposed greenhouse gas mitigation technology that binds carbon dioxide (CO For reasons of mineral availability, cation concentration, and reactivity, the focus of mineral carbonation research has been on the carbonation of rocks rich in the magnesium silicate minerals serpentine (Eq. Research in mineral sequestration has focused mainly on aqueous carbonation processes ( Aqueous carbonation of mineral silicates involves two steps: Dissolution of cations from the silicate minerals into solution followed by nucleation and growth of carbonate precipitate ( If dissolution and precipitation are to take place simultaneously in an aqueous system, conditions must exist such that the system is undersaturated with respect to the silicate mineral but supersaturated with respect to the carbonate phase ( Some have sought to overcome slow dissolution kinetics by dissolving the silicate minerals in strongly acidic solutions. This results in the requirement to add base to the leachate solution in subsequent process stages so as to allow for the formation of the solid carbonate product. These processes have been described as pH-swing processes ( Eq. Compared to dissolution rates in strongly acidic systems, proton-promoted dissolution kinetics will be slow under the weakly acidic to basic conditions that allow for carbonate precipitation, because values for the pre-exponential factor, Both organic and inorganic ionic (non-acidic) species can promote the dissolution of silicate minerals ( In this study, we have sought to identify non-acidic ionic solution species (e.g. the citrate ion) that enhance the silicate dissolution without inherently being consumed in chemical reactions, and that work in the weakly acidic to weakly basic pH conditions that are suitable for the precipitation of carbonate phases. In addition, we have focused our experimental work on enhancing the dissolution of serpentine, among the least reactive and most abundant of the ultramafic minerals ( Experimental work has focused on enhancing the dissolution of the antigorite serpentine (referred to as serpentine from here forward) in weakly acidic solutions. Serpentine has been dissolved in various solutions of neutral salts in the presence of a constant CO Starting material was untreated serpentine collected from tailings at the Belvidere mountain asbestos mine in Northern Vermont. Two size distributions were sieved from tailings ( One set of experiments was used to compare the dissolution in different salt solutions. For these experiments 3 Another set of experiments was performed to understand the salt concentration and temperature dependence of citrate promoted dissolution. To obtain the temperature dependence of the citrate-promoted dissolution, 1 In all experiments, ground serpentine is reacted in 1 Samples are analyzed for magnesium content using a Buck Instruments AA flame spectrophotometer with an error of 5% of the measured concentration. The instrument can characterize magnesium concentrations accurately in a range of 0.1–1 The pH could not be measured in situ. In addition, the thermodynamic properties of the citrate molecule have not been measured in the temperature and solution composition range required to model precise pH values for the experimental conditions used. A maximum pH range in the absence of the organic compounds was constructed based on the CO The organic salts in solution could provide buffering capacity that prevents the pH from falling below the p The authors took the commonly used approach of using experimental conditions such that the system was far from equilibrium with respect to serpentine solubility ( The activation energy, Assuming no breakage or agglomeration of particles occurs, the time-varying change of the distribution Once the initial particle size distribution, All samples were taken after the experiment reached steady state temperature, which took between 20 and 45 Results are provided as the fraction of the sample dissolved versus time from when the reactor was closed. The fraction of the mineral dissolved is calculated as the ratio of magnesium in solution to total magnesium in the sample. In three experiments where it was measured, silica dissolution was found to be congruent with magnesium, until the solution was saturated with respect to silica, justifying the use of magnesium as a proxy for total mineral dissolution ( In experiments with NaCl, NH One gram samples of serpentine were dissolved in 0.5 One gram samples of serpentine were dissolved in 0.05, 0.1, 0.3, and 0.5 Aqueous silica was measured for experiments with citrate in which the temperature was varied between experiments. Results are shown in Mineral dissolution rate laws are generally published as a rate normalized to a surface area in units of [mol With that qualification in mind, the concentration and temperature dependence of citrate promoted dissolution derived in this study can be used to construct a rate law of the form of Eq. Dissolution experiments in inorganic and acetate salt solutions show that dissolution of serpentine in these solutions is of little interest for an industrial scale mineral carbon sequestration process. Enhanced dissolution in organic acids and in citrate solutions in particular has been previously observed for silicate minerals ( Identifying a catalyst for promoting the dissolution of metal-bearing silicate minerals under pH conditions that allow for the formation of solid carbonate phases would represent a significant breakthrough in the development of a direct aqueous carbonation process. With this work we have shown that dissolution-promoting organic anions such as citrate or oxalate can increase the dissolution rates of serpentine by three orders of magnitude over proton-promoted dissolution rates in the pH regime in which carbonate phases are stable. Extending the resources base of a mineral sequestration process to include serpentinized rocks greatly expands the geographical applicability of the technology as well as the overall CO We have not demonstrated that these salts can be used as catalytic solution additives. Further work is required to understand the conditions necessary to form carbonate phases in solutions containing these neutral organic salts. The formation of soluble metal–ligand complexes in the bulk solution will both reduce the metal activity in solution and reduce the proportion of “free” or uncomplexed ligand. Lowered magnesium activity will lead to a lower saturation index of the carbonate phases and more total metal cation will need to be in solutions to precipitate carbonate minerals. Reduced free ligand in solution will lower the dissolution enhancement effect ( What has been identified are solution additives that greatly enhance the dissolution rate of serpentine in a pH regime in which carbonate phases are stable. This is the first test that must be passed by any potential catalyst in this process. Despite the potential limitations, the magnitude of the enhancement observed in this study is sufficiently large to encourage further investigation of the potential utility of such additives in a full carbonation process. The authors thank the American Iron and Steel Institute, the Link Energy Foundation, and the NSF IGERT Program in Earth Sciences and Applied Mathematics at Columbia University for financial support of this research. Marjorie Gale of the Vermont Geological Survey and Howard Manosh kindly helped us obtain samples of serpentine for use in this study.