We integrated chemical, enzymatic, isotopic and molecular approaches to investigate both straw decomposition and its priming effect (PE) on native soil organic carbon (SOC) decomposition in soils with 23 years of application of chemical fertilizer (NPK) and partial substitution of chemical fertilizer by organic manure (NPKM). We found that NPK and NPKM past application significantly increased decomposition of straw. The increases in straw decomposition were not correlated with the abundances of microbiome assimilating straw carbon, but were significantly correlated with abundances of total bacteria, fungi and activities of cellulose-degrading enzymes. In addition, application of NPK did not change straw-induced PE while application of NPKM markedly reduced PE. The variation of PE with different past fertilization was correlated with the abundance of residue-stimulated fungi. The unchanged PE with NPK application in the presence of enriched nutrients and reduced pH was probably due to residue-promoted growth of acid-tolerant SOC-decomposing taxa (unclassified bacteria families belong to Acidobacteria GP3, Gamaproteobacteria and WPS-2 and unclassified fungal families belong to Chaetothyriales and Agaricomycetes). Our research sheds light on the complex processes of carbon transformation in the soils undergoing different long-term nutrient management.Crop residue and organic manure contain abundant organic carbon and elements essential for crop growth ( The processes of organic carbon decomposition in soil are complex. Previously, it has been generally accepted that residue decomposition rates are controlled by macroclimate at the large geographic scale ( The straw entering soil can increase or decrease the decomposition of native organic carbon, a process known as the priming effect (PE). Several decades of research show that the PE is under complex control by many factors and through diverse mechanisms, which are usually controversial in different conditions ( To test these two hypotheses, we used highly enriched The soils were collected from three treatments in a long-term fertilization experiment located at Qiyang, Hunan, China. The detailed information on this experiment was described in previous report ( The experiment was set-up with completely randomized design. One factor was long-term fertilization regime (CK, NPK, NPKM), the other factor was carbon addition with 3 treatments (no carbon addition control, Gas samples (10 ml) were taken from the headspace, following ventilation and resealing for 4 h, at 1, 3, 8, 17, 22 and 31 days after straw addition. The concentrations of CO The respired carbon derived from soil or residue with residue amendment was calculated with a two-pool mixing model ( Priming effect (PE) was calculated as: 1,4-β-glucosidase (BG, EC 3.2.1.21), cellobiohydrolase (CBH; EC 3.2.1.91) and phenol oxidase (PhOx; EC1.10.3.2) were selected to represent enzymes depolymerizing cellulose and lignin, respectively. Enzymatic measurements were conducted immediately on fresh soil samples as described previously ( Microbial biomass carbon and MBC atom% DNA was extracted from 0.5 g of each soil sample using the Fast DNA SPIN Kit for Soil and FastPrep-24 machine (MP Biomedicals, CA, USA) according to the manufacturer's instructions. Effective DNA exaction was confirmed by agarose gel electrophoresis and extracts were stored at −20 °C until use. We performed qPCR to determine the abundances of bacteria and fungi as our previous report ( Ultracentrifugation was performed using procedures modified from our previous report ( DNA for microbial community determination were diluted to 2 ng μl Sequences with quality scores greater than 25 and without mismatches between the barcode and primer were processed further. The sequences were trimmed to 200 bp before clustering with UPARSE at a 97% similarity level ( We defined a microbial taxon as a Statistics was conducted on R software ( Soil respiration rate without straw addition declined continuously during the 31-d incubation ( The pattern of decomposition rate of straw in the three fertilizer treatments was almost the same as that of total respiration with straw addition ( The priming effect (PE) induced by the straw addition of all the three treatments first increased and then declined ( When expressed as per unit SOC, the order of total respiration and straw decomposition both reversed to CK > NPK > NPKM. In addition, PE of NPK soil became significantly smaller than that of CK soil. Both long-term fertilizer application and straw addition significantly increased BG activity ( Both long-term fertilizer application and straw addition significantly increased CBH activity ( The main effect of fertilization on PhOx activity was significant ( When expressed as enzyme activity per unit SOC, the differences between the fertilizer treatments shrank. BG and CBH activities in CK and NPK soil became not significant. In addition, PhOx activity in NPKM soil became significantly lower than in CK soil. The main effects of fertilization (two-way ANOVA, The main effects of fertilization and straw addition on fungal abundance were also significant ( The main effects of fertilization and straw addition on bacterial diversity were significant ( Unconstrained PCoA analysis showed that both bacterial and fungal communities in the three fertilization regimes separated from each other, whereas the effects of straw addition were much less apparent ( At the phylum level, bacterial community of NPK soil was most different from that of CK ( At the phylum level, NPK reduced the relative abundance of Zygomycota while increased the relative abundance of Ascomycota ( Fertilization significantly changed the proportions of Both fertilization and straw addition significantly changed the abundances of SOC-decomposing bacteria stimulated by straw addition in CK were dominated by Acidobacteria ( Straw decomposition was significantly and positively correlated with BG and CBH activities, and abundances of total bacteria and fungi ( It is surprising that the results of the present study did not support our hypothesis that straw decomposition rate is positively correlated with abundance of the straw-carbon-assimilating microbiome in soils following long-term past applications of NPK and NPKM. Higher straw decomposition rates in NPK and NPKM did not correspond to a greater proportion or abundance of On the contrary, we found that the decomposition rate across the fertilizer treatments was significantly correlated with N and P contents, and the abundances of total bacteria and fungi. This is consistent to the stoichiometry theory that greater nutrient availability accelerates mineralization of organic carbon due to an increased growth of the microbial communities ( In support of our second hypothesis, we found that straw-induced PE with long-term applications of NPK and NPKM was correlated with the abundance of straw-stimulated SOC-decomposing and residue-decomposing fungi. However, the PE was correlated with the proportion but not with the abundance of residue-decomposing bacteria, and not with both the proportion and abundance of primed SOC-decomposing bacteria. The results resemble a previous report that fungi are the predominant actors of cellulose-induced PE with variable nutrient availability ( The unchanged PE with long-term application of NPK in the presence of enriched soil C, N, P contents and reduced soil pH was inconsistent with reports that nutrients reduce soil PE ( We used SIP to identify straw-decomposing and SOC-decomposing microbiomes. This technique is powerful in investigating the In summary, we integrated chemical, enzymatic, isotopic and molecular approaches to investigate both straw decomposition and its priming effect on native SOM decomposition in soils receiving long-term NPK and NPKM application. We found that long-term NPK and NPKM application significantly increased short-term decomposition of straw. The increases in straw decomposition were closely associated with microbial capacity to depolymerize cellulose that supported by whole bacterial and fungal community. In addition, past application of NPK did not change straw-induced PE while past application of NPKM markedly reduced PE. The variation of PE with different past fertilization was closely related to the abundance of fungi that was stimulated by residue addition. These results have implications for our understanding of complex carbon transformation with long-term nutrient managements. None. This work was jointly supported by The