The reconstruction of the anterio-posterior inclination of the medial aspect of the orbital floor, despite a wide 360° exposure, including coronal and conjunctival incisions, is a challenging task in severe injuries of the orbit with massive comminution and complete displacement of the medial orbital wall and orbital floor.
                  Out of a total of 20 patients with orbital fractures, five underwent a surgical intervention of repositioning the medial aspect of the orbital floor and especially the transition area between the orbital floor and medial orbital wall, using navigation-aided procedures. Using the mirroring tool of the Stryker–Leibinger STN-system, post-operative CTs indicated an average difference of the globe position of −4.9% between the operated side and the unaffected side, depending on the position of the medial aspect of the orbital floor. Navigation-aided procedures proved to be an essential precondition for achieving precise and predictable results in orbital reconstruction.
                  In such cases, unlike those with an intact medial orbital wall remnant as a surgical target, bone grafts for reconstruction of the orbital floor cannot be implanted as onlay grafts.A precise repositioning, or reconstruction, of the orbital walls, especially of the transition area between orbital floor and medial orbital wall, is a key procedure in orbital trauma management, and contributes to a high degree to the normal function and aesthetics of the midface. From January 1999 to July 2001, 20 patients with unilateral post-traumatic orbital deformities underwent computer-assisted surgical reconstruction of the orbit. Five patients presented with severe injuries to the orbit, including a massive destruction of the transitional area between the medial orbital wall and medial aspect of the orbital floor. These five patients were operated on, using coronal and transconjunctival approaches. Intraoral incisions were performed additionally for those patients also suffering from zygomatic, or midface fractures. Harvested calvarial split-bone grafts were used for the reconstruction of the orbital wall. Spiral-CT data sets (scanner: Plus 4, 1 For computer-assisted pre-operative planning at the workstation, the full data set was adapted to the surgeon’s requirements such as the grey scale calibration of hard and/or soft tissue values. The patient’s individual anatomy was assessed in multiplanar (axial, coronal, sagittal) and 3D views ( Virtual corrections were possible by drawing new anatomical contours, or designing virtual implants at the workstation. With the mirroring tool, ideal virtual reconstructions of the target area, at the transitional zone at the medial orbital floor, were created by superimposing and comparing the unaffected and the affected side. In side-to-side comparison, special attention was given to the correction of vertical height of the orbital floor at the transition to the medial orbital wall ( Intraoperative navigation was carried out by frameless stereotaxy with three infrared cameras controlling the pointer, via integrated light emitting diodes (LEDs). The patient’s position was identified with a Digital Reference Frame (DRF) fixed rigidly to the Mayfield’s clamp. The virtual image at the workstation and the patient were matched by an individual registration with four markers in the maxilla ( The quantitative analysis of orbital changes included pre- and post-operative CT measurements of the orbital width and depth and the determination of changes of the globe projection, such as the distance between the entrance of the optic canal and the corneal surface. The differences between the virtually planned and the achieved results were analysed at three defined points—on the medial orbital wall, the transitional zone between the medial aspect of the orbital floor and the medial orbital wall, and the orbital floor ( Intraoperative, pointer-based navigation was successfully carried out at the STN-workstation in five reconstructions of the medial aspect of the orbital floor/medial orbital wall for positioning of bone grafts. In the three zones of measurement, the post-operative CT scan demonstrated a maximum discrepancy of 2.7 The mean orbital volumes for the unaffected orbits measured pre-operatively were 26.13 ± 2.70 Pre-operatively, the mean value of the globe projection of the unaffected side was 50.75 ± 3.05 A 20-year-old female patient suffered from a massive enophthalmus of the left orbit following a road accident. Reconstruction of a displaced zygomatic fracture and reconstruction of the outer orbital frame were performed 9 months later. The frontal view with the intruded and caudally displaced globe is shown in The virtual position of the bone grafts and amounts of intended corrections of the sagittal eye projection were drawn at the workstation ( Via a combined coronal and trans-conjunctival approach, bone grafts were inserted for augmentation of the medial orbital wall and the medial aspect of the orbital floor. The transition area between both sides was contoured with bone chips. Mirroring from the unaffected right to the injured left side allowed for a precise positioning and control of the bone grafts. An additional bone graft was placed at the lateral orbital wall to avoid a lateral displacement of the globe. The data obtained for contouring the virtually positioned, mirrored orbit, navigated during surgery, compared to those from post-operative CT-findings, demonstrated a side difference right/left of 1.8, 0.6 and 1.8 The refinements in pre-operative planning for cranio-maxillofacial surgery procedures have lead to major improvements in clinical outcomes. During surgery, navigation provides exact determination of transverse, cranio-caudal and postero-anterior dimensions within the orbit and precise control of the position of bone grafts. As the majority of traumatic, or tumour-related, orbital deformities are unilateral, navigation-aided surgery is an ideal adjunct to a precise reconstruction of the orbit, using the described side-to-side comparison method. The results show an average accuracy of 1 Using a twin-Digital Reference Frame (twin-DRF) may lead to further advances and even better conditions for precision in surgical procedures. For the exact control of the position of calvarial bone grafts, especially in situations when anatomical landmarks, such as, for example the medial height of the orbital floor, are lost, the use of intraoperative navigation is an essential precondition for the correction of severe orbital deformities. The introduction of CAS into cranio-maxillofacial surgery provides the surgeon with a highly reliable, constructive tool. This technique not only promotes safety in surgical interventions, but also opens a broadened spectrum of possible surgical approaches, especially in situations where anatomical landmarks for precise positioning of bone fragments, or bone grafts, are missing. Perspectives are navigation procedures based on cone beam tomography, with reduced radiation dosage and an easier data acquisition protocol (