The purpose of this study is to relate the combustion reactivity of lignite to its physical and chemical properties. Non-isothermal thermogravimetry, where the sample whose temperature increased at a linear rate (40 K/min) was heated in air, has been used to investigate the combustion reactivities of 25 lignite samples originating from different areas of Turkey. Since combustion reactivity is affected by the chemical and physical properties of coal, the combustion reactivity of the lignites used in this study was related to their proximate and ultimate analysis results and physical properties such as pore structure and surface area. The calculated activation energy values for the combustion reactions of the lignites ranged between 64 and 139 kJ/mol. Definite correlations between the activation energy values and the above-mentioned properties were found.The combustion efficiency of coal depends on a number of factors, some related to the operating conditions and others to the coal properties. In any furnace, the combustion of coal is primarily a matter of combustion of volatiles and char. The events that lead to combustion when a coal particle is progressively heated in air can be divided into three stages, viz (a) pyrolysis, with the evolution of volatile matter and consequent charring of the particle, (b) ignition and combustion of vaporized hydrocarbons and (c) at sufficiently high temperatures but even then only if sufficient oxygen can reach the particle surface, ignition and burning of the residual solid particle itself. Coal is a complex mixture of organic and inorganic compounds that affect its reactivity. Although noteworthy investigations have been made on the combustion of coal, the details are not known definitely. The macromolecular structure of coal varies with rank, and this variation influences its physical and chemical properties. The macromolecular structure of lignites consists of small aromatic units Because of the high surface area and high porosity, lignites are generally very reactive coals. Bituminous coals have lower porosities and lower total surface areas than lignites which results in a lower reactivity. Another reason for the high reactivity of lignites is the abundance of functional groups present which provide the potential for a variety of chemical reactions to occur The purpose of the present study is to investigate how the physical and chemical properties of lignite influence its reactivity. Non-isothermal thermogravimetry, in which the coal sample was heated in air whose temperature increased at a linear rate (40 K/min), have been used to investigate the combustion reactivities of 25 Turkish lignite samples. In the experiments, 25 lignite samples originating from different areas of Turkey were used. Samples were ground and sieved into a powder with a particle size of 250 μm. The proximate and ultimate analyses of the samples were performed according to ASTM standards The thermogravimetric analysis was performed using a Shimadzu TG 41 thermal analyzer. Forty milligram of coal samples were spread uniformly on the bottom of the crucible made of alumina. Dried air was selected as the oxidizing gas. The flow rate of air was fixed at 40 ml/min. The temperature was raised with a heating rate of 40 K/min to 1273 K and held for 30 min at this temperature. The proximate and ultimate analyses of the lignite samples are shown in The dynamic thermogravimetry technique is widely used to study the combustion of carbonaceous materials and also to estimate kinetic parameters such as the activation energy, frequency factor and reaction mechanism. In this study, burning profiles of the coal samples were used to calculate the activation energy values of the coal samples by the method of Coats–Redfern In the method of Coats–Redfern, the equation derived to calculate the activation energy values is given as A plot of A plot of the rate of weight loss against temperature while burning a sample in air has been called a “burning profile” The calculated activation energy values by the method of Coats–Redfern ranged between 64 and 139 kJ/mol. Since coal is a highly heterogeneous material, its activation energy may widely vary, even within a given rank. In general, the variation may arise from differences in the chemical nature or physical structure of the coal samples. The variations of activation energy values with volatile matter content calculated on the dry and dry-mineral matter free (dmmf) bases of the lignite samples are shown in The variation of activation energy with volatile matter content can also be explained with   The variation of activation energy with fixed carbon content (dmmf basis) is illustrated in Ignition of coal can be described as a process of achieving a continuing reaction between the coal and an oxidizer The ignition temperatures of the lignite samples used in this study were determined from their burning profiles. The ignition temperatures derived at constant heating rate from the burning profiles of the lignite samples lie in the range of 420–500 K. Essenhigh et al. The peak temperature of the burning profile at which the rate of weight loss due to combustion is a maximum is called the “peak temperature” ( The rate of weight loss at the burning profile peak temperature is called the “maximum combustion rate” ( Coal is a porous matter and the porosities of the lignite samples used in this study ranged between 20% and 50%. The distribution of pore size of coal is generally not simple, and during combustion, the pore structure is modified progressively by continued oxidation. Most of the surface of coal is associated with the micropores, but most of the porosity resides in the larger (macro)pores  The relationship between maximum combustion rate and conversion for the lignite samples is investigated. It was observed that all samples showed the same trend, and an example is represented in The second peak in The conclusions of this work are summarized as follows: The reactivity of coal may vary widely, even within a given rank. An increase in the volatile matter content causes a decrease in the activation energy, the higher the total carbon or fixed carbon content, the greater is the activation energy. Although the pore diameter and porosity of the lignite samples are progressively modified by continued combustion, the pore structure of the raw coal affects the activation energy. The variation of the activation energy with total surface area passes through a minimum. There are definite correlations between the characteristic temperatures of the burning profile and the activation energy values of the lignite samples. The combustion rate reached a maximum at about 30% conversion and decreased thereafter. However, at the temperature range of the secondary degasification, in which mainly methane and hydrogen is removed, the conversion tends to increase.