For the purpose of studying the mediation of organic matrix on the crystallization of calcium carbonate, water soluble matrix (WSM), acid soluble matrix (ASM) and acid insoluble matrix (AIM) were extracted from aragonite pearls and vaterite pearls respectively. Then, in-vitro calcium carbonate crystallization experiments under the control of these six organic matrices were carried out in the present study. Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) was utilized to observe the morphology of CaCO3 and Raman spectroscopy as a powerful technique was used to distinguish the crystal polymorph. Influences of the six kinds of organic matrices on the calcium carbonate crystal growth are proposed. ASM of vaterite pearls can induce vaterite to crystallize and WSM of aragonite pearls mediates to produce aragonite crystals. The single AIM membranes of the two pearls have no pronounced effect on the CaCO3 crystallization. Additionally, the crystal size obtained with the additive of WSM of the two kinds of pearls is smaller than that with the additive of ASM. Moreover, self-assembly phenomenon in the biomineralization process and the distorted morphology calcite are observed. Current results demonstrate important aspects of matrix protein-controlled crystallization, which is beneficial to the understanding of nacre biomineralization mechanism. Further study of the precise control of these matrix proteins on CaCO3 crystal growth is being processed.Calcium carbonate is one of the most abundant minerals in the world, and it is also widely produced in biomineralization processes, from biominerals such as pearl, nacre of mollusk shell and otolith In southern China, fresh water cultured pearls are generally gestated in The researchers have extracted and purified various organic matrices from nacreous layer of mollusk shells Currently, decalcification by Na Aragonite pearls and vaterite pearls gestated in CaCl Atomic force microscope (AFM, Mdeailar Lmaging Company) was used to provide information about surface morphology of AIM and electron diffraction scatter (EDS, Oxford Instruments) was used to character the elemental composition of AIM membranes to make sure the complete decalcification. The resulting CaCO In-vitro mineralization experiment is a convenient method to study the mechanism of biomineralization directly, which is to the benefit of affording basis theory for designing advanced materials. In the previous study, the organic matrix extracted from the natural biominerals was used to mediate the calcium carbonate crystal growth, leading to investigate the effect of the organic matrix on the regulation and control of biomineralization process. AFM and EDS results of these AIM membranes derived from aragonite pearls and vaterite pearls are shown in In many reports and in our previous research, insoluble matrix was either extracted from powders of mollusk shells or extracted as membranes, and the induced precipitations were isolated for characterization   On the basis of the results mentioned above, ASM of aragonite pearls and vaterite pearls can mediate to form a larger crystal size that is concentrated on the scale of 50 Three polymorphs of calcium carbonate crystals, calcite, aragonite and vaterite, are magnified in During the crystallization experiment with the additive of ASM from vaterite pearls, calcite as the thermodynamically stable polymorph of CaCO The control of organic matrix on the nucleation, growth and orientation of calcium carbonate is a considerably complicated process. The most crucial principles are as follows: (1) Nucleation energy of the crystal is reduced via the interfacial interactions. (2) Nucleation rate, location of nucleation, crystal form and orientation are controlled by the interfacial interactions between the functional groups of organic matrix and the ions in the supersaturated solution Among the different polymorphs of calcium carbonate, calcite crystal is more thermodynamically stable than aragonite crystal. Hence, calcite is the common polymorph in nature because the radius of the calcium ion is close to the limiting value for the transition from the rhombohedral calcite structure to the orthorhombic aragonite structure Besides the study of the extracted organic matrix, a large number of purified proteins, such as calcium-binding glycoprotein (48  A crystal structure can in principle be regarded as a manifestation of self-assembly and self-organization Self-assembly is not only involved in living organism or mimetic biological process, it is also detected in some materials that have no relationship with biological process The organic matrices extracted from aragonite and vaterite pearls are divided into acid insoluble matrix (AIM), acid soluble matrix (ASM) and water soluble matrix (WSM). In-vitro calcium carbonate crystal growth under the control of different organic matrices is investigated and discussed in the present study. ASM of vaterite pearls induces vaterite crystals and WSM of aragonite pearls mediates to produce aragonite crystals. The single AIM membranes of the two pearls have no pronounced effect on the CaCO The authors are grateful for the financial support from the