The abrasive wear performance of high-strength steels was evaluated by two kinds of designed laboratory test methods, i.e. the sliding abrasion test and the stirring wear test. Optical microscopy and scanning electron microscopy were utilized to observe the worn surfaces, microstructures and inclusions. The tested results show that the feeding of a small amount (1.5kg/t) of Ca–Mg–RE–Zr (RE, Rare Earth) composite cored wire replacing 0.31 (wt%) expensive Ni in the steels resulted in better mechanical properties and much better abrasive wear performance, which was attributed to the modification of inclusions and improvement of impact toughness by the addition of Ca–Mg–RE–Zr composite cored wire. Microcutting, microploughing and scratching were the main wear mechanisms in abrasive wear tests. The abrasive loss of high-strength steels was larger in the wet wear condition than that in the dry wear condition in the sliding abrasion test, which was caused by the increasing corrosion wear and reducing debris accumulation.Abrasive wear is a very serious and costly problem in mineral and mining processing and the transportation industry. To a certain extent, the wear properties can directly determine the mechanical parts or components. Three basic methods are often used to improve the wear properties in the development of wear resistant steels. The first is surface treatment, such as surface heat treatment and surface coating The high strength wear-resistant steels with the hardness of about 360 Feeding micro-additives into liquid steel is commonly practiced for microalloying and refining of high-strength steels. This relatively flexible and efficient method can significantly improve the performance of high strength steels due to the modification of inclusions Several methods are usually used to investigate wear resistance of steels Two kinds of high-strength low-alloy wear resistant steels were produced on an industrial scale. Steel 1 contained 0.31 (wt%) Ni. It was produced by the conventional processing. Steel 2 did not contain Ni. However, it was treated by feeding Ca–Mg–RE–Zr composite cored wire (1.5 The steels were hot-rolled to a final thickness of 30 Specimens were ground and polished using standardized techniques and etched in 4 The stirring wear test was designed to simulate a cement mixer working condition. A digital stirrer was utilized to perform the test. It drove the specimen bars stirring in the abrasive medium (small quartzite stones). The initial surface roughness of specimens was  A sliding abrasion test was designed to simulate the steel parts contact condition. Specimens with a length of 12 Before the sliding abrasion test, the specimens were ground and slightly polished using standardized techniques and etched in 4 The sliding abrasion test was done in the dry and wet conditions. In the dry wear condition, no water was dropped on the grinding paper. While in the wet wear condition, 5 The wear of the specimens was measured by thickness removal.  The measured mechanical properties of the investigated steels are listed in Three specimens were tested for each steel in stirring wear tests to get the average value. The measured weight losses of Steel 1 were 8.8±0.29 The worn surfaces of the specimens in the stirring wear test are shown in During the stirring wear test, wear occurred as a result of microcutting and microploughing. From the analysis of the scanning electron micrographs of the worn surface morphology ( In the sliding abrasion test, the measured thickness losses of the investigated steels are shown in  MnS is the extremely common inclusion in steels. It usually forms large MnS in steel in traditional industrial production. Large MnS inclusions can considerably reduce the toughness, ductility and fatigue strength of steels by acting as nucleation sites for voids and micro-cracks. De-bonding of the matrix alloy from such inclusions or fracture of inclusions can lead to void formation, ultimately resulting in lower mechanical properties. The feeding of Ca–Mg–RE–Zr composite cored wire into liquid steel increased the content of micro-alloying elements such as Ca, Mg, RE, Zr, etc. According to thermodynamics data, these elements are strong oxide-forming elements. During the steelmaking process, ZrO The addition of composite cored wire refined MnS inclusions and no clusters of MnS were observed in Steel 2. This is because the pre-formed ZrO The longitudinal length and frequency distribution of inclusions in the investigated steels are shown in The measured grain size indicates that the microstructure of Steel 2 is finer than that of Steel 1, which is attributed to the feeding of composite cored wire into Steel 2. On the one hand, the small composite inclusions in Steel 2 can provide nucleation sites of the solid phase. During the solidification, the dispersed small complex inclusions and compounds have high temperature stability, and they significantly retard the grain boundary migration. One the other hand, it has been confirmed that grain growth was strongly inhibited by the pinning effect of second phase particles Some works have indicated that the hardness of material has a significant influence on wear performance In the wear process, stress is concentrated around inclusions; and micro cracks tend to be formed around inclusions. The larger the inclusion is, the more cracks form around the inclusion. As the stress is increased or accumulated, the crack is continuously extended. In Steel 2, inclusions were refined and evenly dispersed, owing to the addition of composite cored wire. The stress is hard to concentrate around smaller inclusions. Thus, the sources of forming cracks were reduced, resulting in better wear performance. In the wear tests of the present work, microcutting, microploughing and scratching are main mechanisms during wear process. The hardness of the selected abrasives was much greater than the steel matrix. When under external stress, abrasives interacted with the contacted material surface. As the result of the multi-angular abrasive shapes and the inequitable acting directions, different types of wear morphologies form on the surface. For the same steel, the abrasive loss was larger in the wet wear condition than that in the dry wear condition in the sliding abrasion tests ( In the present work, two kinds of high-strength low-alloy wear resistant steels, which are often used in mining, electricity and transportation engineering, were investigated using two different types of laboratory wear tests, one simulating a cement mixer working condition and the other simulating a steel parts contact condition. The following results are to be noted: The basic microstructure of the investigated steels was tempered martensite. However, the Steel 2 treated by the feeding of composite cored wire had finer grains than that of Steel 1. The mechanical properties, such as tensile strength, hardness and impact toughness of Steel 2 was better than that of Steel 1. A small amount of Ca–Mg–RE–Zr composite cored wire feeding replaced 0.31 (wt%) of the expensive Ni and resulted in better mechanical properties. Feeding Ca–Mg–RE–Zr composite cored wire into the liquid steel refined large MnS inclusions into small composite inclusions and made them evenly dispersed within the steel matrix. The wear performance of Steel 2 treated by the feeding of composite cored wire was better than that of Steel 1, both in the stirring wear test and the sliding abrasion test. Microcutting, microploughing and scratching were the main wear mechanisms in the abrasive wear tests. The abrasive loss was larger in the wet wear condition than in the dry wear condition in sliding abrasion tests because of the increase in corrosion wear and the decrease in debris accumulation. The authors gratefully acknowledge the support from the