This work presents a novel leaching system involving NO2–Cu to oxidize and complex silver without the use of cyanide, ammonia or thiosulfate. It is possible to oxidize metallic silver through the reduction reaction of the nitrite ions, the cupric-nitrite complexes seem to be responsible for increasing the silver leaching kinetics; the nitrite ions act as a complexing agent for the silver ions in the solution. The effect of cupric ions concentration (0.05M, 0.1M and 0.2M) and nitrite ions concentration (1.0M, 1.35M and 1.5M) on the dissolution kinetics of silver was evaluated. Based on the results the best leaching conditions were worked out as: 1.5M nitrite ions and 0.2M copper ions at a natural pH of 5.0. This leaching solution dissolves 80% of silver within 6h. The effect of temperature on the dissolution kinetics of silver was studied at the room temperature till 30, 45, 50 and 55°C, showing a progressive increase in silver recovery from 7.69% to 10.38%, 28.62%, 44.7% and 53.93%, respectively in 30min. The kinetic analysis revealed that silver leaching depends on the temperature and rate controlling step corresponds to the silver dissolution through the chemical reaction. The apparent activation energy of the reaction is found to be 50.92kJ/mol, along with the enthalpy and entropy of activation values of 48.34kJ/mol and −139.05J/molK, respectively. The kinetic model corresponding to the silver leaching can be represented by the expression: 1−(1−x)1/3
                     =k0 exp. (−50.92/RT) t. The analysis of solid residue obtained after leaching at pH5 by XRD and SEM with elemental mapping showed the formation of a copper-hydroxysulfate species, brochantite, formed in the bulk solution and not on the silver particle surface. The leaching results of silver by the NO2–Cu system were also ratified by the species distribution diagrams.Cyanidation is the process traditionally employed worldwide for the extraction of silver and gold from different sources. Metallic silver can be found in different wastes. For example in the so-called urban ores, it is of environmental and economic importance to leach metallic silver from printed circuit boards (PCB's), electronics, spent catalysts and fabrics containing silver nanoparticles ( Recently, In view of the above, the current researches have aptly focused on exploring a new system to dissolve the precious metals from different resources without the use of cyanide, thiosulfate or thiourea. Mention may be made of a recent study in which In this work, use of a novel leaching system involving NO Thus at pH > Whereas, at pH The leaching solutions were prepared with analytical grade reagents and deionized water. The reagents used were: metallic silver (99.999%, 1–3 All silver leaching experiments were performed in an agitated batch reactor (250 The solid residues formed at 6 Silver leaching tests at different temperatures and kinetic aspects could be complemented with the thermodynamic analysis of the nitrite–copper system and characterization of the solid residue. In order to elucidate the predominant species (solid and liquid phase) formed in the nitrite-copper-silver system, Pourbaix and species distribution diagrams were constructed at different pH and room temperature representing the potential leaching conditions with the help of Medusa Software using the equilibrium data contained in the Hydra database ( This anodic reaction must occur simultaneously with a reduction reaction, which is likely at the acidic pH [Eq. Furthermore, cupric ions can be complexed with nitrite ions (copper-nitrite complexes), therefore, it is possible that cupric ions can work as a nitrite carrier which could catalyze the silver leaching kinetics. A look at Eq. In order to demonstrate the viability of the process, experiments were carried out for the leaching of silver at pH However, the low recovery of silver ( The solid residues were characterized to determine the surface morphology and phase identification by scanning electron microscopy and XRD, respectively. The SEM analysis ( Leaching experiments were carried out to optimize the recovery of silver while varying the concentrations of cupric and nitrite ions and results are presented in In order to determine the rate controlling step during the silver leaching in the present system the shrinking particle model (SPM) was employed to fit the leaching data given in Where, X Data in This is an interesting result as compared to the other alternatives e.g., in thiosulfate–EDTA and citrate ( The effect of nitrite ions on the silver recovery was also examined and data are presented in  The kinetic analysis presented in The solid residue obtained from the leaching solution C with 0.2 In order to validate the formation of copper hydroxysulfate species in the solid residue during the silver leaching with 0.2 The presence of the Cu The solid residue obtained with the leaching solution C ( The effect of temperature on the leaching kinetics was studied using the best leaching conditions optimized in the previous section (1.5 The silver recovery results shown in The leaching of silver at room temperature was compared with that of 55 Temperature dependence was used to estimate the apparent activation energy. The activation energy value > Where k To calculate the apparent activation energy, Arrhenius plot (lnk vs T The apparent activation energy calculated for the leaching system is 50.92 In this work a novel leaching system involving NO The leaching of silver at different temperatures and the calculated enthalpy of activation (48.34 Gabriela Alvarado Macías and Fabiola Nava-Alonso are grateful to CONACyT (México) for the postgraduate scholarship and to the sabbatical support received, respectively. Also, the collaboration of Ana Elena Muñiz, Felipe Márquez, Sergio Rodríguez Arias and Socorro García in this investigation is duly recognized.