The progress of the technology is directly related to the growth of production and consumption of electrical/electronics equipment, especially of personal computers. This type of equipment has a relatively short average lifetime, 2–3 years. The amount of defective or obsolete equipment has been increasing substantially; consequently its disposition and/or recycling should be studied.
                  In this work, printed circuit boards, which are used in personal computers, were studied in order to recover the metals in the circuit boards through mechanical processing, such as crushing, screening, as well as magnetic and electrostatic separation.
                  The results obtained demonstrate the feasibility of using these processes to separate metal fractions from polymers and ceramics, and that it is possible to obtain a fraction concentrated in metals containing more than 50% on average of copper, 24% of tin and 8% of lead.The quantity of electro/electronic equipment produced nowadays is very high and it has been constantly increasing due to the growth in the consumption of these goods by the population as well as the relatively short lifetime of this equipment. On the basis of its high electrical conductivity, copper is the one of the basic materials of electrical engineering technology.  In western Europe, 6 million ton of electric and electronic waste were generated in 1998. The amount of this waste is expected to increase by at least 3–5% per annum ( In Taiwan, in terms of industries producing post consumer wastes, the top three are electronics and electrical engineering industries, with 630.000 ton (43%), chemicals with 450.000 ton (31%) and metal industries with 200.000 ton (14%) ( The recycling of this scrap is still quite limited due to the heterogeneity of the materials present on the product and the complexity of the production of this equipment. Printed circuit boards are part of this equipment and their composition is quite varied, containing polymers, ceramics and metals. The metal content is around 28% (copper: 10–20%, lead: 1–5%, nickel: 1–3%). The content of the most important materials remaining is: plastics 19%, bromine (especially as flame-retardant) 4%, glass and ceramics 49% ( Aside from the special case of precious metals, copper in circuit boards is economically the most interesting metal for recovery and use as a secondary raw material because of its relatively high content compared to the corresponding content in explorable ores and its economic value. Copper recovery is also of ecological importance because of the relatively high copper content in comparison to the earth’s crust composition and the corresponding low acceptable concentration limits, concerning leachate from landfills ( In addition to these inorganic elements, the following important organic compounds are found in circuit boards: isocyanates and phosgene from polyurethanes, acrylic and phenolic resins, epoxides and phenols, such as chip glues ( The existing processes of recycling printed circuit boards use pyrometallurgical ( Some authors are using mechanical processing ( This work intends to study magnetic and electrostatic separation processes in order to obtain fractions with higher metals concentration, especially copper, from printed circuit boards scrap, previously comminuted and separated by size. In this work, mechanical processing was used as an alternative to processes that are usually used (thermal and hydrometallurgical processes) to the recycling of copper. This was done in order to concentrate metals in a fraction and polymeric and ceramic materials in another, without great amount of energy consumption and atmospheric pollution generation, case of thermal processes, or great amount of effluents generation, case of hydrometallurgical processes. The steps of mechanical processing used in this work were comminution, size separation, magnetic separation and electrostatic separation. All experiments were conducted at least two times and the analysis show an experimental error always smaller than 5%. Particle size, shape and liberation degree play crucial roles in mechanical recycling processes. Almost all mechanical recycling processes have a certain effective size range ( Printed circuit board scrap used in this work originated from damaged or obsolete personal computers. About 3 kg of whole printed circuit boards as well as 4 kg of electronic components were used. By previous experiences, we accepted these as a representative sample to this study, since there are no great differences in copper content between printed circuit boards in new and older personal computers ( The electronic components used in this work were removed from the substrata, to which they were welded, by heating the printed circuit boards and consequently melting the Pb–Sn weld. This way we obtained two types of samples: Entire printed circuit boards (containing also electronic components) (PCB): ±3 kg. Electronic components (just the electronic components) (EC): ±4 kg. These two types of samples were used in order to evaluate two different possibilities of obtaining the scrap. The first one occurs with post consumer (defective or obsolete) personal computers. The second sample could be generated with residues of the production line, when defects are detected or some project changes are necessary. Both types of samples were comminuted separately in a cutting mill until the fractions reached particle sizes smaller than 1 mm. The scrap was comminuted below 1 mm to warrant an excellent grade of release from metals ( The samples were separated by particle size into three different fractions: F1 The chemical composition of the scrap studied is presented in Lead, tin and aluminum also have significant concentrations: 3.2% lead in electronic components, 4.9% tin in electronic components and 3.0% aluminum in whole printed circuit board. When a magnetisable particle is placed in a magnetic field, it is acted upon by a magnetic force. Various classification schemes of magnetic separators have been introduced and probably the most practical and logical one is that which classifies separators as either dry or wet. The equipment used was a dry magnetic separator, with a maximum magnetic field of 6500 G. A dry separator was chosen since for this type of residue the operation is easier; in addition the scrap was hydrophobic and would therefore, make the use of a wet separator more difficult. A dry magnetic separation process was applied to each fraction of each sample, using, on average, a magnetic field from 6000 to 6500 G. A magnetic field close to the maximum capacity of the equipment was chosen to guarantee that all magnetic material was separated, since due to the small amount (in terms of mass) the magnetic material could be dragged with other non-magnetic materials present in the scrap. The main application of dry magnetic separators is either the removal of tramp iron and strongly magnetic impurities or the concentration of a strongly magnetic valuable component ( In this stage, we obtained a magnetic fraction and a non-magnetic fraction. The non-magnetic fraction was transported to an electrostatic separator that would separate conducting from non-conducting materials. The electrostatic separators were initially developed to recover non-ferrous metals from shredded automobile scrap or for the treatment of municipal solid waste, but are now widely used for other purposes including foundry casting sand, polyester polyethylene terephthalate (PET), electronic scrap, glass cullet, shredder fluff, and spent potliner. The electrostatic separator segregates conducting of non-conducting materials. The equipment includes two electrodes of continuous current, one of induction and another of attraction. The extreme difference in the electrical conductivity or specific electrical resistance between metals and non-metals provides an excellent condition for the successful implementation of a corona electrostatic separation in waste recycling. This separation has been mainly utilized for the recovery of copper or aluminum from chopped electric wires and cables, and the recovery of copper and precious metals from printed circuit board scrap. The electrostatic separator used was the Model ES 1010 produced by Equimag. In this work, the electrostatic separator was controlled as follows: Ionizing electrode: distance of rotor Static electrode: distance of rotor Rotation of the rotor: 85 rpm. Source of high tension: 45–46 kV. The initial parameters were chosen according to studies by A conductive fraction and a non-conductive one resulted from the electrostatic separation. The flow chart ( The magnetic, conductive and non-conductive samples were dissolved with aqua regia and after were chemically analyzed by means of atomic absorption spectrometry (AAS). The results are presented in   It was expected that the fractions that were magnetically separated should have high concentrations of Fe, proving the efficiency of this type of separation. Although the amount of magnetic material present in printed circuit boards is small, it is interesting to separate it previously, in order to obtain conductive fractions with higher copper content. The largest amount of magnetic material in whole printed circuit boards was obtained for the fraction F3: 54 g in 2 kg of samples. In electronic components 78 g in 2 kg was obtained for the fraction F3 ( The concentration of iron in the magnetic fractions were, on average, 43% for whole printed circuit board and 46% for electronic components. The concentration of nickel was, on average, 15.2% for whole printed circuit board and 15.6% for electronic components ( From the electrostatic separation it can be seen that the largest amount of conductive material was obtained for the fractions F3 of whole printed circuit board and F2 and F3 for electronic components ( It was expected to find the largest amount of magnetic and conductive materials in the fractions F3, because it is more difficult to mill metals than polymers and ceramics, therefore metals remain more concentrated in the largest fractions. It can also be seen that the concentrations of copper reached more than 50% (in mass) in most of the conductive fractions and significant concentrations of Pb and Sn were present in all fractions ( The results shown in previous work ( Comparing these results with the results shown in this paper of the fractions concentrated after magnetic and electrostatic separation, it can be seen that the concentrations of copper are similar, while lead and tin contents are higher at the conductive fraction (obtained by magnetic and electrostatic process) than at the dense fraction (obtained by density separation). The conductive fractions, which are now concentrated in copper, will be treated by electrochemical techniques for the recovery of the copper by electrowinning. The non-conductive fractions (polymers and ceramics) presented low contents of metals, thus proving the efficiency of the magnetic separation and the electrostatic separation. The exception is the contents of copper in F2 and F3 for whole printed circuit board ( The use of magnetic separation and electrostatic separation was efficient to obtain fractions with relatively high concentrations of metals starting from scrap of printed circuit boards. The fractions magnetically separated reached 43% of iron on average in whole printed circuit boards scrap (PCB) and 46% of iron in electronic components scrap (EC). The fractions electrostatically separated presented, for PCB, medium concentrations of 50% copper, 25% tin and 7% lead. For EC the concentrations were 46% copper, 23% tin and 8% lead. Those fractions can now be used in secondary industries or applied as raw material in electrowinning techniques to separate most metals from each other. The non-conductive fractions (that contain polymers and ceramics) need more studies to be suitably disposed of or to be sent to other recycling processes. The authors thank CAPES (PROCAD), FAPERGS and CNPq.