Amorphous iron phosphate nanoparticles mineralized in yeast cells are studied by transmission electron microscopy, Fourier transform infrared spectrograph and micro electrophoresis. Iron phosphate nanoparticles in yeast cells show uniform morphology with extensive surface roughness and disperse well. The size distribution of iron phosphate is about 50–200 nm. Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy (FT-IR) is used to analyze the chemical bond linkages between iron phosphate nanoparticles with protein macromolecules in yeast cells. The mechanism of biomineralization was simply discussed by chemical bonds and surface charges.Research in nanotechnology mostly deals with the synthesis and stabilization of various nanoparticles by physical and chemical processes. Several different manufacturing techniques are in use, which usually employ atomistic, molecular and particulate processing in a vacuum or in a liquid medium. Most of the techniques are capital intensive, as well as inefficient in materials and energy use. Currently, there is a growing need to develop an eco-friendly process for nanoparticle synthesis and hence the focus should turn towards ‘green’ chemistry and bioprocesses. Inspiration comes from examples in nature of inorganic materials synthesis directed by microorganisms, which include the formation of iron oxides by bacteria, calcification cyanobacteria, silica deposition in diatoms, and the formation of various other biogenic minerals by bacteria, lichen, algae, and fungi Microbial cells have greater surface area and abundant surface charge within broad range of pH and ionic strength This article describes the use of microorganism cell as a ‘living factory’ for the production of nanomaterials. In this work, amorphous iron phosphate nanoparticles biomineralized in yeast cells were observed and a possible mechanism of biomineralization has been proposed. Morphologies of amorphous minerals found in yeast cell were observed by transmission electron microscopy and the mechanism of biomineralization was confirmed by Fourier transform infrared and micro electrophoresis. The starting materials used in this study included ferric chloride (FeCl Yeast cells (1 g) were cultivated in 80 ml glucose aqueous solution for 30 min at 36 °C. 0.54 g FeCl The morphological features of the product were investigated with a JEM-100X transmission electron microscope (JEOL, Japan), using an accelerating voltage of 100 kV. Samples for TEM were prepared by air-drying a drop of a sonicated ethanol suspension of powders onto a gelatin-coated copper mesh. The chemical bond linkages of the samples were studied by FT-IR spectroscopy (NEXUS 470, Nicolet, USA) by a KBr wafer technique. The surface charges of the powders were characterized by JS94H micro electrophoresis (Powereach, Shanghai, China). The TEM micrograph of a complete yeast cell connecting with aggregations of iron phosphate nanoparticles is shown in The FT-IR of native yeast cell fragments, organic-inorganic hybrid iron phosphates and pure iron phosphate are shown in The electrophoregrams of the resulting samples were shown in On the basis of above results, the possible synthetic mechanism of iron phosphate nanoparticles in yeast cells is depicted in A large number of inorganic nanoparticles have been synthesized by biomineralization in microorganism cells. These studies are mainly focused on mineralizing in bacteria cells and the resultant materials are mostly noble metals and oxides. Here we report a new microbiologically based production method for iron phosphate nanoparticles biomineralizing in yeast cells. The spherical iron phosphate nanoparticles with size of 50–200 nm disperse well in yeast cells. In the biomineralization, protein macromolecules in yeast cells play an important role in providing nucleation sites and immobilize the nanoparticles to establish disperse nanoparticles system. To our knowledge, using monocelled fungi (yeast cells) to mineralize phosphate has not been reported. The yeast cells are cultured easily and can absorb various metal ions. In comparison with the former research, the approach presented in this study is more economic and practical, which will be of considerable interest in the future. The authors thank Natural Science Foundation of China (Grant No.B2052140, B5050470) for the financial support; they also thank the Analytical Center of Shandong Institute of Light Industry, China, for the technological support.