The study investigated the effects of different combined top-down and bottom-up nanocrystallization technologies on particle size and solid state of avanafil nanoparticles. Combined antisolvent precipitation-ultrasonication (sonoprecipitation) technique was adopted to prepare 18 formulas according to 32.21 factorial design using 3 stabilizers; Tween 80, polyvinyl alcohol (PVA) and Pluronic F68 at different concentrations with different cryoprotectants. Particle size analysis of the lyophilized formulas showed that Tween 80 was an effective nanoparticles stabilizer in contrast to Pluronic F68 and PVA which failed to prevent nanoparticles flocculation when they were used at high concentration. The combined effects of nanonization and amorphism contributed to the improvement in solubility. Further processing of the sonoprecipitated formulas by high pressure homogenization (HPH) (modified NANOEDGE™ technology) resulted in further size reduction of PVA-stabilized particles, while it stimulated flocculation of Tween-stabilized nanoparticles. Nevertheless, all of the homogenized formulas partially retrieved their crystallinity which reduced their solubility. Non-homogenized formula 2E composed of 1:2 (avanafil: Tween) with glucose as cryoprotectant, exhibited 13.68- and 2.59-fold improvement in solubility and in vitro dissolution, respectively. This formula had oral bioavailability of 137.02% relative to Spedra® tablets and it maintained its nanosize, amorphism and dissolution behavior over 6 months of storage under stress conditions.Avanafil is an inhibitor of phosphodiesterase enzyme type 5 (PDE5). It was approved by Avanafil and dapoxetine hydrochloride were purchased from Arcadia biotechnology (Shanghai, China), Tween 80 (polyoxyethylene sorbitan monooleate, hydrophilic-lipophilic balance (HLB) Sonoprecipitation technique was adopted for preparation of eighteen formulas in a 3 An accurately weighed amount of each of the prepared formulas (equivalent to 5 Accurately weighed 10 A drop of 1% (w/v) suspension of the selected formula in distilled water was applied to a collodion-coated 300 Excess amount of each of the prepared formulas was mechanically shaken in 10 Zeta potential of the prepared suspensions was determined (Zetasizer nano ZS; Malvern, UK) and analyzed using factorial ANOVA to study the effects of different variables. Two sided PXRD was used to compare the solid state of crude avanafil to that of the prepared formulas. The powders were scanned using a Dian X-ray diffractometer equipped with Co Kα (2100E; Dianocorp, USA). The tube was operated at 45 Four milligrams of the lyophilized products were subjected to heat flow using aluminum cell (DSC-50; Shimadzu, Japan), under atmosphere of nitrogen at flow rate 25 The surface morphologies of the prepared formulas were examined using SEM where the powders were fixed on a brass stub using double sided adhesive tape and made electrically conductive by coating in a vacuum chamber with a thin layer of gold for 30 Six formulas were selected for further processing by HPH for 20 cycles at pressure 1500 This experiment was performed in accordance with FDA guidelines for the dissolution of avanafil ( This study compared avanafil bioavailability from formula 2E with that of the conventional Spedra Analysis of samples was performed using an HPLC system with an isocratic pump (LC-10 AD; Shimadzu, Japan), a spectrofluorimetric detector operated at 238 The plasma concentration-time data were plotted and analyzed using extravascular model (Kinetica 5 program). The following pharmacokinetic parameters were calculated: peak plasma concentration (C The prepared capsules of the formula 2E were stored at 40 Mean drug loading values ranged from 97.8  Formula 2E appeared under TEM as spherical particles of size 170–200 Solubility of crude avanafil in water was found to be 7.79 The control formula had a zeta potential of −15.3 The X-ray diffraction pattern of crude avanafil exhibited prominent peaks at 2Ɵ in the range of 20–30° as a consequence of its crystallinity ( Crude avanafil had a sharp endothermic peak at 162 Crude avanafil appeared as rod-shaped crystals under SEM ( Homogenization of formula 2E resulted in partial recovery of its crystalline nature as could be inferred from the appearance of prominent peaks at 2Ɵ in the range of 20–30° in the X-ray diffraction pattern of the homogenized formula, as well as the sharp endothermic peak at 162 Homogenization of the selected formulas had different effects on their particle sizes as shown in  Formula 2E exhibited 78.74% HPLC analysis of blank rabbit plasma spiked with avanafil and dapoxetine hydrochloride showed that these peaks were sufficiently separated and readily distinguishable, eluting at 7.04 and 12.63 The plasma concentration-time curves following administration of both formula 2E and the Spedra One-way ANOVA showed that administration of formula 2E produced significantly higher C The stored capsules of formula 2E showed signs of moisture absorption with yellow discoloration after 4 months. The avanafil content of the stored capsules decreased linearly to 27.98 DSC thermograms and X-ray diffraction patterns of the contents of the stored capsules were similar to those of the fresh formula 2E as shown in Sonoprecipitation technique succeeded in preparing amorphous nanoparticles of avanafil with significant improvement in aqueous solubility. Formulas 2B, 2C, 1D, 2D, 3D, 2E and 2F had Z-average values in the nano-range which contributed to the improvement in solubility ( The crystalline nature of the control formula as well as its 1.65-μm particle size justify the importance of stabilizers for maintenance of the nanosize and the amorphous nature of the prepared formulas ( Although formulas 1A, 2A, 3A and 3F had significantly higher particle sizes than the control formula, their solubility was significantly improved. The adverse effect of flocculation on solubility may have been compensated by the wetting and solubilizing effects of the used stabilizers as well as the partial decrease in crystallinity. The adverse effect of HPH on solubility can be explained in terms of partial increase in crystallinity of drug particles. The same observation was reported by Formula 2E was selected for further investigation of PVA-stabilized particles prepared by modified NANOEDGE™ technology had smaller size than those prepared by sonoprecipitation. However, the homogenized formulas exhibited lower solubility due to partial retrieval of avanafil crystallinity on HPH. Although HPH had non-significant effect on zeta potential, it stimulated flocculation of Tween-stabilized formulas. Further studies will be required to explore this effect in a more comprehensive way. The authors report no declarations of interest. The manuscript was written through contributions of all authors. All authors have given approval to the final version of the manuscript. All the authors contributed equally.