Fractures of the femoral shaft are associated with high-energy, multisystem trauma. Management must be methodical, initially excluding life-threatening injuries. Patients surviving for the first 24 hours after major injury as a result of effective resuscitation remain at risk of progressive organ failure and death from a local and general inflammatory response. The involvement of senior clinicians is vital to ensure there is not a delayed decline in condition after initial injury.
                  Femoral fractures are usually managed surgically, though traction should be considered in certain circumstances. Ninety-five percent of post-traumatic diaphyseal femoral fractures heal with antegrade femoral nailing. Minimal-invasive devices stabilize these fractures without extensive dissection of soft tissue. Flexible intramedullary rods may be used in children to achieve fracture stability, but immature bones, open physes, parental care available, and growth potential must be considered when forming the management plan.
                  Early complications include haemorrhage, fat embolism, pneumonia, multiorgan failure, neurovascular injury and compartment syndrome. Later complications include infection, non-union, delayed union, metalwork failure and heterotopic ossification.
                  The goal of the physiotherapy programme should be weightbearing to tolerance provided surgical stability allows. The fracture should progress to union by four months. Soft tissue injuries of the knee (ligament, meniscal) Ipsilateral femoral neck fracture Tibial fracture (floating knee) Hip dislocation Spine fractures  Poor control of the length and alignment of the fractured bone Development of pulmonary insufficiency Deep vein thrombosis Decubitus ulcers Joint stiffness due to supine positioning The femur is the strongest, longest and heaviest bone in the body and is essential for ambulation. It consists of a shaft (diaphysis), a proximal metaphysis and a distal metaphysis. The femur has excellent soft tissue coverage, accounting for its high vascularity. The blood supply enters the femur through the metaphyseal arteries and branches of the profunda femoris artery, penetrating the diaphysis and forming medullary arteries extending proximally and distally. The worldwide annual incidence is 1–1.33 fractures per 10,000 population. The annual incidence is 3 fractures per 10,000 population in individuals aged <25 years, and in those aged >65 years. These injuries are commonest in males aged <30 years. The cause of fracture of the femoral shaft may be traumatic or atraumatic ( A high-velocity injury is usually involved; significant pain and the inability to bear weight are present. There may be shortening of one leg, swelling and gross deformity. They are often associated with multisystem trauma because of the energy involved to cause the fracture. Life-threatening associated injuries must be addressed first. An organized and methodical approach to the multiply injured patient must follow ATLS™ guidelines (see The pelvis, hips and knees should be examined as part of the secondary survey. A distal neurovascular examination should be done, and traction may be necessary for initial stabilization to maintain leg length and reduce pain before further management. Common injuries associated with femoral shaft fractures are listed in Patients with atraumatic fractures may present with few physical findings. The thigh may be swollen, the range of motion limited by pain, and they not be able to bear weight. History and examination should be done as appropriate depending on the suspected cause (e.g. examination of the abdomen and breast if a metastatic cause is suspected).       antioxidants enzyme inhibitors pharmacological agents antibodies (to soluble mediators and cell-surface receptor antagonists). Most of these interventions are experimental and have met with only limited clinical success. A major problem with attenuation of the inflammatory response is the overlap of inflammatory pathways; modulation of one or two is unlikely to be beneficial in a patient with major injuries. The speed of these responses, once initiated, requires that therapies must be given very soon after injury to be effective. The tremendous increase in knowledge of the inflammatory response, and the increasing sophistication of laboratory science that can provide assessment of mediators of inflammation and the patient’s response to the inflammatory process, allows early identification of patients at risk of post-trauma organ failure. Treatment can be tailored to an individual response to injury and patients who can benefit from this treatment can be identified rapidly. The spectrum of femoral shaft fractures is broad, and ranges from undisplaced stress fractures to fractures associated with severe comminution and significant injury to soft tissue. The three femoral fracture patterns vary according to the direction of the force applied and the quantity of force absorbed:  a perpendicular force results in a transverse fracture pattern an axial force may injure the hip or knee and cause comminution (dashboard injury) rotational forces may cause spiral or oblique fracture patterns. The amount of comminution present increases with the amount of energy absorbed by the femur at the time of fracture. Treatment of fractures of the femoral shaft has evolved over the past century. Until the recent past, the definitive method for treating femoral shaft fractures was traction or splinting. Before the advent of modern aggressive techniques and treatments, these injuries were often disabling or fatal. Traction has many disadvantages ( Conservative options are used infrequently (excluding fractures in young children), but traction is used in the management of fractures in very osteoporotic bone or certain periprosthetic fractures.   Recent studies suggest results of retrograde femoral nailing approaches success rates found with antegrade techniques. Retrograde nailing may be preferred if the fracture involves the distal femur or is associated with an ipsilateral femoral neck fracture. A floating knee (i.e. an ipsilateral femoral shaft and tibial shaft fracture) is also a relative indication for a retrograde technique. The retrograde technique is beneficial in the obese, the pregnant and in patients with total hip or total knee prostheses. Of post-traumatic diaphyseal femoral fractures, 95% heal with antegrade femoral nailing.   Complications (early and late) are listed in  Physiotherapy should be started to improve the range of motion for the hip and knee, and for muscle strengthening. Weightbearing is permitted after stability of bone healing has been achieved. Crutch-assisted touch-weightbearing may be permitted depending on the fracture pattern. Greater weightbearing can be initiated in simple fracture patterns because they are axially stable postoperatively. A visit to the follow-up clinic at 2 weeks, 6 weeks, 3 months, 6 months, and 1 year should be arranged. The fracture should be healed by 4 months (