Copper (Cu) was cryogenically milled with tungsten (W) in a high-energy ball mill. The process created W particles dispersed in a nanocrystalline Cu matrix. These “alloys” were then annealed to a maximum temperature of 800°C. The addition of W stabilized the Cu at∼40nm during annealing to 400°C for a 1at% W composition and to 600°C for 10at% W. As evidenced through hardness measurement, the W provided a significant increase in strength over pure Cu, and the 10at% W material maintained a 2.6GPa hardness after annealing at 800°C. The stabilization and strengthening mechanisms are compared against theoretical prediction and found to be in good agreement. Although the strength and stability are significantly improved over pure Cu, the maximum benefit was hindered by an extremely broad W particle size distribution (∼5–5000nm). For the 10at% W alloy, only half of the added W was reduced to nanoscale where kinetic pinning and strengthening become most effective.The stabilization of nanocrystalline metals can be carried out in two principal manners: the reduction of grain boundary energy or grain boundary mobility. Eliminating the grain boundary energy, and therefore the driving force for grain growth, is considered the thermodynamic stabilization route. This has been accomplished experimentally by adding a solute which lowers grain boundary energy upon segregation (e.g. The equilibrium binary phase diagram of the Cu–W system In an effort to generate similar results to the thin film work on a larger scale, Cu and W powders were processed via high-energy ball milling at cryogenic temperature. Alloying, as used here, must be loosely interpreted because of the immiscibility of the constituents, but it is important to note that some metastable solid solubility in the Cu–W system can be achieved by techniques such as ball milling Elemental powders of Cu (Alfa Aesar, 99.9%) and W (Cerac, 99.95%, −200 +325 mesh) were added in appropriate quantities to a 440 stainless steel vial (Spex SamplePrep, Metuchen, NJ) with grade 25, 440 stainless steel ball bearings (Salem Specialty Ball). The ball charge consisted of 17 balls 0.3125 W was added to the Cu in concentrations of 1, 5, and 10 Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) analysis was performed with a JEOL JEM 6010LA using a 20 XRD grain size estimation provides a quick and informative analysis technique, but the reasonable upper limit of accuracy in the reported data is only 40 The evolution of the X-ray patterns with annealing for Cu10W is shown in Hardness values (shown in When the samples were polished and examined using SEM (see TEM was used for a more accurate determination of unresolved, dispersed W particle diameters and Cu matrix grain diameters. The Cu10W sample was chosen as a focus case since it exhibited the best stability. According to XRD, after annealing at 800 The SAD pattern in To determine the effect of the W dispersoids on grain size retention in the Cu matrix, a simplified analysis can be applied. For curvature driven grain growth, the driving pressure on a spherical grain boundary of radius, As the radius of a grain decreases into the nano regime (10 This indicates that as the volume fraction of the pinning particles increases and their size decreases, their ability to stabilize a given grain size will improve. Using this approach, the limiting grain diameter, In Many of the W particles are elliptical, and the effect of the deviation from sphericity will be two-fold as described in Typically, the strength of an alloy is also affected by a second phase presence, and can be very significant Examination using TEM such as that in Despite the low volume fraction of nanoscale W, the stability is certainly an improvement over pure copper. The grain size could be maintained near 100 The kinetic route to stabilization by way of Zener pinning relies on a large volume fraction of small, second phase particles distributed in the matrix. This is a difficult proposition when starting with large particles of a hard metal (W) distributed in a soft metal (Cu), even when using cryogenic milling. The W particles ranged widely in size with some being<10 The authors wish to acknowledge the support of this research by the