Advances in thermoelectrics are motivated by the innovation of thermoelectric theories. The Rashba effect, spin-dependent band splitting, paves a new path to enhance thermoelectric performance. Herein, we investigate the Rashba effect in GeTe, in which the rhombohedral distortion provides a unique handle to examine the mechanism of the Rashba effect for tuning thermoelectric properties. Fundamentally, we discover that the Rashba effect originates from the specific atomic site displacement. Experimentally, Sn-doped GeTe has a strong Rashba effect and yields an ultra-high power factor, meanwhile additional Sb alloying effectively tunes the carrier concentration. Moreover, microstructure characterizations reveal that the co-existence of grain boundaries, nanoprecipitates, and stacking faults significantly reinforces phonon scatterings and leads to an ultra-low lattice thermal conductivity. Finally, a high figure of merit is achieved in Ge1−x−ySnxSbyTe. The demonstrated benchmark figure of merit originated from the Rashba effect can provide a promising arena for enhancing thermoelectric performance in wide materials.Thermoelectrics, featured by the direct heat-to-electricity conversion, is increasingly considered as a key ingredient in the burgeoning field of green energy technology. To make thermoelectric devices more economical and powerful, we should enlarge the energy conversion efficiency, gauged by the figure of merit ( Innovative transport mechanisms are the fountain of advancing thermoelectric materials. For example, classical strategies of quantum confinement effect, By contrast, the Rashba effect is promising to facilitate performance enhancement in broad thermoelectric materials. It was reported that Rashba spin splitting yielded a unique constant electronic density of states (DOS) near the Fermi level, which resulted in high In this study, we establish a link between the Rashba effect and the enhancement of thermoelectric performance by engineering the band structures of GeTe materials with strong band-structure spin splitting due to the Rashba effect. We firstly examine the evolution of GeTe band structures with SOC by artificially setting the atomic site displacement within a small scale. We discover that the atomic site displacement is the key factor that leads to the Rashba effect. Experimentally, Sn-doped GeTe demonstrates strong Rashba spin splitting and results in the band convergence, so that GeTe has the rhombohedral crystal structure with lattice parameters of  In contrast, the two spin-polarized bands are described by In the above equations, Furthermore, we profoundly examine the band structures of GeTe by the density functional theory (DFT) calculations. Importantly, the atomic site displacement fundamentally motivates the Rashba spin splitting. Even for the C-GeTe, the atomic site displacement leads to the band splitting at L point ( According to the discussion outlined above, the revealed Rashba physics can be beneficial to enhance the electronic transport in GeTe thermoelectrics. Based on the synthesized Ge   The measured thermoelectric properties of Ge  To clarify the link between band structures and the obtained thermoelectric properties, we conduct modeling studies to investigate the electronic transport characteristics of our samples. It should be mentioned that GeTe-based alloys have multiple VBs accounting for electronic transport. To simplify our analysis, we employ the single Kane band (SKB) model, To quantitatively analyze the electronic transport of our samples, we further plot the determined composition-dependent  Furthermore, according to the method in the mentioned reference, To understand the obtained low To analyze the phonon transport, we determined To understand the link between the observed nanostructures and the obtained ultra-low To investigate the impacts of the observed nanostructures and lattice defects on reducing In conclusion, we theoretically examined the origin of the Rashba effect and confirmed that the atomic displacements are the reason for the Rashba spin splitting. Experimentally, we employ the band splitting due to the Rashba effect to enhance the electronic transport in GeTe thermoelectric derivatives. Specifically, a remarkably enhanced Further information and requests for resources and materials should be directed to and will be fulfilled by the Lead Contact, Zhi-Gang Chen ( This study did not generate new unique materials. The data that support the plots and other findings of this study are available from the Lead Contact on reasonable request. QUANTUM-ESPRESSO was utilized for DFT calculations. The specimens of Ge A ZEM-3, ULVAC was adopted to measure ANSYS was used to implement the FEA simulations. The created module included aluminum substrates, Cu connecting electrodes, This work is financially supported by the Z.-G.C. and J.Z. conceived the idea and supervised the work. M.H., W.L., and M.L. conducted materials synthesis and thermoelectric property measurement. M.H. and Q.S. finished the electron microscopy characterizations. M.H. performed the FEA simulations and the DFT calculations. M.H., J.Z., and Z.-G.C. wrote the manuscript. All authors discussed the results and commented on the manuscript. The authors declare no competing interests. Supplemental Information can be found online at 