Yttria-stabilized tetragonal zirconia polycrystals (Y-TZP) have been widely applied in fixed partial prostheses as well as dental uses i.e. a substructure for crowns. However, Y-TZP has limited applications, which is due to the presence of defects in its microstructure introduced during the manufacturing process. Accordingly, due to Y-TZP limitations, the novel (X)Y-TZP- 20Al2O3-(80-X) SiO2 (X = 65, 70 and 75) ceramic nanocomposites were successfully fabricated via the powder metallurgy method. X-ray diffraction (XRD) patterns of commercial powders showed the stabilization of monoclinic zirconia (ZM) by increasing the silica content. In order to determine the fracture load and micro-bending strength, the three-point bending test was used at ambient temperature. The fractography analysis was applied to evaluate the fracture behavior of the crack path. The Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) test was performed to study the particle size of powders and monitor the fracture surface. The obtained phases prior to the failure of ceramics were alumina, tetragonal-zirconia, and monoclinic-zirconia. Both tetragonal-zirconia and alumina were presented on the cross-section of cracked samples. The obtained results showed that the specimen with 15% silica showed the best thermal properties as well as micro-shear bonding and bending strength which prove its potential for dental applications.Recently with the increase of esthetic demands for dental treatment, all-ceramic materials used in dentistry have got significant attention [ Researchers have reported that the micro-sized ceramics show lower mechanical properties than do nano-sized particles [ Different processing methods have been developed for improving the production process of Y-TZP nanocomposites [ In recent years, a long-standing objective of ceramic scientists was the development of strong and tough ceramics which is proved to be difficult to achieve because of their intrinsic brittleness [ In the present work, a novel ceramic-nanocomposite system of (X) Y-TZP- 20Al The alumina and silica powders (grade TZ-5Y, Tosoh Co., Tokyo, Japan) with a mean particle size of 80 nm and 20–30 nm were prepared, respectively. Four samples with various contents of silica (0, 5, 10 and 15 wt %) were mixed with Y-TZP ( In order to investigate the bending strength, the three-point bending was performed with a universal testing machine with the specimen size of 2 mm × 4 mm × 20 mm, loading speed of 0.5–1 mm/min and span of 30 mm. The cold-press process loading was 200 Mpa. Also, the single edge notched beam (SENB) method was used to determine the fracture toughness of cylindrical specimens. The hardness was determined using Vickers hardness tester (model N3000g) at a peak load of 10 with a holding time of 15 s. Micro-shear bond strength was determined using Santam Co. Tehran, Iran, Bisco universal testing machine (utm). The tests were performed at a crosshead speed of 0.5 mm/min and tensile force of 200 N. In order to measure the bond strength, the amount of load at failure was recorded (N) and divided into the cross-section of specimens (mm The XRD patterns of the Y-TZP/Al The determined failure type of four specimens are listed in Therefore, according to  It is reported that the presence of the zircon phase would give rise to brittleness and decrease the fracture toughness [ From The SEM micrographs and their related EDS analysis of all specimens are provided in The silica addition may lead to an increase in the mullite phase and conversely, a decrease of the volume fraction of the zircon phase. On the other hand, increasing the mullite phase will increase the grain size of the Z According to Although the traces of silica particles were observed in the ceramics with 15 wt % of silica, there was no residual porosity in all grades of zirconia. The investigation of the grain size indicated the differences among the silica-containing zirconia specimens (see The thermal expansion coefficient of composite specimens are listed in  The influence of the silica addition on the physical and mechanical properties such as microhardness, surface roughness, fracture toughness, microstructure as well as coefficient of thermal expansion (CTE) of (X)Y-TZP- 20Al The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. The authors gratefully acknowledge the financial support from the Laboratory of