 Elbow stability Forearm axial stability Elbow motion Forearm motion Fractures of the proximal ulna are thought to be relatively uncommon in children, accounting for approximately 5% of elbow fractures. Most fractures of the proximal ulna are intraarticular, either affecting the ulnohumeral joint or the proximal radioulnar joint (PRUJ), or both. Except for small apophyseal triceps avulsion fractures, olecranon fractures typically extend into the ulnohumeral joint. If the olecranon fracture occurs at the metaphysis near the level of the coronoid, the distal segment (the ulna, radius, and PRUJ) dislocates while the olecranon remains reduced in the ulnohumeral joint ( The transolecranon fracture–dislocation occupies a gray area in classification, somewhere between a Monteggia and an olecranon fracture ( Fractures of the metadiaphysis and diaphysis of the ulna violate the forearm ring, forcing a failure at another portion of the ring. These are the true Monteggia fractures, leading to a dislocation of the PRUJ and the radiocapitellar joint. Occasionally, the annular ligament remains competent, restraining the radial head while the radial shaft displaces, causing a radial neck fracture ( The mechanism of all of these fractures is typically an axial load, but direct impact can also be a cause. The triceps, biceps, and brachialis are strong deforming forces, most often causing the olecranon to migrate proximally, the proximal radius to move anteriorly and supinate, and the ulna to flex or dislocate anteriorly. Whereas olecranon fractures can be high-energy injuries, proximal ulnar fractures in general can have disarmingly minimal edema and pain. The combination of subtle symptoms, signs, and radiographic findings often results in missed diagnoses and less than optimal treatment of these injuries. Monteggia fractures are typically underappreciated because swelling and pain can be minimal. However, the diagnosis can often be made on a clinical basis by palpating the radiocapitellar joint and recognizing the absence of the radial head in its usual location. Associated nerve injuries are rare and usually self-limited. As with distal humeral fractures, understanding the radiographic appearance of the developing skeleton is crucial to accurately diagnosing fractures of the ulnar diaphysis. The proximal ulna is complex, sharing an articulation not only with the distal humerus and the proximal radius but also connected to the distal radioulnar joint and the remainder of the forearm. Radiographic examination should be focused on the elbow, where a true lateral image is an absolute necessity. Separate forearm views are also required. The radial head and shaft should point to the capitellum in all views, even unintended obliques. The capitellar ossification center is not truly centered on the capitellum, making the radiocapitellar line less reliable in younger patients. Any radial head dislocation in a child should be considered a Monteggia fracture until proven otherwise, and particularly so if the dislocation is anterior. Posterior radial head dislocations can be part of a terrible triad injury, posterolateral rotatory instability, an untreated nursemaid's elbow, or an unreduced elbow dislocation. Congenital radial head dislocations can present a diagnostic dilemma, as some “congenital” dislocations may be late-presenting traumatic dislocations. Congenital dislocations tend to be bilateral and present with marked forearm rotation loss. Concavity of a dislocated radial head is a sign of a recent injury but is difficult to assess in younger children with an incompletely ossified radial head (see Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) can assess radial head shape even if unossified but requires sedation or general anesthesia in children under the age of 8. We prefer to perform an arthrogram in the operating room in lieu of an MRI, so that the general anesthetic can be used to treat as well as diagnose the injury. Differentiating between late-presenting, convex radial heads and congenital dislocations can be difficult, especially since a history of trauma at some point in the distant past is common to all childhoods. Treatment of acute Monteggia injuries should focus on obtaining an anatomic reduction of the ulna. As in Galeazzi injuries where anatomic restoration of the distal radius fracture usually results in a stable reduction of the distal radioulnar joint (DRUJ), restoration of ulnar length and alignment usually reduces the PRUJ. Closed reduction of the ulna under general anesthesia is possible in acute injuries. Even plastic deformation can often be bent back over a bolster using a fair amount of force. If the ulnar fracture completes during correction of plastic deformation (rare) or a greenstick injury (common), closed treatment may still be possible. If the radial head reduces spontaneously and feels stable, then the ulnar fracture is adequately reduced. We will often add a percutaneous 2.0 mm or larger Steinmann pin through the olecranon and down the intramedullary canal of the ulna ( If the radial head does not reduce spontaneously after reduction of the ulna, either the radial head is buttonholed through the brachialis or other tissues, or the ulnar reduction is inadequate. For Bado 1 injuries, flex the elbow to 90 degrees and fully supinate the forearm. For Bado 2 injuries, place the forearm in pronation to help pull the head anteriorly. If the head still does not reduce, perform an open reduction of the ulna if the ulnar reduction is inadequate. If the ulnar reduction is anatomic, open the radiocapitellar joint via a Kocher incision as an extension of the direct posterior approach to the ulna. Often we will use this incision combined with a Kaplan approach through the muscles to access the radiocapitellar joint. Extricate the radial head from the restraining soft tissues and reduce the radial head. The annular ligament can often be “shoehorned” over the radial head to provide additional stability by placing a Freer elevator under the ligament and transposing it over the radial head. If reduction is difficult, loosen or remove any fixation of the ulnar fracture. Cross pin the radiocapitellar joint provisionally, and fix the ulnar fracture as it lies. Remove the radiocapitellar pin and recheck stability. Repair or reconstruct the annular ligament if the joint is easily reducible but has a tendency to redislocate. In the subacute setting, some authors have found success with ulnar lengthening alone without the need for an open radiocapitellar reduction, Much controversy exists regarding annular ligament reconstruction, both in the type of reconstruction Late sequelae of Monteggia fractures include loss of elbow flexion (anterior radial head dislocation impinging on anterior humerus), loss of forearm motion, cubitus valgus, valgus instability of the elbow ( Our treatment paradigm has therefore evolved to prioritize in the following order: elbow stability, forearm stability, elbow motion, and forearm motion ( For the vast majority of Monteggia fractures, postoperative immobilization in a long-arm splint or cast will be required for a minimum of 4 but typically 6 weeks. Regardless of the reduction or fixation method, we follow patients with weekly orthogonal radiographs to evaluate maintenance of radiocapitellar joint reduction. We have seen many cases of stable joints in the operating room slowly redislocate in the first 6 weeks after surgery. We have even seen cases of late instability due to the pull of the biceps tendon on the radial head. Results of appropriate treatment for acute Monteggia fractures are quite good. In patients who had at least closed reduction and casting for greenstick/incomplete ulnar fractures, intramedullary fixation for transverse or short oblique fractures, and open reduction and internal fixation for long oblique and comminuted fractures, one study reported no recurrent instability in 57 patients. Intraarticular proximal ulnar fractures, where the majority of the olecranon is separated from the coronoid, result in dislocation of the distal fragment. Radiographs are often difficult to interpret in the skeletally immature, especially if the olecranon has not begun to ossify (see Fracture–dislocations cause much more soft tissue injury than simple olecranon fractures. Marked edema and ecchymosis are the norm. Instability of both the fracture and the soft tissues therefore demand rigid fixation and repair. Rarely will these fractures be amenable to closed or percutaneous treatment. Begin with the utilitarian posterior approach. Place in a long-arm splint or cast in 90 degrees of flexion with the forearm in the neutral position, if possible. Pronation or supination may be required to protect against posterolateral or posteromedial instability, respectively. If fracture fixation alone rendered the elbow stable, begin protected range-of-motion exercises within the first 2 weeks postoperatively. If soft tissue repair was required, maintain immobilization for 4 weeks, and then begin protected motion in a hinged brace. The location, orientation, and displacement of the olecranon fracture are usually discernible on standard orthogonal radiographic views. As discussed previously, contralateral elbow films, arthrography, and MRI may be helpful if the diagnosis is in question. Associated injuries can include any other structure in the elbow ( Nondisplaced olecranon fractures can be managed with immobilization in a long-arm cast with the elbow in less than 90 degrees of flexion ( Standard adult treatment options are possible for these fractures, including fixation with tension band wires and plates. The intramedullary “home run” screw technique should be avoided in children with open physes, as this sends a threaded implant through the apophysis and epiphysis. Likewise, plate and screw fixation should not cross the physis. We favor a modification of the technique described by Gortzak et al. Comminuted or oblique/longitudinal fractures and fractures with ipsilateral unstable injuries may require more rigid fixation as afforded by plate(s) and screws. Avoid placing any implants that span the physis unless the child is near skeletal maturity or there are no other options. In the skeletally immature, any spanning instrumentation must be removed as soon as fracture union is achieved. In the young or rambunctious child, or if exposed percutaneous pins were placed, place the elbow in a long-arm cast or splint until fracture union, typically 4 to 6 weeks. For more mature children, early protected motion can be initiated within the first 2 weeks postoperatively. Results of olecranon fractures are typically good, with patients achieving nearly full painless motion in the vast majority of cases. Patients with intraarticular comminution and concomitant injuries may fare less well in the long term. Fractures of the proximal ulna can be difficult to diagnose, and occasionally challenging to treat. As they are intraarticular fractures, little or no displacement can be tolerated. Nonsurgical management should only be considered for fractures that are either nondisplaced or reducible by closed means. Closed reduction is most likely to be successful within 1 week of injury, making early diagnosis and timely treatment paramount to an optimal outcome. Surgical management should aim at obtaining an anatomic reduction of the fracture(s), often leading to reduction of the dislocation(s). When fracture reduction does not result in joint reduction, either the fracture is surreptitiously malreduced or there is soft tissue interposition preventing reduction.