In order to assess the status of a North Atlantic Ocean Ecoregion (Mondego system, Portugal) after the implementation of a management programme, a study on PO4-P sorption was carried out. Considering that sorption velocity markedly determines the systems promptness to phosphorus external loading, the kinetics of the sorption of PO4-P onto estuarine sediments and the upstream agricultural soils was studied. The pseudo-second order kinetic equation gave an appropriate description of PO4-P sorption onto these soils and sediments, allowing for a quantitative comparison. For soils, the kinetic constants (
                        
                           
                              
                                 k
                              
                              
                                 2
                              
                              
                                 ⁎
                              
                           
                        
                     , μg−1
                     gh−1) ranged between 0.007 and 0.017μg−1
                     gh−1 while, in the case of sediments these ranged between 0.008 and 0.012μg−1
                     gh−1. Results showed that the reduction of water residence time after the management action was relevant for the system status, affecting its reaction capacity to phosphorus loading.Estuarine eutrophication is still a worrying problem all over the world. Although a causal link between anthropogenic nutrient sources and the occurrence of eutrophication symptoms is generally accepted ( Regarding P, coastal systems may have a key role as buffer zones and may halt fluxes of P to coastal seas and to the oceans ( The Mondego estuary (Portugal), on the North Atlantic Ocean Ecoregion, is a relatively small system (3.4 In a previous work ( Together with freshwater diversion, another change was induced in the hydrology of the Mondego estuary from 1998 on, which was the decrease of the water residence time in the estuary from moderate (weeks) to short (days) ( The Mondego estuary is a warm-temperate system located on the Atlantic coast of Portugal (40°08 Three composite samples (each In the present work, a kinetic study was carried out to determine the affinity of the soils and sediments under study for phosphorus and the PO According with this OECD Guideline, a preliminary batch stirred sorption study was first carried out in order to: (1) determine an appropriate solid (soil or sediment) to solution ratio regarding the accuracy of the analytical methodology and the sorption capacity of the solids; (2) establish the time range for the kinetic study. It was found that 1 Taking into account the results from the preliminary study, and according with the OECD Guideline ( The amount of PO From a practical point of view and for comparison purposes, it is very useful to describe experimental results by simple equations that may be used for prediction purposes and may be easily applied. In this study four different equations, namely the Lagergreńs, the pseudo-second order, the Elovich’s and the power function, which description is given as Fig. 3 shows the experimental results corresponding to the sorption of PO The rate constants and parameters derived from the linear regression obtained for each of the considered equations are shown in The previously determined ( The All of the above results were obtained and expressed for dry soils and sediments, as required by the corresponding OECD Guideline ( In the present study, among all solids, A: from land used for rice cultivation presented the highest With respect to sediments, those from the Pranto river sluice (D) and from the Southern arm (F) showed equivalent sorption kinetic constants corrected for moisture ( The induced hydrological change implemented in the Mondego estuary constitutes a case study of a North Atlantic Ocean Ecoregion. In this work, it has been shown that the study of the PO The authors want to acknowledge financial support from FCT (Fundação para a Ciência e a Tecnologia) to CESAM (Centre for Environmental and Marine Studies) and to IMAR (Institute of Marine Research). The Post-Doc grant SFRH/BPD/48449/2008 (P. Coelho) funded by FCT is also acknowledged. Also, Marta Otero acknowledges support from the Spanish Ministry of Science and Innovation (RYC-2010-05634). Special thanks are given go to Dr José Raposo for drawing Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at 