The leaching kinetics of pyrolusite from manganese–silver ores in sulfuric acid solution in the presence of hydrogen peroxide has been investigated. It is found that the H2SO4 concentration has the most important influence on the leaching rate. A reaction order of 0.95 for hydrogen ions is obtained at 0.55–1.6 mol/L H2SO4 concentration. The leaching rate is clearly improved with increasing H2O2 concentration although the effect is eroded by the decomposition of H2O2, which is catalyzed by MnO2. The leaching rate strongly depends on the stirring speed below 950 r/min. The particle size also distinctly affects the leaching process; the leaching rate is directly proportional to the inverse of the square of the average initial particle diameter. The effect of temperature is not apparent and the manganese can be extracted at room temperature in the presence of H2O2. The leaching process follows the kinetic model 1−(2/3x)−(1−x)2/3=kt and the apparent activation energy is determined to be 4.45±0.3 kJ/mol at 30–60 °C. It is concluded that the leaching process of pyrolusite from Mn–Ag ores in acidic sulfuric solution in the presence of H2O2 is controlled by diffusion through an insoluble layer composed of the associated minerals.Refractory manganese–silver ores occur in many parts of the world Several reports have appeared in the last two decades on the kinetic or electrochemical aspects of the leaching of pyrolusite or MnO The sample of manganese–silver ore was obtained from Dixin Manganese Mine, Guangxi, China. Its chemical composition as determined as: 0.30% S, 1% Pb, 4.74% Fe, 3.24% Al, 0.04% Cu, 0.06% Zn, 0.01% Ca, 0.2% Mg, 12.2% Mn and 1850 g/t Ag. Mineralogical analysis shows that the main metallic minerals include pyrolusite, hematite, limonite, galena and metal silver. The gangue minerals are mainly quartz, feldspar, mica and picrite. Pyrolusite (MnO Sulfuric acid and hydrogen peroxide (30% H The experiments were carried out in a 1-L cylindrical reactor immersed in a thermostatically controlled water bath. The reactor had a clam-held lid with three fitted openings. A controlled speed stirrer was connected through the opening in the center of the lid. A thermometer and a solution sampler were placed into the side openings. The Mn–Ag ore sample was first added to the agitated aqueous sulfuric acid solution at the required temperature. Leaching started after hydrogen peroxide was added to the solution. At selected time intervals, 5-ml solution samples were withdrawn with the sampling device and analysed for Mn by atomic absorption spectrophotometry (AAS). The leaching tests were designed to examine the effects of stirring speed, particle size, temperature and H Hydrogen peroxide was chosen and used to extract Mn and Ag simultaneously from Mn–Ag ores by considering its character of acting as both oxidizing agent and reducing agent in acidic solution, as shown in the following equations It is known that the half-cell reaction for reductive dissolution of MnO Combining  Apparently, both H The effect of stirring speed was studied under the conditions of 0.074–0.053-mm particle size, 25 °C, 0.9 mol/L H The temperature effect was examined in the range of 30–60 °C under the conditions of 0.074–0.053-mm particle size, 0.9 mol/L H In order to obtain the kinetic equation and apparent activation energy of pyrolusite dissolution in the presence of H The plots of 1−(2/3 Since, from the above discussion, no insoluble product forms, it is inferred that the insoluble oxide minerals (limonite, hematite, quartz, etc.) associated with pyrolusite play the role of the “product” layer. The apparent activation energy was determined based on the Arrhenius equation: The ln The effect of particle size were studied with the size fractions of 0.147–0.105, 0.105–0.074 and 0.074–0.053 mm at 25 °C and 1:20 solid/liquid ratio. Both H The effect of H In order to obtain the reaction order of hydrogen ions, the activities of H The effect of H The effect of H In addition, some transition metal ions and compounds, such as MnO This paper has examined the kinetic respects of pyrolusite leaching from manganese–silver ores in sulfuric acid solution in the presence of H This research was financially supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China. The authors wish to give their sincere thanks to Dr. Chaoqun Peng, Director of Editorial Office, Trans. Nonferrous Met. Soc. China, for his help in the language aspect, and Dr. J.D. Miller, University of Utah, for his suggestions in the completion of this paper.