Biogeochemically relevant constituents of rice soil microbial communities exhibit profound population shifts during a rice cropping cycle on irrigated fields. Greenhouse experiments were designed to examine the effects of the less stable environmental conditions in submergence- and drought-prone rainfed rice cropping systems on soil microbiota. Successions of cultivable groups of microorganisms (guilds) with assumed key functions in nutrient cycling were assessed under different water regimes. Frequently, microbial population dynamics for both planted and unplanted trials converged both in the flooded field and under controlled submergence in the greenhouse. An induced mid season drought as is typical for rainfed rice cropping systems proved not long enough to reverse prevailing trends in population dynamics of most of the functional groups investigated. Irrespective of the water regime, total bacterial cell counts declined toward the end of the cropping period. In contrast, a fast build-up of heterotrophic biomass by copiotrophic bacteria peaked at the flowering stage. This trend was most pronounced under drought conditions, but also significant under submergence. It leveled off towards harvest and the subsequent fallow period.
                  Fungi as primary microbial digesters of crop residues showed a negative correlation with the soil water content and were predominant only under drought or post-harvest fallow conditions. N-remobilizing, proteolytic bacteria declined strongly in the flooded field, whereas drought reversed this trend in the greenhouse. Observations of successive increases of anaerobic guilds in the field were confirmed under permanent flooding in the greenhouse. Peaks of denitrifiers, mainly triggered by post-season puddling, appeared and disappeared early in the plant growth cycle. Ammonium oxidizing nitrifiers showed extremely low titers under submergence, but also in planted trials under drought. This suggested a negative rhizosphere effect under water limitation. For other guilds, differences between planted and unplanted trials were less pronounced.Low input rainfed rice cultivation has been viewed as sustainable for centuries and even millennia ( Given a periodicity of organic matter inputs and of nutrient cycling under oxic and anoxic conditions, population dynamics of key microbial catalysts of nutrient turnover are likely to change during a cropping cycle and beyond. Main determinants of the endogenous dynamics of the microbiota in the soil/floodwater systems are most likely: input of energy (to meet much higher demands by photoautotrophic and chemoautotrophic processes than in non-flooded agroecosystems), water regime, and redox conditions. Due to exudate release from plant roots, presence or absence of crop growth may further modify these microbial population dynamics. Soil microbiota govern the nutrient supplying capacity in rice ecosystems. Therefore, an insight into the dynamics of both the entire microbiota or biocatalytically relevant parts of it promises to provide clues for gearing the crop management to optimum nutrient use efficiencies. However, our knowledge on seasonal shifts of microbial populations in drought- or submergence-prone rainfed rice cropping systems during a cropping cycle is fragmentary at best. Closed systems in which the key environmental factors remain controlled, are indispensable to draw any mechanistic conclusions. Greenhouse experiments were designed to differentiate between the impacts of permanent flooding, drought spells, and plant growth on the population dynamics of microbial ‘guilds’ under two extreme conditions characterizing tropical rainfed lowland rice cropping systems. Particular consideration of plant root effects on the soil microbiota appeared also justified, since the formation of a thin oxygenated layer around rice roots ( A double annual rice cropping field experiment (B2-field) at the International Rice Research Institute at Los Banos (Philippines) was monitored during wet season 1995. Land preparation for transplanting of the rice variety IR72 included the incorporation of crop residue 2 weeks before transplanting. For pot experiments in the greenhouse, pesticide-free farm soil from Victoria, Laguna Province, Philippines (Andaqueptic Haplaquoll, pH 6.5) was used. After air-drying, grinding and sieving (mesh size: 5 Sets of four pots each were planted to either a submergence-tolerant variety of rice (IR 49840-7-1-2-3) or a drought-tolerant variety (IR 63087-1-17), whereas the remaining half served as unplanted controls. Soil samples were taken 11 DAT, at maximum tillering (48 DAT), panicle initiation (76 DAT), flowering (104 DAT), physiological maturity (139 DAT), post-harvest fallow (200 DAT), 1 week after puddling (219 DAT), and 3 days after residue incorporation (226 DAT). Sawed-off syringes (10 All microbiological determinations were carried out simultaneously and initiated as soon as possible (1–3 Bacterial and fungal segments of the total microbial community were assessed using epifluorescence microscopy with acridine orange direct counts (AODC) for bacteria ( Dilution series for plate counts were started with 5 Most probable numbers (MPN) were based on five replicates and obtained from growth in serial dilutions of the respective culture media with 10 Most probable numbers of denitrifying bacteria were determined after 2 weeks using the method of Sulfate-reducing bacteria (SRB) were assessed using a modification of lactate and acetate based media of A miniaturized MPN based on microtiter plates (8×12) was employed for SRB (Piker and Reichardt, unpublished). These were incubated anaerobically for 4 weeks in the N Calculation of water content of the soil was based on gravimetry with oven drying ( Statistically significant differences in population densities over time and between treatments were determined using the least significant difference (LSD) test at In the double annual cropping field experiment, total microbial biomass and total bacterial counts as well as proteolytic bacteria (PB) decreased drastically during one cropping cycle ( Experimental conditions simulated the water regime in lowland rice systems under both permanent flooding ( Total heterotrophic copiotrophs represent that segment of soil bacteria that is most responsive to highly available organic nutrients. In contrast with total cell counts, densities of this group tended to increase significantly at least in the planted submerged trials, towards the flowering stage ( Proteolytic bacteria with their capacity to initiate the remobilization of N from soil organic matter, maintained significantly high population densities from the initial stages of the experiment until the flowering stage under both flooded and drought conditions ( The different water regimes applied in the pots to simulate permanent flooding and temporary drought, resulted in similar negative correlations between the water content and (a) spore-forming bacteria (SFB) ( A slightly negative correlation ( Minimum bacterial cell densities at harvest under submergence as well as after puddling of the rewetted soil in the drought treatment ( On the whole, post-harvest puddling effects were mixed, as total bacterial counts and total heterotrophs (TH), spore-forming and PB declined under both treatments, whereas ammonium-oxidizing and denitrifying bacteria showed peaks. Short-term effects of residue incorporation 4 days after puddling revealed an initial recovery of total bacterial abundance, while fungi remained unaffected. Confirming previous field observations from a continuous rice cropping experiment in the tropics ( Discrepancies between direct bacterial counts or genetic diversity on one hand, and viable counts (including those of guilds with biogeochemical traits) on the other, are well documented ( The reduction of total bacterial densities ( Reduced total bacterial densities at the end of the plant growth cycle ( As rainfed lowland rice cropping systems can experience both drought spells and excessive flooding, it is important to know the impact of changing water regimes on microbial guilds with key functions in nutrient supply. Negative correlations with water content suggest that water limitation favored not only spore-formers and fungi, but also (especially under drought) THC and PB ( Little is known about single biocatalytic agents that can accelerate indigenous soil nutrient supply in cyclic processes of soil wetting and aeration/drying ( Predominance of fungi, another group of potential digesters of particulate organically bound nutrients in non-flooded (aerated) soil, confirms the competitive advantage of these microorganisms at low water activities ( In the rhizosphere of submerged rice linkages between nitrifying and denitrifying populations have been identified as an important N loss mechanism ( Dependence of nutrient remobilization on C mineralization processes has instigated conceptual models in C and N cycling ( The key significance of organic matter for nutrient supply is most pronounced in infertile sandy soils where organic inputs are essential in maintaining the sustainability of rainfed lowland rice cropping systems ( Flooding favors the (biomass replenishing) copiotrophs, as total bacterial cell densities decline and viable counts of THC including SFB increase simultaneously under both irrigated field and submerged greenhouse conditions. Adverse effects of permanent submergence relate to PB and to fungi that can act as digesters of particulate organic matter. On the other hand, drought with aeration should favor aerobic guilds such as AO; nevertheless, negative rhizosphere effects of certain rice varieties can still interfere. In conclusion, not only fertilizer management, but also interventions in the water regime and the choice of rice varieties can affect certain microbial guilds with key functions in governing the fertility of tropical rice soils.