The body uses multiple feedback loops to regulate the storage and retrieval of critical substances to maintain homeostasis. In the presence of a deficiency of some required constituents, this system will extract the required constituent from tissue storage. If this deficiency persists, after an extended period of time, the extraction depletes the stores of a constituent in the cells rendering the various cellular pumps ineffective in further extraction. When this happens, the endocrine system releases hormones instructing the immune system to assist in the extraction process. This results in inflammation and cumulative cellular damage. When there is a large quantity of tissue available the individual cellular damage will be less severe, but the total cumulative effect can still be significant to the point of being incapacitating. This cumulative cellular damage is the chronic disease like arthritis. Because of limited quantities of a tissue type, like myelin, the cumulative cellular damage can progress to such an extent that the immune system can no longer recognize the individual cells, which initiates an immune system response.This manuscript was developed be applying various system level analysis techniques to the hierarchy of the feedback loops of the homeostatic system The biological definitions that give information about the hormones, but do not define all of the elements of the loop or how they impact the body are inadequate. A familiar example will clarify this concept. The cruise control of an automobile could be defined in terms of the set speed and a coupling from the drive train developing a feedback signal proportional to the actual speed. The automobile maintains a constant speed because of the interaction of the set speed and the feedback signal within a feedback loop. Even though this definition is correct, it does not have much useful information. The effects of running out of gas could not be predicted, diagnosed, or effectively treated using the information contained in the loop definition. Many of the biological definitions of feedback loops within the body suffer from the same problem. These definitions cannot be used for predictions, analysis, or treatment. This lack of information is a significant hindrance to identifying the cause and mechanism of chronic diseases. A basic feedback loop configuration requires a sensor element which generates the feedback signal, a comparator/controller element which generates a control signal, and a controlled element. The controlled element is frequently another feedback loop. All of these elements and signals must be defined before the loop is defined. Ganti Prasada Rao explains feedback loops in his article titled Elements of Control Systems. In paragraph 4.2 he states: “Figure 15 shows a typical feedback control system. In this system, the actual output is fed back and compared with the desired response. The resulting error is the basis for the application of a control signal to the plant. The controller generates the control signal on the basis of the error… In this arrangement, the control signal takes the actual controlled variable into account including disturbances if any. The plant is driven (by the control signal) until the error is reduced. This is the principle of feedback control in which feedback is negative” The body contains a hierarchy of feedback loops. Some Adrenal Gland Steroids typify the simple loop. Each glucocorticoid or mineralocorticoid indicates a separate feedback loop. Collectively, they comprise a family of similar loops. The mineralocorticoids control the metered re-absorption in the distal tubule within the kidney, after the kidney filters the minerals from the blood.  Sylvia S Mader describes a loop similar to this one where ADH is released to control the concentration of salt in the water The evaluation of the loop architecture of the homeostasis control system around the kidney indicated an efficient system. The kidney is a multi-stage filter that removes everything below a certain size, and then reclaims the desired substances by re-absorption The fine control loop consists of the adrenal cortex, distal tubular within the kidney, tissue storage distributed throughout the body, enzymes, and the adrenal gland’s steroid hormones. All tissue types, – muscle, cartilage, veins, bone, myelin, etc. – are potential storage repositories. The tissue storage feedback loop is similar to the feedback loop for mineral re-absorption, except the cellular pumps are in the storage cell membranes distributed throughout the body instead of in the distal tubule. Primarily, these tissues meet specialized body needs, while mineral storage is a secondary function resulting in a more optimized system. Calcium storage and removal from reserves in the bone is one example The cells have mineral requirements other than for growth. For example, the nervous system, using mineral transport to generate electrical signals for a nerve pulse, continuously requires minerals within the extracellular fluid The readily available mineral will be depleted after a period of time in which mineral retrieval exceeds mineral storage. The various cellular pumps will no longer be effective in further mineral extraction A dysfunction in the body that prevented one of the nutrient homeostatic loops from obtaining its contribution to homeostasis would trigger this immune system extraction process. The quantity of cells available within the affected storage tissue determines the extent of this cumulative damage. When there is a large quantity of tissue available the individual cellular damage will be less severe, but the total cumulative effect can still be significant to the point of being incapacitating. This suggests the hypothesis that cumulative cellular damage is the cause of chronic diseases like arthritis. When there is a limited quantity of a tissue type, like myelin, the individual cellular damage can progress to such an extent that the immune system can no longer recognize the individual cells as part of the body. After the immune system cannot recognize the damaged cells as part of the body, it identifies them as antigens and initiates an immune system response. It is hypothesized that this is the cause and mechanism of the family of autoimmune diseases. As long as the assumed failure exists and the mineral extraction rate exceeds the mineral storage rate, sustained cell healing or regeneration cannot occur. Another observation presents an interesting paradox. Autoimmune diseases are caused by a deficiency, possibly mineral, in the body’s homeostasis, but increasing the mineral’s quantity through increased diet will probably increase the damage. According to this hypothesis, if a mineral is deficient then the homeostatic system will extract the deficient mineral. The extraction will be proportional to the difference in concentration between the deficient mineral and the other minerals. The total concentration of minerals is at a maximum shortly after eating which will result in the maximum difference of concentrations and the maximum extraction occurring shortly after eating. This concentration and the rate of extraction will sink over time. Eating more will increase the concentration of minerals. This will increase the time that the mineral is extracted and therefore it will increase the damage. Nutrient loss will occur because the re-absorption loop about the adrenal gland and the kidney cannot achieve 100% re-absorption. The rate of mineral loss would be proportional to the amount of blood flowing through the kidney, which is at a maximum while the body is at rest and at a minimum during exercise This dysfunction does not have to be in the feedback loop. Anything involved in raising the availability of the required nutrient will be beneficial. This includes the absorption of the nutrient in the digestive system or the transportation of the nutrient in the blood via carriers. Not much is known about the availability of the required carriers within the blood. A system like the homeostatic system usually has similarity between the different elements, which infers that the carrier availability within the blood is similar between the gaseous and non-gaseous portions. According to the complete blood count, women typically have fewer red blood cells than men do With supplementation it is theoretically possible to have the long-term storage of a single mineral exceed the long-term extraction of that mineral. In this instance, the individual cells will have a reluctance to accept additional mineral storage beyond some level. The glucocorticoids and mineralocorticoids will apply unrelenting pressure on the storage tissue cells to accept the excessive mineral. The vulnerability of the individual cell will vary over time Excessive storage is encouraged in the tests for mutagenic or carcinogenic substances by administering sufficiently large quantities of the test substance. Because of these laboratory tests, sufficient data exist to postulate a hypothesis. It is hypothesized that cancer is a result of a malfunction within the homeostasis loop that results in excessive storage initiating cell mutations that eventually grow into cancer. Men would be more likely to have cancer then women if the observation that men probably have more mineral carriers within there blood then women is correct. With more carriers, they would be able to store more during the time that the mineral was present and would therefore be more susceptible to having the storage exceed the usage. The outer loop involving the hypothalamus will have significant effects on the body’s response to the dysfunction. The hormones generated by the pituitary in response to the hypothalamus appear to be composite commands. The hypothalamus cannot command increased re-absorption of a specific mineral; it can command increased re-absorption of a family of minerals. If this outer loop increased the absorption from the digestive track, transportation in the blood, and re-absorption in the kidney, of the family of minerals, it would increase the availability of the deficient mineral. This might be sufficient to keep the body from invoking the immune system to extracting nutrients. One of the body’s normal responses will be for the outer loop to increase the hormones that increase the re-absorption of multiple minerals in the proximal tubular and the loop of Henle within the kidney. This hormone production will increase the re-absorption of multiple minerals including the deficient mineral, but it will not restore the proper mineral-to-mineral balance within the blood stream. This overabundance of multiple minerals results in a decrease of hormones, which leads to decreasing re-absorption, ultimately restoring an extraction rate that exceeds the storage rate. This process continues in a cyclical manner. The body attempts to compensate for the failure, but with the fault within the adrenal gland and kidney homeostatic control loop, the solution does not exist within the body. The outer loop or coarse control loop oscillates with no possibility of recovery. Normally, the oscillations in a feedback loop will not continue at constant amplitude. The amplitude of the oscillations will decay over time. This is detectable in MS. When the amplitude of the oscillations is large it will have periods when the extraction rate exceeds the storage rate followed by periods when the storage exceeds extraction. The disease will go into periods of remission. When the amplitude of the oscillations decreases to the extent that the extraction always occurs, then the amplitude of the oscillations determines only the rate of extraction. The disease will always be progressive under this condition. During pregnancy, the body increases these hormones for the benefit of the unborn baby. For diseases like MS, this increase is frequently sufficient to significantly retard the progression of MS. The body accepts the changes in homeostatic condition for the benefit of the unborn baby, but it will not sustain these hormonal changes after delivery. The hormones proceed to a post pregnancy status, which does not retard the progress of MS. Developing experiments for an effective treatment is a perplexing problem. The problem appears to be an obscure mechanism associated with a single channel of a family of loops that comprises a portion of the inner loop of a feedback system. Both the inner loop and the outer loop will interpret any treatment that they can detect as a disturbance. As Ganti Prasada Rao mentions in his description of control mechanism, a negative feedback system will take these disturbances into account and will attempt to nullify them. If the inner loop disposes of 5% of a nutrient continuously, it will reduce the mineral concentration to 1% of maximum in just over 6 h, thereby reducing the effectiveness of the attempted treatment. Over the long term the outer loop will also compensate, thereby nullifying the attempted treatment. This would manifest itself in the characteristic that during a test that the early indications were very promising, the benefits would vanish over time. Frequently, this type of loop has a null zone where it will not strenuously react to criteria below a threshold level. This characteristic offers a possibility of treatment. Supplementation of very low quantities of a nutrient will probably be below the threshold and could therefore be effective. Continuous supplementation of a quantity slightly in excess of the extraction rate, but below the threshold should prevent future extractions and allow regeneration. This would have to be monitored carefully. Utilizing quantities designed to be below the quiescent threshold could significantly impact the homeostasis of the body. This could lead to toxic buildup of some nutrient or mineral. Another danger is the possibility of causing cancer by the mechanism described under the topic dangers of supplementation. This risk is increased if the nutrient supplemented already has a surplus instead of a deficiency. Careful monitoring should be considered as mandatory.