How seed-eating animals influence the germination of endozoochorous plant species is of great relevance to our understanding of long-distance seed dispersal. To evaluate the effect of gut passage on the germination speed of aquatic and riparian plants, we fed seeds of 19 species to common carp (Cyprinus carpio) and Mozambique tilapia (Oreochromis mossambicus). Carp has a pharyngeal ‘mill’, compensating for lack of a stomach and teeth, while tilapia has tiny teeth and an acid stomach. Potamogeton species, Alisma plantago-aquatica and Sagittaria sagittifolia showed a continuous germination with relatively low, and constant germination rates throughout the germination period. In contrast, the seeds of Myriophyllum spicatum and Nymphoides peltata and those of the riparian species exhibited discontinuous germination, i.e. almost all seeds germinated within a few days. Compared to control seeds, we found on average a negative effect of gut passage on the germination speed for carp, but no effect for tilapia. However, several plant species deviated from this general pattern. For example, gut passage in carp enhanced germination speed of viable seeds relative to controls for Potamogeton alpinus, but reduced it for Filipendula ulmaria. Similarly, tilapia enhanced germination speed for P. alpinus, but reduced it for P. pusillus. We conclude that carp’s efficient mastication affects the germination speed of plant species after gut passage, whereas stomach-passage in tilapia generally does not influence the germination speed when compared to control seeds. However, inherent variation across species in germination speed proved to be greater than effects of fish gut passage.How fruit- and seed-eating animals influence the germination patterns of endozoochorous plant species is of great relevance to our understanding of the ecology and evolution of animal-plant interactions ( Effects of gut passage on seed germinations have been recorded extensively for birds and mammals (see reviews in In a recent study (  To study the effect of gut passage on germination speed, we analyse yet-unpublished data on germination timing from a previously published experiment. In subsections The seeds or fruits (the term ‘seed’ will be further used to refer to seeds plus fruits) of 19 plant species ( From March-June 2013, we fed seeds to common carp and Mozambique tilapia, which had a mean standard body length and mass of 15.8 For each fish species, 10 replicate tanks were used for the experiments and each tank housed 10 individuals. Seeds embedded in dough pellets were fed to the fish. The number of seeds used per trial depended on seed dimensions and ranged from 50 to 100. Within 1 In June 2013, retrieved and control seeds were placed in Petri dishes on water-saturated filter paper to optimize hydrological condition for both aquatic and riparian species ( The dataset of germination times was analyzed with the ‘survival’ package ( Next we quantified ‘early germination’ as the proportion of the viable seeds that germinated in the first week, ‘late germination’ as the proportion of the remaining viable seeds that germinated after one week (i.e. days 8–100) and ‘dormancy’ as the proportion of viable seeds that did not germinate within the 100 day germination period. Comparison of the control seeds of the 8 aquatic species (top two rows in The control seeds of the aquatic species First of all, it should be noted that carp had a strong negative effect on seed survival of several species ( Compared to control seeds, we found on average a (small) negative effect of gut passage on the speed of germination and the final germination percentages for carp, but no effect for tilapia ( The absolute differences in days until germination match the results of A 2–5 day acceleration of germination, demonstrated for The help of Jikkie Boedeltje-Elzinga and Marij Orbons in preparing the experiments and counting seedlings during the germination experiments, respectively, is highly appreciated. We thank two anonymous reviewers and Dr. Elisabeth Gross for comments that improved the manuscript. Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at The following are Supplementary data to this article: