Amenability of Aşkale coal to desulfurization by magnetic separation following microwave heating was investigated. The coal was subjected to magnetic separation at 2 T following the treatment in a microwave oven at 850-W power and 2.45-GHz frequency. The increase in magnetic property by microwave heating at 850 W and 2.45 GHz was not sufficient to enhance the removal of considerable amount pyritic sulfur from the coal by magnetic separation at 2 T. Pyritic sulfur content was reduced by 37.46%. With the addition of 5% magnetite, which is an excellent microwave absorber mineral, microwave heating was enhanced and pyritic sulfur content of coal was reduced by 55.11%, by magnetic separation at magnetic field intensity of 2 T following the microwave heating. In addition, 21.54% decrease in ash content and 20.39% increase in calorific value also resulted.Microwave energy is nonionizing electromagnetic radiation with frequencies that range from 300 MHz to 300 GHz or wavelength that range from 1 to 300 mm. Microwaves can be transmitted, absorbed or reflected. Insulators are transparent to the microwaves and, thus, do not store any of energy in the form of heat. Metals with high conductivities reflect the microwaves, which provide no significant heating effects. Materials such as semiconductors, with medium conductivities, typically from 1 to 10 S m In recent years, there has been a growing interest of microwave heating in mineral treatment and a number of potential application of microwave processing have been investigated. These include microwave-assisted ore grinding, microwave-assisted carbothermic reduction of metal oxides, microwave-assisted drying and anhydration, microwave-assisted mineral leaching, microwave-assisted roasting and smelting of sulfide concentrate, microwave-assisted pretreatment of refractory gold concentrate, microwave-assisted spent carbon regeneration and microwave-assisted waste management. One of the most important possible application of microwave heating is coal desulfurization. The inorganic sulfur occurs in raw coal mainly in pyritic and sulfate form. The separation of fine pyrite from coal is difficult by conventional magnetic separation methods. The performance of magnetic separation in removing mineral pyrite from coal can be improved by increasing the pyrite's magnetic susceptibility. Several studies have shown that magnetic susceptibility of pyrite can be enhanced by heating In More intensive efforts at high-frequency heating for desulfurization of coal have been carried out in America. The frequency dependence of the dielectric properties of coal was examined, and it was discovered that the dielectric loss factors of a dense pyrite-bearing portion separated from coal with high sulfur content increases with frequency The decomposing reaction of pyrite in coal, caused by microwave heating, FeS A research carried out by the General Electric of North America considered pilot-scale microwave desulfurization studies. Microwave conveyor systems operating at 15 kW were used to treat run of mine coal. The microwaves were found to selectively heat the pyrite in the coal, causing the formation of pyrrhotite. It was stated that pyrrhotite could be removed by low-intensity magnetic separation. The quoted treatment cost per tonne of coal was US$22; this compared most favourably to traditional technologies such as fuel gas desulfurization, which had a treatment cost of US$26 per tonne The purpose of this study is to determine the amenability of Aşkale lignites to desulfurization by magnetic separation following microwave heating. Aşkale lignite was investigated in this research because of its high pyritic sulfur content. The effect of coal particle size, changes in pyritic sulfur content, ash content and calorific values after microwave heating and following magnetic separations that were not mentioned in the previous studies were also examined. Representative samples taken from Aşkale pit of Doğu Lignite Works of Turkish Coal Institution was used during the experiments. The sample was characterized by mineralogical, chemical and XRD analysis. The mineralogical examination of samples revealed that pyrite grains were in various sizes and shapes. Pyrites were found as isolated, anhedral grains up to 3.5-mm sizes as well as spherical (frambiodal) aggregations of microcrystals within the coal matrix in sizes between 1 and 300 μm. Other gangue minerals in the sample are quartz, clay, calcite and siderite. Chemical analysis of test sample is given in Five different size fractions of coal were prepared by applying closed-circuit communition and screening. These size fractions were −3.32, −2.4, −1, −0.420 and −0.15 mm. At first, coal having the size fractions above were directly subjected to magnetic separation without being heated in microwave oven, at 2-T magnetic field intensity, by using high-intensity dry test magnet. Nonmagnetic products of separations were analysed for ash, total sulfur and pyritic sulfur contents. Then, 12.5 g of coal samples from each size fractions were heated in microwave oven at 850 W in closed porcelain crucible for 1200 s. Microwave-heated coal samples were subjected to magnetic separation at 2 T. Heated products and nonmagnetic products of separations were analysed for ash content, pyritic sulfur content and calorific value. Since the sulfur removal by magnetic separation following the microwave heating was not satisfactory, magnetite, as an excellent microwave absorber, was added to coal, and magnetic separation following the 300-s microwave treatment was carried out. Microwave heated coal and nonmagnetic products of magnetic separations were analysed for ash content, pyritic sulfur content, and calorific value. The results of magnetic separation of coal without being heated in microwave oven are presented in Results of microwave heating of coal having −3.32, −2.4, −1, −0.420 and −0.15 mm size fractions for a heating time of 1200 s, and magnetic separations following the microwave heating are presented in The results indicated that heating the pyrite in coal by microwave treatment is not sufficient for the conversion of pyrite to more magnetic minerals. Ash content and calorific values of coal slightly increased due to release of moisture and little amount volatile matter. By magnetic separation at 2 T following the microwave heating, ash and pyritic sulfur contents of coal decreased. The amount of ash and sulfur removal increased with decreasing particle size. For −0.15-mm size fraction, ash and pyritic sulfur removals were 19.87% and 37.46%, respectively, as calorific value increased by 16.43%. Increase in calorific values can be explained by a decrease in ash content. Although pyrite mineral is a good microwave absorber and can be easily converted to more magnetic minerals such as pyrrhotite by heating, pyrite in coal could not be heated enough and increase in magnetic property of pyrite in coal by microwave heating at 850 W and 2.45 GHz was not sufficient to enhance the removal of considerable amount of pyrite by magnetic separators. The comparison of test results indicated that there was a slight increase in magnetic property of microwave-heated samples. Despite insufficient heating of pyrite in coal, slight increase in magnetic property can be explained by small alterations on pyrite surface due to microwaves. The above results showed that a mineral that could be heated by microwave to a temperature high enough for good magnetic separation could not be heated sufficiently when it was found in small amount in another matrix having no microwave-heating characteristic. In other words, the heat from the microwave absorption of a microwave absorber material is dissipated by the surrounding material. The pyrite volume in coal is low and pyrite particles in coal are so disseminated that they do not touch each other. Pure coal particles and other poor microwave absorber materials in coal such as calcite, siderite and quartz dissipate the heat absorbed by pyrite. Therefore, the addition of good microwave absorber material into coal was essential for increasing the medium temperature to sufficiently heat pyrite and convert it to magnetic products for desulfurization by subsequent magnetic separation. In the following tests, the addition of magnetite to coal to promote microwave heating was studied. 2.5%, 5% and 7.5% magnetite was added to coal of −0.15-mm size fraction. Magnetite size was selected as −3.32+1.65 mm for its easy removal by screening after microwave heating. Heating time was adjusted as 300 s. Temperature measurements was performed using a stainless-steel-sheathed, K-type thermocouple, which was inserted through the roof of the oven and the hole of crucible cover directly into the center of samples. The temperatures of coal increased to 193 °C maximum in the absence of magnetite. In the presence of magnetite, temperature measurements were erratic and flocculated depending on the position of thermocouple in the mixture. Higher temperatures were observed in the vicinity of magnetite; lower temperatures were observed away from the coarse magnetite particles. Thus temperature measurement were not reported in the study. The results are presented in With 7.5% magnetite addition, pyritic sulfur and ash contents were reduced by 58.20% and 22.60%, respectively, by magnetic separation following the microwave heating. Calorific value was increased by 21.81%. However, with the increase of volatile matter release and carbonization during microwave heating with 7.5% magnetite addition, little amount of coal particles adhered to magnetite particles and 4.77% coal loss was observed during separation of magnetite particles from microwave heated coal by screening. For this reason, microwave heating by addition of magnetite more than 7.5% was not studied. In fact, the aim of this study is the removal of sulfur by magnetic separation following microwave heating without significantly disturbing coal structure.  Direct magnetic separation of coal at 2-T magnetic field intensity did not significantly reduce the pyritic sulfur content of sample. The maximum sulfur reduction was obtained for −0.15-mm size. As a result of direct magnetic separation, ash and pyritic sulfur removals were 15.79% and 22.29%, respectively. The increase in magnetic property by microwave heating at 850 W and 2.45 GHz was not sufficient to enhance the removal of pyritic sulfur from the coal by magnetic separation at 2 T. For −0.15-mm size fraction of coal, pyritic sulfur removal was 37.46%. Addition of magnetite, which is an excellent microwave absorber, enhanced the microwave heating and pyritic sulfur removal by magnetic separation. With the addition of 5% magnetite, pyritic sulfur contents of coal was reduced by 55.11%, by magnetic separation at 2 T following the microwave heating. A decrease (21.54%) in ash content and an increase (20.39%) in calorific value were also obtained.