Background
                  The purpose of this study was to evaluate the clinical and radiologic outcomes of unstable distal clavicle fractures treated with anatomic plate fixation without coracoclavicular ligament augmentation and to compare the outcome of Neer type IIA with that of type IIB.
               
                  Methods
                  Twenty-five patients with unstable distal clavicle fractures who underwent anatomic plate fixation without coracoclavicular ligament augmentation were enrolled prospectively, including 9 patients of Neer type IIA and 16 patients of Neer type IIB. Clinical outcomes were evaluated using Constant and University of California–Los Angeles (UCLA) scores. Coracoclavicular distance was measured on plain radiographs.
               
                  Results
                  Bone union was achieved in all patients. Satisfactory clinical and radiologic outcomes were obtained regardless of fracture type. After operation, the mean coracoclavicular distance on the injured side was increased by 10% compared with the uninjured side. However, between the patients who showed an increased coracoclavicular distance >10% (Constant score, 89.4 ± 3.7; UCLA score, 32.6 ± 3) and the patients with increased coracoclavicular distance <10% of the uninjured side (Constant score, 88.7 ± 3.6; UCLA score, 31.9 ± 3), there was no statistically significant difference in clinical outcomes of Constant score (P = .934) and UCLA score (P = .598).
               
                  Conclusion
                  In unstable distal clavicle fractures, precontoured anatomic plate fixation without coracoclavicular ligament augmentation showed satisfactory clinical outcomes and high union rates even with a small lateral fragment. Patients who had increased coracoclavicular distance also demonstrated satisfactory shoulder functional outcomes regardless of the fracture type. Therefore, anatomic plate fixation without additional coracoclavicular ligament augmentation can be considered one of the treatment options for unstable distal clavicle fracture.
               
                  Level of evidence
                  Level IV; Case Series; Treatment StudyIn the treatment of distal clavicle fractures, diverse surgical treatment methods are used for Neer type II fractures. Unlike Neer type I and type III fractures, which are usually treated conservatively, the type II fracture is unstable. In 1982, Rockwood subdivided type II fractures into type IIA and type IIB. Various surgical methods, such as tension band wiring, The purpose of this study was to evaluate the clinical and radiologic outcomes of unstable distal clavicle fractures treated with anatomic plate fixation without additional CC ligament augmentation and to compare the outcomes between Neer type IIA and type IIB. The hypothesis was that a satisfactory result can be obtained for the treatment of unstable distal clavicle fractures simply by fracture fixation using an anatomic plate without CC ligament augmentation. This is a retrospective study of 25 consecutive patients seen from January 2010 to May 2013, who had Neer type II unstable distal clavicle fractures and were treated with open reduction and fixation with an anatomic plate. Inclusion criteria were patients with unstable distal clavicle fractures who were treated surgically with only a precontoured anatomic plate, classified as type II fracture by the Neer classification, and who were available for at least 2 years of follow-up. Patients with accompanying fractures or nerve injuries and with a history of surgery on the ipsilateral upper limb were excluded. In addition, patients who had been transferred from other hospitals because of nonunion of the distal clavicle were also excluded. A total of 29 patients met inclusion criteria during the study period. However, 3 patients were lost to follow-up, and 1 patient refused to participate in this study. All 25 patients with Neer type II distal clavicle fractures underwent surgical treatments. There were no patients with Neer type II fractures who were treated conservatively or by other fixation methods. Precontoured anatomic congruent clavicle plates (Acumed, Hillsboro, OR, USA) were used without repair or reconstruction of the CC or acromioclavicular (AC) ligaments in all patients ( Diagnosis of unstable distal clavicle fractures was made clinically and radiologically. Clinical diagnosis was based on an assessment of pain and tenderness occurring after frank injury. Preoperative radiologic examinations included anteroposterior and cephalic tilt views taken with the shoulder fixed in the same position to minimize the impact of inconsistent posture in the interpretation of the radiographs. To confirm the definite fracture site, the location of fracture fragments, and the degree of comminution, 3-dimensional computed tomography was performed for all patients preoperatively. Fracture patterns were classified as Neer type IIA or type IIB after review of radiographs and computed tomography images of the patients. In the radiologic assessment, CC distance was measured as the vertical length connecting the superior border of the coracoid process to the lateral border of the conoid tubercle on the lower part of the clavicle. Maintenance of reduction was evaluated on postoperative shoulder anteroposterior radiographs. The CC distance ratio was calculated after measuring both the injured and the uninjured shoulder. It was considered an increase of CC distance when postoperative CC distance on the injured side was 10% longer than that on the uninjured side. Radiography of the shoulder was performed at 1, 3, 6, and 12 months and at the time of the final follow-up. The criteria for union were when the callus filled the vertical length of the fracture, when the fracture line was invisible, and when the bone trabeculae were connected. Differences between Neer type IIA and type IIB in changes of the CC distance were compared by using plain radiograph measurement. CC distance was measured by 1 radiologist and 1 orthopedic surgeon who were not involved in this study in a blind manner. For the assessment of shoulder functional outcomes, Constant scores and University of California–Los Angeles (UCLA) scores were recorded by the physician assistant at final follow-up. Constant score results were classified as excellent (100-90), good (89-80), fair (79-70), or poor (<70). The UCLA scores were divided into 4 grades: excellent (34-35), good (29-33), fair (20-28), and poor (<20). Postoperative rehabilitation was identical for all patients. Patients were instructed to wear an arm sling for 3 weeks. To prevent shoulder stiffness, pendulum exercise and passive gentle range of motion exercise were started from 3 days postoperatively. Passive range of forward flexion was limited to below shoulder level until 1 month postoperatively to avoid stress on the distal clavicle fixation. After that, forward flexion >90 degrees and external and internal rotation exercises were allowed. Both active assisted range of motion exercise and cross-body adduction stretch were allowed from 2 months after operation. Sports activity and active use of the affected arm were allowed from 3 months after operation. Paired and Student The 25 patients included 17 men and 8 women with an average age of 41.6 ± 16.2 years (range, 29-78 years). The mean follow-up period was 25 ± 1.6 months (range, 24-27 months). The causes of injury were fall from a standing height in 8 patients, motor vehicle accidents in 7, bicycle accident in 7, and sports injury in 3. The average period from injury to operation was 4.9 ± 2.9 days (range, 1-11 days). The average size of the lateral fracture fragment was 21 ± 8 mm (range, 13-40 mm). The average number of lateral fragments was 1.4 ± 0.6 (range, 1-3). According to the Neer classification, 9 patients were type IIA and 16 were type IIB. There was no difference in patients' demographic characteristics according to Neer classification except for fracture fragment size ( The mean postoperative CC distance on the injured side was 9 ± 2 mm (range, 6-14 mm), and that on the uninjured side was 8 ± 2 mm (range, 5-11 mm), showing a mean increase in CC distance of 10% when the injured side was compared with the uninjured side in all patients ( For all patients, mean Constant score evaluated at the time of the final follow-up was 89.0 ± 3.6 (range, 78-95) ( All patients obtained bone union in an average of 12.8 ± 7.9 weeks (range, 8-13 weeks). At the final follow-up, the range of shoulder motion was restored in all patients except for 1 patient. Postoperative adhesive capsulitis occurred in 1 patient who was unable to receive primary physical therapy because of combined fractured rib. Arthroscopic capsular release was performed to obtain normal range of motion. Thirteen patients wanted plate removal after bone union because of cosmetic problems accompanied by the thin skin around the clavicle (5 patients) and patients' requests without any discomfort (8 patients). No complications related to plate fixation, including screw protrusion into the AC joint, pullout of screws, and reduction loss, were found at final follow-up. There was no postoperative complication, such as infections, neurologic symptoms, or vascular damages related to internal fixation. In this study, satisfactory clinical outcomes were obtained using anatomic plate fixation without additional augmentation of the CC ligament in patients with unstable distal clavicle fracture. Sufficient fracture fixation was possible and bone union was achieved even for small fragments using only an anatomic plate. Postoperative CC distance of the injured side was increased by an average of 10% compared with the uninjured side; however, an increased CC interval had no clinical impact on shoulder function. Recently, several treatment methods for unstable distal clavicle fracture involving both fixation of fracture and CC ligament augmentation have been introduced. Another surgical technique commonly used for distal clavicle fractures is hook plate fixation. This has the advantage of allowing stable internal fixation to prevent AC joint displacement. Hook plate fixation also enables early joint mobilization. However, various complications have been reported in association with hook plates, including subacromial impingement and synostosis. Muramatsu et al In a study similar to this study, Andersen et al Although there is some debate about surgical treatment in Neer type IIA fractures, in this study, the same plate fixation without a CC augmentation procedure was used for both Neer type IIA and type IIB distal clavicle fractures to obtain secure bone union. In this study, bone union was achieved in all patients with distal clavicle fracture regardless of changes in CC distance after plate fixation. Regarding AC dislocation, it has been reported in numerous studies that an increased CC distance does not significantly affect the clinical outcomes. There are some limitations in this study. First, the small sample size of enrolled patients is not enough to ensure an adequate power to detect statistical significance between the shoulder's functional outcomes and postoperative CC distance. To achieve a meaningful power, a sample size should be at least >900 patients to be enrolled with a significance level of .05 and a power of .8. Because distal clavicle fractures are relatively rare, it is difficult to obtain a larger group of patients at 1 institute. A small sample size can result in wide confidence intervals or risks of errors in statistical hypothesis testing. However, despite inadequate sample size in this study, the actual difference between the 2 groups was very small. This small difference limits risks of statistical error and results in less bias. Second, this study does not include measurements of preoperative CC distance. Improved reduction status should have correlated with improved fracture bone apposition and subsequent union rate compared with initial fracture displacement. However, the quality of preoperative radiographs could not be verified because many patients were not able to maintain an appropriate position from severe pain before operation. For this reason, we decided to substitute the CC distance of the uninjured side for that of the preoperative injured side for standardized measurement of CC distance. Third, the relationship between CC distance in the distal clavicle fracture and shoulder functional outcome was compared with that in AC joint dislocation. CC interval widening in the distal clavicle fracture relates to fragment displacement and risk of delayed union or nonunion, whereas CC distance in AC joint injury relates to AC joint incongruity, extent of ligamentous disruption, and distal clavicle instability. However, patients who had increased CC distance also demonstrated satisfactory shoulder functional outcomes regardless of the type of Neer classification in this study. We wanted to compare this conclusion in previous literature regarding surgical outcomes after distal clavicle fracture fixation; however, it was difficult to find literature that focused on CC interval widening and functional outcomes in distal clavicle fractures. Therefore, as an alternative method, we compared this relationship from the previous AC dislocation studies that described the relationship between CC distance and shoulder functional outcome. Last, there was no control group in this study. Thus, a randomized prospective study based on random allocation with patients undergoing additional CC augmentation is required to obtain more reliable conclusions. Fixation using a precontoured anatomic plate for unstable distal clavicle fractures showed satisfactory clinical outcomes and high union rates without additional CC ligament augmentation even when the lateral fragment was small. Patients who had increased CC distance also demonstrated satisfactory shoulder functional outcomes regardless of the type of Neer classification. Therefore, anatomic plate fixation without additional CC ligament augmentation can be considered one of the treatment options for unstable distal clavicle fracture. The authors, their immediate families, and any research foundation with which they are affiliated have not received any financial payments or other benefits from any commercial entity related to the subject of this article.