Highly stable organic electroluminescent devices based on spin-coated soluble phenyl-substituted poly-p-phenylene-vinylene (Ph-PPVs) thin films have been achieved. We investigated the electrical properties of ion beam assisted aluminum cathode contacting Ph-PPV and compared them to those of thermal evaporation. Although energetic particles of Al assisted by Ar+ ion generate the damages in organic materials, I–V–L characteristics can be improved by using thin Al buffer layer to avoid damages. In addition, dense Al cathode inhibits the permeation of H2O and O2 through pinhole defects, which results in retarding gas bubble formation. This may be explained by highly packed structure of Al cathode and decrease of the contact resistance between Al and Ph-PPV. It is believed that the larger contact area and increase of density of state in Ph-PPV minimize the contact resistance and that results in the longevity of organic light-emitting devices (OLEDs).Organic light-emitting devices (OLEDs) have attracted increasing attention in recent years because of their potential advantages in low-power, emissive, flexible, cost-competitive, flat panel displays One of the most important factors limiting the durability of OLEDs is the degradation of electron injecting contact. In OLEDs metal cathode layer is commonly deposited by thermal evaporation to minimize the damages of organic materials. In case of using energetic process, such as sputtering, energetic atoms and ions are incident on the organic surface and transfer their energy to the surrounding organic molecules. The interactions between ions and solids can cause substantial damages to organic materials and result in degraded device performance Although many researchers studied about the mechanisms of current transport and carrier injection from the contacts In this paper, we develop the dense aluminum cathode with ion beam assisted deposition (IBAD) process to protect OLED device from the O Indium tin oxide (ITO) coated glass was used as the substrate for OLEDs and it was approximately 200 The Al cathode depositions by IBAD were done with two different of conditions, one was adopted the thermally evaporated Al buffer layer about 300  The current–voltage (   The devices with ion beam assisted Al cathodes with buffer layer show higher current level and higher luminescence than thermal evaporation. This indicates lower serial resistance ( To characterize the contact resistance between Al and Ph-PPV, impedance spectroscopy was performed. In this plot the implicit variable is the frequency, which increases from right to left (20   In summary, Al cathode deposited by IBAD has the advantage over that by thermal evaporation such that it became the more packed Al structure that inhibited the permeation of H