Boron minerals are generally concentrated using attrition methods followed by screening and classification to remove clay minerals in industrial scale. Physical concentration methods are used in Kestelek Boron Mine for the concentration of colemanite. Because of the inefficient process operation, the tailings containing about 20% B2O3 are discarded into the tailings pond. In this study, colemanite tailings sample taken from tailings pond was treated using scrubbing+screening followed by flotation to recover the lost boron. As a result of the experimental studies, a concentrate containing 44.5% B2O3 was produced with 68.4% B2O3 recovery.In industrial scale, boron minerals are generally concentrated by attrition followed by screening and classification to remove clay minerals. Although Turkey has large deposits of boron minerals, such as colemanite, there are considerable amount of plant tailings containing 20–30% B Colemanite can be beneficiated by using different methods, such as attrition The purpose of present study was to investigate the beneficiation possibilities of colemanite tailings using scrubbing The representative sample taken from Kestelek Colemanite Concentration Plant’s tailing pond was used in this experimental study. According to the mineralogical analyses it was found that the sample contains colemanite and ulexite as the main minerals, calcite, quartz, volcanic tuff, clay minerals, gypsum, biotite, chlorite, limonite, and magnetite were determined as the gang minerals. Ninty percent of the sample was liberated below 0.8 Scrubbing In the flotation tests the pre-concentrate of the scrubbing test was used after grinding. Conventional flotation tests were carried out at 15% solids ratio and agitation rate was 1200 The best results of scrubbing tests were obtained, under the following conditions: 20 According to the flotation tests, sulphonate type of collectors (600 As a result of this investigation a marketable concentrate was produced with the total recovery of 68.4%. The application of this process at industrial scale will be feasible from the economical point of view; furthermore, environmental benefits will be gained by reducing the amount of tailings.