Objective
                  The aim of this study was evaluate the effects of resistance exercise on bone markers in HD patients.
               
                  Material and methods
                  Twenty-six patients undergoing hemodialysis were assigned to either an exercise group (EG – n
                     =14) or a control group (CG – n
                     =12). The EG performed approximately six months of intradialytic resistance exercise program (using elastic bands and leggings with both lower limbs) monitored thrice weekly (72 sessions), while the CG received standard care. Plasma bone markers (osteoprotegerin – OPG, osteocalcin – OC, Osteopontin – OPN and intact parathyroid hormone-iPTH) were measured by Luminex.
               
                  Results
                  OPG levels increased significantly after resistance training in EG (from 6.8±1.8 to 7.8±1.8ng/L, P
                     =0.02), whereas OC, OPN and iPTH did not change.
               
                  Conclusion
                  In summary, resistance exercise may have contributed to the increase in OPG plasma levels and probably to the prevention of bone loss among HD patients who participated in the exercise program.In chronic kidney disease (CKD), bone quality and quantity can deteriorate quickly. In fact, low bone mass is common in hemodialysis (HD) patients. This accelerated bone loss is due to an abnormal bone remodeling process that affects bone mineral density (BMD) and increases bone resorption, leading to osteopenia and osteoporosis Several biochemical markers are evaluated to diagnose bone mineral disorders in CKD patients. Serum osteocalcin (OC) has been shown to be as reliable as intact PTH (iPTH) for evaluating bone turnover in HD patients. In addition to OC The nuclear receptor activator kB (RANK) system and its receptor, the receptor activator of nuclear factor kB ligand (RANKL), have recently been studied in HD patients. RANKL is essential in osteoclast formation, fusion, activation, and survival, resulting in bone resorption and bone loss, but the effects of RANKL are counteracted by OPG Some studies have demonstrated the effects of physical exercise on bone metabolism and observed that high-intensity resistance training and activities with impact loading can be effective in promoting osteogenic stimuli, increasing BMD and maintaining bone health Although the mechanisms for explaining how resistance exercise may increase BMD are unclear, the mechanical load on bone during resistance exercise might place a high-tension load at the muscle-bone interface, which may stimulate bone formation through the periosteal apposition and modeling process. This concept is supported by studies that have reported an increase in markers of bone formation in non-CKD patients after resistance exercise To date, it is unclear whether strength training affects the catabolic processes involved in bone density and muscle mass in CKD patients This prospective study enrolled 42 HD patients (54.8% men, 47.9 Patients in the EG performed intradialytic resistance exercise training program consisting of 72 sessions, while those in the CG received standard care. The inclusion criteria were age >18 years and treatment by maintenance dialysis for at least six months. Patients with autoimmune diseases, cancer, acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS), amputated limbs, bariatric surgery, regular exercise regimens, catabolizing drug regimens and catheter access for hemodialysis were excluded. Patients who complied with less than 75% (less than 54 exercise sessions) of the resistance training program were excluded. The etiologies included hypertension ( The Ethics Committee of the School of Medicine at Federal Fluminense University approved of the study protocol (number 301/11). Informed consent was obtained from all individual participants included in the study. The resistance exercise was performed during the first two hours of hemodialysis, three times per week, for approximately 6 months (72 sessions). The patients performed the exercises with elastic bands (Theraband Blood samples were drawn at the baseline and after the period of resistance exercise program from each subject in the morning, after overnight fasting and prior to the dialysis session. The blood was collected in Vacutainer tubes containing ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid (EDTA) (1.00 The following biochemical data were measured: serum OPG, OC, OPN and iPTH plasma levels were analyzed using Multiplex kits (R&D System Inc The following anthropometric parameters were measured at the baseline and after exercise intervention period: body weight (kg), height (m), waist circumference (WC, cm). All measurements were performed on a day of a non HD session in the morning. The body mass index (BMI) was calculated as the body weight (kg) divided by the squared height (cm) and was used to assess the nutritional status according to the World Health Organization The participants’ bone mineral density (BMD) was measured by DXA (Prodigy Advanc Plus LUNAR, Corp/General Eletrics Madison-Wisconsin-USA) on a day of a non HD session. The WHO definitions were used to interpret the BMD values The results were expressed as the mean Twenty-six patients undergoing hemodialysis completed the present study. The group that performed resistance exercise consisted of 14 patients and the group with patients who did received standard care consisted of 12 patients.  According to the baseline total body BMD results measured by densitometry and interpreted by This study was conducted with HD patients in order to observe the effects of an intradialytic resistance exercise training program on bone markers. The patients were assessed at baseline, and there were signs of imbalance in the bone remodeling process, as is usually observed in dialysis patients. The present study demonstrated that a resistance exercise program can be effective in producing significant changes on bone metabolism in patients undergoing hemodialysis. Studies have shown that physical strength training can increase muscular strength and BMD, even among elderly people or those patients with chronic disease Six weeks of high-intensity resistance training and activities with loading impact can be effective in increasing BMD in elderly men Some researchers support the hypothesis that resistance exercise can effectively improve BMD and avoid bone loss by applying mechanical load on bone In the present study, serum OPG plasma levels increased significantly in the EG patients; this was not observed in the CG. This increase in plasma OPG levels after the exercise period may represent a protective factor that acts through increasing skeletal resistance in response to the negative effects caused by the high levels of iPTH in HD patients Removing RANKL or administering OPG to HD patients as a therapeutic intervention has been suggested as a strategy for regulating bone remodeling in patients with renal bone disease. In fact, it is established that OPG is a potent suppressor of RANKL release through its inhibition of RANKL shedding OPG inhibits osteoclast maturation and protects bone tissue from the resorptive action of osteoclasts It is possible that resistance exercise can decrease plasma iPTH levels in CKD patients. The iPTH levels can vary after physical exercise depending on the duration and intensity of the activity, suggesting that there is, likely, a stimulation threshold for exercise training According to Ma et al. High iPTH plasma levels do not help to improve bone mass, but maintaining medium-high levels of PTH is helpful in maintaining bone mass. Because bone loss is an asymptomatic process, the early identification of small reductions in bone mass is really important to allow for early interventions to be executed in order to prevent bone loss, and physical exercise may be helpful in maintaining bone quality Regarding the maintenance of bone mass, serum OC and OPN plasma levels were not significantly altered in any of the groups assessed in the present study, although there was a considerable increase in serum OPN plasma levels in the CG and a decrease in serum OPN levels in the EG. OPN is involved in regulating mineralization and probably acts as an inhibitor of apatite crystal growth Some limitations should be taken into consideration when interpreting our results, beginning with the small sample size which prevented us from performing more powerful analyses to evaluate the effects of resistance exercise training. In addition, we could not evaluate the serum levels of RANK and RANKL, which would otherwise have given us a better understanding of the OPG/RANK/RANKL signaling pathway in HD patients after resistance exercise training. However, the results reported here might inspire larger confirmative studies. In conclusion, resistance exercise may have contributed to the increase in OPG plasma levels and probably to the prevention of bone loss among HD patients who participated in the exercise program. This finding indicates that systematic resistance exercise may have an impact on bone remodeling in HD patients. Future studies could be important in order to investigate the effect of resistance intradialytic exercise on bone metabolism in HD patients. The authors declare that they have no competing interest. The authors acknowledge the