Plasma sulfnitriding technology has been employed to harden the surface of SKD 61 steel. In this plasma sulfnitriding method, a small amount of H2S gas has been added in the mixture of N2 and H2 used in the plasma nitriding method. This process has been performed under 3 torr pressure at 580 °C for 20 h. The plasma sulfnitriding yielded the very thin FeS iron sulfide layer 2–3 μm in thickness on the top of a 15–20 μm thick compound layer, which consisted of ɛ-Fe2–3N and a second phase of γ′-Fe4N. In comparision with commercial plasma nitriding treatment, the plasma sulfnitriding treatment has showed better surface roughness and corrosion resistance due to the presence of the thin FeS layer, which filled microvoids and microcracks in the outside of the compound layer. It has also been found that plasma sulfnitrided sample revealed better wear resistance due to the presence of the thin FeS layer which acted as a solid lubricant.Recently, plasma ion nitriding has been receiving great attention due to its reduced distortion and environmental-friendly process. The plasma ion nitriding is a thermochemical process to improve the surface properties, such as wear resistance, corrosion resistance, and fatigue strength, of various engineering steels In this paper, the microstructure and characteristics of wear resistance and corrosion resistance of the sulfnitrided layer produced on SKD 61 steel have been investigated in detail. In addition, the plasma sulfnitriding treatment has been compared with commercial plasma nitriding treatment in order to show the better material properties. The material used for this investigation is SKD 61 steel which is an alloy steel commercially used for hot forging die for automotive parts. The cylindrical samples (  Plasma sulfnitriding process produced a black 2–3 μm FeS iron sulfide layer on the top of a 15–20 μm compound layer on the surface of SKD 61 steel, while plasma nitriding process generated only a compound layer (white layer) on the surface ( Microhardness profiles of plasma nitrided/sulfnitrided SKD 61 steel are shown in According to surface roughness profiles of plasma nitrided/sulfnitrided SKD 61 steel compared with unnitrided sample, Ra values of the sulfnitrided sample are lower than those of nitrided sample. This is due to the presence of the thin FeS layer, which covered microvoids and microcracks on top of the nitrided layer. Thus the sulfnitriding process provides much smoother surface than the nitriding process. The variation of the friction coefficient of plasma nitrided/sulfnitrided SKD61 steel as a function of sliding distance is shown in Like graphite, FeS has a hexagonal structure and good plasticity. In the frictional process, the layers of basal plane can slide over each other easily. This easy sliding nature of the FeS layers gives an excellent solid lubricating properties  It has been confirmed that plasma sulfnitriding process produced a black 2–3 μm FeS iron sulfide layer on top of a 15–20 μm compound layer on the surface of SKD 61 steel. The compound layer was composed predominantly of ε-Fe The surface hardness of the sulfnitrided sample has been lower than that of nitrided sample due to relatively lower hardness of the FeS layer. However, the hardness of the diffusion zone of the sulfnitrided sample has been higher than that of nitrided sample. Plasma sulfnitrided sample yielded better wear resistance due to the presence of the thin FeS layer which acted as a solid lubricant. In comparision with commercial plasma nitriding treatment, the plasma sulfnitriding treatment showed better surface roughness and corrosion resistance due to the presence of the thin FeS layer, which covered microvoids and microcracks on top of the nitrided layer. This research was supported by the Program for the Training of Graduate Students in Regional Innovation which was conducted by the Ministry of Commerce Industry and Energy of the Korean Goverment.