The effect of pork skin (PS) and green banana flour (GBF) on the physicochemical, technological, microbiological, and sensory properties of Bologna-type sausages was assessed. For this propose, six batches were manufactured: control (formulated with 20% fat) and five treatments replacing 20%, 40%, 60%, 80%, and 100% of pork-fat by a mixture of PS, water, and GBF (1:2:2). Fat contents significantly (P
                     <0.05) decreased, while moisture, resistant starch and ash levels significantly (P
                     <0.05) increased with the addition of PS and GBF gel. Lower cooking loss and higher emulsion stability (P
                     <0.05) were observed in the modified treatments. No difference was observed between the treatments for the microbiological quality. The substitution of up to 60% fat did not influence (P
                     >0.05) on color (L*, a*, b*, and whiteness), texture parameters, and sensory acceptability. Therefore, healthier Bologna type sausages could be produced by replacing up to 60% of the fat with a mixture of PS, water, and GBF without depreciating product's quality.Currently, obesity is considered an epidemic in industrialized countries, and it is estimated that this disease will reach about 1.12 billion people by 2030 ( Meat products stand out by presenting higher fat levels when compared with other categories of processed foods. Due to their high consumption and fat content ranging from 15 to 35%, emulsified meat products exert a great impact on the population diet. Therefore, studies on the reduction of fat in this type of product can contribute to improving the quality of life of the population. However, it is extremely difficult to reduce fat in emulsified meat products without impairing the technological and sensory quality. Fat significantly improves the performance and rheological properties and is also essential for obtaining products with high sensory acceptance, since it contributes to the color, taste, flavor, tenderness, juiciness, and palatability of the products ( Despite the success in pilot scale, the use of fibers as fat substitute generally increases the production cost, impairing the use of the results at the industrial level. Thus, it is necessary to search for new fat substitutes capable of maintaining or improving technological, nutritional and sensory characteristics without making the product economically feasible. Banana ranks first in the world ranking of fruits, with a production of 105.96 Pork skin (PS) is a cheap raw material that contains 35% connective tissue (mostly collagen) ( One way to minimize the problems caused by fat reduction in meat products is the combination of different ingredients acting synergistically in order to obtain products with nutritional characteristics, and desirable sensory technology. So far, no research has been conducted on the combined use of PS and GBF as fat replacer in meat products. Thus, the aim of this study was to assess the effect of PS and GBF on the physicochemical, technological, microbiological, and sensory properties of Bologna type sausages. About 50 PS was cooked at 80 Six different formulations of Bologna type sausages were processed in a pilot plant. Three independent replicates of each batch were prepared in different days, and 10 To process the Bologna type sausages, ground pork meat (3 Physicochemical analyses were carried out for the PSGBF gel and Bologna-type sausages. The proximate composition (moisture, protein, fat, and ash contents) was determined according to the Association of Official Analytical Chemists ( The determination of resistant starch was carried out according to the method 2002.02 of Agricultural Association of Official Chemists ( The pH values were determined using a pH meter (Model MA 130; Mettler Toledo Indústria e Comércio Ltd., SP, Brazil) and water activity (Aw) was measured by using a Decagon Aqualab instrument (Decagon Devices Inc., Pullman, USA). All determinations were performed in triplicate using three pieces for each treatment. Color measurements were performed in a Minolta CR-400 colorimeter (Konica Minolta Sensing Inc., Japan), according to CIE L* a* b* system, using spectral reflectance included as calibration mode, illuminant D65, and observation angle of 10°. The color variables were measured at four points on the central part of the cut surface of three slices of the samples. L*, a*, and b* values were determined as indicators of lightness, redness, and yellowness, respectively. Whiteness was calculated from the L*, a*, and b* values as described by To determine differences in color values to visually perceived differences, the calculation of ΔE was made with the following equation: Emulsion stability was determined in five replicates for each treatment using the methodology proposed by Cooking loss was determined in five replicates for each treatment using the methodology proposed by Cooking loss (%) Texture profile analysis (TPA) was carried out using a TA-TX2 Texture Analyzer (Stable Micro Systems Ltd., Surrey, England) with a load cell of 25 Twenty-five grams of Bologna-type sausages were aseptically placed into a sterile stomacher bag. This was then homogenized with 225 The sensory analysis protocol for the Bologna type sausages developed in the experiments was previously approved by the Ethics in Research Committee of the University of Uberlândia, MG, Brazil, under protocol number 42469614.0.0000.5152. A sensory acceptance test was performed using a 9-point hedonic scale (9 - liked extremely; 8 - liked very much; 7 - liked moderately; 6 - liked slightly; 5 - neither liked nor disliked; 4 - disliked slightly; 3 - disliked moderately; 2 - disliked very much; 1 - disliked extremely). The attributes (color, aroma, flavor, texture and overall acceptability) were assessed by 100 consumers that regularly consumed Bologna type sausages ( A randomized complete block design was used and the entire experiment was replicated three times on three different days. An analysis of variance (ANOVA) using the general linear model procedure was performed to analyze the data, which considered the treatments as a fixed effect, and the replications of the experiments as a random term ( The physicochemical characteristics of the PSGBF gel are shown in The GBF showed a resistant starch content (RS) of 57.21% The effect of replace of pork back fat by PSGBF gel on physicochemical and technological properties of Bologna type sausages is presented in All modified treatments had significant ( The modified treatments presented resistant starch (RS) levels ranging from 1.8 to 4.72% ( The effect of replace of pork back fat by PSGBF gel did not show significant differences among treatments in values of pH and Aw ( As reported by The replacement of pork back fat by the PSGBF gel had a significant ( The replacement of pork back fat by PSGBF gel affected ( The behavior of gumminess and chewiness was, in general, as expected since these are secondary parameters related to hardness, springiness and cohesiveness. Control samples were showed higher ( Total coliforms, coagulase positive staphylococci, The effect of replace of pork back fat by PSGBF gel on consumer test is shown in On the other hand, despite lower scores ( The use of PSGBF gel as fat replacer contributed to the production of healthier Bologna type sausages. The fat content decreased according to the replacement level of pork back fat by the PSGBF gel. Furthermore, the addition of the PSGBF gel did not change the protein levels and contributed to significant levels of resistant starch in the reformulated products. So, the nutritional quality was improved, and thus the reformulated products can be labelled with health claims. Besides the nutritional aspects, the PSGBF gel improved cooking loss and emulsion stability, and the level up to 60% substitution did not affect color and texture parameters. Furthermore, the PSGBF gel maintained the microbiological quality of products. From the sensory point of view, although the replacement of up to 60% of back fat by PSGBF gel was effective for maintaining the sensory quality, acceptable products were obtained with a degree of substitution up to 100%. Therefore, the results obtained in this study indicate that PSGBF gel can be used as fat replacer in Bologna type sausages.