Flotation performance depends on bubble–particle attachment which is controlled by the particle surface properties which include the particle composition and the surface liberation of valuable minerals. This paper discusses the contribution of liberation of valuable minerals to bubble–particle attachment time measurements, under constant chemical conditions. The bubble–particle attachment time measurements were performed using a sized fraction from concentrates obtained at different times and tails by flotation of a copper–gold sulphide ore (Northparkes Mine, Australia) in a mechanically agitated batch flotation cell. All products and tails were analyzed using quantitative mineral liberation analysis. The results showed that there was a relationship between the time of the concentrate collected, the Cu grade of the sample and the bubble–particle attachment time, and that the measurements were most sensitive to the amount of unliberated material. The fast floating material was higher grade, with a lower attachment time indicating that the measured bubble–particle attachment time could be used to characterize flotation performance of an ore.Flotation is a physicochemical process that utilises the surface properties between valuable and non-valuable materials to achieve the beneficiation. In this process, particles collide with bubbles, and if the particle is sufficiently hydrophobic, there is the thinning and the rupture of wetting films between a bubble and a particle, and the expansion and relaxation of the gas–liquid solid contact lines, resulting in bubble–particle attachment. The bubble–particle aggregates, transported to the froth zone, are collected in the concentrate launder. Therefore, bubble–particle attachment is a critical step for successful flotation. Bubble–particle attachment is influenced by numerous factors including surface chemistry and the physical properties of particles and bubbles (  The measured attachment time is sensitive to show correlations with particle composition because particles with different composition may have different states of hydrophobicity ( There is an optimum collector dosage, pH and ionic strength at which the attachment time is the shortest and flotation recovery is the highest ( The attachment time increases with increasing particle or bubble size since it needs longer time for the displacement of the wetting film on the surface of larger particles or bubbles ( The attachment time decreases considerably with increasing temperature ( The attachment time for spherical particles is higher than that for sharp-edged particles because the sharp edges facilitate the thinning of wetting film ( All these studies have been conducted using pure minerals. Although important mechanisms and phenomena have been established using pure minerals, the real value lies in ascertaining whether it is possible to use this technique to understand the factors contributing of flotation real ores. It is also very important to note that bubble–particle attachment times determined for real ore particles could be used to characterize ore floatability and in flotation circuit characterisation and optimization. However, the literature does not provide data for bubble–particle attachment time of real ore particles being governed by the particle composition and liberation of valuable minerals. For that reason, the main objective of this work is to investigate the contribution of the liberation of valuable copper minerals, at fixed chemical conditions, on bubble–particle attachment time measurements, and thus develop the relationship between bubble–particle attachment time and the mineralogy of a copper–sulphide ore. Apart from the degree of the liberation of valuable minerals, other factors like solution chemistry, bubble and particle size, and pulp temperature also affect ore floatability and thus the flotation process but these factors are kept constant in this study. The factors will have to be considered in order to develop a general relationship between attachment time and flotation performance. The low grade copper–gold sulphide ore (1% Cu) used in this study was obtained from Northparkes Mine, New South Wales, Australia. A summary of the modal mineralogy of the most important minerals found in flotation feed, flotation products (concentrates collected after 0.5 The particle size distribution of the feed was reduced to P The impeller speed was set at 800 The bubble–particle attachment time measurements were performed with the Attachment Timer (University of Alberta, Canada) ( The modal mineralogy and liberation of the sized samples of (106 The model proposed by The results of the flotation experiments are shown in The bubble–particle attachment time measurements were conducted for the 106 It is noted that there is a critical contact time above which attachment efficiency increases rapidly with increasing contact time. The reason for this behaviour is as follows: above the critical contact time there is more time for drainage of wetting film between a bubble and a particle, improving the bubble–particle attaching force. The stable bubble–particle aggregate is formed, when the bubble–particle attaching force is higher than the bubble–particle detaching force. However, the experimental determination of these forces as a function of contact time is beyond the scope of this study. The MLA results for the flotation products (Con-1, Con-2 and Con-3) and the tails are presented in  The predominant sulphide minerals are bornite, chalcopyrite and pyrite and the amount of these minerals in the 106 In addition, the particle liberation data for bornite and chalcopyrite were grouped into four classes: liberated (100% liberated of the mineral of interest), highly liberated (100–75% of the mineral of interest), middlings (75–25% of the mineral of interest) and poorly liberated particles (<25% of the mineral of interest) as shown in The bubble particle attachment time measurements were correlated with Cu grade (calculated using the MLA results), as shown in The relationship between bubble–particle attachment time and Cu grade confirms that the bubble–particle attachment time can be used as a tool to estimate Cu grade in ore samples (concentrates and tails). Such a relationship also proved that the bubble–particle attachment mechanism play an important role for the recovery of Cu minerals found in Northparkes ore since the less the amount of Cu minerals in concentrates the higher the bubble–particle attachment time. Indeed, the relationship between the bubble–particle attachment time and the grade of valuable metal may exist for other flotation systems, because the majority of valuable minerals are recovered by bubble–particle attachment mechanism. The bubble–particle attachment time and the MLA method were used to study the contribution of liberation of valuable minerals to bubble–particle attachment time. In this study, a copper–gold sulphide ore (Northparkes Mine, Australia) was employed. The bubble–particle attachment time measurements performed for the concentrates and tails indicated that the bubble–particle attachment time measurement is dependent on particle composition and is a reliable method to discriminate between the concentrates collected during the flotation. The bubble–particle attachment time was reduced when there was a higher weight percentage and liberation of valuable minerals in the flotation products. The decrease in Cu grade of concentrate resulted in increasing the value of bubble–particle attachment time. The analysis of the bubble attachment time and the MLA results showed that there is a relationship between the bubble–particle attachment time and Cu grade. However, further investigations are needed to consider the effect of other factors (solution chemistry, bubble and particle size and pulp temperature) which were kept constant in this study. Financial support from the AMIRA International P9O Project and the member companies is gratefully acknowledged.