The flotation rate constant was modelled as a function of air dispersion properties and the complete feed particle size distribution by using the collision–attachment–detachment approach and introducing a parameter (Ф) which represents the inherent floatability of the ore. It was found that this parameter Ф is characteristic of the geometallurgical unit and does not depend on the main operating conditions. The parameter Ф is dimensionless and can be estimated either from laboratory testwork or directly from an industrial kinetics survey and can be used to predict industrial operation, provided that the other components of the model are evaluated under actual operation conditions. An empirical expression for the maximum achievable recovery – infinite time recovery – is also presented. The complete model, including flotation rate constant and infinite time recovery, was tested showing good correlation at both laboratory and industrial scale. At industrial scale the model was able to predict metallurgical results in a time frame of several weeks at Compañia Minera Doña Inés de Collahuasi SCM, showing an average relative error of less than 2%.Compañía Minera Doña Inés de Collahuasi SCM initiated the development of a new geometallurgical model to characterize its Rosario deposit in terms of its comminution circuit capacity ( The flotation process is affected, among other factors, by the dispersion of bubbles and particles. The dispersion of gas into bubbles – gas dispersion – has a key impact on the flotation performance, as described in the literature ( Scaling-up laboratory results to industrial scale is a fundamental problem both for designing new operations and for the optimization of existing ones. The similitude approach is usually applied, where similarities between laboratory and industrial conditions are established by using a series of dimensionless parameters such as the Power number, Flux number, and Reynolds number. Another commonly used approach refers to the use of purely empirical correlations ( In the current approach, the flotation rate constant for two Collahuasi’s geometallurgical units (UGM, from the Spanish “ Several authors have modelled flotation as a first order process ( Eq. From Eq. For flotation modelling, the attachment and detachment processes can be estimated using Eqs. The attachment probability can be estimated as follows: The detachment probability, Eqs. The bubble size can be estimated using Eq. Data from survey campaigns with direct measurements of The model presented in this article considers the Sauter mean bubble size as a single bubble diameter representing the complete bubble size distribution. Further development of this model to include the complete bubble size distribution is under way and will be presented in a future article. According to Abrahamson’s model (  The number density of bubbles ( The gas holdup, on the other hand, can be estimated from the Since none of the expressions used in the model accounts for the inherent floatability of the ore, a dimensionless parameter For simplicity, Eq. Note that The parameter   Collahuasi’s Rosario deposit is characterized by six geometallurgical units (UGM1–UGM6). The definition of the geometallurgical units was made in two stages, based on previous work developed by the Xstrata Process Support Group, Canada ( The characteristics of each unit (alteration and lithology), along with the proportion in the deposit, are presented in A laboratory flotation test program was carried out using samples of two different geometallurgical units (UGM) from Doña Inés de Collahuasi Mining Company, UGM1 and UGM5, which represent 18% and 7% of the total ore to be processed during the following 3 The experimental test program carried out with each geometallurgical unit consisted of a series of flotation tests in a Denver laboratory flotation cell modified to receive forced air from an air injection system. The studied variables were the grinding size ( Each For each test, a first order kinetics (  The quality of the prediction can be observed in From a statistical analysis of the results, it was found that infinite time recovery is strongly influenced by the bubble size ( The parameters According to Eq. Each UGM corresponds to a different mineral type, and hence, it has a characteristic From January 2008 to April 2009, weekly data was collected from the production records. Information included throughput, the The proportions of each UGM fed to the plant are known from the mining planning report for the period, which allows estimating the flotation performance with the model presented in this article and comparing it with the actual flotation performance in the plant (from production records). As it can be seen, the flotation model was able to predict in a satisfactory manner the observed copper recoveries. For each week, the copper recovery for the blend of geometallurgical units was calculated estimating the individual copper recovery for each UGM and then calculating the weighted average using the mass fraction of each UGM in the blend. The calculated average relative error of the model was 1.8%. Note that the good fit of the model supports the assumption of froth recovery equal to 1. Since each geometallurgical unit has a characteristic After an initial survey performed at the plant (Day 1 in The results presented in this article show that it is possible to estimate flotation performance in terms of the operating conditions and the complete particle size distribution of the flotation feed. The model considers the probability of flotation and includes a parameter The parameter The infinite time recovery The authors would like to thank Doña Inés de Collahuasi Mining Company for its support and the opportunity to write this article.