This paper presents a critical assessment of the compressive behavior of reinforced recycled aggregate concrete (RRAC) columns. Previous research has demonstrated that recycled aggregate concrete (RAC), manufactured using crushed concrete aggregates obtained from construction and demolition waste, can be a feasible and environmentally friendly alternative to conventional concrete for the use in structural applications. Currently, very limited information is available in the literature about the methods to be used for designing RC elements manufactured with recycled concrete aggregates. With the aim of extending the available experimental data, a fiber section based nonlinear finite element (FE) model was developed so as to provide in-depth insights into the compressive behavior of RRAC columns. First, a comparison between simulation results of the compressive behavior of RRAC columns and available experimental results were made to validate the FE model. Then, using the validated FE model, a parametric study was performed to investigate the effects of different recycled concrete aggregate (RCA) contents, volumetric ratio and yield strength of longitudinal steel reinforcement, and spacing and yield strength of transverse steel reinforcement on the compressive behavior and load capacity of RRAC columns. Finally, based on the limited available experimental database, a grey correlation analysis was used to evaluate the parametric sensitivity of the compressive behavior of RRAC columns. The experimental and numerical investigations demonstrate that the method used for considering the additional water absorption of RCAs in manufacturing RAC has a significant influence on the compressive load capacity of RRAC columns and that the influence of the RCA content on the compressive load capacity of RRAC columns is lower when compared with other important parameters but this effect should not be ignored in modeling the behavior of RRAC columns.sectional area of column sectional area of concrete sectional area of longitudinal steel reinforcement in total square sectional width of column diameter of concrete cylinder specimens external diameter of column cross section diameter of longitudinal steel reinforcement diameter of transverse steel reinforcement elastic modulus of concrete elastic modulus of longitudinal steel reinforcement cylinder compressive strength of concrete cylinder compressive strength of concrete when cylinder compressive strength of concrete when yield strength of longitudinal steel reinforcement height of concrete cylinder specimens square sectional height or circular sectional diameter of column coefficient to allow for concrete specimen aspect ratio coefficient to allow for concrete density coefficients to allow for concrete specimen size length of column recycled concrete aggregate (RCA) content [%] spacing of transverse steel reinforcement ultimate axial load ultimate axial load when ultimate axial load when experimental ultimate axial load numerical ultimate axial load effective ratio of water to cement axial strain of RC column axial strain of RAC at peak stress axial strain of NAC at peak stress axial strain of concrete at peak stress concrete density volumetric ratio of longitudinal steel reinforcement volumetric ratio of transverse steel reinforcement grey correlation coefficient grey correlation entropy density The use of construction and demolition waste (CDW) as aggregates in the new concrete mixture has been recognized as an attractive approach to conserve natural resources and to reduce the environmental impact of the construction industry Reinforced concrete (RC) structures manufactured using RAC, namely reinforced recycled aggregate concrete (RRAC), can promote the reuse of waste concrete and can be used in construction in wide-scale similarly to conventional RC structures made of NAC. Beams and columns are the main resistance components in frame structures, and their mechanical behaviors that relate to the shear, flexure and compression need to be accurately determined during the structural analysis and design process. Han et al. The literature review reported herein reveals that the investigation of the compressive behavior of RRAC columns has generally received limited attention. Moreover, very limited information is available about the methods to be used for designing RC elements manufactured with recycled concrete aggregates. Therefore, studying the compressive behavior of RRAC columns is of crucial importance to gain sufficient confidence to enable large-scale structural applications of this material and to obtain reliable design procedures for the resulting structural members. This paper presents a critical assessment of the compressive behavior of RRAC column. The primary objective of this study is to develop and validate a nonlinear finite element (FE) model of RRAC columns under concentric compression and to quantify the effect of RCA content on the behavior of RAC (Section The first step of this study was to develop a fiber section based nonlinear FE model capable of predicting the compressive behavior of RRAC columns under concentric axial load. The modeling and nonlinear analyses of RRAC columns were done by employing SeismoStruct The so-called “ Based on the available database of the compressive behavior of RAC, Gholampour et al. With respect to the peak strain of RAC ( Lim and Ozbakkaloglu The so-called “ The axial load-deformation (i.e. axial strain and displacement) curves of RRAC columns simulated by the FE model are compared with the experimental results presented in Choi and Yun In the FE model, It can be seen from The results of the numerical investigation demonstrate that the proposed fiber-based FE model can be used to accurately predict the compressive behavior of RRAC columns. As an alternative, existence of a simplified calculation method for the determination of the axial load capacity of RRAC columns might be beneficial. In fact, using the equilibrium equations on the cross-section, the ultimate strength can be calculated as As specific design codes are not yet available for RRAC columns, design methods intended for conventional RC columns under concentric compression are compared to the experimental results to examine their accuracy for RRAC columns. The considered design expressions included the ones from GB 50010-2010 A parametric study was conducted, based on a reference case, to complement the results of the existing experimental test database on the mechanical behavior of RRAC columns under concentric compression. The details of the reinforcement layouts used in the reference case are shown in In the following, five groups of RRAC columns with various geometric and material parameters were numerically modeled using proposed FE model by varying the geometrical and physical parameters. In particular, the following input parameters were varied in order to carry out a complete parametric study to investigate the effects of (1) RCA content, (2) longitudinal steel reinforcement ratio, (3) yield strength of longitudinal steel reinforcement, (4) spacing and (5) yield strength of transverse steel reinforcement on the compressive behavior of RRAC columns. The results of each parametric analysis are reported in the following. A large number of studies  The test results of Xiao et al.   From Four different values of the longitudinal steel reinforcement ratio ( With regard to the material strength, four values of the yield strength of the longitudinal steel reinforcement ( It can also be seen from The variable of the spacing of transverse steel reinforcement ( With regard to the material strength, three values of the yield strength of the transverse steel reinforcement ( It is worth noting that the improvements to the compressive load capacity and displacement ductility of RRAC columns that resulted from a using higher To determine the parametric sensitivity of the compressive behavior of RRAC columns the grey correlation analysis (GCA) was conducted in this study. GCA is a mathematical approach to predict the sensitivity of independent variables to dependent variables by considering the degrees of their correlation, meaning that GCA can be used to evaluate the geometric proximity between different discrete sequences within a system The experimental values of compressive load capacity of RRAC columns were selected as the reference sequence, Normalization and non-dimension are adopted to reduce the influence of the parametric dimension and the numerical fluctuation in original sequences. The normalization formulation is obtained as: The grey correlation coefficient In general, the grey relation entropy analysis could be used for measuring the relationship between different sequences. The higher grade of the relation obtained from a series of calculations could be considered to have a greater ranking. Grey correlation entropy density It should be highlighted that when From A critical assessment of the compressive behavior of reinforced recycled aggregate concrete columns has been presented. The study was motivated by the fact that very limited information is currently available in the literature about the methods to be used for designing RC elements manufactured with RAC. Through FE numerical simulations of the compressive behavior of RRAC columns, the available experimental data were extended so as to provide in-depth insights into the compressive behavior of RRAC columns. In addition, GCA was employed to investigate the parametric sensitivity of the compressive behavior of RRAC columns. Based on the results and discussions presented in this study, the following conclusions can be made: The developed FE model can accurately predict the axial load-deformation curves of RRAC columns under concentric compression. GB 50010-2010, ACI 318, Eurocode 2, NZS 3101 and equilibrium equation give 19%, 16%, 20%, 19% and 10% underestimations compared to the measured and simulated results, respectively. The comparison results again demonstrate that the proposed numerical model is an excellent approach to predict the compressive load capacity of RRAC columns. The existing experimental investigations demonstrate that the compressive strength of RAC manufactured using the equivalent effective water method decreases with increasing RCA content; whereas, in general, the opposite is true when the additional water absorption of RCAs is not taken into consideration by the use of the equivalent total water method. As for the behavior of columns, the concentric compressive load capacity of RRAC columns manufactured using the equivalent effective water method generally decreases with increasing RCA content; whereas the opposite is true when the equivalent total water method is used. Improving the volumetric ratio and yield strength of longitudinal steel reinforcement both linearly increase the concentric compressive load capacity of RRAC columns. Increasing the yield strength of transverse steel reinforcement and reducing the spacing of transverse steel reinforcement enhance the concentric compressive behavior of RRAC columns due to increasing the confinement level provided by transverse steel reinforcement. Based on the available experimental database evaluated by GCA, the concrete strength has the primary correlation on the compressive load capacity of RRAC columns; the yield strength of longitudinal steel reinforcement has the secondary correlation on the compressive load capacity of RRAC columns; the yield strength of transverse steel reinforcement has the tertiary correlation on the compressive load capacity of RRAC columns. The sensitivity of RCA content on the compressive load capacity of RRAC columns is lower when compared with other parameters but this effect should not be ignored in modeling the behavior of RRAC columns. The results of this study show that the use of RAC in reinforced concrete columns has only a minor influence on the overall compressive behavior of the column. This is very promising as it indicates that the application of this environmentally advantageous technology in the construction of future RC structures is feasible. However, the current research in the area of performance-based design of RRAC columns is limited, and there is the need for additional studies to undertake compressive damage evaluation and to determine ductility-based requirements for civil engineering applications. The research reported in this paper was supported by