Triterpenoids, which may have significant application to the development of natural medicines and functional foods as biological active components, are widely distributed throughout the plant kingdom. This paper evaluated the safety of a triterpenoid-rich extract of bamboo shavings (EBS) systematically. (i) Acute toxicity test: The oral maximum tolerated dose of EBS was more than 10 g/kg body weight both in rats and in mice, due to the absence of toxicity according to the criteria of acute toxic classifications. (ii) Mutagenicity test: It had no mutagenicity judged by negative experimental results of Ames test, mouse bone marrow cell micronucleus test and mouse sperm abnormality test. (iii) 30 days feeding study: No abnormal symptoms and clinical signs or deaths had been found in rats in each group during the test. No significant difference had been found in body weight, food consumption and food availability of rats in each test group (P
                     >0.05). In addition, no significant differences were found in each hematology value, clinical chemistry value and organ/body weight ratio, either (P
                     >0.05). No abnormality of any organ was found during histopathological examination. It can be concluded that the extract of bamboo shavings is of low toxicity and support the use of EBS for various foods.Bamboo shavings ( It is well accepted that there are abundant biological active components in bamboo shavings such as triterpenoids, saponins and sterols ( Most triterpenoids, which are made up of 30 carbons, are considered as a condensation compound of 6 isoprenes. Triterpenoids and their saponins, which are important biological active components, can be divided into triterpenoid saponins and steroid saponins according to their different chemical structures ( EBS mainly contains a group of pentacyclic triterpenoids which are identified as friedelin, lupenone and their homologous compounds, etc. These triterpenoids refer to a group of low polar components extracted from bamboo shavings using the carbon dioxide SFE technique. This paper evaluated the safety of EBS that mainly contains pentacyclic triterpenoids and reported corresponding data and results systematically based on the present study. Triterpenoid-rich extract (EBS) was prepared from bamboo shavings of Sprague–Dawley male and female rats were obtained from the Experiment Animal Center in the Drug Control Institute (Hangzhou, China) with a body weight range from 180 to 220 g. The animals were housed in cages in a temperature-controlled animal room (20–25 °C) with a relative humidity of 40–60%. They were fasted overnight but given water ad libitum prior to dosage. The animals were divided into four groups of five males and five females, and EBS was administered by oral gavage at doses of 1000, 2150, 4640 and 10,000 mg/kg body weight. The observations of general status, toxic symptom and mortality in rats was continued for two weeks after treatment. Finally, the maximum tolerant dose and acute toxic classification were determined. Kunming strain male and female mice (a closed strain coming from Kunming, Yunnan Province, China) were also obtained from the Experiment Animal Center in the Drug Control Institute (Hangzhou, China) with a body weight range from 18 to 22 g. The method was similar as described above (see Section EBS was examined for its mutagenic potency in four histidine-requiring Fifty Kunming strain male and female mice obtained from the Experiment Animal Center in the Drug Control Institute (Hangzhou, China) with a body weight range from 25 to 30 g were used in this test performed in a randomized double-blind manner. EBS was dissolved in distilled water and administered orally, two times, 24 h apart, at doses of 2500, 5000, 10,000 mg/kg body weight to five males and five females each at random. The animals were killed at 6 h after the final dose. Their sternum marrow cells were analysed following methanol fixing and Giemsa staining. The frequency of micronuclei (MN) was counted based on an examination of 1000 polychromatic erythrocytes (PCE) per mouse. Distilled water and cyclophosphamide (60 mg/kg) were given to mice as a negative control and a positive control, respectively. Fifty Kunming strain male mice obtained from the Experiment Animal Center in the Drug Control Institute (Hangzhou, China) with a body weight range from 28 to 32 g were used in this test performed in a randomized double-blind manner. EBS was dissolved in distilled water and administered orally, daily for 5 days, at doses of 2500, 5000, 10,000 mg/kg body weight to 10 males each selected at random. The animals were killed by cervical dislocation at the 35th day after the first dose. The bilateral epididymides of five mice were placed in physiological saline and minced with ophthalmic scissors. Smears were prepared on clean slides, fixed with methanol and stained with 1% eosin. The slides were air-dried and coded for subsequent examination. Morphological evaluation for sperm was carried out using a high-magnification microscope. Morphological abnormalities of sperm head shape were assessed according to systematic criteria ( The healthy Sprague–Dawley male and female post-weaning rats obtained as described above with a body range from 60 to 80 g were used and divided into four groups of 10 males and 10 females. EBS was added to a basal feed at concentrations giving 0 (control group), 0.21 (low-dose group), 0.42 (middle-dose group) and 0.83 g/kg body weight (high-dose group), respectively ( Parametric ANOVA method was used to all the toxicology tests. Chi-square test and rank test were used to mouse micronucleus test and sperm abnormality test, respectively. The data obtained from other tests were statistically analysed with No toxic symptoms or deaths occurred in each EBS group. The general conditions of all rats and mice were also normal. The oral maximum tolerant dose of EBS was more than 10,000 mg/kg body weight both in rats and mice. Therefore, the oral acute toxicity both in rats and mice was no toxicity according to the criteria of acute toxic classifications ( No increase in the number of revertant colonies occurred in the four test strains at any concentrations of EBS, either in the presence or absence of S The frequencies of MN in the micronucleus test in mice were not significantly different between the EBS groups and the control group ( The frequencies of sperm abnormalities for three different dose groups were 1.70%, 1.30% and 1.70%, respectively. The negative and positive control groups were 1.36% and 7.72% abnormalities, respectively. There were no significantly differences between three dose groups and the negative group ( No deaths were found in all groups. There were no abnormal symptoms or clinical signs related to feeding of EBS in any of the groups. There were no significant differences in body weight ( There were no differences between groups in hematology values ( There were no differences between groups in clinical chemistry values ( There were no significant differences in organ/body weight ratios between any of the EBS groups and the control groups during the study (ANOVA, Gross examination at necropsy did not reveal any treatment-related changes. Some microscopic changes were observed in some organs of the males and females both in the control group and in the high-dose group; however, considering their slight incidence and severity of the changes, there were no differences noted between the control group and high-dose group. Therefore, histopathological examination did not reveal any treatment-related changes. Bamboo shavings, which is a traditional Chinese medicinal material, has not been used so far in other countries. The development of its extraction process and biological functions have not been investigated. The increasing recent focus on the safety of natural products especially some natural active components extracted from plants ( To date, there have not been systematic toxicological studies on triterpenoids. The triterpenoid saponins obtained from the bark of In our tests, the toxicological studies performed on the botanical extract EBS did not demonstrate any significant toxicological effects both in rats and in mice because oral dosage with EBS at more than 10,000 mg/kg body weight to the animals could be considered as no toxicity. There were also no adverse effects at the highest concentration administrated in acute toxicity study and 30 day feeding study. These results indicated a potential possibility for the bamboo extract EBS to be applied in some new fields such as food supplements. In the present study, we found that there was 15.3% squalene in the compositions of EBS during structure identification by GC–MS and quantitative analysis by GC. Squalene (C On the other hand, it is the first time that the safety of triterpenoids from bamboo shavings is systematically investigated in the present study. In order to estimate the safety of this novel botanical extract, 30 days feeding study was preferentially chosen for estimating the toxicity of EBS further on the basis of acute toxicity study according to the Technical Standards for Testing and Assessment of Health Food in China ( Negative results were shown in mutation tests (Ames test, mouse micronucleus test and mouse sperm abnormality test). No obvious toxicity had also been found in 30 days feeding study in rats. Nearly no statistically significant differences were found in the essential organ weight. No dose dependency and nearly no adverse effects were seen histopathologically. Therefore, they were not considered to be treatment-related effects. The highest dose did not induce noticeable signs of toxicity. The no-observed-adverse effect level (NOAEL) of EBS in the sub-acute toxicity study was equal to 830 mg/kg body weight while the maximum tolerated dose of EBS in the acute toxicity test was more than 10 g/kg body weight. These results suggest that EBS is of low toxicity and has the potential for development and application in food systems or functional foods. We sincerely thank the Natural Science Foundation of Zhejiang Province of China for sustaining this research project (no. ZA0218).