This paper studies the regulation of concessions in the global gold mining rush. The liberalization of the gold mining sector has given way to complex forms of regulation where non-state and illegal mining entrepreneurs compete in governing mining extraction. Taking the case of gold mining in Burkina Faso, this paper analyses the conditions and dynamics under which such complex regulation takes place. We draw on extensive ethnographic fieldwork conducted in Northern Burkina Faso, in particular the Burkinabè mining sector. We argue that enclave economies in the gold mining sector are co-produced by state and market regulation through a “plurification” of regulatory authority. This “plurification” is the effect of competition amongdifferent frontier entrepreneurs, who seek to broker regulatory authority in mining concession sites. We show that concession sites are not discrete extractive enclaves, but are better understood as indiscrete sites that are entangled in local politics and social relations. Rather than thinning social relations, as is often claimed, we observe that enclave economies thicken politics around concessionary regimes, where governmental bodies re-emerge as an arbitrating regulatory force. These findings problematize policy prescriptions to formalize the gold mining sector and draw attention to the role of the state in re/producing frontier entrepreneurs with unequal political rights to claiming concessions.During 2007–14, Burkina Faso experienced a remarkable gold rush: it jumped from sixteenth- to fourth-largest gold producer on the African continent. In 2012 alone, 941 mining permits and licenses were distributed. They have mostly benefitted international investors like those who have financed Burkina Faso’s eleven large-scale gold mines since 2008. This boom has also fuelled small-scale mining— Our story evokes an unexpected entanglement of fortunes in the gold mining rush. A number of mining concessions have emerged as “extractive enclaves” or government-sanctioned spaces of mineral exploration and extraction. These mining concessions have created new configurations of “haves” and “have nots,” with small-scale typically losing out to large-scale miners. As Ferguson points out, enclave economies are characterised by private capital that lands—or rather hops—onto “non-contiguous “useful” bits that are secured, policed and, in a minimal sense, governed through private or semi-private means” ( A decade ago James Ferguson asserted that enclave economies of mineral-extraction connect “discrete points” scattered around the globe which have essentially thinned out state–society relations and “hollowed out” states in Africa ( Through the case of Burkina Faso’s gold mining frontier and its concessionary landscape, we analyse actually existing social relations that make it possible to establish a mining concession. We argue that analysing the everyday politics of “making concessions” that cuts across conventional governmental divides—private–public, illegal–legal—helps to shed light on the actually existing social relations that entangle global capital in messy local struggles around regulatory authority, and thereby reproduce the indiscrete spaces of enclave economies. We show that, rather than a thinning of state–society relations, a concessionary mining regime emerges through a “plurification” of regulatory authority. Resource concessions in the gold mining frontier in Burkina Faso are sites characterised by regulative pluralism and intense politics ( “Making concessions” requires more than the stroke of a pen or the threat of a gun—as Rasmussen and Lund put it in the introduction to this volume. Indeed, making mining concessions gives rise to political frictions—contest, disagreement, confrontation—and requires “making (political) concessions”—compromising, negotiating with, accommodating—between a number of actors. These concessions do not equally benefit all parties, and this is precisely why they are important to investigate. Not only do they help explain the seemingly contradictory configurations of extraction, such as the accommodation of Alhamdou’s illegal mining activities by the Canadian investor in the above vignette, but they also permit insights into the reconfigurations of state–society relations at the margins of the state. Two overarching steps are taken in our analysis. We first show that the multiplication of mining concessions in Burkina Faso can be traced back to the production of a concessionary resource regime at the national level. This resource regime withdrew government regulation from sites of production. In the central government attempt to capture gold mining rents, mining concessions became sites of regulative pluralism, which involved a variety of mining frontier entrepreneurs in the struggle over regulative authority (Sections We draw on extensive fieldwork conducted by the first author in Burkina Faso, including interviews with various branches of the central Burkinabè mining administration, with executive and technical staff of private national and international mining companies, and with a number of The gold mining frontier is an interesting case study of the entanglements between global capitalism and the politics of regulation “on site” ( First, this fragmentation reveals a contradictory dialectic. On the one hand, legibility and standardisation imperatives make resources investible; but, on the other hand, the messy, often violent politics of contestation and corruption erupts around the application of legible standards. Recent concerns over “land grabbing” portray dynamics of resource enclosures as discrete enclosed spaces of “accumulation by dispossession” ( James Ferguson once claimed that what differentiates new from old enclosures in the extractive sector, is the expansion of an “enclave economy” model that seems to disembed resource extraction from the social context—local and national—in which it takes place ( Studies that focus on misaligned government interests in mineral extraction, including those between central and local governments ( Secondly, making political concessions does not mean arriving at a consensus. On the contrary, overlapping resource claims spark particularly intense friction between resource claimants. Such friction is akin to Tsing’s metaphor as the folding of global abstractions into concrete places and encounters ( Insights from the fields of legal pluralism and the micro-politics of resource access are useful to help analyse these frictions. Rather than assuming that state frameworks are unequivocally imposed or adopted, studies in legal pluralism show that they are better understood as a playing field, where players engage in contingent institutional “bricolage” and develop practical norms ( It is precisely here that the frontier lens becomes useful, particularly Igor Kopytoff’s concept of “institutional vacuum” (1987, 25–33). Many anthropologists have studied informal small-scale gold mining regulation in West Africa through this lens to theorise the emergence of norms and rules in partial juridico-legal contexts as a way to turn around popular perceptions of artisanal mining as a disorderly space structured by greed and violence, and instead bringing forward evidence of a moral economy of risk sharing and sophisticated labour organisation in these mining sites ( As Kopytoff himself understood it, “institutional vacuums” should not be approached as a factual given (e.g., an objective retreat of the state, illegality), but rather as a political and discursive construction or imagination promoted by a political centre (e.g., a national government), that justifies incursion by frontier entrepreneurs in “interstitial spaces” ( We distinguish regulative pluralism from legal pluralism and hybrid governance in two ways. Firstly, it is a political formation that is specific to resource frontier dynamics, where frontier entrepreneurs are not only entrepreneurial in their specific economic realm, but also in the field of politics. Secondly we build on scholarship revealing “hybrid governance” and “twilight institutions” to mobilise a wealth of empirical evidence of political concessions between frontier entrepreneurs, but also to go beyond the description of everyday politics. The politics of making concessions exposes the ways in which the regulative competition between mining frontier entrepreneurs folds back into the discourses and institutionalisations of juridico-legal frameworks. Through this analytic we are able to account for the micro-politics through which enclave economies are produced. We begin this analysis by tracing the emergence of the concessionary mining regime in Burkina Faso at the global gold mining frontier. Making gold investible has been an essential aspect of appropriating the frontier. The Burkinabè government engaged in laborious reforming work in order to attract taxable investment in the gold mining sector ( Regulating gold mining became a public concern in Burkina Faso in the mid-1980s, when farmers started to engage in it in order to compensate for crop failure after the 1970s drought. That time was also marked by profound political transformation with the advent of a revolutionary socialist regime led by Thomas Sankara. A parastatal institution was created in 1986 to regulate the mining sector. The The liberalisation of the mining sector in the 1990s gave way to a more politically and territorially fragmented form of regulation. It effectively put an end to the government gold mining monopoly, and replaced it with private exploration and extraction licenses delineated in the Mining Code ( Firstly, mining liberalisation reforms dislocated the regulation of gold commercialisation away from the artisanal mining sites overseen by CBMP agents, and relocated it in the hands of private trading posts ( Secondly, the concessionary mining regime relocated juridico-legal regulation around mining concessions, but this task is no longer performed by the central government. The retreat of central government from regulatory authority gave impetus to the discretionary power acquired by frontier entrepreneurs to regulate mining activities within their concession sites. In small-scale mining at the time of the government monopoly over production, for example, CBMP agents fulfilled particular regulatory functions at mining sites—overseeing security, allocating small-scale mining jobs, and arbitrating disputes ( Yet not all frontier entrepreneurs acquired equal regulatory discretion. The concessionary mining regime constructed political distinctions between This plurification of regulatory authority shows the growing significance of mining concessions as territorial units around which “institutional vacuums” and regulatory opportunities are politically constructed. Mining regulation in Burkina Faso after the liberalisation reforms initially produced legal and illegal categories around mining concessions. These categories were premised on an imagined “institutional vacuum”, or the idea that, outside concession sites, illegal artisanal mining ( Extractive enclaves are produced through on-site local interactions, rather than through their avoidance. Government regulators paint concession sites as safe for the private frontier entrepreneurs, with neat boundaries of extractive spaces. The government’s premise is that only within these concessionary spaces does lawful extraction occur. But this is only the regulators’ representation of such space. In fact, concessions are rather indiscrete spaces of regulation. They are populated by a number of frontier entrepreneurs who operate by and through multiple layers of normative registers. Under a concessionary regime, The case of the SEGA concession in North Burkina Faso (see Amara’s mining project ended within the 21  After CBMP abandoned the site, a new system of regulatory authority developed that was deeply entangled in the local landholding system. In the main   These deals between Furthermore, relations among frontier entrepreneurs have not always been consensual, and conflicts of interest arose between Clearly, autochthonous shaft owners eventually lost more in these negotiations than the concessionary, but they lost less than the diggers whom they employ. Unlike the latter, who did not have a say in these negotiations, shaft owners accepted this momentary loss because financially they could count on the numerous other business activities they were able to invest in through the wealth they accumulated from The case of the SEGA concession site illustrates how making concessions does not primarily involve a bypassing of government regulation, but an emergent regulative pluralism that engages Frictions between frontier entrepreneurs and concessionaries, or among frontier entrepreneurs themselves, are not necessarily symptoms of political disorder and state weakness. They nevertheless reaffirm an imagination of For example, the central government administration created the category of “fraud” to denote undeclared gold produced within concession sites, which produced a new Another type of friction emerges when different mining frontier entrepreneurs oppose each others’ claims within resource concessions. Conflicts between frontier entrepreneurs have repeatedly taken place at a number of sites across Burkina Faso where large-scale mining concessions have been granted because they have generated frictions with Friction also occurs regularly in registered artisanal mining concessions. Artisanal concessions often impose exploitative rules that undermine the enterprises that Kopytoff’s work on political formation under frontier dynamics is analytically useful here, in particular his notion of interstitial spaces and Friction produces opportunities for the assertion of regulatory authority beyond the state coming back in. Indeed, while In the village of Bakou located on the SEGA concession, for instance, the local development committee (Conseil Villageois de Développement, CVD) has levied taxes from the production of mining shafts (a percentage of bags extracted). A similar arrangement is in place in the neighbouring village of Bangassila where Hat switching is not only internal to Yet the protesters were not disengaging from state frameworks altogether. Indeed, as a part of their protest strategy, the “We reject the COSIC [Comité de Suivi Inter-Communal] that was set up […] we think that decentralisation commands that every administrative entity contributes to its own development. In Gambo we are fully carrying out this task. […] the discovery of gold on the hill of Gambo has allowed the population to realise the following without a single help from the state: a rural health post, a high school [Collège d’Enseignement Général] is currently being finalised […], similarly the primary school B has benefitted from three new classes, we also rebuilt the village market. All this has been done without a single contribution either from the central government or from the municipality. Thus, we ask that GAMBO be designated as an independent rural commune without delay”. Interestingly, the request sent to provincial officials is justified on the grounds that illegal These cases from Burkina Faso demonstrate that political friction around resource concessions creates an opportunity for the reconfiguration of regulatory authority. Making concessions gives rise to intense politics. We have raised the question Making concessions is a political process that brings to its stage a great diversity of frontier entrepreneurs with a wide range of normative registers (international codes of practice, ancestral land access rules, national taxes and permits….) All these players collide and compete in the process of making mining concessions. Political friction is inevitable, then, but this friction can produce innovative political formations within the resource frontier, rather than simply reproducing an “ideologically conservative force”, Global capitalism is entangled in the local politics of mining frontiers. Indeed, making concessions is a fundamental site and moment of rearranging regulatory authority on resource frontiers. Rather than a thinning of the social fabric in an expanding “enclave economy” ( We have drawn on work that has emphasised the “hybrid” and “twilight” nature of governance, and our analysis advances this work. In addition to describing regulative pluralism we have drawn attention to the friction between frontier entrepreneurs that, in turn, provides opportunities for government regulatory authority to be re/produced. These effects may be seen less as heralds of failed or disappearing states than as changing political topographies ( This analysis speaks to wider questions about the “strength of weak states” ( The resource extraction regimes of local sites at the global mining frontier are characterised by regulative pluralism. Making concessions re-configures spaces of law, rather than evacuating and “lacking” law or legibility. This regulative pluralism requires that we ask what concessions are being made, between whom, and at what cost. Rather than focusing on the extent to which government frameworks are seemingly absent—which they rarely are—we therefore invite greater analytical attention to the entanglements of mining capitalism: “making (resource) concessions” involves the subtle and unexpected everyday politics of making (political) concessions. The following people have provided generous comments that have helped improve the paper (in alphabetical order): Michael Eilenberg, Christian Lund, Andrea Nightingale, Timothy Raeymaekers, Mattias Borg Rasmussen and Rory Rowan. The empirical research was funded by an ERSC +3 scholarship, and by the Mosse Centenary Fund at the University of Edinburgh.