Ultra-fine grain (UFG) Cu–Cr alloy is prepared by equal-channel angular pressing (ECAP). The microstructure, tensile and fatigue properties of the UFG Cu–Cr alloy were investigated. The bulk materials with average grain size of ∼230nm were obtained through ECAP for 12 times. The cellular subgrains with low-angle grain boundaries were first formed at relatively low strains, and high-angle grain boundaries dominate the microstructure with the increasing of strains. Materials exhibit homogeneous equiaxed subgrains after ECAP processing. The Cu–Cr alloy processed by ECAP has high strength besides high conductivity and sufficient ductility. Fatigue experiments were carried out in terms of stress-controlled for the 4 and 6 passes ECAPed samples. The increase of fatigue limit and prolong of fatigue life are remarkable as compared with those of coarse grain Cu–0.75Cr alloy and ECAPed pure Cu reported in available literatures.Ultra-fine grain (UFG) materials prepared by equal-channel angular pressing (ECAP) have attracted more interests during the last decade due to their promising physical and mechanical properties without any contamination or porosity Up to now, much work has been done on mechanical properties, fatigue behaviors and microstructures evolvement of UFG materials prepared by ECAP The commercial Cu–Cr alloy QCr0.5 (in Chinese standard) was used in this study. The QCr0.5 rods were solution annealed at 1020 The billets of 14.5 A transmission electron microscope (TEM, JEOL 200CX) was used in this experiment at 160  The microstructure and SAED of samples processed for 4 and 6 passes are shown in  During ECAP, the dislocations are created continuously, which should make the microstructure changes in several ways. Firstly, there is a large increase in the total grain boundary area along with the grains shape changing. Secondly, the internal structure appears within the grains as the accumulation of dislocations. The deformation process of metals has been explained by variety models The advantage of ECAP is that the samples can be pressed repeatedly to obtain large strain in materials without fracture. The microstructural evolution mainly depends on strain level. The processes initially produce cellular structures with dense dislocation walls and low-angle misorientations inside initial coarse grains ( From above results, it can be seen that the deformed microstructures in QCr0.5 alloy are not as homogeneous as that in pure Cu reported in Tensile stress–strain curves of ECAPed UFG samples and CG samples are shown in The results of ECAPed samples indicate that the improvement of strength and hardness of the ECAPed samples is evident when compared with the pre-ECAPed and cold-worked samples, in addition, the strength and hardness increase with the passes of ECAP processing. For instance, after 4 passes ECAP, its strength is higher than that of cold deformed sample; after 6 and 12 passes ECAP, their ultimate tensile strength increase to 605 The increases of the yield strength and ultimate tensile strength of ECAPed QCr0.5 with the number of processing passes might be due to following reasons. Firstly, the grain size fines with the number of ECAP passes, the effect of the grain size on strength follows the classical Hall–Petch type equation in general, i.e. the yield strength increases with grain size decreasing. This is due to the number of dislocations in the pile-ups is decreased with the grain size decreasing, which should produce a much smaller stress concentration in the next grain  From comparison between the present experimental results and data reported in literature in Ultra-fine grain Cu–Cr (QCr0.5) alloy were prepared by ECAP, their microstructure characteristics, tensile properties, microhardness, conductivity and fatigue limit were investigated and discussed in present work. The dominant microstructural features are homogeneous equiaxed subgrains after several number passes ECAP. Microstructural analysis shows that the average grain size of UFG QCr0.5 are about ∼510, ∼315 and ∼230 The yield strength and ultimate tensile strength of ECAPed QCr0.5 increase with the number of ECAP. The overlap effects of the grain refinement, cold deformation and precipitation strengthening mechanisms result in the hardness and strength further improvement. After 4 passes ECAP its strength is higher than that of cold deformed sample; after 6 and 12 passes ECAP, their ultimate tensile strength increase to 605 The fatigue limits The authors would like to show their thanks to Sino-Czech bilateral project (Grant No. 2004-37-17), National high technology research and development program of China (863 plan) (Grant No. 2002AA331110) and the Doctorial foundation of Xi’an Jiaotong University (Grant No. DFXJTU 2003-4).