A composite contact algorithm for a complex particle system containing polyhedrons and super-ellipsoids is proposed in this paper to simulate the grinding process of ore in a ball mill. In this algorithm, the contacts between polyhedrons are calculated based on the overlapping volume method, and the contacts between super-ellipsoids are determined by a deepest point method. The contacts between super-ellipsoids and polyhedrons are obtained by transforming super-ellipsoids into polyhedrons, and then using the overlapping volume method between the polyhedrons. The increase in the number of faces of the super-ellipsoid contributes to the closer shape to the real shape. In this paper, experimental researches and numerical simulations are carried out to validate the accuracy of this composite contact algorithm. Furthermore, the influence of the ratio of super-ellipsoids and polyhedrons, the number of faces of converted super-ellipsoid, and the sharpness of the super-ellipsoid on the computational efficiency are compared in both box filling process and particles mixing process in a rotating tumbler. Finally, the stability and feasibility of this composite contact algorithm is tested in a ball mill application containing more particles.Particle systems are very common in daily life and industrial production, and different particle systems can be very different. There are not only very small fine sand but also huge rocks [ Since DEM (Discrete Element Method) was proposed by Cundall et al. [ Which lays in front of the target to investigate the complex particle system is the contact detection between particles, and the calculation algorithm of force and moment. Most of the particles expressed by continuous function representation (CFR) have continuous surfaces [ In the existing research, most researchers only pay attention to the contact problems of the same type of particles, such as the contact between spheres, contact between super-ellipsoids, contact between polyhedrons, etc. When there are many types of particles, the contact between particles will become more complex. There are two common ways to solve this problem. The first one is to develop a method to describe particles of arbitrary shape, which can solve the problem of multiple types of particles with a unified theory. The other is to develop a composite algorithm of multiple types of particles contact [ In this paper, a composite contact algorithm is proposed to simulate the complex particles system containing polyhedral and cylindrical particles, as shown in The super-ellipsoid model can be described by an inside-outside function [ In this function, Different from the way that super-ellipsoid particles generated by setting parameters in DEM code, the geometry of the polyhedral particles can be generated by any 3D modeling software (such as UG NX, Pro/E, SolidWorks, CATIA, and so on), and polyhedral particles can be obtained by importing the text STL file. In this research, a composite algorithm is used to deal with the complex contact detection problem of particle system including polyhedron and super-ellipsoid particles. This composite algorithm contains contact detections for many types of particle, including polyhedron to polyhedron (PH-PH), polyhedron to super-ellipsoid (PHpH-SE), and super-ellipsoid to super-ellipsoid (SE-SE). To improve the efficiency and accuracy of contact detection, different types of contact are solved by different methods. Among them, the contact between polyhedrons are solved by calculating the overlapping volume [ In this paper, the theory of Feng et al. [ When a polyhedron contacts with another polyhedron, the overlap between them can be described as a polyhedron block. Taking the simplest tetrahedral particle as an example, when two tetrahedrons are in contact, there are many different types of contact. The typical three are vertex-vertex contact, vertex-surface contact, and edge-edge contact, as shown in After the position of intersection points (or vertexes) of the contacting polyhedrons are determined, the centroid of the overlapping block can be calculated, which is also defined as the contact point. Since the area The overlap of contacting super-ellipsoids is determined by a “deepest point method”. Two super-ellipsoid particles (SE-1 and SE-2, which are described as When two polyhedral particles contact with each other, the overlapping block is still polyhedron, and the volume and normal vector of this block are easy to calculate. However, the accurate calculation of the overlap volume between super-ellipsoid and polyhedron particles will significantly complicate the calculation of the collision between particles, which is obviously not suitable for large-scale simulations. On the other hand, since the surface of polyhedron particles with sharp edges is discontinuous, the overlap When a super-ellipsoid is in contact with a polyhedron, the super-ellipsoid will be treated as a polyhedral particle with specific faces according to the number of slices, as shown in the In the numerical simulation, the motion of particles follows the Newton's second law, and the corresponding equations are written as: The contact torque Rotational motion is the major difference between spherical and non-spherical particle. For non-spherical particle, the orientation of particle affects the rotational motion and contact detection. The orientation and rotational motion can be described by Euler angles. To determine the rotational motion of a non-spherical particle, the inertia tensor and the contact torque in Eq. In this paper, the accuracy of the composite contact algorithm in particulate system with polyhedron and super-ellipsoid (“PH-SE particle system” for short) are verified by experiment and numerical simulation. The verifications are carried in two processes: the packing of particles in a box, and the mixing of particles in a horizontal rotating tumbler. The box has a width of 50 mm, length of 50 mm and height of 120 mm, and the tumbler has an inner diameter of 200 mm and length of 27 mm. The particles used in the experiment are made by 3D printing with white resin material (Shanghai Prindream Intelligent Technology Co. Ltd). After printing, the tetrahedral particles are dyed into red by paint for visual distinction, while the color of cylinder particles keep the original milky, as shown in the In the packing experiment, 200 tetrahedral particles and 100 cylindrical particles are put into a box after being mixed artificially. In the numerical simulation, a total of 300 tetrahedral particles and cylindrical particles are randomly generated in the inner space of the box at a ratio of 2:1, and fall freely under the action of gravity. Due to the randomness of particle orientation in the process of packing, this process has been repeated three times both in the experiment and numerical simulation. The packing of particles in the box is shown in the To verify the feasibility and stability of the composite contact algorithm in motion, the mixing process of polyhedral particles and cylindrical particles in a horizontal rotating tumbler is studied. At the beginning, 200 polyhedral particles are packed at the bottom of the stationary horizontal tumbler, while 100 cylindrical particles are packed above them, as shown in To get the calculation efficiency of the PH-SE DEM, the process of filling a box and mixing of particles in a rotating tumbler with different ratio of the polyhedral and cylindrical particles are investigated here. In the process of box filling, we fill a box of height 0.5 m and of length and width 0.2 m with particles at a steady flow rate of 600 particles per second for 5 s of simulation time. Each simulation runs 6 s of simulation time to make sure all the particles eventually stay stationary. Particles drop from a plane near the top of the box with random horizontal position and orientations and with an initial downward speed of 0.5 m/s. While in the process of particles mixing in a rotating tumbler, a tumbler with diameter of 0.54 m and length of 0.2 m is filled with 3000 polyhedral and cylindrical particles and rotates at 15 rpm for 10 s of simulation time. The polyhedron particles used here are regular tetrahedrons with 28 mm sides, while the cylindrical particles modelled by super-ellipsoid are 15 mm in both diameter and length to exclude the impact on the number of contacts by aspect ratio, and the shape indices of super-ellipsoid particle are set to Each simulation is performed three times on a desktop with an Inter Xeon E5–2650 v3 CPU, 32GB RAM, and Windows Server 2012 operating system. In addition, when the percentage of super-ellipsoid increase from 0% to 100%, the percentage of different contact in the PH-SE particle system is studied here. There are three types of contact in PH-SE particle systems, including PH-PH contact, PH-SE contact, and SE-SE contact. When particles are in contact, the types of contact can be determined. Each simulation has been repeated three times to eliminate the deviation. Super-ellipsoidal particle is transformed into a polyhedron with a specific transform scheme when it contacts with a polyhedral particle. To quantitatively compare the computational efficiency of the DEM simulation between polyhedron and super-ellipsoid when the super-ellipsoid particles are divided into different number of slices, the process of filling a box and mixing of particles in a rotating tumbler are carried. In this section, the number of slices is set to 8, 10, 12, 14, and 16. In both the box filling and rotating tumbler simulations, the ratio between polyhedral and cylindrical particles is set to 1:1. Other parameters are set as the  In addition, it is also noticed that the shape of converted super-ellipsoid is different in each transformational scheme. On the macro level, the difference of this shape will be shown in the packing height. As for that, the packing height of polyhedron and super-ellipsoid particles with different number of faces in the box mentioned above is compared here, as shown in To simulate the behavior of the mixture of polyhedral and cylindrical particles, an alternative way is to use only polyhedral model, in which the cylindrical particles are also modelled by polyhedrons. However, the efficiency of using polyhedron to describe cylinder is much lower than using super-ellipsoid. Here, the cylindrical particles modelled by polyhedrons and super-ellipsoid are used to compare the calculation efficiency of the two methods in the box filling process. The same cylindrical particle as above is modelled by polyhedrons with different number of slices, as shown in In the ore grinding process, the edge of the grinding medium (cylindrical steel block) added in ball mill gradually becomes smooth due to the wear of the ore. In DEM simulation, this phenomenon manifests itself as the collision between polyhedral particles and super-ellipsoid particles with different sharpness. By changing the shape index in the super-ellipsoid model, different shapes of grinding media can be represented. Here, the super-ellipsoid particles ( The process of box filling and mixing of particles in the rotating tumbler are simulated, and the snapshots of simulation are shown as The feasibility test of polyhedron DEM in large-scale simulation is an important method to judge the stability and efficiency of the algorithm [ In the ore grinding process of the mining industry, the particles are usually irregular polyhedrons, and some grinding medium are cylindrical steel block. To realistically simulate this process, a composite contact algorithm for polyhedron and super-ellipsoid particle systems is proposed here. Some conclusions can be drawn as follows: For the PH-SE particle system, the composite contact detection algorithm proposed in this research can well solve the contact problem between super-ellipsoid and polyhedron. The experimental and simulation results agree well on the packing height in a box and the mixing index in a rotating tumbler. The composite contact algorithm of the PH-SE particle system proposed in this paper has considerable computational efficiency. The calculation efficiency in the PH-SE particle system mainly depends on the proportion of PH-SE contact. The calculation speed of the composite contact algorithm decreases with the increase of the number of faces of super-ellipsoid particles, and it is not greatly affected by the sharpness of the super-ellipsoid particles. The composite contact algorithm proposed in this research is suitable for the simulation of large-scale PH-SE particle systems and has good stability. The authors declared that they have no conflicts of interest to this work. We declare that we do not have any commercial or associative interest that represents a conflict of interest in connection with the work submitted. The authors would like to acknowledge the support provided by the