In order to efficiently clean fine coals, enhanced gravity separators, such as Knelson concentrator, have been developed. Although the Knelson concentrator has not been applied yet in industrial scale for fine coal cleaning, different investigations have been conducted in recent years. In this study, an oxidized coal with high sulphur was subjected to cleaning process by Knelson concentrator after being classified into the size fractions of −106μm, −300+106μm and −500+300μm. Experimental variables were coal particle size, bowl speed and fluidizing water pressure. Maximum combustible matter recovery, pyritic sulphur rejection, and ash rejection were achieved to be 99.13%, 91.60%, and 60.94%, respectively. The highest separation efficiency for the pyritic sulphur and ash was determined to be 67.91% and 39.53%, respectively. These corresponded to the removal of 70.45% of pyritic sulphur with combustible matter recovery of 97.46% and removal of 45.96% of the ash with combustible matter recovery of 93.57%. Coal particle size, bowl speed and fluidizing water pressure were determined to affect the separation performance with a close interaction between them.Gravity concentration techniques are extensively utilized in coal cleaning due to their high efficiency and low cost. However, conventional gravity processes are not applicable for cleaning fine coal The ability of gravity separating equipments to treat fine coal has been much improved with the development and application of enhanced centrifugal gravity separators An oxidized coal sample from Muzret mine was used in this study. Proximate and sulphur analyses, and particle size distribution of coal sample are illustrated in Schematic representation of Knelson concentrator and photo of batch type (KC-MD3) Knelson concentrator used in this study are illustrated in The combustible matter recovery (CMR), ash rejection (AR), pyritic sulphur rejection, (PSR), ash separation efficiency (ASE), and pyritic sulphur separation efficiency (PSSE) were determined using the following equations: CMR (%) Test results revealed that the Knelson concentrator provided a considerable amount of ash and pyritic sulphur removal from the coal. The performance of the cleaning process can be obviously seen from the pyrite contents of feed, tailings and clean coal ( Increasing bowl speed adversely affected the combustible matter recovery ( In general, a higher amount of ash was rejected with increasing particle size in contrary to expectation that higher ash removal would be obtained at small particle sizes due to better liberation of mineral matter ( Increasing bowl speed created more pronounced effect on pyritic sulphur rejection than ash rejection ( Maximum ash separation efficiency was determined to be 15.29%, 34.62% and 39.53% for the size fractions of − In this study, optimum values of ash rejections and pyritic sulphur rejections have revealed to be 45.96% and 70.45%. However, their maximum values were determined to be 60.94% and 91.60%, respectively. In the preliminary study by the authors Pyritic sulphur and ash were found to be substantially rejected from oxidized coal by using the Knelson concentrator. The Knelson concentrator seems to be more efficient at coarse size fractions of coal. Coal particle size, bowl speed and fluidizing water pressure were determined to affect the cleaning process with a close interaction between them. A maximum ash reduction of 60.94% with a corresponding combustible matter recovery of 45.81% was achieved in the −