Ankle fractures in elderly persons with severe osteopenia and/or pre-existing medical conditions such as diabetes and asthma/chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) pose difficult problems. Rigid fixation of these fractures in elderly patients is often technically difficult due to comminution at the site of the fracture and osteoporosis. It is also associated with a high risk of complications such as skin break-down, infection, failed fixation, and generally yields poor results. Four patients presented with osteoporotic bimalleolar ankle fractures. The average age of the patients was 78 (range 69–86). All four had significant co-morbidity. Two of the four were on long-term steroid treatment for COPD, and the other two were insulin dependent diabetics. All four patients presented with poor soft tissues around the fractured ankle, exaggerated by the swelling caused by the underlying fracture dislocation. They underwent fixation using a minimally invasive technique with a Rush pin for the fibula and two K-wires for the medial malleolus. Post-operatively all four patients received a back slab and were mobilised non-weight-bearing. Repeat X-rays performed 1–3 weeks post-operatively confirmed displacement of the fracture with dislocation of the ankle in plaster. As a salvage procedure, all four patients had a retrograde insertion of an ankle arthrodesis nail (Biomet Inc., Warsaw, IN) through an incision in the sole of the foot after denuding the cartilage from the distal tibia and the talus. The nail was locked proximally in the tibia with two transverse locking screws and distally with two transverse screws, one in the talus and the second in the calcaneum. The tibiotalar joint was packed with bone graft substitute (OsteoSet, UK) to facilitate fusion. No attempt was made to expose the subtalar joint or denude the articular surfaces of subtalar joint. Post-operatively all the patients were permitted to weight-bear as tolerated with two crutches. In two patients the salvage operation was delayed 6–8 weeks due to medical problems, and in the other two, the operation was done within 1–2 weeks. The median follow-up was 12 months (range 9–14 months). All four patients achieved solid ankle fusion both clinically and radiologically within 3 months following surgery. The limbs were straight and pain-free in all four cases. They were fully weight-bearing without support and were satisfied with the result. The goal of treating displaced ankle fractures is anatomical reduction and stable fixation to restore the congruity of ankle mortise. An osteoporotic ankle fracture as defined by Kannus et al. Although most studies favour open reduction and internal fixation versus closed manipulation for displaced ankle fractures in the elderly, The incidence of loss of reduction after internal fixation of ankle fractures is reported to be 4–13%. Tibiotalocalcaneal arthrodesis is a recognised treatment procedure for post-traumatic arthritis, avascular necrosis of the talus, rheumatoid arthritis, charcot neuroarthropathy and severe deformity of the hindfoot secondary to neuromuscular disease. Intramedullary fixation helps maintain alignment and length Non-union rates for tibiotalocalcaneal arthrodesis by retrograde intramedullary nailing range from 5–15%. Goebel et al. We used an ankle arthrodesis nail (Biomet Inc., Warsaw, IN) in all four cases and achieved a 100% fusion rate. An ankle arthrodesis nail provides immediate stability to the arthrodesis site allowing early weight-bearing out of plaster, which is a boon for elderly patients with poor soft tissues. We did not denude the cartilage off the subtalar joint in any of the four cases, and this did not have any adverse effect on the final outcome. All four patients in this series achieved solid ankle fusion within 3 months. We still believe that internal osteosynthesis by a minimally invasive approach is superior to the traditional open reduction and internal fixation with plate and screws in these elderly patients especially with associated co-morbidities like diabetes and osteoporosis. However, we believe that intra-articular ankle arthrodesis is a good option when the minimal osteosynthesis fails, as these patients need a single operation, which does not compromise the overlying soft tissues and renders them mobile as quickly as possible. We recommend this salvage technique for osteoporotic ankle fractures with failed primary fixation, which may prove superior to any other alternative methods.