In this paper we exposed samples of poly(l-lactide) (PLLA) extruded foil to ArF excimer laser (193 nm) radiation near the ablation threshold. The modified foil was immersed in the Simulated Body Fluid (SBF) at 37 °C for both short and long time (short term: up to 24 h, long term: up to four weeks). We described the physicochemical changes in PLLA before and after incubation in SBF. The laser irradiated PLLA incubated in SBF revealed turbidity on the irradiated surface. UV–Vis spectroscopy showed a remarkable decrease in transmittance for the irradiated PLLA incubated in SBF as compared to the non-irradiated PLLA incubated in SBF. Scanning electron microscopy proved the presence of minerals on the surface of PLLA in the laser irradiated area. The mineralization occurred only on the irradiated surface indicating that the process is selective. In the mineralized area a reduction of water contact angle was observed, suggesting a higher hydrophilicity of the surface. Moreover, a reduction in molecular weight was recorded in the long term incubation experiment for irradiated PLLA as compared to the unmodified sample. The samples were also investigated in terms of supramolecular changes in the material (DSC) and in terms of their thermal properties (TGA).Bone tissue engineering is one of the most fascinating fields of study for researchers all over the world [ Since most polymers used for scaffold preparation are hydrophobic, they are difficult to use in biomedical applications, where wettability is one of the most important factors determining the cytocompatibility of a polymer material [ One of the most common methods for polymer-ceramic material preparation is biomineralization. For this purpose the simulated body fluid (SBF) has been developed. SBF is a solution with ion concentrations similar to those of human blood plasma [ In this paper, we present for the first time a new method for PLLA mineralization using an ArF excimer laser operating in ultraviolet (193 nm) and a simulated body fluid. The mineralization process is carried out by incubating PLLA in SBF following laser activation of the polymer surface. Thanks to the precisely defined laser beam geometry and the ability to accurately control the irradiation parameters (including: scanning speed, power, repetition frequency, precise beam movement), the method described below is highly selective. The mineral is deposited primarily on the laser-modified surface. The second, additional goal of this work is to determine the effect of laser modification (ArF excimer laser) on the long-term PLLA hydrolysis in SBF. The direct impact of an ArF excimer laser on the physicochemical properties of PLLA has already been described in our previous work [ The effect of selective mineralization described in this paper was obtained on poly( In this research, we used poly ( The investigations were carried out on PLLA in the form of foil approximately 100 μm thick. The foils were extruded using a Labtech Engineering LE8-30/C (Sweden/Thailand) conical single screw extruder, equipped with a flat die combined with a micro cast film line LUMCR-75 at 200 °C. The foil preparation process is described in detail in our previous paper [ The PLLA foils were subjected to selective irradiation near the ablation threshold using an Optec ProMaster ATL 300I laser system based on an ArF excimer laser operating at 193 nm. The impulse duration was 5–6 ns and the nominal power was <5 W. The PLLA samples were irradiated without the imaging lens using a pulse energy of 6 mJ and a scanning speed of 0.5 mm/s. The pulse repetition rate was 100 Hz. The size of the beam on the surface of sample was about 2,5 × 2,5 mm FWHM (4.0 × 4.0 mm D4σ). The applied single pulse laser fluence was estimated at 96 mJ/cm The samples being tested (laser activated samples and references) were put in a plastic beaker filled with SBF, and then placed in a dryer heated to 37° for specific periods of time (short term: 1 h, 2 h, 4 h, 24 h, long term: 2 weeks, 4 weeks). When the drying time was over, they were removed from the solution, washed with distilled water and analyzed. The surface of modified foils was observed using SEM. For this purpose, a Quanta 250 Scanning Electron Microscope was used. The microscope operated at the voltage range of 5–12.5 kV and the magnification range from 400× to 10000x, in a vacuum below 10 Water surface tension measurements were conducted with a PG-X contact angle goniometer (Testing Machines, Inc.). At least 10 measurements for each sample were performed and the mean value as well as the standard deviation were calculated for these results. The GPC measurements were conducted using a 1260 Infinity chromatograph (Agilent Technologies) equipped with a PLgel MIXED C column (300mm/20 μm, Agilent Technologies) and a RI detector (optilab T-rEX) at 35 °C with the eluent flow rate of 0.7 ml/min. Before the measurements, all the samples were dissolved in chloroform (concentration ~1.5 mg/ml) and filtered using the PVDF syringe filters. Polystyrene standards were used as reference. The DSC measurements were performed with a Mettler Toledo DSC1 system, coupled with an Huber TC 100 intracooler. The instrument was calibrated using indium (T The thermogravimetric analysis was performed with a TGA/DSC1 Mettler Toledo thermobalance. Samples were heated at a rate of 10 °C/min from 25 °C to 900 °C under 30 ml/min of air flow. For the purpose of data presentation, the TGA curves were exported to OriginPro 64 (v. 9.0) as ASCII files. The UV–Vis measurements were conducted with a JASCO V-630 spectrometer (Japan) in the wavelength range 200–1100 nm and with a scanning speed of 400 nm/min. The effect of PLLA surface mineralization in SBF is observed mainly for the laser activated surface. For its analysis, we first used the UV-VIS spectroscopy method. At the beginning, the sample of neat PLLA was measured before and after laser modification. The laser activated sample has a markedly increased absorption of radiation in the range of 250–350 nm as compared to the unexposed reference, which shows by a decrease in transmittance ( The samples incubated in SBF were also examined. As can be seen in SEM analysis was performed to confirm, visualize and interpret the mineralization products on the laser-activated surface. As mentioned earlier, a noticeable turbidity effect of the PLLA sample after the incubation process was observed only on the laser modified part of the PLLA foil. SEM analysis was also performed for the laser-modified areas and for border areas (containing both the laser modified and non-modified surfaces) incubated in SBF for different times (short-term and long-term periods). For all the laser-modified samples, the appearance of an irregular mineral layer on the surface was observed, the thickness of which depended on the incubation time. The largest local surface mineralization effect during short-term incubation was observed for the sample incubated in SBF for 24 h ( The EDS analysis was carried out for selected sample fragments and showed that the minerals formed on the laser-activated surface were apatite-like ceramics with a predominance of calcium (  In his work [ The deposition of apatite ceramics on the polylactide surface takes a relatively long time. The process may take up to several weeks due to the slowness of hydrolysis in aqueous solution [ Good surface wettability is a very important property required of biomaterials used in bone tissue engineering [ When analyzing Looking at the changes occurring during long-term incubation, we can see that the contact angle for the sample decreases drastically after 2 weeks in SBF and levels out (  Another phenomenon that can be observed is the increase in the hydrolytic degradation rate occurring in SBF for laser modified samples, as compared to the unmodified ones. The reference PLLA undergoes hydrolytic degradation in SBF, but only to a very small extent. After four weeks in SBF, the average molecular weight M Based on thermogravimetric analysis, the thermal stability of PLLA after laser modification and long-term incubation in SBF was determined. Thermal stability was defined as the temperature of 5% weight loss of the samples (T The first dm/dt derivatives are also shown in The degradation residue at 600 °C was also determined. It is clearly higher for laser modified samples and increases with the time of hydrolysis. This confirms the previously described phenomenon of thin ceramic film deposition (stable at these temperatures) on the laser activated PLLA surface in SBF. Based on the DSC curves shown in Above the glass transition range, exotherm of cold crystallization is present with peak maximum (T The most noticeable dissimilarity between unmodified and laser modified PLLA concerns melting. While the melting enthalpy (ΔH Melting is preceeded by a weak exothermic peak, corresponding to the α′-α transition, with maximum (T This paper presents a new approach to the mineralization of biodegradable polymers (on the example of poly( The research presented in this paper shows a gradual growth of the apatite ceramic mineral layer on the laser-modified PLLA surface (proportionally to the time of incubation in SBF). Based on the available literature data and the research carried out, the mechanism of this phenomenon was proposed. Deposition of the apatite layer on the polymer surface also resulted in a significant improvement in surface wettability (reduction of contact angle even by approx. 30%), which is very desirable in the context of applications in bone tissue engineering. It was also shown that laser modification reduces the molecular weight of PLLA and accelerates the hydrolysis occurring during long-term incubation in SBF. This may suggest that laser modification could reduce the time of polymer degradation in the body in potential applications in tissue regeneration.  The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. KS would like to thank Prof. Masami Okamoto from Toyota Technological Institute for inspiration. The “Multifunctional biologically active composites for applications in bone regenerative medicine” project is carried out within the TEAM-NET program of the The following is the Supplementary data to this article: Supplementary data to this article can be found online at