Precious and base metal recovery from leaching metal sulphide concentrates or low-grade ores is often based on the activity of bacteria, mainly Acidithiobacillus ferrooxidans, which converts insoluble metal sulphides into soluble sulphates. This study explored the possibility of using organic wastes as nutrients during the growth of A. ferrooxidans. Flask bioleaching tests using 10% (v/v) pulp density of a pyritic mine waste concentrate have shown that the liquid fraction of municipal sewage sludge, paper mill sludge and pig manure can support the growth of the leaching bacteria and allow metal solubilisation almost like a synthetic mineral medium. Dilution of these organic wastes is required to reduce the dissolved organic carbon (DOC) concentration, which inhibited the bacterial growth activity. The toxicity of the DOC appeared when the concentration of pig manure supernatant and sewage sludge filtrate was higher than 180 and 500 mg/L, respectively. A lag period has been noted before the active growth of A. ferrooxidans in the presence of pig manure and sewage sludge. In contrast to sewage sludge and pig manure, there is no toxicity detected (no bacterial activity inhibition and lag phase period), using paper mill sludge supernatant containing DOC ranging from 40 to 350 mg/L. An important decrease of the DOC (23–94%) has been measured during all bioleaching tests. The organic matter was probably removed by heterotrophic microorganism activity.Microbial leaching processes are increasingly applied for metal recovery from mining and other industrial waste products that cannot be processed economically by conventional methods The bacterial leaching processes, like tank bioleaching or bacterial heap and dump leaching, usually require the addition of nutrients, mainly nitrogen and phosphorus, to support the growth and activity of the iron- and sulfur-oxidizers Among the thiobacilli, the acidophilic species Some research works have also demonstrated that Three types of effluents were used as nutrient supplements for bacterial growth: sewage sludge filtrate (SS), paper mill sludge supernatant (PS) and pig manure supernatant (PM). Sewage sludge filtrate was obtained after primary and secondary sludge dehydration by belt filter and was supplied by the Quebec Urban Community wastewater treatment plant (Quebec). Pig manure was provided from the experimental farm of the Institut de Recherche et de Développement Agronomique (IRDA) located in Saint-Lambert (Quebec). Paper mill sludge was supplied by Bowater (formerly named Produits Forestiers Alliance) located in Donnacona city (Quebec). Pig manure and paper mill sludge were initially centrifuged at 13,700× The microorganisms used throughout this study were a consortium of bacteria, especially indigenous iron-oxidizing bacteria. These bacteria were obtained from the indigenous microflora of sewage sludge The pyritic mine waste concentrate was provided from Norebec-Manitou mining site (Quebec). The mineral was sieved before use in the experiments. Microtrac analysis indicates that the mean particle diameter was 100% less than 53 μm. The mineral constituents of the ore were pyrite (32.8±3.5% Fe) with low amounts of sphalerite (1.39±0.05% Zn) and chalcopyrite (0.28±0.01% Cu). Experiments were carried out in 500 mL Erlenmeyer flasks, each containing 220 mL of culture medium and 5% (v/v) of inoculum. The samples were incubated at constant temperature of 30 °C in a gyratory shaking incubator (Lab-line, model 3520) at 160 rpm. The culture media was made of an organic waste described above and contained 10% (v/v) of pyrite concentrate. The mineral suspension pH was adjusted at 2.5 with H Shake flasks tests were conducted at different concentrations of effluents: 5% (v/v), 10% (v/v), 25% (v/v), 50% (v/v), 75% (v/v) and 100% (v/v), respectively mixed with 95% (v/v), 90% (v/v), 75% (v/v), 50% (v/v), 25% (v/v) and 0% (v/v) of distilled water or SM medium. The SM medium had the following composition: ammonium sulfate (NH The presence of heterotrophic acido-tolerant microorganisms was determined by the plate count agar method. A total of five different solid media were tested. Four of them were comprised of the sterilized and acidified (pH 2.5) previously shown media added to a sterilized agar solution (final concentration 15 g/L), and the fifth one was comprised of the glucose trypticase soy broth (GTS-2.5) acidified to pH 2.5 with 2 N sulfuric acid Values of ORP and pH were determined using a Fisher Accumet AR 25 model pH meter. The pH and ORP electrodes were, respectively in Ag/AgCl and in platinum. ORP measurements were checked with quinhydrone at pH 4 and 7. Dissolved organic carbon (DOC) was measured with a Shimadzu TOC 5000 apparatus. Ammonia and orthophosphate were measured using a Technicon autoanalyser. Solubilised metals were determined on a Varian atomic absorption spectrophotometer, model SpectrAA 220FS. Metal concentrations in the pyritic mine waste concentrate were determined after digestion in HNO The effects of DOC on microbial FeS The ORP increased from 425 to 550 mV for the samples containing 25%, 50% and 75% of sewage sludge filtrate The increase in ORP is mainly attributed to the increase in the Fe The ORP of samples containing 100% of sewage sludge filtrate decreased slowly and stabilized around 400 mV during the whole experiment. The pyrite was not oxidized in 100% of sludge filtrate, most probably due to the inhibitory effect of organic matter in high concentrations. Inhibitory organic compounds may affect the iron-oxidizing activity of The ORP increased and reached maximum value of approximately 550 mV after 2 days of lag phase in all experiments using paper mill sludge supernatant Microbial pyrite oxidation on different concentrations of pig manure supernatant is illustrated in It is very important to notice that for each culture media, several transfers of inoculum were carried out in order to perform pyrite oxidation, but bacterial activity was not affected. The results obtained with the first transfer were almost similar to those obtained after the ninth transfer. In order to determine the limit of dissolved organic carbon concentrations for which bacterial activity was inhibited for each of the effluents added to the culture media, the redox potential (ORP) was plotted against dissolved organic carbon Furthermore, the activity of iron-oxidizing bacteria in a culture medium containing organic matter can be enhanced by the presence of heterotrophic organisms The percentage of DOC removed ranged from 73% to 94% in culture media containing sewage sludge, 64–78% for paper mill sludge supernatant and 23–59% for pig manure supernatant. In sewage sludge filtrate and in paper mill sludge supernatant, organic carbon removal was higher than in pig manure supernatant. This confirms that organic compounds in pig manure are refractory compounds that are difficult to oxidize. Likewise, successful tests (ORP increased from 450 to 550 mV) occurred when the DOC was reduced by more than 50%.   Successful microbial pyrite oxidation led to the decrease of pH from 2.20 to 1.25 Microbial pyrite oxidation in different culture media has been demonstrated. It is also interesting to evaluate metal solubilisation in these culture media. Copper and zinc solubilisation resulted from indirect bacterial leaching as indicated in the case of the pyrite. Unsuccessful tests operated with 100% sewage sludge filtrate and those operated with 10%, 50%, 75% or 100% pig manure, indicated that metal solubilisation was mainly due to bacterial activity. The chemical oxidation was negligible. Furthermore, there was no significant difference of metal solubilisation between the results obtained with the dilutions achieved with SM medium and those achieved with distilled water. This study has demonstrated that sewage sludge filtrate, paper mill sludge supernatant and pig manure supernatant can be used as nutrient sources, without the addition of mineral salts, for the growth of dissolved organic carbon distilled water oxydo-reduction potential (mV) pig manure supernatant medium paper mill sludge supernatant medium synthetic mineral medium sewage sludge filtrate medium The authors are very grateful to Pauline Fournier, Michelle G.-Bordeleau, John K. Ndonji and Sébastien Duval for their technical assistance. Sincere thanks are also due to the National Sciences and Engineering Research Council of Canada (Grant 216819-99) and FCAR (Grants 00-NC-1961 and 00-ER-2428) for their financial support.