Monitoring, control and real-time optimisation of complex metallurgical plants require that strategic variables be directly measured or inferred from other process variable measurements. The sensors to be implemented in the plant must be carefully selected in such a way that all the strategic variables can be estimated with sufficient precision and at reasonable cost. The objective of the study is to develop and illustrate methods which allow an optimal selection and placement of the sensors into the plant. The optimality is defined with respect to process observability (minimal or redundant), cost of investment and maintenance of the sensors, and expected improvement of the process performance. The method is based on a model of mass and energy conservation around the plant flowsheet. The model, combined to cost and accuracy data for the potential sensors to be implemented, is used to determine the best compromise between the instrumentation costs and the anticipated benefits. The design technique is illustrated for a generic mineral separation plant.The measurement or the estimation of the process variables (the states) of a continuous production plant is always a preliminary step to process monitoring, control and optimisation applications. When the variables are processed one by one and are directly measurable, the problem of designing the plant instrumentation is relatively straightforward. The decision of purchasing a sensor is made by assessing the cost in comparison to the expected advantage of knowing the corresponding process variable. However, when process observation requires a simultaneous processing of various measurements to infer the states through a model, the problem of designing the instrumentation strategy becomes more complex To make the design problem more tangible, a generic mineral separation plant (a flotation circuit, for instance, The cost involves the investment, which is usually related to the accuracy and reliability of the instruments, and the sensor operation and maintenance. The benefits are related to the accuracy of the process variable estimates, but depend on the nature of the subsequent utilization of the estimates, either process monitoring or multivariate statistical process control (SPC), fault detection, process modeling, control and optimisation. The economic evaluation of the benefits, related to the improvement of the quality of the estimates, is not obvious and is usually specific to the plant. For the mineral processing example mentioned above, the value of the product is normally related to the concentrate quality and quantity In addition to the various ways of defining a design criterion, various approaches can be used to find the instrumentation strategy which optimises the criterion: the complete set of feasible solutions can either be explored by a trial and error procedure or by a guided exploration minimizing the number of tested solutions, or an analytical solution can be directly found. Various methods are shown in In the first part, the paper formulates the design problem in a generic way, then two different illustrations are presented for two generic mineral separation plants, varying the design criterion, the material balance equation (linear or bilinear), the degree of measurement redundancy and the plant flowsheet. The various steps of a strategy to design an instrumentation architecture are summarized in The The states The estimator The cost of the instrumentation strategy (box 4 of The instrumentation efficiency, i.e. the design criterion, is quantified through the loss of optimality of the process performance due to the impact (box 5 of The optimal instrumentation design Two case studies of optimal instrumentation design are considered in the paper. The first one is dealing with the circuit of The streams are described by the flow rate vectors: The observation equation is: For case study 1: For case study 2: mineral contents The performance criterion In the second case study, the loss function of the design criterion is formulated as: The first case study is illustrated with the linear material balance model of the mineral separation system of The process state and observation equations for the plant of The sensor configuration for the minimal cost solution is given by: First step: The columns of the incidence matrix Second step: A pivot is looked for in the first column of the matrix. When a pivot does not exist, the second column is tried and so on. Third step: The nonzero terms of the column are eliminated by addition or subtraction of matrix rows. The second step is repeated up to the last matrix column. Fourth step: The matrix When the domain For illustration purposes, the material balance equation of the flotation circuit of The maximum likelihood estimates, obtained through the maximization of the squared sum of The estimate variance is: The above formulas are valid when the system is globally observable, i.e. when either rank ( As it is usual in the absence of quantitative information on the impact of the estimate variances on the process performance There is no algorithm, such as the minimal cost procedure, that have been derived to minimize  The cost and variance criteria can be used together in order to find the best compromise between both aspects of the design. When the two criteria can be evaluated on a common economic scale, a combined criterion such as Another technique for presenting the results along the Pareto front is to introduce the following weighted criterion:  For the mineral separation case study, this nonlinear balance approach is more realistic since it takes into account the actual two levels of measurement, metal assays (leading to mineral contents) and flow rates. Another interest of this approach is the direct use of the process performance indicators in the Finally, the criteria The study shows that for metallurgical processes which can be described by complex networks of material and energy flows, it is possible to quantitatively design an instrumentation scheme for maximizing the sensor efficiency. The method is based on the assumption that all the variables cannot be measured and that some of them can be inferred through mass and energy conservation models. The selection of the sensors to be installed is performed within a set of available sensors of known accuracy and cost. The proposed algorithms aim at selecting the number of sensors to be implemented and their optimal placement in the plant flowsheet. The study proposes the following algorithms: A direct analytical method to find the set of sensors to be implemented for minimizing the instrumentation cost while warranting the process observability. The method requires that the model process must be linear both in its state and observation parts. An application to a flotation circuit results in the selection of the streams which have to be instrumented for measuring the valuable mineral flow rates at minimal cost, for either minimal or redundant observability. An empirical search method to find the sensor configuration which minimizes the sum of the variances of the estimated variables. An application to a flotation circuit illustrates that the method helps to find the streams which have to be instrumented to maximize the accuracy of the information about the valuable mineral balance around the circuit. A method based on the Pareto front to find the best compromise between the design at minimal cost and the design at minimal estimate variance. The method is applied to the same flotation circuit as above. An exhaustive search routine of the best sensor configuration when the variance of the process performance indicators is to be minimized. The method is applied to maximize the accuracy of the concentrate grade and mineral recovery in a flotation circuit. Future developments of the method are required to allow the sensor accuracy to become a design variable, to introduce design criteria such as economical benefits generated by control or real-time optimisation procedures, and robustness of the instrumentation configuration in face of possible failures of the sensors. In addition, more powerful search algorithms are required when the process model is not linear. The authors thank the Education Department of the Quebec Government for funding this research project. In the nonlinear case, the process model: The solution value is then: The performance indicator for the mineral processing circuit of Their variances can be calculated as follows: