Mudstone and shale, which contain a large proportion of clay minerals, account for 50% of near-surface rock. Human engineering activities are often affected by the presence of mudstone, in fields such as mining engineering, geotechnical engineering, hydraulic power engineering, tunnelling, and underground storage. For a long time, the physicomechanical properties of mudstone, such as swelling, reduced strength, and softening or disintegration, have had huge effects on the stability of engineering enterprises Preliminary studies have indicated that the modification of weak rock by electrochemical methods is an effective management strategy The computed tomography (CT) scanning technique is a powerful tool for non-destructive analysis, and can be used to scan the pore structures of rocks, generating high-resolution images. Therefore, it is extensively used in geotechnical engineering The experimental apparatus used for the electrochemical treatment in the present study is shown schematically in The mineralogical compositions were tested with a Shimadzu XRD-6000 X-ray diffractometer. The basic system, with a high-precision goniometer, could be varied with optional items to adapt it for specific purposes. The μCT experimental system (μCT225kVFCB) used for scanning was co-operatively designed by the Taiyuan University of Technology and the Institute of Applied Electron China Academy of Engineering Physics. The X-ray imaging system of the μCT experimental system consists of an X-ray machine of little focus, digital plane detector, horizontal movement device, machine seat, sample-revolving stage, jig, and sample, and can analyse metallic and non-metallic materials with μCT scanning in three dimensions. The sample size, amplification factor, and scanning unit resolution are Φ1–50, 1–400, and 0.5–0.194 The specimen, which was taken from the roof of the 3410 tail entry of the mine at Gaoping (in the province of Shanxi, China), was a continental clastic sedimentary rock from the Lower Permian Shanxi formation. The specimen was sealed in the tail entry and processed into 80 cylindrical samples, each 50 To investigate the tensile strength of the samples under different electrochemical treatments, 11 experimental schemes were designed, as shown in The samples were modified with the experimental apparatus shown in A representative sample was selected from scheme 5 and its pore structure was measured. Two μCT samples were selected from the anodic and cathodic zones. The μCT samples were ground with abrasive papers to sizes of Φ1.92×10 and Φ2.43×10 After scanning, the μCT samples were crushed and ground with a mortar and pestle, and screened with a 300-mesh decimate sifter. The powdered samples constituted the X-ray diffraction samples, each of which was positioned on an aluminium sample holder with a 1  The combination of μCT, digital image processing, and three-dimensional reconstruction is a new, simple, and feasible method for the analysis of the pore structures of rocks. A single μCT image was randomly selected from the 1200 slices of the μCT section images. The single digital image was processed by image segmentation, binarisation, and compression, and new images were generated with different resolutions. When the pixel size of the new image was taken as the pore aperture, the rule for the variation in rock porosity as the pore aperture varied was estimated from the single μCT image. The volume-rendering algorithm of the visualised reconstruction can make the single image the image sequence, and can generate a three-dimensional digital image. The rule for rock porosity variation with variation in the pore aperture was estimated based on the image sequence. In this study, we analysed the pore structure of mudstone after electrochemical treatment based on only a single μCT image. The maximum statistical area of the scanned sample was segmented from the single μCT image with Matlab. The statistical area of slice 300 is shown in In the single μCT image, the grey level of every pixel dot corresponds to the material density: a black dot indicates a low density and a white dot indicates a high density. The segmented image is the binary processed image. When the grey level is 0, the pixel dot indicates a pore; when the grey level is not 0, the dot indicates a solid component of the sample. The panels in The algorithm for image compression based on the single μCT image is: the odd line of the original image is preserved on the The relationships between the variation in sample porosity ( In As shown in From Eqs.  According to the mineralogical composition of the sample, the main minerals were clay minerals and silicate minerals. Silicate is a semi-conductor, with an electrical conductivity lower than the electrical conductivity of the electrolyte used for this electrochemical treatment. The electrical conductivity of the mudstone mainly depends on the electrical conductivity of the electrolyte in its pores As shown in Because of the excess negative charges on the surfaces of the clay mineral particles, the solid particles with negative charges move to the anodic zone and are enriched there by electrophoresis. This causes the fine particles in the pores of the anodic zone to agglomerate and coarsen, so these particles increase in size to fill the pore, causing the porosity to decrease. Electro-osmosis causes the liquid electrolyte, which has a positive charge, to move to the cathodic zone, where it becomes enriched, causing the degree of electro-osmosis to increase. More clay minerals and silicate minerals then take part in the electrolysis, and move toward the anode. The porosity in the cathodic zone increases. Electrolysis causes the observed changes in the mineralogical composition of the clay and silicate minerals. Electro-osmosis and electrophoresis cause the observed changes in the pore structure by causing the positively charged liquid electrolyte to move to the cathode, which in turn causes the hydrated layer to decrease, reduces the hydrophilicity, the dehydration, and the consolidation of the anodic zone increases the intermolecular and hydrogen bond forces, augments the cohesive and interconnection forces, and increases the cementation properties of the clay mineral particles. As a result, the mechanical strength of the mudstone increases. The mechanism of electrochemical modification in mudstone is summarised as follow: one is the changes in mineralogical composition and forming new minerals, the other is electroosmotic dewatering and consolidation. Newly formed minerals, dewatering, and consolidation dominate the crystal-chemistry property, colloid-chemical property, physicochemical property, mechanical property, engineering property, etc. We performed an experiment in which the mudstone in a coal stratum was electrochemically modified. The tensile strengths of the unmodified and modified samples were evaluated with the Brazilian test. The μCT experimental system was used for the non-destructive inspection of the samples in the anodic and cathodic zones. The pore structures in the two zones of the samples were analysed with Matlab. The mineralogical compositions of the samples were analysed, and the electrochemical modification mechanism was proposed based on the pore structure and mineralogical composition of the mudstones. The following conclusions were drawn: This electrochemical method can change the physicomechanical parameters of mudstone, and therefore provides a new way to increase the long-term stability of weak rock, facilitating weak rock engineering. Electrochemical modification can improve the mechanical properties of mudstone. The mean tensile strength of the original sample was 1.31 When a single μCT image was segmented, binarised, and compressed with Matlab, using a method of digital image processing, the porosity of the rock material at different pore apertures could be calculated. The analysis of a single μCT image showed that as the pore aperture increased, the porosity decreased. In the anodic zone, the modified sample was less porous than the unmodified sample. In the cathodic zone, the modified sample was more porous than the unmodified sample. During treatment with a direct current field, electrochemical reactions occur in the pores of mudstone. These reactions, which mainly involve electrolysis, electrophoresis and electro-osmosis, cause the mineralogical composition and pore structure of the mudstone to change. These are the main factors that modify the mechanical parameters of the mudstone. This research was supported financially by the