A crucial step in the processing of PGM-bearing reefs in South Africa is the flotation of the sulfidic minerals from the host rock. Flotation plays a crucial role in reducing the mass of material to be processed further downstream by smelting, converting and hydrometallurgical refining. However, flotation has the lowest recovery of valuable metals along the processing chain. As a result, small improvements in efficiency in flotation have an enormous benefit to the company’s performance. Modelling and simulation play an important role in circuit optimisation, due to the ability to test and examine multiple options in a small amount of time without affecting the operational circuit. Unfortunately flotation is extremely difficult to model and simulate due to the complexity of the mechanism and the large number of variables involved. Whole circuit modelling is even more difficult, for the reasons already mentioned as well as maintaining a consistent mass balance in the face of multiple recycle streams. The purpose of this work is to construct a whole-circuit model of a flotation circuit, and use the model to predict the effect of changes to the flotation circuit. A goal in the construction of the model was to use as few parameters as possible. The work presented in this paper is focused on the regression of the parameters of a first-order kinetic flotation model to actual pilot plant data. The performance of the model was then validated by predicting the behaviour of a modified flotation circuit.
                  The regression showed excellent correlation with actual plant data on a bank by bank basis. Using the regressed parameters directly on a modified circuit configuration, the model was able to predict the circuit behaviour when compared to plant data.Flotation is a crucial step in the processing of PGM-bearing reefs in South Africa ( This section briefly presents the methodology followed when developing a flotation circuit model which is then fitted to available plant data. The methodology consisted of the following steps: Review collected data and compile a model training data set. Configure circuit flow sheet in the Cycad process modelling package. Select the flotation model (1st-order). Configure the minimisation: include training data, weightings, and initial model parameters. Review regression results against raw data. Adjust initial model parameters, training data, and models as per requirements until an acceptable fit is achieved. Simulate a modified circuit configuration. Compare the predicted performance of the modified configuration against actual test data to validate the performance of the prediction tool. One of the major difficulties, particularly during extended sampling campaigns, is maintaining steady-state operation of the flotation circuit. This is required in order to reasonably assume that the results of any regression against a steady-state model have any validity. There are some ways in which variability can be minimised and averaged out of the data set. One such method is to increase the number of samples taken within a given sampling period. This is intended to compensate for short-term fluctuations. Nonetheless despite employing the best sampling practices it is typically necessary that the input data set be checked and corrected for internal consistency. In cases where there is more data available in a particular data set than what is required to solve the mass balance then data manipulation must be performed. The incorporation of all raw data sets into a single, consistent data set is commonly known as mass balance smoothing. Direct mass balance smoothing involves making no assumptions about the process other than that the mass balance is closed and consistent. A set of smoothed data is generated from the raw data set based on minimising the error between the data and a consistent mass balance. Often the reliability of different data is accounted for by weighting the error contributions of a particular measurement. In this study the data was not smoothed prior to regression of the model parameters. Due to the structure of the model the simulated data from the fitted model is inherently consistent. This is essentially model-based smoothing ( Different data has different levels of reliability; this can and should be taken into account in the minimisation objective function. The most direct method of achieving this is by weighting the error of each data point relative to its reliability. The focus of this study is to determine the efficacy of using a simple flotation model to fit sampling campaign data to a complete circuit model. Guided by the Pareto principle a basic first-order kinetic flotation model was used. The form of the model used in this study excluded entrainment, air or particle size effects. The modelling of entrainment and air effects is discussed extensively in literature ( The first-order flotation model was selected based on its common usage ( Rate constants were allocated for PGMs, chromite and gangue. A different constant was determined for each section of the flotation circuit – roughers, scavengers and cleaners. Thus in total 9 parameters were used. Applying flotation rate constants to chromite is debatable since it is recovered primarily due to entrainment. This was done, in part, to maintain a simple and consistent flotation model over the entire circuit. For the purposes of this study it is deemed acceptable since at small rate constant values the recovery predicted from the recovery model is similar to that of entrainment for low recoveries. In addition there is likely to be some true flotation due to attachment of chromite grains to floatable particles. A dataset was obtained from pilot-plant scale test work performed on the flotation of PGM-containing ores (  Once the mass balance for the circuit had been set up, incorporating the kinetic flotation model in a multi-variable, non-linear unconstrained, weighted minimisation was performed to fit the flotation model constants. The minimisation technique used is the Levenberg–Marquardt algorithm (with automatic variable scaling). This minimisation technique is in common usage and has been discussed extensively in literature ( Mass flow rates for each component (PGM, chromite and silica) were regressed for the concentrate flows and the tails flows. To validate the predictive ability of the model a different circuit layout was configured, corresponding to “Test 3 Circuit B” in ( The flotation rate parameters as regressed in Circuit A were used without modification in this setup. Nine flotation rates were used, for PGMs, chromite and gangue in the roughers, scavengers and cleaning section. The flotation cells were run at different froth depths for this test, as recorded in the published dataset. The model was adjusted to represent this froth depth. Due to the water recovery not being included in the flotation model it was input as a fixed parameter in the form of solids percentage of the concentrate streams. Note that the notation “Low Grade Cleaners” (LGC) has been retained on the cells producing final concentrate, even though these cells produce a higher-grade product than the “High Grade Cleaner” cells. This is due to these being the same physical cells that were used in the original circuit, and they are referred to as low-grade cleaners in  After the circuit model had been regressed to the pilot plant data, the simulation results of the model were compared to the test work data. It is important to note that the pilot-plant data does not represent a consistent mass balance. However, the simulation data is intrinsically consistent and is based on the circuit feed rates as quoted in the campaign dataset. Therefore differences in the fit were inevitable due to the mass balance inconsistency. The results are shown as mass flow rates of each mineral class, in the same units as The results from Similarly, It was expected that the model for the recovery of chromite would have limited effectiveness, since the primary mechanism for chromite recovery is entrainment; the driver for entrainment in flotation circuits is particle size. The accuracy is further limited due to the relatively small amount of chromite that reports to the concentrate compared to the amount of chromite in the pulp. Consequently the chromite recovery is very sensitive to small changes in the rate constant. This result can be seen in the relatively poor fit of the modelled data to the actual pilot-plant data. It is possible that a model based on the driving force of particle size is required to model chromite flotation adequately.  In the cleaner section it is again apparent that a two parameter recovery model for PGMs would likely improve the fit. Cell A in both the high grade and low grade cleaners is overpredicted, and cell B is underpredicted. Despite this the fit is quite good. The pilot plant chromite mass flow rate is relatively constant across the cleaner section. However, the model predicts a profile of high recovery in the first cell of each section, followed by much lower recovery in subsequent banks. Nonetheless the model is able to represent the chromite flow in the correct order of magnitude. Since a single flotation rate parameter was used for each section, the fit of the model is expected to improve when the results are analysed on a sectional basis.  The sectional model for chromite is very good, as shown in The ability of the model to predict a change in circuit configuration is presented in a similar manner to the model regression. The results are shown on a bank-by-bank basis, to determine how well the model was able to predict the performance of the modified circuit. As might be expected, the predicted results do not fit the data as well as the model regression did for Circuit A. The flow of PGMs in the rougher concentrate is under-predicted, while the tailings is overpredicted. In the scavenger section the actual plant data shows that the flow of PGMs to the tailings stream is greater than the concentrate. However the model predicts that the rate of PGM recovery to the concentrate will exceed that of the flow to the tailings. In the cleaners the model underpredicts the PGM flow to both the concentrate and tailings streams. However, the final concentrate flow prediction is very close to the actual data. In terms of chromite the prediction is quite accurate. The rate of chromite reporting to the concentrate streams is of the greatest interest, and in all areas (rougher, scavenger, high-grade and final concentrate) the prediction is within 30%. Although it is interesting to determine how well the circuit modification is predicted, a major use of the model is to predict trends and change magnitudes for different circuit configurations. The results were analysed to determine how well the model predicts the major changes that occurred when the circuit was changed from the Circuit A configuration to the Circuit B configuration. This is shown in This figure looks at the most important overall parameters of the circuit. It is clear that in terms of both PGMs and chromite, both configurations receive similar amounts of feed. The modified configuration does not produce a low-grade final concentrate, and therefore this configuration is expected to decrease the amount of PGM recovered. The pilot-plant data shows this effect with a noticeable decrease in the production rate of PGMs. The model predicts this decrease quite well. The higher levels of cleaning can also be expected to decrease the recovery of chromite. This is a clear result in the experimental data, and the model predicts this effect extremely well. The most obvious discrepancy between the prediction and the actual data is the PGM tailing flow rate. The model predicts a 42% increase in PGMs lost to final tailings, whereas the actual data shows almost no change at all. The configuration modifications remove the low-grade PGM final concentrate, and recycle the cleaner tailings to the roughers. This would be expected to insert a relatively high-grade stream into the rougher section, causing the tailings to increase. It is therefore postulated that the mismatch may be due experimental error. One of the objectives of this study was to perform a plant-wide regression of pilot-plant data to a model of a whole flotation circuit. It was shown that the whole circuit was successfully modelled, with an excellent fit using very few adjustable parameters. This indicates that even a simple flotation model can be used to represent an entire flotation circuit. Another objective was to use the regression parameters of the fitted model to predict the effect of a change in circuit configuration. The general behaviour of the modified circuit was represented with a high degree of accuracy by the predictive model. In particular this was shown in the change to PGM and chromite mass flow to final concentrate calculated by the model. These streams were expected to be most affected by the configuration change, and the model predicted these effects well when compared to the actual plant data.