The direct electrowinning of copper from dilute cyanide solutions was conducted in a membrane cell using graphite felt. The accumulation of deposited copper on the graphite felt as the plating proceeds significantly improves the conductivity of the graphite felt, increases the specific surface area and benefits copper deposition. The deposition current efficiency decreases with the increasing CN/Cu mole ratio. Copper can be deposited efficiently on the graphite felt from low concentration solutions (1–2 g L−1 Cu and CN/Cu mole ratio=3–9) with 50–80% current efficiency and with the removal of around 40% Cu. The energy consumption was 1–2 kW h/kg Cu in the current superficial density range 30–100 A m−2 at ambient temperature.Cyanide leaching has been widely accepted as an excellent economical method to recover gold and silver In some cases, the direct electrowinning of copper from barren dilute cyanide may be preferred to recover copper and recycle cyanide. Two chemical systems are proposed in the current study. In the first one, copper is deposited at a high surface area cathode while oxygen is evolved at the anode. The anode and cathode are separated by a Nafion membrane and the anolyte is a solution of sodium hydroxide. To reduce the consumption of NaOH and to create the possibility of manufacturing a valuable by-product, a second system is proposed. Chlorine may be formed at the anode. To realize efficient copper deposition from the dilute solutions, a high surface area electrode such as graphite felt supported by a stainless steel mesh has been studied. Although there are some reports about the recovery of copper from dilute cyanide solution using high surface area, no data are given  In the porous electrode at In the case of copper deposition from cyanide solutions, the following equation can be applied: From the above equations, the distributions of the potential and current are non-uniform due to the resistivities of the fiber and the electrolyte. In the case of the copper deposition, the driving force (  The deposition of copper is also expected to depend on the electrolyte composition, temperature and flow velocity of the solution through the cathode (mass transfer). The maximum potential difference between the fiber and the electrolyte or the maximum current is selected by the experiment with reference to the electrolyte composition and temperature. The thickness of the fiber electrode is determined by the desired extent of copper removal from the electrolyte and the maximum potential difference between the fiber and the electrolyte The mass transfer coefficient in the graphite fiber felt beds is needed in order to predict the effect of flow rate (velocity) on copper deposition efficiency. Transformed into dimensionless form, The compression of the fiber felt also significantly changes its conductivity that depends primarily on the contact resistance between the fibers. The degree of matrix compression is accounted for by the change in the porosity, and the matrix conductivity can be calculated approximately by the correlation The conductivity of a typical aqueous electrolyte falls in the range 1–100 S m Copper cyanide species establish an equilibrium speciation The concentration distributions of these species are dependent on pH, temperature and total concentrations of copper and cyanide. The mass balances of the copper and cyanide species are described by the following equations. Generally, the main types of solution flow for porous electrodes are flow-through and flow-by. Flow-through was employed for this study, i.e. the flow in the fiber felt is parallel to the current flow. The graphite fiber felt supplied by National Electric Carbon has a specific surface area of 0.7 m To start an experiment, approximately 18 L of the electrolyte in a container was preheated to about 40 °C using a water bath, and then pumped to the electrolytic cell using a Cole-Parmer pump Model 7519-20A equipped with a digital variable speed console drive for precise uniform flow rate control. The electrolytic cell was put in a water bath to maintain the electrolyte temperature at 40 °C. After the electrolyte had passed through the cell, it was pumped to a container in order to maintain a uniform flow rate. Two tubes and pumps were used to add NaOH and NaCl and circulate the anolyte. A coulometer was used to record the amount of charge consumed. In the case of chlorine evolution, a Bach-Simpson PHM82 standard pH meter was used to monitor the pH of the anolyte, keeping it above 4 and avoiding the significant migration of the hydrogen ions through the membrane. A Jenway Model 5310 conductivity meter was used to measure the conductivity of the electrolyte. The copper concentration in the solution was analyzed by atomic absorption, and the cyanide concentration was analyzed using a distillation–absorption–titration method. The copper deposited in the graphite felt was dissolved in nitric acid and analyzed by atomic absorption. Metal deposition also significantly increases the conductivity and the specific surface area of the fiber matrix and decreases the porosity of the fiber matrix. The current and potential distributions change with time. Thiocyanate is usually present in gold barren cyanide solution and, therefore, it was added into the electrolyte. Reagent grade sodium cyanide, copper cyanide, sodium hydroxide, sodium thiocyanate and sodium chloride were used to prepare the required synthetic solutions. Solid sodium cyanide and copper cyanide were analyzed prior to the preparation of the solutions to ensure that the required compositions could be achieved. The conductivity of the dilute copper cyanide solutions is expected to be low and this significantly affects the potential and the current distribution. The conductivity was therefore measured. The results are listed in In all tests, the catholyte was separated from the anolyte by a Du Pont Nafion 450 membrane. The anolytes were 5 M NaOH and 5 M NaCl, respectively, for the oxygen and chlorine evolution experiments. The current efficiency of copper deposition and the conductivity of the solution are expected to increase with increasing solution temperature. Operating copper deposition at elevated temperatures requires heating a large volume of dilute solution, resulting in significant energy consumption. However, operating at low temperature results in a low current efficiency, which increases the power consumption. A temperature range of 25–40 °C was selected for the investigation. The flow velocity used was in the range 3–10 cm min The current efficiency of copper deposition and power consumption for oxygen evolution at the anode are shown in From When the ratio of the current to the flow rate was maintained constant, the current efficiency decreased with increasing current and flow rate, suggesting that the effect of flow rate on mass transfer and on current efficiency was lower than that of the current density. This phenomenon becomes more apparent when the ratio of cyanide to copper is high. The reasons are as follows. (1) The mass transfer coefficient in the graphite felt is only proportional to (flow rate) (2) The charge transfer coefficient for hydrogen evolution (e.g. about 0.45; Due to the above dependence of current efficiency on the CN/Cu mole ratio and current density, the conversion of Cu(I) to Cu decreases with increasing CN/Cu mole ratio and with increasing current density at a fixed ratio of current density to flow velocity From  As the experiment progressed, the copper concentration of the solution exiting the cell decreased with time. This indicates improved plating efficiency with time. This phenomenon is attributed to the increasing amount of the copper deposited on the graphite, giving improved conductivity of the graphite fiber electrode, higher specific surface area and a more favorable surface condition. The effect of the deposited copper on the current efficiency was tested by recycling the copper cyanide solutions. With each recycle, the cathode was exposed to a solution with a higher mole ratio of cyanide to copper. The experiments were conducted as a three-cycle run with 1 and 2 g L After three cycles, copper concentrations decreased from 1 to 0.34 g L The current efficiency of copper deposition on a graphite felt electrode decreases with increasing CN/Cu mole ratio and current density. Due to the low conductivities of the solution and the graphite felt, the potential and current distribution of the copper through the three-dimensional electrode are non-uniform. The accumulation of the deposited copper on the graphite felt as the plating proceeds significantly improves the conductivity of the graphite felt, increasing the specific surface area and benefiting copper deposition. Copper can be deposited efficiently on the graphite felt from the low concentration solutions, even at a high CN/Cu mole ratio, provided that the graphite felt already has a deposit of copper. Up to 60% of the Cu can be removed efficiently from the solution. The energy requirement for copper deposition was as low as 1–2 kW h/kg Cu (1000–2000 kW h/ton Cu) in the current range 30–100 A m