A method was developed for extraction of nickel from ultramafic rocks containing awaruite, an alloy of nickel and iron (nominally Ni3Fe). The leaching solution contained ammonia, ammonium, citrate and thiosulfate at moderately alkaline pH. Leaching studies were carried out on synthetic Ni3Fe, josephinite (a naturally occurring material consisting mainly of awaruite from Oregon, USA) and serpentinite containing low levels of awaruite from British Columbia, Canada. In addition to citrate, several other carboxylic acid ligands were also found to be suitable for this process.Awaruite (Ni Previous efforts have been directed at recovery of awaruite from asbestos-related material. Therefore, a hydrometallurgical approach using inexpensive, readily available chemicals was desired. Although acid leaching would extract nickel from an awaruite-containing ore, the serpentinite matrix would consume excessive amounts of acid, and generate large amounts of magnesium and iron salts. This is the basis of the Magnola process ( Alkaline ammonia–ammonium would avoid leaching the serpentinite matrix, while still being able to leach awaruite, since nickel is highly soluble in alkaline ammonium solution. Another advantage would be the low solubility of iron (inevitably dissolved along with nickel from awaruite) providing a convenient way to reject iron. Accordingly, aqueous ammonia–ammonium at moderate pH (7 to 9) was investigated. Eq. However, complications arise due to the passive behaviour of awaruite. Studies of Ni–Fe alloys of various compositions have found that the surface can undergo passivation under both acidic and alkaline conditions ( These previous studies show that awaruite needs to be depassivated before it can be leached. In the acidic Magnola process, this was probably achieved by the high chloride concentration. Thiosulfate is another well-known depassivating agent for Ni–Fe alloys in the corrosion literature ( A similar effect was found on metallic nickel ( The addition of thiosulfate to alkaline ammonium sulfate was, however, unable to facilitate awaruite leaching. A possibility was that precipitation of iron(III) as an oxyhydroxide on the mineral surface blocked further dissolution, as has been observed for pentlandite and chalcopyrite leaching in ammonia solution ( Using these conditions (alkaline ammonium sulfate with citrate and thiosulfate), leaching studies were carried out on three types of samples; synthetic Ni Synthetic Ni A small amount (2.36 g) of the stoichiometric mixture was milled for 10 min, inspected, and milled for a further 10 min. After the initial milling period, the particles were noticeably flattened and had increased in size. After the second milling period, the lustre of the particles was substantially more metallic than that of the starting powders. These short milling runs were used to remove any contamination from the grinding media and crucible prior to the longer, preparative milling experiments. The stoichiometric mixture of nickel and iron (6.96 g) was added to the crucible along with the five hardened steel balls that had been used previously for the initial grinding test. Neither the balls nor the crucible were cleaned in any way. The loaded crucible was purged of air by blowing a stream of nitrogen for a few minutes and then sealed and milled in 30 min periods (with at least 30 min between milling cycles to avoid overheating) for a total of 8 h. The crucible was not opened during this procedure. The material before and after milling was examined by XRD ( An unusual occurrence of awaruite in Josephine County, Oregon, where large nuggets (up to 2 cm diameter) consisting mainly of awaruite are found in stream beds, is known as josephinite. The nuggets generally have a shell of silicate minerals surrounding a mainly metallic core. Several of these nuggets were milled for 30 s in a ring mill. SEM/EDX analysis showed that josephinite contained sulfide, oxide and silicate phases in addition to the major phase (awaruite) and that all of the phases contained some nickel. Analysis by ICP-MS found that the josephinite sample mainly consisted of nickel (61.3%) and iron (28.0%); minor metallic constituents were magnesium (1.97%), zirconium (1.96%), copper (1.46%), calcium (0.696%), cobalt (0.411%) and zinc (0.198%). Note that silicon, oxygen and sulfur were not analyzed. The main minerals present were awaruite, magnetite, serpentine, andradite and pentlandite. The serpentinite samples were received as hand-specimen sized pieces, and were crushed in a series of jaw and gyratory crushers to fine gravel size and then milled for 60 s in ~ In contrast to josephinite, the serpentinite sample contained just 0.228% nickel. The major metallic constituents were magnesium (28.3%) and iron (5.52%). Other than nickel, the only other metallic elements > Stirred-tank leaching tests were carried out in water-jacketed 2-L batch reactors equipped with three baffles. Solution agitation and gas–liquid mixing were achieved with a pair of Rushton impellers at 1200 rpm. Oxygen was sparged at a constant rate of 30 mL/min throughout the tests. Solution temperature and pH were monitored Scoping tests were carried out in sealed 250-mL conical flasks in a Gyromax 737 orbital shaker–incubator (Amerex Instruments) operating at 40 rpm. Each flask contained 50 mL of solution, leaving enough oxygen in the headspace for the leaching reactions to proceed. After shaking for 24 h, the solutions were filtered immediately and analyzed for nickel and iron simultaneously by XRF. Leaching solutions (deionized water) were made from either (NH Nickel and iron concentration in solution were measured by a Spectro Titan XRF, which was calibrated with standards containing varying levels of iron and nickel in an ammonia-citrate–thiosulfate matrix, using a 4 mm yttrium X-ray tube filter, 6 µm polyester thin film and background correction. Solid samples were analyzed by a local analytical lab (International Plasma Laboratories, Richmond, BC, Canada) for a 30-element suite by complete digestion in acid followed by ICP-MS analysis. XRD was carried out on a Rigaku Rotaflex 200 diffractometer using Cu Kα radiation operating at 40 kV and 20 mA, scanning from 40 to 100° 2 Pure Ni  Since the synthetic Ni The effect of thiosulfate concentration on nickel and iron extraction is shown in The effect of citrate concentration on josephinite leaching was also investigated, at 50 °C and at 25 °C. At both temperatures, total ammonia was held constant at 1.5 M, and the thiosulfate concentration was fixed at 2.0 mM. While the thiosulfate concentration was shown to primarily influence the rate of nickel extraction, the citrate concentration largely determined the extent of nickel leaching ( The solubility of Fe(III) effectively controls the leaching of nickel from josephinite. In alkaline ammonium solution, Fe(III) is almost totally insoluble and is present as an oxide or hydroxide. In studies of pentlandite and chalcopyrite leaching in alkaline ammonium solution, Fe(III) was found to precipitate on the mineral surface, preventing further leaching ( The coordination chemistry of iron(III) in citrate solutions is complicated. Both the carboxylic acid moieties and the α-hydroxy moiety can coordinate to an Fe(III) centre. Variously hydrolyzed complexes with one or two citrate ligands as well as hydroxo-bridged dimers or higher oligomers can also form, as shown by potentiometric titrations ( The iron is therefore present in solution and as a solid, and the proportion in each state is determined by the concentration of both iron and citrate, as well as pH and temperature. The solubility of Fe(OH) Further tests were carried out at 25 °C, again using 1.5 M [NH The effect of temperature is shown in The third type of sample, and the most industrially relevant of the three, is serpentinite containing a low percentage of awaruite. This introduced a number of complexities which were not present in the tests that used josephinite or synthetic Ni In order to quantify the fraction of nickel present in awaruite, an iodine–methanol assay was used, which selectively leaches awaruite (and other metallic phases) in the presence of oxides and silicates ( In order to examine a wide variety of leaching conditions, a series of shake-flask tests were carried out, varying pH (7–10), temperature (50–70 °C) and milling time (1–5 min) as well as thiosulfate (2–50 mM), citrate (50–250 mM) and total ammonia (1.5–3.0 M) concentration. Pulp density (150 g/L) and shaking speed (40 rpm) were held constant. The full list of conditions and results is detailed in  The effects on iron extraction were clearer, as shown in The effect of particle size was investigated using milling time (1, 2 or 5 min) as a proxy for the actual particle size distribution ( Based on the results of the shake-flask tests, which showed that temperature had a strong effect on the final nickel extraction, a tank test was carried out at 70 °C (with 1.5 M [NH While citrate proved to be effective at enabling leaching of awaruite, there are many similar carboxylic acids that can also complex Fe(III). In this study, tartaric acid, oxalic acid, glycolic acid, lactic acid and malic acid were tested ( The reason for the poor performance of oxalate for nickel leaching is that it failed to maintain iron in solution, thereby probably blocking the surface of the awaruite grains. Malate was the best of the alternative complexants, since it achieved almost as high nickel extraction as citrate and tartrate, while dissolving less iron. However, none of these alternatives are as economically attractive as citric acid, since it is the most produced organic acid by tonnage ( The ammonia-citrate–thiosulfate lixiviant for awaruite presented herein has demonstrated that nickel can be leached selectively from this previously unexploited style of nickel mineralization. The optimal leaching conditions for the serpentinite ore were those applied in the stirred-tank test, The authors acknowledge First Point Minerals for funding and for provision of josephinite and serpentinite samples.