An equiatomic AlCoCrFeNiMn hexanary high entropy alloy (HEA) was successfully synthesized by mechanical alloying. The 40 h milled powder exhibits chemical homogeneity with an average particle size of less than 3 μm. This alloy, after 40 h of milling produces a solid solution BCC phase (a = 2.89 ± 0.03 Å), the lattice parameter of which is very close to the lattice parameter of Fe and Cr. Similar BCC solid solution phase is also obtained by following a two different milling schedule containing 3 elements i.e., AlCoCr & FeMnNi separately. Dynamic DSC thermogram of the hexanary alloy powder shows two exothermic peaks. The peak temperatures and heat evolution corresponding to each peak are sensitive to heating rates, indicating that the transformations are diffusional in nature. Phase evolution at these heat events was confirmed through high-temperature XRD and TEM study. It has been found that this alloy is stable upto 500 °C (773 K). Heat treatment at higher temperatures leads to the formation of a FCC phase closely related to Ni3Al type and Mn3Co7 type intermetallic phase. Microwave sintered samples show the similar kind of behaviour as in heat-treated powder. The BCC phase along with ordered Ni3Al type (L12) phase was observed in the bulk consolidated high entropy alloy. Thermo-physical properties of this alloy have been studied in order to elucidate its classification as high entropy alloy and to understand the essential differences with multicomponent glass forming alloys.The genesis of the new class of multi-component alloys in equiatomic or near equiatomic proportions of its constituents has opened up a new paradigm of materials engineering. There is a sudden upsurge of research in the scientific community to design and develop these alloys with the enhanced properties over the conventional materials [ Various experimental techniques such as arc melting, injection casting, electrochemical deposition, mechanical alloying, melt spinning, laser cladding etc. have been used to prepare high entropy alloys (HEAs). Arc melting is one of the widely accepted techniques to fabricate these alloys. However, segregation, as well as inhomogeneous microstructures, are the main drawbacks of this popular technique [ High entropy alloys appear to have a few similarities & dissimilarities with the bulk metallic glass forming alloys. Number of components being the aspect of similitude; the composition selection criteria, nature of the enthalpies of mixing, atomic size mismatch etc. are the dissimilar factors. Akin to the glass forming alloys, understanding the thermodynamic criteria for high entropy alloy formation remains to be a major challenge. Even though there has been a considerable effort, a unified picture is still illusive. In addition to that, the phase and microstructural evolution and its stability over temperature-time space are the important aspects to be understood as this would eventually play an important role for application of these alloys [ High purity (>99 wt%) elemental powders of Al, Co, Cr, Fe, Ni, and Mn with particle size ≤ 325 mesh were used as the starting materials. These powders were mixed in the equiatomic proportion at room temperature and then milled in a high-energy planetary ball mill (Retsch PM 400) using tungsten carbide (WC) vials and balls of 10 mm diameter with the rotation speed of 200 rpm. Milling was carried out in the wet atmosphere upto 40 h using toluene as the process control agent with a ball to powder weight ratio of 10:1. Milled powders were extracted at a regular interval of 5 h and were characterized to understand the milling behaviour. Structural and microstructural characterizations were carried out by X-ray diffraction (XRD), (Rigaku Mini flex-600 (40 kV-15 mA)) and high-temperature XRD by Rigaku Smart Lab (45kV-200mA) with Cu-Kα radiation (λ = 0.154 nm), scanning electron microscopy (SEM), (FEI Quanta 200 F) operating at 20 kV, transmission electron microscopy (TEM TECHNAI G  In order to understand the mechanism of solid solution phase formation, this hexanary alloy system was divided into two (ternary) alloy systems. These alloy systems were taken on the basis of their milling behaviour during the hexanary alloy. AlCoCr and FeMnNi systems were separately milled upto 20 h and their milling behaviour with time was followed by XRD. After that 20 h, milled powder from both the ternary alloys were mixed together and they were milled for another 20 h to observe the final phase formation. The evolution of phases in AlCoCr alloy system upto 20 h of milling as followed by XRD is given in Morphology of 40 h milled alloy powder is given in The presence of the phases and their alloying effects were investigated in detailed manner through the transmission electron microscopy. Bright field images, and corresponding SAD patterns have been shown in The STEM-EDS elemental mapping of the 40 h milled powder sample has been shown in Thermal stability of the 40 h milled high entropy alloy has been investigated through dynamic DSC at different heating rates (10, 20, 40 & 50 K/min) and corresponding thermograms are shown in Activation energy calculation for the transformation of this alloy has been done through Kissinger and Ozawa models [ From the slope and the intercept of the straight line, it is possible to calculate the activation energy of transformation for both the equations. Here β is the heating rate in K/min, T In order to understand the phase transformations associated with the heat events as observed in DSC, high-temperature in-situ XRD was conducted of this 40 h milled powder sample at seven different temperatures form 350 °C (623 K) to 800 °C (1073 K) at regular interval of 75 °C (346 K). XRD patterns as obtained at all these temperatures have been shown in To understand thermal stability, the high entropy alloy samples annealed at 500 °C (773 K) and 800 °C (1073 K) were observed in TEM. Bright field images with corresponding diffraction patterns of these samples have been shown in Visible light micrographs of microwave sintered AlCoCrFeNiMn high entropy alloy, which were sintered at 900 °C (1173 K), 950 °C (1223 K) & 1000 °C (1273 K) are shown in The discovery of high entropy alloys began almost at the same time as that of bulk metallic glass forming alloys [ In the present work, the alloy system was mechanically milled, and the evolution of phases was monitored with a specific time interval. It has been observed that the Al, Co and Mn peaks disappear sequentially. It has been understood that the elements with lower melting point lose their identity first [ In the dynamic differential scanning calorimetric thermogram, it has been observed that phase composition of the alloy changes in two separate exothermic heat events when it is heated upto 1100 °C (1373 K). The alloy is stable upto 500 °C(773 K), and subsequently, the heat events appear at around 540 °C(813 K) and 900 °C (1173 K). It is important to note that the peak temperatures for these heat events shift to the right as the heating rate is increased. In addition to that, the heat evolved at each event is increased as the heating rate is increased. These observations can be explained in the light of diffusional transformation. Similar behaviour is observed in the glasses and other metastable alloys when they undergo diffusional transformation [ The phases evolved with the heat events have been explored through in-situ high-temperature XRD and TEM. It is observed that a FCC phase, which is quite closely related to the Ni It can be concluded from the present work that AlCoCrFeNiMn equiatomic alloy leads to the formation of a single-phase BCC (a = 2.89 ± 0.03 Å), alloy upon mechanical alloying. Similar phase evolution is obtained by dividing the alloy composition into two different segments and milling them in a different schedule. The semi-empirical thermodynamic analysis reveals that the ratio of TΔS/ΔH is ∼2.5 which is well within the range of high entropy alloys as reported in the literature. The high entropy alloy is stable upto ∼500 °C (773 K), and then it undergoes two diffusional transformations leading to the precipitation of a nanocrystalline FCC ordered phase (a = 3.63 ± 0.02 Å) closely related to Ni Consolidated and sintered pellet of the same alloy after heat treatment shows the precipitation of similar phases. The authors would like to thank Profs. R. K. Mandal, S. Lele, Dr B. Mukherjee and Mr Vivek Kumar Pandey for stimulating discussion on various occasions.