The primary copper sulfide mineral chalcopyrite (CuFeS2) is recalcitrant to both chemical and biological leaching, due to the supposed passivation of the mineral surface by sulfur and/or ferric iron compounds. Previous work has shown that addition of soluble silver can enhance solubilisation of copper from chalcopyrite by acidophilic bacteria. Silver may also be present in the concentrate itself. Here we describe the bioleaching of chalcopyrite concentrates with silver contents varying from <1 to 1500 g/t by consortia of thirteen species of mesophilic bacteria and eleven species of moderately thermophilic acidophiles in shake flask cultures incubated at between 30 °C and 45 °C. The compositions of the microbial consortia that established in each culture were determined using a combined cultivation-based and biomolecular approach. The most effective solubilisation of copper from the 1500 and 800 g/t Ag-concentrates occurred at 30 °C, while concentrates that contained <1 and 26 g/t of silver displayed the opposite (and predicted) pattern of mineral dissolution increasing with incubation temperature. The type strain of Acidithiobacillus ferrooxidans was the sole dominant iron-oxidising autotroph in the 800 and 1500 g/t silver concentrates, and was present in similar numbers to Leptospirillum ferrooxidans in the <1 and 26 g/t silver concentrates, leached at 30 °C. Obligate and facultatively heterotrophic acidophiles (e.g. Acidiphilium and Gram-positive acidophiles) were also usually present, but in much smaller numbers. In contrast, at 45 °C the dominant (or sole) bacterium present at day 30 was the iron/sulfur-oxidising mixotroph Sulfobacillus thermosulfidooxidans. Sulfobacillus spp. also tended to dominate cultures incubated at 37 °C, although other bacteria, including At. ferrooxidans, were present in some mineral leachates. Highly efficient dissolution of copper (76 to >98% over 30 days) from the 1500 g/t chalcopyrite concentrate at 30 °C was achieved using pure and mixed cultures of At. ferrooxidans. The results indicated that chalcopyrite concentrates that contain significant concentrations of silver are highly amenable to bioleaching at relatively low temperatures, using well-known acidophilic micro-organisms.Bioprocessing of ores and concentrates to recover gold, copper and other metals, is now an established as well as an evolving area of biotechnology ( Chalcopyrite (CuFeS The diversity of acidophilic micro-organisms that have direct and indirect roles in the oxidation of sulfidic ores and concentrates is considerable ( Chalcopyrite concentrates produced from different ores may contain varying concentrations of “contaminant” metals. Generally, the presence of significant concentrations of metals such as silver is considered to be undesirable from a bioleaching perspective. However, given previous reports of enhanced chalcopyrite bioleaching resulting from addition of soluble silver, the question of whether silver present in the concentrate itself could also impact extraction of copper was tested. This involved bioleaching four chalcopyrite concentrates containing different amounts of silver (ranging from < Four finely ground (< Two microbial consortia, each including a diverse range of iron- and sulfur-oxidising prokaryotes, and autotrophic and heterotrophic acidophiles, were assembled from the Replicate shake flasks (250 ml), each containing 100 ml of basal salts/trace elements medium and 2 g of chalcopyrite concentrate, adjusted to pH 2.0 with sulfuric acid and sterilized at 120 °C for 20 min, were inoculated with either: (i) the mesophilic consortium; (ii) the moderately thermophilic consortium; or (iii) a mixture of both consortia. Cultures were incubated at 30 °C, 45 °C, or 37 °C, respectively, shaken (100 rpm) for 30 days. Samples were removed at weekly intervals and concentrations of soluble metals measured. Microbial populations were determined using both a culture-dependent method (at 15 and 30 days) and a culture-independent method (at day 30), as described below. Culture pH and redox potentials were measured at the start and end of incubation. Viable bacteria and archaea present in mineral leaching cultures were isolated and identified on days 15 and 30 by streak-inoculating solid media that have been devised to promote the growth of acidophilic micro-organisms. A variety of “overlay” media were used that, together, facilitated the growth of all of the bacteria and archaea included in the mesophilic and moderately thermophilic consortia. These were: ferrous iron/tryptone soya broth (TSB) overlays (Fe The diversity of bacteria present at the end of the bioleaching period was also determined by terminal restriction fragment length polymorphism (T-RFLP: Soluble metals in acidified, mineral- and bacteria-free leachates were determined by ion chromatography, using a Dionex-320 ion chromatograph fitted with an IonPac® CS5A column and an AD25 absorbance detector (Dionex Inc., USA). Culture pH and redox potential (corrected to be relative to a standard hydrogen reference electrode) were measured using a “rapid renew” combination glass electrode (VWR, U.K.) and a platinum combination redox electrode (Russell, U.K.) respectively, both coupled to a Accumet pH/redox meter 50. Rates of copper solubilization solubilisation from the four chalcopyrite concentrates processed at 30 °C, 37 °C and 45 °C, are shown in The microbial populations that established in the mineral cultures varied with the chalcopyrite concentrate and incubation temperature used. Replicate cultures showed great similarity in the composition of microbial communities that had evolved by the end of the bioleaching period in every case. Often, the microbial communities present after 30 days of leaching were very simple, comprising as few as two different bacterial species ( In cultures incubated at 45 °C, where the composition of the microbial inoculum was entirely different to the mesophilic consortium, the evolved consortia in the silver-containing chalcopyrite concentrates were similar to each other but very dissimilar to that in the silver-free concentrate. In the former group, The consortia that established on the different chalcopyrite concentrates in cultures incubated at 37 °C tended to be more complex and variable than at other temperatures ( The reproducibility of obtaining highly efficient extraction of copper from the 1500 g/t silver concentrate at 30 °C was tested in two further experiments. In the first of these, replicate cultures of this concentrate were inoculated with the mesophilic consortium, as in the previous experiment. After 30 days, 98% (mean value) of the copper had been leached, and analysis of the mineral leachate (using the plating technique) showed that, as before, the dominant bacterium present was Chalcopyrite is well known to be recalcitrant to chemical or biological leaching, though a number of (bio)hydrometallurgical processes for overcoming the problem of passivation have been described in the past 10–15 years (reviewed in The major difference between the chalcopyrite concentrates used in the present study was in their silver contents. This had a major impact on the optimum temperature (over the range tested) for bioleaching of copper. No enhanced extraction of copper was obtained in inoculated cultures of the < Other work ( Adding soluble silver to enhance bioleaching of chalcopyrite at a commercial scale has the important detraction that it would be necessary subsequently to recover the silver. If, as described here, the concentrates themselves contain significant amounts of silver, this potential drawback is invalid. Bioprocessing at relatively low temperatures (30 °C) with simple, well-known acidophiles (principally We are grateful to Dr. Mariekie Gericke (Mintek, South Africa) for supplying the mineral concentrates and the corresponding analytical data. This work was carried out in the frame of BioMinE (European project contract NMP1-CT-500329-1). The authors acknowledge the financial support given to this project by the European Commission under the Sixth Framework Programme for Research and Development. We also wish to thank our various partners on the project for their contributions to the work reported in this paper. DBJ is grateful to the Royal Society (U.K.) for the award of an Industrial Fellowship.