Actual image analysis software allows the automatic quantification of the different main phases present in Portland clinker. This work studies, by optical microscopy analysis, the modification of porosity and relative amount of phases existing in plain clinker when increasing silica and alumina proportions. The compositions were dry mixed in a laboratory ball mill during 30min. In all cases three different amounts of additions (3, 6 and 9wt.%) were chosen. The different mixes were pressed by isostatic pressing (in wet bag) at 180MPa. The sintering was carried out in air at 1400°C during 30min. All materials were polished, without etching, to reach the best contrast between porosity and material to analyse the level of porosity. The samples were etched with a mix of acetic acid and ethanol or hydrochloric acid to quantify the relative amount of main phases of materials. The obtained results were correlated with mechanical properties as bending strength and hardness.Portland clinker is obtained from crudes through a process called clinkering. Clinker is composed of oxides as alumina, silica, lime, iron oxide, magnesia and others. The main phases in clinker are: alite (3CaO·SiO Usually, clinker has been used as main component of cement. Recent works have studied the processing of this material as classical ceramic through conventional methods related to Powder Technology. In these works, sinterability Alumina and silica powders were added to clinker Portland in three different quantities: 3, 6 and 9% in weight. Their characteristics are shown in Porosity study ( Pore size diminishes with both additions (   (2) increasing alumina amount diminishes alite and increases belite and liquid phase. Transformation is as follows: The increase of liquid phase with alumina addition is appreciated in With respect to relation between microstructure and mechanical properties, flexural strength was the first evaluated property. It was found that both silica and alumina additions increase strength. Relating this property with porosity values ( Hardness is not related with porosity. The influence of phases on bending strength shows that both belite ( The election of an adequate attack allows good quantification of phases in clinker Portland-based materials through IA. Porosity trends to increase with alumina and to decrease with silica. Pore size diminishes with all additions respect to base material. Pore size trends to increase with alumina amount, decreasing with silica. Silica addition increases belite amount and diminishes alite keeping constant liquid phase. Alumina addition increases belite and liquid phase, diminishing alite. Bending strength increases with belite and liquid phase.