The wear rate of working tools during the cutting and drilling of rocks is closely related to the abrasiveness of those rocks. As the contact area of the tools increases, due to wear, the specific cutting energy will also increase, and that directly affects the overall consumption of excavation tools. A new artificial intelligence (AI) based model has been developed. It utilizes acoustic emission (AE) and rock properties as main indicators of rock abrasivity, estimated by Cerchar Abrasivity Index (CAI). AE sensors are attached to both the Cerchar testing apparatus and the rock in question while conducting scratch tests using hardened steel pins of 42 and 56 HRC. Prior to the implementation of Artificial Neural Network (ANN) modeling, the selection of independent variables was carried out via Gamma test and V-ratio analyses. As a result, AE parameters, such as total number of events and root mean square of signal, in addition to testing parameters (i.e. uniaxial compressive strength, Young׳s Modulus, quartz content and pin hardness) are found to be the optimum model input combination needed to accurately predict CAI.Rock abrasivity is an important factor to be considered in rock excavation. It is directly related to wearing processes taking place at the rock–tool interface. As such, rock abrasivity has a high impact on lifespan of drilling, tunneling and excavation tools utilized in mineral exploration, oil and gas industry and infrastructure projects. Due to high costs associated with excavation tools and limited understanding of the laws governing the wearing process, it is important for engineers to constantly monitor rock abrasivity during rock cutting. This allows better excavation tool selection, decreases downtime caused by tool failure and reduces project costs and duration. In mechanical rock cutting, four tests are commonly used to assess rock abrasivity. They were developed at different laboratories and thus their names: Centre d׳Études et Recherches des Charbonnages (Cerchar) test Gouging abrasion test Laboratoire des Ponts et Chaussées (LCPC) abrasivity test Norwegian University of Science and Technology (NTNU) test Many researchers and engineers use Cerchar abrasivity index (CAI) as an abrasivity measurement because it has been recommended by the American Society for Testing and Materials (ASTM) Tool condition monitoring in metal machining has long utilized AE features as a successful methodology in order to infer wear of single/multiple-contact cutting tools Majority of research covering tool condition monitoring using AE is devoted to metal cutting. Fewer studies are focused on the application of those techniques to monitor the wear of rock cutting tools Thus, the primary aim of this study is to analyze various AE features that could potentially correlate to the length of the wear flat induced at the top of the steel pin, CAI, and to develop an alternative approach to predict CAI from a tool condition monitoring point of view using the previously selected AE features and rock properties at laboratory scale. The secondary aim is to gain more insight into the main mechanisms generating AE during Cerchar abrasivity tests. This work is primarily an academic study that looks to set the basis of a relatively new research field, applications of tool condition monitoring techniques to rock cutting, and currently is at an early stage of development towards a fully AE-based CAI prediction model. A series of 88 tests has been carried out in 11 different rock types. The surface of the rock specimens used can be considered smooth as specimens were diamond sawn according to ASTM A Philips XL40 scanning electron microscope (SEM) is utilized to find out the nature of the acoustic emission. Secondary electron and backscattered electron images are respectively used to scan the surface for damage and to identify the minerals along the groove left by the pin. For testing, a conventional West Cerchar apparatus has been used (see Some discrepancies exist amongst the scientific community regarding adequate Cerchar test parameters. The most notable are test velocity and the hardness of the pin used during testing. In terms of pin hardness, there is a lack of agreement on unique pin hardness. Some researchers claim that 56 HRC should be used Additionally, test velocity is another important testing parameter that presents discrepancy. The different proposed velocities vary within an order of magnitude. Some researchers suggest testing velocity of 10 UCS tests were carried out on core samples with height to diameter ratio of approximately 2 During uniaxial compressive strength tests, deformation measurements were also performed with dual axial extensometers and a circumferential extensometer, model MTS 632.11F-90 and model MTS 632.12F-20 respectively. Tangent Young modulus ( As mentioned earlier, rock properties also influence the CAI values to some extent. There is agreement on that the “classical” rock properties that have more influence on CAI are UCS AE are transient stress waves, which are generated when the deformation state of a body changes AE is a technique that has previously been used under certain condition to monitor CAI Regarding AE system used for testing, AE sensors and their respective preamplifiers are utilized along with a data acquisition card (DAQ) and LabVIEW program as seen in In a multivariate scenario, a regression model uses a set of independent variables to predict a dependent variable, in our case is CAI. Although all independent variables, AE features and rock properties, can contribute to the model, there are some variables that have more significant contribution compared to others. It is therefore better to include only the most relevant variables for simpler modeling. Since we have multiple AE features, it is important to apply feature selection to our work. Gamma test is a data analysis routine that can measure the noise level of any smooth model of the following form (Eq. ( ANNs are extensively used in different engineering applications due to their well-known capabilities of performing non-linear modeling amongst multiple variables with unknown relations. They are smooth models therefore the gamma statistic is suitable to estimate the error variance of some specific ANN architecture. ANNs imitate the behavior of the real neural system. The basic principle is given by the neuron activation mechanism, where a neuron is activated by an input and only responds if the input magnitude is greater than a determined threshold The weights are the interconnection between layers that contribute to the prediction and classification power of the ANN. During the learning phase, these interconnections learn from experimental data by optimizing the quadratic error between the prediction and real value of the output variable. A widely used optimization method is the gradient descendent method. For performance assessment of the ANN model, three datasets are required: training, validation and testing datasets. The training dataset is used to find the optimal weights. Validation dataset is utilized in order to avoid overfitting, which occurs when the ANN memorizes and replicates the training dataset. Finally, the ANN performance is evaluated using the unseen testing dataset. ANN has been extensively used in tool condition monitoring as described by Sick For the prediction performance assessment of the ANN model, four different indicators are computed between measured and predicted CAI values. Coefficient of determination ( A total of 88 CAI tests were performed on 11 different rocks (see Prior to conducting ANN analysis, a set of independent variables, namely, signal RMS, In In After training different network configurations, it is found that the network with better performance has 6 independent input variables, 24 neurons in the hidden layer and 1 output neuron for predicting flat wear length, CAI. It is important to highlight that the network increases its complexity from 6 neurons in the input layer to 24 neurons in the hidden layer. This increment provides the capability of finding complex non-linear relations amongst input variables and wear flat measured during testing. The architecture of the proposed ANN is illustrated in In Also in In addition, In order to explore the main source of the AE, scanning electron microscopic (SEM) images were carried out, after each abrasivity test, in the grooves created by the pin during scratching the rock surface. In spite of being widely accepted that 85% of the wear occurs in the first 2 In this paper, we discuss from a tool condition monitoring viewpoint the applicability and the role of AE as an alternative monitoring technique in order to predict rock abrasivity via CAI. The amount of flat wear in the conic steel pin, CAI, was accurately predicted from AE parameters, rock properties and Cerchar testing parameters using the newly proposed approach. The findings from this research can be summarized as follows: Gamma test and V-ratio analyses demonstrated that including rock properties along with AE features as input variables significantly reduced the noise or error variance in the prediction. AE features such as RMS and total number of events are found to produce less variance in the CAI prediction model. It has also been demonstrated that predicting CAI from a tool condition monitoring viewpoint is a feasible approach. This new approach opens up a promising research field. Consequently, tool condition monitoring based on AE features and rock properties was implemented as a new valid means to estimate the length of wear flat in 42 and 56HRC steel pins. Finally, the main sources of AE during CAI abrasivity tests are fracture generation and propagation for crystalline rocks and grain dislocation and appearance of wear debris for sedimentary rocks. Further research is required as the current work just sets the basis of the applications of tool condition monitoring to rock cutting applications. At present the research is on-going and more work is required in the field in order to develop the first tool condition monitoring system that may predict CAI from AE features exclusively. Although this methodology is still far from having industry application, it is a promising field of research. The work has been supported by the Deep Exploration Technologies Cooperative research Centre whose activities are funded by the