In this paper the microstructure and ageing behavior of Al–Si–Fe/Mg alloys produced through sand-casting route is presented. 4.0–6.0wt% Mg was added to Al–Si–Fe alloy. Standard mechanical properties test samples were prepared from the sand cast 25mm diameter by 45mm rods. Thermal ageing was done for 6h at 200°C. The ageing characteristics of these alloys were evaluated using tensile properties, hardness values, impact energy and microstructure as criteria. The thermal aged samples exhibited higher yield strength, tensile strength and hardness values as the weight percent of magnesium increased up to 5wt% in the Al–Si–Fe/Mg alloys as compared to as-cast samples. The optimum values were obtained at 5wt%Mg. Lower percent elongation, reduction in area and impact energy values were obtained for age-hardened Al–Si–Fe/Mg alloy samples as compared to as-cast samples. The increases in hardness values and strength during ageing are attributed to the formation of coherent and uniform precipitation in the metal lattice. It was found that the age-hardened showed acceleration in ageing compared to the as-cast alloy. However, the 5wt%Mg addition to the alloy showed more acceleration to thermal ageing treatment. These results show that better mechanical properties are achievable by subjecting the as-cast Al–Si–Fe/Mg alloys to thermal ageing treatment.Aluminium alloy is a very important material because of its low density and excellent mechanical properties Nowadays, research all over the globe is focusing mainly on aluminium alloy The age hardening characteristics of an alloy are generally modified by the introduction of alloy elements and modifier In contrast to this extensive data available on the heat treatment of Al–Si–Fe alloys with some alloying elements The materials used in this study are: magnesium, ferrosilicon, high purity aluminium electrical wire purchased from Northern Cable Company NOCACO (Kaduna), silica sand, bentonite were obtained from the Foundry Shop of Dept. of Metallurgical Engineering, A.B.U, Zaria, Nigeria. The equipment used in this study included: pyrometer, mechanical stirrer, crucible, moulding boxes, electrical resistance furnace, Rockwell hardness tester, Charpy impact machine, extensometer and metallurgical microscope with built-in camera. The synthesis of the aluminium alloy that was used in this research was produced at the Foundry Shop of Dept. of Metallurgical Engineering, A.B.U. Zaria, Nigeria. The samples were produced by keeping the percentage of iron and silicon constant, and magnesium content was varying from 4.5 to 6.0 With progressive melting, the furnace temperature was raised to 780 The alloy was then cooled down to temperature just below the liquidus point (580 A sand mould with diameter 18 and 300 The test samples were solution heat-treated at temperature of 500 Metallographic samples were cut from the produced samples. The cut samples were then mounted in Bakelite, and mechanically ground progressively on grades of SiC impregnated emery paper (80–600 grits) sizes using water as the coolant. The ground samples were then polished using 1-μm size alumina polishing powder suspended in distilled water. Final polish was done using 0.5 The hardness values of the samples were determined according to the provisions in ASTM E18-79 using the Rockwell hardness tester on “B” scale (Frank Well test Rockwell Hardness Tester, model 38506) with 1.56 The tensile properties of the as cast and ageing samples were conducted on extensometer. The test pieces were machined to the standard shape and dimensions as specified by the American Society for Testing and Materials The impact test of the as cast and ageing samples was conducted using a fully instrumented Avery Denison test machine. The mass of the hammer was 22 7 Before the test sample was mounted on the machine, the pendulum was released to calibrate the machine. The test samples were then gripped horizontally in a vice and the force required to break the bar was released from the freely swinging pendulum. The value of the angle through which the pendulum has swung before the test sample was broken corresponded with the value of the energy absorbed in breaking the sample and this was read from the calibrated scale on the machine The various microstructures developed for different grades of Al–Si–Fe/Mg alloys in the as-cast and age-hardened condition are shown in Microstructures of the as-cast and thermally aged Al–Si–Fe/Mg alloys at ageing temperature of 200 The microstructure of the age-hardened samples reveals reasonably uniform distribution and precipitation of magnesium phase in the alloy after ageing (see The formation and presence of precipitates of the Mg–Al interfaces may be appreciated by comparing micrographs of the alloys in the as-cast conditions (see From The higher values of both ultimate tensile strength and yield strength obtained at 5 When comparing these results with that of as-cast samples a substantial increase in both the yield strength and ultimate tensile strength was obtained. For example yield strength of Al–Si–Fe/4%Mg increased from 45.67 to 47.54 These results show that Al–Si–Fe/4%Mg samples have 4.09% and 5.47% increase in yield strength and ultimate tensile strength respectively over that of the as-cast samples, while for the Al–Si–Fe/5%Mg the respective increments were 26.55% and 11.71% for yield strength and ultimate tensile strength. The increase in strength of the age-hardened samples over that of the as-cast are attributed to the uniform distribution of Mg in the aged samples than the as-cast samples, see Ghosh et al. From From From the results of the investigations, the following conclusions have been made. The uniform distribution of the Mg in the microstructure of both the as-cast and age-hardened Al–Si–Fe/Mg alloy is the major factor responsible for the improvement in the mechanical properties. The addition of Mg affects not only the precipitation, but also the relative amounts of the various phases present in the microstructure, and that during quenching from the solution heat treatment temperature, the Mg cool more slowly than the α-Al phase. This causes the α-Al phase around the hard intermetallic phase of Mg to be warmer than the bulk α-Al phase. The high dislocation density and the high solubility centers (the warm intermetallic phase—α-Al phase interfaces) in the alloy are favorable conditions for precipitation formation. This mechanism is a possible explanation for the higher volume fraction of precipitates obtained in the alloy of the age hardening condition. This research therefore, has established that these grade of alloys response to precipitation hardening heat treatment. The authors acknowledge with thanks the Department of Metallurgical and Materials Engineering and Department of Mechanical Engineering, Ahmadu Bello University, Zaria, Nigeria for allowing us used their equipment. The experimental contribution of Mr. Muyiwa Ologun is highly acknowledged as well.