Black fault gouges sometimes develop, mainly in sedimentary rocks, but the cause of the color transformation is not well understood. Here we demonstrated the blackening of synthetic mixtures of montmorillonite and bituminous coal and of montmorillonite and magnetite in milling, heating, and friction experiments. Mixed samples with a higher volume fraction of coal or magnetite before the experiments showed lower L* values (lightness index; lower values indicate darker blacks), because coal and magnetite are intrinsically black. The milling and heating experiments showed that the L* values of mixed samples of montmorillonite and coal drastically decreased with longer milling times and higher temperatures. The L* values of mixed samples of montmorillonite and magnetite also decreased with longer milling times, but no notable change was observed in the samples after the heating experiments. Because comminution by milling induces granulation of the constituent materials, blackening of the experimental samples was primarily caused by dispersal through the sample of fine black particles such as coal and magnetite, but it could be strengthened by adsorption onto host particles of organic gases produced by pyrolysis of carbonaceous material at high temperature. The friction experiment with mixed samples of montmorillonite and coal produced the remarkably low L* values. Friction induces both comminution and heating of samples, so the blackening could be greater than after either milling or heating alone. Therefore, relatively black fault gouges, compared with the surrounding host rocks, might have experienced comminution and heating, probably related to earthquake slip. Thus, black coloration could be one of the important information on fieldwork.Fault gouges often differ in color from the surrounding host rock, and when the host rock is of sedimentary origin, relatively black fault gouges are often observed (e.g., Because determination of the peak temperature reached during slip is crucial for identifying the faulting mechanism of an earthquake, various temperature proxies have been proposed, for example, magnetite formation at high temperature (≥ In this study, we used a high-velocity friction apparatus, a thermogravimetric (TG)–differential scanning calorimeter (DSC), and a milling machine to produce blackening in synthetic fault samples, and we used color digital spectrophotometry and pyrolysis–gas chromatography–mass spectrometry (py-GC/MS) to evaluate color changes and the organic chemical properties of the samples. We then considered how comminution and pyrolysis of carbonaceous materials contributed to the blackening. As analogues of fault gouge components, we used Na-rich montmorillonite (Crook County, Wyoming, USA; SWy-2 supplied from The Clay Minerals Society) and bituminous coal (Ashibetsu, Hokkaido, Japan). We also used magnetite (Diamantina, Minas Gerais, Brazil), because the color change in the Chelungpu fault was ascribed to black magnetic minerals ( Before the experiments, we characterized the Ashibetsu bituminous coal thermochemically by using a TG-DSC apparatus (STA 449 C Jupiter balance, Netzsch) to heat the coal to 800 We analyzed the bituminous coal on the molecular level by py-GC/MS, using a pyrolyzer (Py-3030D, Frontier Lab; furnace temperature 700 Before the friction, milling, and heating experiments, we examined the color differences due to different initial concentrations of coal and magnetite particles. Mixed samples of 99.99 For the friction experiments we used a high-velocity rotary shear apparatus to examine the effects of mechanical damage and frictional heat on synthetic fault samples ( For the friction experiments we used a high-velocity rotary shear apparatus to examine the effects of mechanical damage and frictional heat on synthetic fault samples ( For the comminution experiments, a laboratory planetary mill (Pulverisette 6, Fritsch) was used to grind samples for 1, 2, 4, or 6 For the heating experiments, we used the TG-DSC apparatus to heat (1) mixed samples of 99 An ultraviolet–visible spectrophotometer (V-750, Jasco) was used for quantitative evaluation of the color of the samples before and after the experiments. Powdered sample material was placed in a cylindrical cell with a transparent quartz window. Because the degree of compaction of a sample can affect its color, the porosity of each sample was manually controlled to 39.7 To investigate the mechanical damage that occurred during the friction and milling experiments, we observed the microstructure of mixed samples (montmorillonite 99 We first examined the initial color change in mixtures with different ratios of coal or magnetite to montmorillonite, and then, after all experiments were completed, we determined the degree of blackening of each sample from the change in its L* value. All color measurement data (L*, a*, and b*) are shown in We first examined the initial color change in mixtures with different ratios of coal or magnetite to montmorillonite, and then, after all experiments were completed, we determined the degree of blackening of each sample from the change in its L* value. All color measurement data (L*, a*, and b*) are shown in The initial L* values of mixed samples with higher weight fractions of coal or magnetite were lower ( After the friction experiments ( The milling experiment results showed that the L* value of montmorillonite (100 In the heating experiment results, the L* value of montmorillonite (100 The other color index values, a* and b* values, of all samples are shown in Scanning electron microscope images of the montmorillonite and coal used for the experiments ( Scanning electron microscope images of the magnetite used for the experiments show that initially the grains were approximately 10–200 The chemical compositions of particles (or particle aggregations) from the montmorillonite and coal (1 The main question that we address here is the blackening effect of each experimental treatment. The initial mixed samples (montmorillonite The milling experiment reproduced the comminution and granulation that occurs during earthquake slip. Mixtures of coal or magnetite became blacker with longer milling times. Considerable numbers of fine particles (< The heating experiment reproduced the frictional heating during earthquake slip. The large decrease of the L* value of only coal mixtures at temperatures above 400 In friction experiments, the samples were both comminuted and heated, so after the experiments the mixed samples presumably exhibited the effects of both together. The highest temperature experienced during these experiments was estimated to be approximately 330 In friction experiments, the samples were both comminuted and heated, so after the experiments the mixed samples presumably exhibited the effects of both together. The highest temperature experienced during these experiments was estimated to be approximately 330 After the friction and milling experiments, samples of 100 Our experiments, which were carried out on synthetic mixtures of montmorillonite and bituminous coal and of montmorillonite and magnetite ( Other black rocks that occur in fault zones are (1) pseudotachylyte, which is usually glassy and black, similar to obsidian in appearance, owing to the presence of iron and magnesium impurities (e.g., For quantitative evaluation of the degree of blackening (change of the L* value) related to slip parameters, more advanced friction experiments performed under various conditions are required. In addition, the kinetics of the pyrolysis reaction must be evaluated to determine whether the reaction can progress during a short rise time. Thus, more analyses of materials of various types, integrated with laboratory experiments and kinetic evaluations, are required to account for the physicochemical and thermomechanical processes and reactions that occur in a slip zone to improve our understanding of fault zone blackening during earthquake slip. The following are the supplementary data related to this article. Supplementary data to this article can be found online at We thank Hideki Mukoyoshi and Wataru Tanikawa for technically supporting our friction experiment. We also thank Kiyokazu Oohashi and an anonymous reviewer for their constructive reviews, and editor Kelin Wang for editing this paper. This work was supported by a Grant-in-Aid for