A parametric study of the efficacy of the ionic liquid (IL) pretreatment (PT) of corn stover (CS) using 1-ethyl-3-methylimidazolium acetate ([C2C1Im][OAc]) and cholinium lysinate ([Ch][Lys]) was conducted. The impact of 50% and 15% biomass loading for milled and non-milled CS on IL-PT was evaluated, as well the impact of 20 and 5mg enzyme/g glucan on saccharification efficiency. The glucose and xylose released were generated from 32 conditions – 2 ionic liquids (ILs), 2 temperatures, 2 particle sizes (S), 2 solid loadings, and 2 enzyme loadings. Statistical analysis indicates that sugar yields were correlated with lignin and xylan removal and depends on the factors, where S did not explain variation in sugar yields. Both ILs were effective in pretreating large particle sized CS, without compromising sugar yields. The knowledge from material and energy balances is an essential step in directing optimization of sugar recovery at desirable process conditions.In the traditional biomass conversion process used for manufacturing biofuels and specialty polymers, the pretreatment step is the central unit operation affecting the overall yields and the economic viability of biorefinery systems ( In general, the success of any pretreatment highly depends on physico-chemical properties of the pretreated material as well as the conditions employed. Optimal processes conditions during biomass pretreatment are highly responsible for positive effects on the accessibility of the biopolymers of sugars, determining the viability and satisfactory yield for the downstream steps. Particle size reduction through comminution, biomass loading and temperature could all be decisive for converting uniform and homogeneous feedstock to biofuel, while having a great impact in energy consumption of the whole process ( Pretreatment with certain ionic liquids (ILs) has been proven to be a successful pretreatment method and highly effective at reducing biomass recalcitrance due to the dual ionic and organic nature of ILs that give these molten salts unique properties ( It is difficult to perform a fair comparison among ionic liquid pretreatment processes, since the majority of the information available in the literature comes from different experimental conditions. The aim of this study is to provide a comprehensive analysis of comparative material balance and process yields after different IL pretreatment configurations through a parametric study of the efficacy of [C 1-Ethyl-3-methylimidazolium acetate [(C Corn stover samples were pretreated with [C After pretreatment, DI water was added to the samples at ratio 1:5 (biomass The pretreated material was stored at 4 Enzymatic hydrolysis of untreated and IL-treated samples without prior lyophilisation was carried out at 50 Total sugars, lignin extractives and ashes from raw corn stover after both IL pretreatment and enzymatic hydrolysis were determined according to NREL protocols ( Monomeric sugars in the supernatant collected from different experiments of this study were quantified through liquid chromatography, using an Agilent HPLC 1260 Infinity equipped with a 300 Specific heat capacities of the two ILs were determined by the calorimetric method ( Analysis of variance (ANOVA) was used to evaluate and identify significant factors (T, IL, S, SL, EL) and interaction effects among factors. Simple Pearson correlation matrix was performed to measure relationship between the sugar yield and the measured variables. Duncan’s multiple range test (DMRT) was used to evaluate comparisons among multiple mean values of outputs from various pretreatment scenarios. The level of significance was set at 0.05. For statistical analyses, SPSS software 200 (SPSS Statistics v21.0, IBM, Armonk, NY, USA) and Matlab software (MathWorks, Natick, MA, USA) were used for data analysis. With the goal of assessing and comparing the pretreatment capability of [Ch][Lys] and [C The first part provides a comparison with literature and description of the IL pretreatments in terms of the major component distribution (i.e. glucan, xylan and lignin) over IL hydrolisate and solid residue; furthermore the different factors were statistically evaluated. The second part considers the effect of the different parameters on the overall performance. The statistical significance of each parameter determined by ANOVA is then summarized providing an overview of different scenarios. The third section presents a technical analysis, approaching the energy consumption and the energy efficiency relative to sugar yields with varying combination of conditions. The fourth part focuses on the primary substrate features affecting the overall sugar yields to explain differences in performance during IL pretreatment and enzymatic hydrolysis. The chemical composition of pretreated materials generated from un-milled and milled corn stover material at each temperature and solid loading are presented in IL pretreatment caused solubilization of biomass components in the pretreatment liquor, the extent of which depended on the pretreatment temperature. As expected, DM solubilized was greater after pretreatment under high temperature conditions (140 Results obtained confirmed that after IL pretreatment the biomass retained the majority of the initial glucan content, i.e. 86.2 The amount of xylan retained during IL-PT of corn stover was highly variable, ranging from a low of 48% to a high of 94% (data from Considering lignin removal, the results from a Multi-factor ANOVA within-subject factors and between-subject factors indicated a significant main effect of IL, temperature, and statistically significant two-way interaction with combined parameters that indicated effect for IL Pretreatment with [Ch][Lys] resulted in significantly higher (  Considering the conditions used here, the results suggest that [Ch][Lys] has a high delignification capacity even at conditions that avoid the energy intensive size reduction and high solid loading. All factors, i.e. temperature (T), IL, biomass loading (BL) and particle size (S), had pronounced effect on delignification efficiency. In particular, the lignin content decreased in the solid pretreated when high temperature was applied, while the extent of lignin dissolution in the IL decreased with both particle size and solid loading increasing ( The effect of pretreatment temperature and solid loading on sugar recovery and enzymatic digestibility of pretreated corn stover was considered next, evaluating also the effect of either large or small particle size, [C  To better understand the effect of each process variable on glucose and xylose yields, and on combined sugar release and lignin recovery, an ANOVA was performed to determine which variables and interactions among them have a significant impact on both ionic liquid pretreatment (IL-PT) and enzymatic hydrolysis (EH). The statistical significance of each factor and their interactions as the explanatory variables was determined are shown in As expected, higher temperature led to significantly higher ( When comparing the enzymatic hydrolysis of corn stover pretreated by [C Generally, enzyme loading was observed to impact hydrolysis across the factors considered (i.e. IL, biomass loading, particle size and temperature), with about 20% enhancement of the sugars yield in response to higher enzyme loading (calculated from Considering the effect of biomass loading, the ANOVA suggests sugar yields are significantly affected by the level of biomass loading. Low loading resulted in overall sugar yields of about 81 In summary, the highest sugars yield of 98 Data discussed above indicates that the overall sugars yields were significantly dependent on the factors in the following order T It is well recognized that the use of mild pretreatment and the minimal extent of physical pretreatment (i.e. milling) benefit the energy balance and economic feasibility of a biorefinery, as the energy demands of any physical size reduction process and heating are high. Typical energy consumptions of milling corn stover or herbaceous biomass are approximately 11–50  The results indicate that the temperature of the process significantly affects the energy requirement. In particular, thermal energy input is the most energy intensive step and accounts for more than 90% of the total energy input, while the milling accounted for only 3–20% of the total energy input. As expected, the effect of solid loading on the energy requirement showed that it was a major contributor to the energy efficiency of the pretreatment process. In particular, increasing pretreatment solids loading is critical to reducing pretreatment thermal energy input. In agreement with Solids loading of 50% achieved significant reduction in thermal energy input for pretreatment, while thermal energy for pretreatment significantly increased as solids loading decreased. In particular, when comparing values obtained at 140 As suggested by The data shown in Moreover, the benefits in terms of energy efficiency derived from particle size reduction are more evident at 90 Results presented above indicate that different pretreatment conditions gave different sugar yields, and that the parameters considered affected IL pretreatment and subsequent saccharification performance; however, the mechanisms by which process parameters affected overall sugar yields are not clear. IL pretreatment is effective because it deconstructs cell walls, making the plant polysaccharides easier to hydrolyze by cellulases. In particular, IL pretreatment has been shown to remove both lignin and hemicellulose and to produce a lower crystallinity cellulose, thereby increasing cellulose digestibility ( These considerations suggested that both lignin and xylan removal played a main role during the saccharification step. Lignin has been reported to adsorb and bind cellulases and to inhibit their activity ( Pretreatment efficacy with [C The work conducted through the Joint BioEnergy Institute was supported by the Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at 