In this study, a route for simultaneous mineralization of CO2 and production of titanium dioxide and ammonium alum, and microporous silicon dioxide from titanium-bearing blast furnace slag (TBBF slag) was proposed, which is comprised of (NH4)2SO4 roasting, acid leaching, ammonium alum crystallization, silicic acid flocculation and Ti hydrolysis. The effects of relevant process parameters were systematically investigated. The results showed that under the optimal roasting and leaching conditions about 85% of titanium and 84.6% of aluminum could be extracted while only 30% of silicon entered the leachate. 84% of Al3+ was crystallized from the leachate in the form of ammonium aluminum sulfate dodecahydrate with a purity up to 99.5 wt%. About 85% of the soluble silicic acid was flocculated with the aid of secondary alcohol polyoxyethylene ether 9 (AEO-9) to yield a microporous SiO2 material (97.4 wt%) from the crystallized mother liquor. The Al- and Si-depleted solution was then hydrolyzed to generate a titanium dioxide (99.1 wt%) with uniform particle size distribution. It was figured out that approximately 146 kg TiO2 could be produced from 1000 kg of TBBF slag. Therefore, the improved process is a promising method for industrial application.Carbon dioxide capture and storage or carbon dioxide capture utilization and storage (CCS, or CCUS) is one of the important options to reduce CO Mineral sequestration can be divided into two components: direct and indirect routes. The former is simple, but it is difficult to obtain valuable byproducts, therefore making it an economically poor option [ The iron and steel industry is one of the largest industrial CO Many studies have been conducted using BFS to store CO Recently, we suggested a new method for simultaneous mineralization of CO This method is also suitable for treating titanium-bearing blast furnace slag (TBBF slag) [ In our previous study [ Our solution is to minimize the dissolution of silicon during the leaching unit through the highly efficient extraction of Ti, Al, Ca and Mg. The preliminary research demonstrates that the amount of soluble silicon depends not only on the leaching but also the roasting stages. Therefore, the roasting and leaching parameters need to be further optimized. Furthermore, the soluble silicon, which inevitably enters the leaching solution, must be removed prior to the titanium hydrolysis. There have been some reports about the removal of silicon from acidic solutions with the aid of suitable flocculants [ In this study, the effects of roasting and leaching conditions on the extraction of Ti and Al and dissolution of Si were systematically investigated and the silicon dissolution mechanism was analyzed. The secondary alcohol polyoxyethylene ether 9 (AEO-9) was used to selectively flocculate the silicic acid, and the flocculation mechanism was discussed. The effects of silicic acid removal and ammonium alum crystallization on the quality of the final TiO The water quenched TBBF slag used in this study was provided by Weiyuan Iron and Steel Group Company Limited (Sichuan, China). The slag was ground and the fraction less than 50 μm was used in the experiments. Its chemical compositions are shown in The chemical reagents In each roasting experiment, 4 g of the water-quenched slag was thoroughly mixed with (NH In each leaching experiment, 9 g of the roasted slag obtained under the optimal roasting parameters was dissolved at different temperatures, sulfuric acid concentrations and liquid–solid mass ratios for 1 h. The filtrate and washing liquor were collected. Based on the concentrations of each component, the extraction ratios were calculated. An orthogonal experiment was also performed to determine the optimal leaching conditions. Based on these considerations of the titanium hydrolysis [ The extraction or dissolution ratios ( Where, Concentration of element in collecting liquid, g·L Volume of collecting liquid, L; Quality of TBBF slag, g; Content of Ti, Al, Si in the TBBF slag, wt%. The extraction ratio ( Where, Concentration of element in collecting liquid, g·L Mass of leaching residue, g; Volume of collecting liquid, L; Quality of TBBF slag, g; Content of Ti, Al, Si in the TBBF slag, wt%. At each crystallization process, 50 ml of the leachate obtained under the optimal roasting and leaching conditions was placed in a constant temperature water bath and crystallized at a required temperature (0, 5, 10, 25 °C) for 10 h. The crystallization ratio was calculated. The crystalline product was dried under vacuum at 30 °C before different characterizations such as XRD, SEM and XRF. The crystallized ratio ( Where, Concentration of Al Concentration of Al In every flocculation process, a certain amount of 10 wt% AEO-9 solution with deionized water was added into 50 ml of the leachate or crystallization mother liquor and stirred at 30 °C for 30 min. The Si removal ratio and Ti loss ratio were calculated. The filter cake was dried under vacuum at 30 °C for 10 h and then calcined at 700 °C for 4 h. The flocculated samples were subjected to EDS, XRD, SEM, NMR, FT-IR and BET analyses. The hydrolysis experiments were carried out in a 250-ml three-necked flask equipped with a reflux condenser. The solutions were hydrolyzed at around 100–102 °C for 3 h and then filtered. The filter cakes were washed with 2.5 wt% H The hydrolysis ratio ( Where, Concentration of Ti Concentration of Ti The concentrations of calcium, magnesium, titanium, silicon and aluminum ions in solutions were determined by inductive coupled plasma atomic emission spectroscopy (ICP-OES) (Spectro ARCOS ICP, Germany). The compositions of solid raw material and products such as TBBF slag, crystalline ammonium alum, silica gel and the Ti-rich hydrolysate were determined by using X-ray fluorescence spectrometry (XRF-1800, Shimadzu, Japan) with a Rh K The design and the results of the orthogonal experiment are presented in the Supporting Information section. The objective of this study was to simultaneously recover TiO The relative reactions in this process are shown in In the case of a low (NH Therefore, the optimal roasting condition selected was A3B2C2, ( The roasting slag obtained under the above optimized conditions was leached with dilute H It could be seen that the importance sequence of each factor for the leaching of Ti was temperature > acidity > liquid–solid ratio, and the optimum conditions were A3B4C4. For the Al leaching, it was temperature > liquid–solid ratio > acidity, and the optimum condition was A2B4C2. Whereas, for the Si leaching, it was acidity > liquid to solid ratio > temperature and the optimum condition was A3B3C4. Obviously, the influence of three factors was not exactly the same on the leaching of Ti, Si and Al. Increasing temperature would facilitate the leaching of Ti and Al. However, when the temperature exceeded 55 °C, the extraction ratio of Ti decreased due to the lower stability of titanium solution in dilute H The leachate obtained under the aforementioned optimized roasting and leaching conditions consisted of 15.74 g·L Since the leachate was acidic and also contained a large amount of NH XRD analysis demonstrated that the crystallization product was phase pure NH In order to precipitate the silicon in the acidic solution, flocculation was used. The conventional flocculants, including Polyacrylamide and Modified polymer iron PTS400 were employed but did not work. Liu It should be noted that the Ti loss at different acidities in the presence of AEO-9 was related to the titanium ion stability in the aqueous solutions. In a lower acidity, titanium ion was easy to hydrolyze and formed minute H Since the optimal acidities for the leaching and Si removal were different, a feasible operation method was to leach the roasting slag using 5 wt% H  The flocculated product obtained under the optimal conditions was calcined at 700 °C for 4 h. Its chemical composition is shown in To explore the flocculation mechanism, the It was observed during the experiments that the flocculated product varied in response to a change in the solution acidity. At a lower acidity (2.5 wt%   After the Si flocculation, an Al- and Si-deleted solution was obtained and subjected to hydrolysis. For comparison, three other solutions derived from the leachate under the optimal roasting and leaching conditions ( In this paper, a route for the simultaneous mineralization of CO The authors are grateful for the financial support of the  Supplementary data to this article can be found online at