A 62-year-old woman was admitted to our hospital after a bicycle accident with a displaced left (non-dominant) distal radius fracture. After closed reduction a long cast was applied. Due to loss of reduction, twenty-four days later open reduction internal fixation with locking compression plate (LCP) was performed. The patient returned to her normal activities but nineteen months after surgery showed functional impairment of the left thumb for Extensor Pollicis Longus (EPL) injury for which she necessitated transposition surgery. Twenty-six months after ORIF, functional deficit of the extension of the third and fourth left finger was noted secondary to injury of extensor tendons. Ultrasound and CT scan showed protrusion of the angular stability screws in LCP plate that caused a progressive wear resulting in rupture of the extensor tendons. Another tendon transposition surgery was performed with dorsal approach while the plate was removed utilising the original volar incision. Reconstruction of distal radius fractures with volar plating, requires accurate plate application with precise measurement of the length of the screws in order to prevent dorsal protrusion and thus avoiding tendon injuries.Distal radius fractures are the most common fractures of the upper extremity. These injuries demonstrate a bimodal distribution, with peak ages of 6 to 10 and 60 to 69 years of age. Closed treatment of distal radius fractures is generally reserved for nondisplaced or displaced fractures that are reducible and stable. Surgical treatment is indicated for displaced and unstable fracture patterns and such devices have been used as external fixators, k-wires, plates and screws [ A 62-year-old woman was admitted to our hospital after a bicycle accident and having sustained a displaced left (non dominant) distal radius fracture ( The removable splint was discontinued at 5 weeks when there was radiographic evidence of union of the distal radius fracture. A short course of physiotherapy contributed to the restoration of a full range of motion seen by 10 weeks. The patient returned to her normal activities (dressmaker) but nineteen months after surgery, she developed functional impairment of the EPL of the left thumb ( ORIF with a fixed angle plate after distal radius fractures facilitate accurate reduction and earlier implementation of activity. Fixed angle plates are indicated in osteoporosis for their decreased incidence of adverse effects, but they can be associated with early tendon irritation eventually leading to rupture [ In conclusion, reduction of distal radius fractures with the volar approach, requires careful attention to minimise the risk of development of complications [ None declared.