Some ionic collectors were used as an alternative to conventional non-ionic collectors to obtain clean concentrates from fine coal samples containing 46.1% ash. Mixtures of kerosene and pine oil were used as conventional reagents while commercial fatty acids were used as ionic collectors. Flotation results showed that conventional collectors could not reduce the ash content of concentrate below 21.0% whereas, ionic collectors were found significantly better at reducing the ash content down to 16%, but their yields were lower.Owing to natural hydrophobicity, many coals may be easily floated with only a frother and fuel oil is often necessary to increase the yield. But, non-conventional reagents have been found very effective in the flotation of low-rank oxidized coals. In this research, non-ionic and ionic reagents were used as collectors to obtain clean concentrates from high ash coal fines. The reagents were compared in terms of flotation yield and ash content of the concentrates. The flotation mechanism of different reagents and their effectiveness as collectors were discussed. Minus 0.5 mm size coal fines of Zonguldak Coal Washery (in Turkey) were sampled before entering thickener. The samples were first allowed to settle, decanted and then dried at 60 °C. Ash analysis carried out according to ASTM D 3174-73 standard showed that the sample contains 46.1% ash. Kerosene and pine oil were used as conventional reagents while tall oil, Pamak 1, and Pamak 4 were used as non-conventional ionic flotation collectors. The ionic surfactants composed of fatty acids contain more than 40% oleic acid. For comparison, 99% pure oleic acid was also used in the flotation experiments. 100 g of coal sample was subjected to single stage direct flotation in a Wemco Sub-aeration laboratory flotation machine with 1 l cell making solids concentration 10%. The pulp was conditioned for 30 s prior to any reagent addition. After adding reagents, it was conditioned for another 2 m. Then, the pulp was aerated and the froth was collected for 3 m. The experiments were carried out at natural pulp pH around 8.0. Both, floated and non-floated fractions were dried in an oven at 60 °C and then weighed to calculate flotation yield. Coal samples were first floated by using 40–320 g/t of pine oil alone. The results are given in In order to increase the flotation yield, 360–1350 g/t of kerosene was used together with pine oil that was kept constant at 80 g/t. The presence of kerosene increased flotation yield as well as ash of the concentrates significantly by floating ash-forming materials. The reason for the lack of selectivity in the presence of oily collectors could be explained by non-selective adsorption of the oily reagent on both, coal and ash-forming matter ( 900–3000 g/t of ionic reagents were used in the flotation of coal fines and the results are presented in As an oily collector, kerosene is ineffectively dispersed/emulsified in the flotation cell such that some coal particles are coated excessively as others are starved. But, ionic collector Pamak 1 is expected to be dispersed/emulsified in the flotation cell better than kerosene, in turn, decreased the entrapment of ash forming matter within agglomerates. When compared in Tall oil fatty acids are by far the most consumed organic reagents in the flotation of non-metallic ores. Similar flotation yields were achieved with tall oil and Pamak 1 despite slightly higher ash with the former reagent. Oleic acid is the weakest collector among the fatty acid based collectors and not as selective as others. It could be inferred that fatty acid mixtures shows synergism over single fatty acid collector, oleic acid. Despite their lower flotation yield and higher consumptions, ionic collectors can be used successfully in coal flotation where cleaner concentrates are required from high ash coal fines. Oily collector, kerosene, increased the yield and ash content of concentrates due to the entrapment of ash-forming materials within coal agglomerates formed by bridging action of collector. Collectors containing more than 40% oleic acid resulted in higher flotation yield than oleic acid alone for the same ash-level of the concentrates. The reason was explained by the synergism between surfactant mixtures.