Background
                  Recent studies report high hardware removal rates after plate fixation of midshaft clavicular fractures. Precontoured clavicle plates may decrease hardware-related complications while improving healing rates and patient-reported outcomes (PROs).
               
                  Methods
                  Using a private-payer national database, we identified 7826 patients who underwent clavicle open reduction and internal fixation (ORIF) in 2007 to 2011. Database patients were tracked for 2 years to assess hardware removal and revision fixation. In addition, we retrospectively identified 73 patients who underwent plate fixation of midshaft clavicular fractures at our institution. These patients completed the Disabilities of Arm, Shoulder and Hand (DASH) assessment, the EQ-5D (EuroQol, Rotterdam, The Netherlands) quality of life assessment, and a hardware-related outcomes survey.
               
                  Results
                  Among 7826 database patients, 994 (12.7%) underwent hardware removal and 78 (1%) required revision ORIF. The annual incidence of clavicle ORIF increased 61.5% between 2007 and 2011. In our institutional cohort, 56 patients (77%) were fixed with precontoured plates and 17 (23%) with standard plates. At a mean follow-up of 4.2 years, 11 patients (15%) underwent hardware removal and 1 patient (1.4%) experienced nonunion. Patients reported excellent outcomes, with average DASH of 4.0 ± 8.9 and EQ-5D of 0.89 ± 0.19. There were no differences in PROs, hardware removal, or union rate between plate types, although our study was underpowered for these outcomes. Patients who underwent hardware removal reported lower DASH, EQ-5D, satisfaction, and shoulder function compared with patients with hardware retained. Women were more likely to undergo hardware removal in the institutional (P = .009) and the database (P < .001) cohorts.
               
                  Conclusion
                  Displaced midshaft clavicle fractures have high union rates with precontoured plate fixation. Women are 4 times more likely than men to have hardware removed. Patients undergoing clavicle hardware removal report worse long-term outcomes than patients with hardware retained.Clavicular fractures are common injuries, accounting for 2.6% to 10% of all adult fractures. However, these historic studies were later criticized for heterogeneous patient populations that included pediatric patients, lack of rigorous radiographic evaluation of union, and failure to assess patient-reported outcomes (PROs). More recent literature suggests the incidence of nonunion after nonoperative treatment of displaced midshaft clavicular fractures approaches 15% or higher. The optimal implant for clavicular ORIF remains controversial. Intramedullary pins offer a fixation method that minimizes surgical dissection, scar, and hardware prominence. In an attempt to minimize hardware irritation and decrease the need for plate contouring by surgeons, precontoured clavicle plates are now available from multiple manufacturers. Precontoured plates are lower profile, with beveled edges designed to decrease hardware prominence. The precontoured plates have simplified clavicle plate fixation by matching the S-shaped curvature of the clavicle and decreasing the challenge of bending a standard plate during surgery. In a study of 200 cadaveric clavicles, precontoured plates matched the S-shaped curvature in most of the specimens. Whether the proposed benefits of precontoured plates are realized in clinical practice is unknown. Initial smaller series have suggested that healing rates would improve and hardware removal rates would decline with the use of precontoured clavicle plates. Patients who underwent clavicle ORIF (Current Procedural Terminology [CPT; American Medical Association, Chicago, IL, USA] code 23515) were retrospectively queried using the private-payer component of the PearlDiver Patient Records Database (PearlDiver Technologies, Fort Wayne, IN, USA). This database is a Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act–compliant national insurance database with a private-payer population formed from patient records of the UnitedHealth Group (Decatur, IL, USA). The database currently contains information from years 2007 through 2011 and includes more than 2.9 billion patient records from more than 25 million patients with an orthopedic International Classification of Disease, Ninth Revision (ICD-9) code or CPT code. Search results yield the number of patients in 5-year age groups, year of surgery, and gender for each CPT or ICD-9 code. We identified all patients in the national database who underwent clavicle ORIF by CPT code 23515. These patients were tracked in the database for 2 years from their index surgery to evaluate the frequency of hardware removal (CPT 20680) and revision surgery (CPTs for clavicle ORIF and hardware removal during the same procedure). Because patients were queried by the CPT code for ORIF of clavicular fracture, the database includes plate and intramedullary fixation. Patients at our single institution were identified using the ICD-9 code for closed fracture of the clavicular shaft (810.02) and the CPT code for open treatment of clavicular fracture, with or without internal or external fixation (CPT 23515). We included patients who had surgery from July 1, 2007, onward because this was when our institution adopted an electronic medical record. Our inclusion criteria were patients aged 18 to 70 years old with Arbeitsgemeinschaft für Osteosynthesefragen/Orthopaedic Trauma Association type 15-B midshaft clavicular fractures treated with ORIF with plating who had a minimum of 1 year of follow-up. Patients were excluded if they had ipsilateral limb injuries requiring surgery, open fractures, or inadequate documentation considered as no clinic notes or operative reports. With these criteria we identified 111 patients who underwent midshaft clavicle ORIF with plate fixation with a minimum of 1 year of follow-up. The operations were performed by 3 orthopedic surgeons at our academic institution who use the same surgical indications, surgical technique, and rehabilitation protocol. Operative indications included greater than 100% displacement of the fracture ends in the superior-inferior plane, 2 cm of fracture shortening, or failure of nonoperative management for 3 months with no evidence of healing. Patients were treated with noncontoured and precontoured plates manufactured by Synthes (West Chester, PA, USA) or Acumed (Hillsboro, OR, USA; Postoperatively, patients were made nonweight bearing in a sling for 2 weeks. They were progressed to active and passive range of motion after 2 weeks and to weightbearing activity at 6 weeks. Physical therapy was prescribed for all patients to restore range of motion and strength. Patient records were retrospectively reviewed to determine age at surgery, gender, and mechanism of injury. Operative reports and radiographs were reviewed to determine the type of plate used. All patients in the cohort were contacted by e-mail and telephone to complete outcome questionnaires. Outcome questionnaires included the Disabilities of the Arm, Shoulder and Hand (DASH) and EQ-5D (EuroQol, Rotterdam, The Netherlands), which are validated outcome measures for upper extremity pathology and overall quality of life, respectively. A Student A query of the private-payer national database revealed that 7826 primary clavicle ORIF surgeries were performed in the USA from 2007 to 2011. During this 5-year period, the annual number of clavicle ORIFs increased by 61.5% ( During a 2-year period, 994 of 7826 patients (12.7%) underwent surgery for hardware removal after ORIF of a clavicular fracture. Another 425 patients (5.4%) had a second clavicular ORIF, suggesting they had a fracture on the contralateral side or an ipsilateral fracture adjacent to the previous hardware or a refracture after hardware removal. There were 78 patients (1%) who required removal of hardware and clavicle ORIF, consistent with a revision ORIF procedure. Of 111 eligible patients undergoing midshaft clavicle ORIF at our institution from 2007 to 2012, 73 patients (66%) provided questionnaire responses with a mean follow-up of 4.2 years. The institutional cohort was 70% men with a mean age of 39.0 ± 13.0 years. The mechanism of injury is reported in In the cohort, 72 of 73 patients (98.6%) demonstrated clinical or radiographic union. Patients overall reported excellent PROs, with an average DASH score of 4.0 ± 8.9, EQ-5D of 0.89 ± 0.19, and overall satisfaction of 93.8 ± 15.9. At the final follow-up, 11 patients (15%) underwent hardware removal and another 9 (12%) expressed a strong desire to have the plate removed. Complications included 1 nonunion in a patient fixed with a standard plate requiring revision ORIF and 1 subclavian vein thrombosis requiring long-term therapeutic anticoagulation. There were no infectious complications. A comparison of the patients with hardware removed vs patients with retained hardware is summarized in A comparison between groups fixed with precontoured and standard clavicle plates is reported in Among patients with retained hardware, hardware-related symptoms and desire to have the hardware removed were compared by plate type ( In this study, we looked at a national database to investigate recent trends in midshaft clavicular fracture treatment in the USA. Our review of 7826 patients from a private-payer national database reveals a 61.5% increase in clavicle ORIF procedures during a 5-year period from 2007 to 2011. The timing of this increase followed the publication of the first randomized controlled trial in 2007 that demonstrated the superiority of primary operative fixation for displaced midshaft clavicular fractures compared with nonoperative management. Although adolescent patients are thought to be more amenable than adults to nonoperative treatment of clavicular fractures, patients aged 10 to 19 years old accounted for 26% of all clavicle ORIFs. A review of 537 pediatric clavicular fractures managed nonoperatively found only a 2.5% overall complication rate, including nonunion, need for ORIF, or refracture. Multiple randomized trials in adults have demonstrated improved rates of union and PROs with primary operative fixation of displaced midshaft clavicular fractures compared with nonoperative treatment. The major criticism of plate fixation for clavicular fractures has been the high rates of symptomatic hardware and hardware removal. The subcutaneous location and complex architecture of the clavicle makes fixation with standard plates technically challenging, often resulting in hardware prominence. A multicenter Canadian database found a clavicle plate removal rate of 18.8%. A unique finding in this study is that patients who underwent hardware removal reported lower DASH and EQ-5D scores, decreased satisfaction with surgery, decreased scar satisfaction, and worse shoulder function than patients with retained hardware. To our knowledge, this is the first time that PROs have been studied in patients remote from clavicle hardware removal. The persistence of worse outcomes despite hardware removal suggests there may be other etiologies of discomfort at the surgical site that are independent of the hardware, such as neuroma or symptomatic malunion. Precontoured clavicle plates have recently become available from multiple manufacturers with the proposed benefits of reducing hardware-related symptoms and improving patient outcomes. Vanbeek et al We hypothesized that precontoured plates would lead to lower hardware removal rates with improved union rates and PROs. Although we observed trends towards less hardware-related complications with precontoured plates and improved union rates, these findings were not statistically significant. We found a hardware removal rate of 12.7% for precontoured plates compared with 22.2% for standard plates. Moreover, patients with retained standard plates tended to report more hardware-related symptoms and the desire to have the hardware removed compared with patients with precontoured plates. Our hardware removal rates by plate type are highly similar to the studies by Ashman et al In our study, we only observed 1 nonunion that occurred in a patient treated with a noncontoured plate. This gave our series an overall nonunion rate of 1.4%, which is consistent with the 1% nonunion rates found in our national database cohort. Our nonunion rate by plate type was 0% for precontoured plates vs 5.9% for standard plates, but this observation was not significant ( In our series, female sex was a significant predictor of hardware removal in the institutional (odds ratio, 4.1; There are inherent limitations to consider when analyzing the database and institutional cohorts. Patients in the national database are broadly tracked by CPT codes that may be incorrectly entered and do not include laterality. Because there is a single code for clavicle ORIF, the patients in the database cohort cannot be differentiated based on type of internal fixation such as plates and intramedullary devices. Furthermore, the database does not track other patient characteristics, such as body mass index, that may affect hardware removal. Because the PearlDiver Database is derived from a private-payer insurance group, our results may not accurately reflect the Medicare and Medicaid populations. In addition, patient death or lost to follow-up without additional procedure of clavicle ORIF or hardware removal were counted to the represent a minimum value. Within our institutional series, 66% of patients responded to our questionnaires. This is a reasonable response rate for a retrospective trauma cohort and higher than a previously published series Displaced midshaft clavicular fractures have high union rates and excellent PROs with modern plate fixation. The rate of ORIF of midshaft clavicular fractures increased by 61.5% during the 5-year period from 2007 to 2011. However, up to 15% of patients will undergo a secondary surgery for hardware removal. There were nonsignificant trends toward lower hardware removal, hardware irritation, and nonunion rates with precontoured plates compared with noncontoured plates. Women are as much as 4-times more likely than men to have their hardware removed. Patients who elect to undergo hardware removal should also be aware that removing the plate and screws does not always guarantee relief of symptoms. The authors, their immediate families, and any research foundations with which they are affiliated have not received any financial payments or other benefits from any commercial entity related to the subject of this article.