Electrodeposited Ni/SiC composite coatings were obtained in a Watts-type bath. The effect of fine SiC particles on polarization curves of the cathodic reduction of nickel ions was discussed. The incorporation of the particles into the deposit with respect to current density and SiC concentration in the bath was tested. Cathodic current efficiencies were also calculated. Structure of as-plated and heat-treated Ni/SiC composites were examined by means of metallography observations as well as scanning and transmission electron microscopy methods. Two phase transformations in the temperatures range of 20–700 °C were found. For annealed samples, Ni2Si and Ni3Si2 phases were identified. Hardening of the Ni/SiC composites as a function of the particle content in the deposit and annealing temperature was determined by means of the microhardness testing method.The development of various methods for incorporation of inert particles into a metal matrix has gained in importance over the past decades. It allows synthesizing a wide range of materials with unique and/or superior functional properties. In this respect, the advantages of the electroplating technique are commonly accepted. They include a variety of particle and metal matrix combinations and availability of composite production from aqueous solutions. Uniform distribution of particles in the deposit and high enough deposition rates can be obtained at relatively low-costs equipment, especially if compared to high temperature pyrometallurgy or powder metallurgy processing methods. Electrodeposited nickel-matrix composites containing dispersions of fine ceramic particles are in wide demand on advanced materials market. Incorporation of SiC The most extensive studies were performed on nickel matrix composites that contain incorporated SiC particles. Considerable researches have been mainly focused on the fundamental conditions of the electrolysis such as composition and pH of the electrolyte Experiments described below were performed in order to test the effect of both the particles concentration and the current density on the particle distribution and the structure of Ni/SiC electrodeposited composite. Microhardness and structure of as-plated and heat-treated composites are also reported. Ni/SiC coatings were deposited from a nickel Watts solution with the volume of 2 dm Cathodic polarization curves were determined for pure nickel and composites. A metallic layer was deposited on the substrate at a current density of 2 A/dm Charge flowed through the circuit during the electrolysis was determined with a copper coulometer. Cathodic current efficiencies were determined by weight gain and the coulometric data. SiC volume fraction within nickel matrix was determined by image analysis using the “Aphelion” software. Calculations were done on grey levels images of polished deposit surfaces observed with the use of the optical microscope (NEOPHOT 32). Differential Scanning Calorimetry (DSC Mettler Toledo 821 Samples of Ni/SiC deposit were annealed in tubular furnace under argon atmosphere (with a flow rate of 3 dm The surface as-plated and heat-treated deposits was examined by means of optical and SEM microscopes. Thin foils for transmission electron microscopy (TEM) were prepared by means of Gatan PIPS 691 ion thinning system. Structure observations and element analysis were performed using JEM 2010ARP transmission electron microscope equipped with scanning transmission electron microscopy device (STEM) and X-ray energy disperse system (EDS). X-ray diffraction patterns were obtained from sample annealed at 800 °C under vacuum. The samples were examined using XPertPro Philips spectrometer and CoKα radiation. Vickers hardness of the Ni/SiC composites was measured with a microhardness method at the load of 100 g for 5 s by means of PMT-3 hardness tester. The cathodic polarization curves were determined in the baths with various SiC concentrations ( The electrodeposition of nickel and Ni/SiC composites requires a considerable overvoltage, at least 0.6 V ( These results are in agreement with the data reported for the Ni/SiC electrodeposited from the Watts bath with saccharin addition SiC codeposition was carried out in various plating conditions. Linear dependence of the deposit thickness on the current density (   The effect of the particle concentration in the bath on the SiC content in the deposits is shown in Semi-bright and grey surface Ni/SiC composite deposits were usually received. The sample surface was preliminary examined by means of optical microscope. As example, deposit produced at the current density of 2 A/dm The electrodeposition of Ni/SiC composites was accompanied by hydrogen evolution. It resulted in the formation of some deep pits on the deposit surface, which are visible even after polishing. It was found that the vicinity of craters had become a privileged area for SiC particles entrapment (  Detailed analysis of the structure of the Ni/SiC composites was done by use of TEM observations. It was found that SiC particles are tightly embedded in the nickel matrix and their boundaries are characterized with sharp and distinguishable edges ( Saccharin also affects the internal stresses in the nickel matrix electrodeposits Line analysis and STEM mapping of elements for Ni/SiC composite were performed. Line element analysis across the matrix and incorporated particles shows abrupt change both silicon and nickel contents at the Ni-particle interface ( Nickel matrix composites reinforced with SiC particles are quite often used in high temperatures applications. In some applications, the interface reaction between SiC and surrounding matrix is a matter of substantial importance in particular for controlled stability of the structure and mechanical properties of the composite. In order to test the structure evolution during heating of the Ni/SiC composite, differential scanning calorimetry tests (DSC) were carried out. Typical DCS curve received within the temperature range of 20–700 °C was shown in The DSC analysis points to the development of two types of transformation in the composite. To determine the possible changes in the material some elementary effects were considered previously. It is known that pure nickel can exist in two allotropic forms. The α form (hexagonal) is stable below 340–360 °C, while the β-Ni (face centered cubic) is stable above these temperatures. On the other hand, the electroplated nickel deposits obtained in the Watts baths show the cubic-type lattice A series of studies of Ni–SiC interfaces reactions  Hence: The Gibbs energy of each Ni As-polished surface of the Ni/SiC composite samples annealed isothermally within the temperature range of 100–500 °C were observed by optical microscopy. Any noticeable changes in both the material microstructure and the angular shape of the SiC particles were not found for samples annealed below the temperature of 400 °C ( TEM observations were performed on the sample annealed at 400 °C ( To intensify the phase transformation, the sample was annealed at 800 °C for 30 min. and then X-ray phase analysis was performed. Received diffraction pattern for as annealed Ni/SiC composite is shown in Strong peaks related to the nickel matrix and relatively weak signals of α-SiC were found on the diffraction pattern. Fine peaks of two Ni The phase analysis of the annealed material revealed two Ni Banded structure of the reaction zone between nickel and silicon carbide (at 950 °C) was observed by Backhaus-Ricoult Structure of the sample annealed under vacuum at 800 °C and observed by means of TEM method is shown in Similar EDX line analysis across the SiC–Ni boundary in the sample annealed under argon atmosphere is shown in It was observed that the composite became very brittle after the heat treatment. Structural observations lead to the conclusion that the material embrittlement results from voids development in the vicinity of SiC particles ( One of the most probable reason for cavities development is related to the thermal diffusion of oxygen atoms from the SiO On the other hand, experimental data reported in the literature It is worth mentioning that both matrix oxidation and chemical reaction between the composite components i.e. Ni and SiC, caused a number of SiC particles being flaked down from a thin foil used at TEM observations. Therefore, many pores observed by TEM are artifacts rather than preexisting defects in the annealed bulk material ( The hardness of the Ni/SiC composite depends on the amount and morphology of SiC particles incorporated in the nickel matrix. It was found that the composite microhardness of 400–500 HV was higher than that for pure nickel deposit i.e. ∼ The effect of annealing temperature on the composite was shown in Electrodeposition of nickel from Watts-type bath containing suspended SiC particles is a useful method for the Ni/SiC composite production. It was found that suspended ceramic (SiC) particles in the bath slightly affect the polarization curve during cathodic reduction of nickel ions. The effect of on the particles incorporation into the deposit was dependent on a current density and SiC concentration. The effect of annealing temperature in the range of 20–700 °C on the composite structure and microhardness was examined. Two phase-transformations were found as well as the development of two nickel silicides, i.e. Ni This research work has been supported by the Polish Committee for Scientific Research under project no. 11.11.180.341.