Research on granulation processes has concentrated on the use of mechanical mixers. Understanding of the mechanisms by which granules are formed interact with each other and change in size has increased greatly. We now appreciate why products frequently have a bimodal distribution, wide size range and non-uniform binder content. The effects of changing binder viscosity and size of the constituent particles are also partially understood. However, much remains to be done. Three areas of research are suggested that may repay intensive investigation. The first challenge is to improve knowledge of the strength of wet assemblies. This is fundamental to granule deformation and coalescence processes and yet is not well understood. Another challenge is to develop better models for granule coalescence. Although there have been significant advances on understanding of the processes of granule adhesion and coalescence, more needs to be done. The third challenge is to learn how to design mixers that inherently give a better control of granule size. This requires an understanding of the motion of material within granulators and how the granulator interacts with the material being granulated.This paper aims to assess research challenges in granulation, focussing on mechanical impeller-type mixers, sometimes termed high shear mixers. These mixers are flexible and can be used to granulate materials having a wide range of properties. Cohesive powders and viscous binder liquids can be processed. Dust containment is also good, making it possible to process obnoxious or hazardous materials. For these reasons, mechanical type mixers are widely used in chemical, pharmaceutical, metallurgical and food processing industries. Informed trial and error experimentation is used in product development, often utilising experience obtained with similar materials and equipment. This may involve adjusting the particle size distribution of the solids, changing binder properties and selection of granulation conditions. It may also involve work with different types and sizes of granulator. Thus, the selection of suitable processing conditions can be time consuming. Frustratingly also, granulation processes remain difficult to control. The mean size is prone to considerable variation and the size distribution is usually wider than that specified or desired. Other aspects of the product concerned with delivery in the application may also be substandard. In extreme cases, the size distribution of the material from the granulator may be so poor that product quality is determined by the efficiency of the post-granulation processes of comminution, classification and recycle. The aim of the paper is to identify directions of research that seem to merit attention and that may yield results that can be translated into advances in practical granulation technology. Three such challenges are presented concerning the deformation behaviour of wet assemblies, models of adhesion/coalescence and improved design of granulation equipment. In the last decade, there have been major advances in understanding of the mechanisms of size enlargement. One of the most important of these concerns the mechanism by which binder is distributed within the powder, forming so-called nuclei. Two mechanisms, termed distribution and immersion, have been distinguished Although uniformity of liquid distribution was, of course, always seen as desirable, the precise implications for its effect on the distribution of sizes of the nucleated granules were only recently recognised. Redistribution of liquid between granule size classes involves both breakage and coalescence of granules. The mechanisms by which size enlargement occurs have become much better understood The binder viscosity determines whether granules are formed from a given size and type of constituent particles under given mixing conditions. If the viscosity is too low, the size of the constituent particles too large or the mixing too vigorous, granules have insufficient strength and a paste or ‘crumb’ is formed. These conclusions seem to be general and to apply to both low shear rotating drum mixers and high shear mixers operated at blade tip velocities of the order of 10 m s The strength of wet assemblies under dynamic loading is thus a key parameter. It varies with the size of the constituent particles and the viscous flow characteristics and surface tension of the binder liquid. Although measurement and theoretical prediction of wet granule strength has advanced Another related aspect to that discussed above is the deformation and adhesion behaviour of contacting granules. Models are required that describe the probability of adhesion and coalescence of two contacting granules. The theory of Ennis et al. The third challenge concerns a remarkably unexplored topic: the relationship between granulator design, operating conditions, material properties and granulation performance. There is limited information on continuous and semi-continuous equipment The strength of wet granules is attributable to capillary, viscous, van der Waals and colloid forces. The importance in granulation of the first two forces has been generally accepted. However, van der Waals force contributions and electrical double layer repulsion effects, as embodied in colloid forces, have been given less consideration and yet may be of major importance with very fine particles As an example of weakness in current knowledge, consider the negative capillary pressure and its contribution to assembly strength. Firstly, it is expected from common experience that with increasing fractional saturation of the assembly, the material should exhibit increasing ductility. Secondly, on the basis of the arguments put by Schubert The data of Holm et al. As a further comment and challenge, it should be noted that, although the importance of binder liquid viscosity is well recognised, a satisfactory theoretical treatment is required for the strength of an assembly filled with a viscous liquid. The effect of particle size on the granule strength under the influence of viscous forces remains to be elucidated. This is a difficult topic, whether approached experimentally or theoretically. A major, and possibly insurmountable, difficulty with experimental work (mentioned above) is that of preparing wet assemblies of constant solid packing volume but containing liquids of differing viscosity, surface tension and saturation. All models of adhesion/coalescence require two components: a representation of the force tending to separate the granules and a representation of the adhesive force holding the partially coalesced granules together. The model of Ouchiyama and Tanaka The theory of Ennis et al. As mentioned in A third challenge is to improve the design and operation of granulation equipment. Specifically, there is a need to improve the uniformity of liquid distribution, the uniformity of solid mixing and to develop size classification/control. These all require understanding of the motion of material within the granulator and the forces to which it is subjected. For instance, the quality of liquid distribution immediately after its addition can be assessed by the use of a dimensionless spray flux PEPT is a proven technique for determination of material motion within equipment There is also the possibility of utilising computational discrete element modelling (DEM) to investigate effects of changes in equipment design and operating conditions. It is however essential to verify the predictions of DEM modelling, for which the PEPT technique is particularly suitable (e.g. The following discussion concentrates on vertical axis types of mixer. The impeller blade in these mixers is usually fitted so that its underside is close to the base (to minimise the amount of material stuck to the mixer). The rotational speed of the impeller is usually set to give a tip speed in the range 5–15 m s The impeller torque can be measured with fair precision and has been used to probe blade action Consider now the control of mean granule size. Normally, the mean size increases with time of mixing. It would be desirable if size enlargement were to cease once the desired size was attained. This is possible if very intensive mixing conditions are used to limit growth by balancing the processes of enlargement and breakage  In the last 20 years, there has been great progress in understanding the behaviour of particulate systems. Granulation research has been an important part of this. It appears to the author that, in the best papers, there has been a striking improvement in the quality of data and in data analysis. There are however some aspects of concern. Research work published in the open literature has lacked scale, in the sense of both its goals and the size and throughput of the equipment used. Work utilising equipment that operates at a realistic throughput requires large quantities of materials to be stored, handled and disposed of and the cost of equipment is also higher than in small-scale work. Some of these issues can be addressed by setting up multi-partner projects between one or more industrial users, an equipment manufacturer and a research institution. A practical requirement is that the research institution needs to have suitable building and logistical facilities for safe handling of the materials required. A typical university department needs financial investment to meet required standards. Collaboration with industrial partners can be unfulfilling (from both the industrial and academic viewpoint) because the time-frame of industrial interest in a development is often, though not always, small—perhaps not even 2 years, whereas realistically it takes at least 4 years for an academic research project to progress from proposal to receipt of funding to completion. In the UK, there is a problem that research funding is based on 3-year PhD studentships and post-doctoral fellowships. It would be desirable to employ a method of funding that continued over a longer period of time, subject to regular critical review during its progress. This would allow an institution to develop the personnel, expertise, equipment and support facilities required to undertake