This article studies the effect of 47kHz ultrasonic (US) waves on polymeric membranes immersed in an aqueous bath. The membranes under study are made from three different polymers: polyethersulfone (PES), polyvinylidenefluoride (PVDF) and polyacrylonitrile (PAN) and present various molecular weight cut-off (MWCO). The evolution of the polymeric structure exposed to US was followed by the measurement of the water permeability and the A
                     k/Δx parameter which represents the ratio of surface porosity to thickness. Results showed that important variations occurred on certain membranes after irradiation. In addition, microscopic imaging using field emission electron scanning microscopy (FESEM) was performed on irradiated membranes in order to visualize the nature of the degradation. An image analysis method gives the evolution of the pore density, porosity and pore size distribution of a homogeneous area of this membrane before and after irradiation.
                  It has been shown that, over the three materials tested, only the PES is affected by the ultrasonic treatment over all its surface, whereas the others present no significant change in the measured parameters except the PAN (50kDa) and PVDF (40kDa) membranes whose edges are affected. In conclusion, in spite of their great efficiency in enhancing filtration processes, ultrasonic waves have to be used with care as the polymeric material itself is sensitive to the ultrasonic waves at the chosen frequency.porosity of the membrane diffusivity [m flux [L hydraulic permeability [L transmembrane pressure [bar] radius [nm] time [s] membrane thickness [m] relative variation of a parameter standard deviation water relative to initial conditions The mechanical and physical effects of ultrasounds (US) have found many applications in several industrial sectors such as chemical or biological industries Ultrasonic physical effects and sonochemical effects are also used in membrane technology in order to clean surfaces Heating: it is generally accepted that the overall temperature increase due to the absorption of sound waves or to the adiabatic compression of the medium in the sound field, is dependent on the nature of the medium and the liquid/membrane interface. Structural effects: when fluids are placed under high-intensity sound fields (frequency>18 Compression and rarefaction: when high-intensity acoustic energy waves travel through a solid medium, rapid and successive compression and rarefaction occurs, the rates of which depend on their frequency. Dense material usually “fracture” under acoustic stress. Turbulence: high-intensity US in low-viscosity liquids and gases produce violent agitation which can be used to disperse particles Cavitation: acoustic cavitation is the formation, growth, and violent collapse of small bubbles or voids in liquids as a result of pressure fluctuation. Among other effects, cavitation may cause enhanced polymerization or depolymerization reactions by temporarily dispersing aggregates or by permanently breaking chemical bonds in polymeric chains We noticed that membranes cleaned by means of an ordinary laboratory ultrasonic bath, presented an unexpected behavior after irradiation. For this reason, we decided to investigate the effect of ultrasonic irradiations on polymeric materials. The aim of this article is to study the effect of 47 Asymmetric PES, PVDF and PAN ultrafiltration membranes are supplied by Techsep (Rhone-Poulenc, France). The MWCO of the membranes used are reported in The permeability Diffusion of small molecules or ions, performed at the pseudo-stationary state, is a convenient method to obtain the In order to investigate the effect of ultrasonic waves, membranes are placed in a beaker immersed in the ultrasonic bath and filled with de-ionized water. The frequency of the ultrasonic waves is fixed at 47 Microscopic observation of the membrane surface is performed by using a field emission scanning electron microscope (FESEM) on a LEO gemini 982 apparatus. Using images at the nominal magnification of 80,000, we measured the porosity, pore density and pore size distribution of the membrane PES100 before and after the two hours of ultrasonic treatment. Analyzed images are chosen from “homogeneous” parts of the membrane surface, i.e. area which do not exhibit large holes or cracks (see Each pore is assumed to be circular and disconnected from its neighbors. The pore density (number of pores per unit area) is deduced from the number of labelled pores on a given surface. The porosity is the total porous surface divided by the total image membrane area. The pore size distribution is calculated from the occurrence of pores in a given area interval. The frequency is defined as the ratio of the number of pores with radius between The variation of permeability of a membrane, relatively to its initial value, Δ With the exception of the PAN40 membrane which exhibits only a small increase in permeability (c.a. 10%), all membranes undergo large permeability variations. The degradation of the membrane occurs during the first 5 The variation of  Comparing the values obtained for these two parameters, we can also notice that ultrasonic waves have a more pronounced effect on the membrane surfaces permeability (10–10 In order to visualize the way by which the ultrasonic waves affect the PES membrane, the PES100 membrane was chosen as a test membrane as its pores are clearly visible by FESEM. Pictures were taken before and after a 2 The picture reported in In Furthermore, as seen on the graph reported in Many of the observed trends in polymer degradation can be explained by theories such as apparition of frictional forces, shear gradients and impacts due to cavitationnal collapse This work shows that, over the three membrane materials tested, only the PES is affected by the ultrasonic treatment over its entire surface. PVDF and PAN membranes are more resistant and present less damages at the exception of the PAN50a and the PVDF40 membranes for which the edges are more affected than the central section. Results also show that the degradation of the membrane surfaces under ultrasonic stress lead to an increase in pore radius for large pores, an overall increase in pore density and porosity and to the formation of large cracks preferentially at the edges of the membrane samples. Any increase in pore density, especially when large pores are concerned may favor the formation of cracks resulting from the interconnection of neighboring pores. These large cracks will bring a large contribution to the increase in permeability and porosity observed for most membranes. From these findings, it is clear that, in spite of their great efficiency in enhancing permeation of fouled membranes, ultrasounds have to be used with care. The nature of the polymeric material as well as the ultrasonic wave frequency and intensity have to be taken into account.