The present study reports the influence of the athermal effects of electroplasticity on the bottom bending process when the Joule effect is minimized to negligible values. To do so a short-time current pulse generator, capable of inducing 300A current pulses and a pulse duration of 50μs, was designed and manufactured. The materials studied were sheets of 1050-H18 aluminium alloy and X5CrNi18-10 stainless steel. A finite element analysis was done in order to characterize the different phases of the mechanical behaviour of a test specimen during the bottom bending process. The influence of current pulses on different phases was studied, specifically on the elastic restoring force and the maximum effective plastic strain phases. Current densities of 10–53A/mm2 and frequencies of 100 and 200Hz were used in the electrically-assisted bending process. Compared to the conventional process, the results of the electrically-assisted bending process show that the force drops up to 18% in aluminium and 6% in stainless steel. The elastic restoring force is also reduced up to 21% in aluminium and 12% in stainless steel. Therefore it can be concluded that athermal electroplasticity effects have an influence on the bottom bending process.The electroplasticity phenomenon is linked to thermal and athermal effects. It was defined by Magnetic and electric fields have been studied to modify the material lattice. First, The physic aetiology of this phenomenon is not fully defined, although experimental studies, like Nevertheless a large number of experimental publications have proved that electroplasticity has a direct industrial impact, as stated in This article has focused on the electroplasticity influence assisting the well-known sheet metal forming process described by Instead, this article studies the sheet metal bending process assisted by high density current pulses and focuses just on the athermal effects of electroplasticity. To do so, an electric field is induced through different flat metallic test pieces, whilst undergoing a bottom bending process. The bending forces are measured to determine force variation due to the application of high-current pulses application. In order to focus on the athermal effects, a new micro-current pulse generator was designed and manufactured. The aim of this article was to analyze the impact of the athermal effects of electroplasticity on the electrically-assisted metal sheet bending process of 1050-H18 aluminium alloy and X5CrNi18-10 stainless steel. A micro-current pulse generator was manufactured to minimize the thermal effects in the test pieces during the electrically-assisted bending process. The generator has two circuits: the main circuit and the trigger control circuit. The function of the main circuit is to induce the current intensity in the test piece through a capacitor discharge. The electric discharges are controlled by a silicon thyristor, which defines when the current pulses are transmitted through the material. Discharge time and/or pulse duration are defined by an RLC circuit configuration. A coil is needed to protect the silicon thyristor from sharp current drifts. The left-hand half of The trigger circuit controls the frequency of induced current pulses. This circuit is a relaxation oscillator made with a programmable unijunction transistor (PUT). The characteristics of current pulses are: 50 The chemical composition of both commercial materials investigated are 1050-H18 aluminium alloy (0.05 A nylon V-die with an angle of 90° and a 3 The temperature variation of the material was determined to assess the relevance of the Joule effect. As the bulk temperature directly depends on the electric energy consumed, the heat flux was estimated from the current pulse electric signal induced during the bending process. The test pieces induced with an electric current did not show a significant thermal variation during the process. The theoretical temperature, estimated by using an adiabatic model, showed that the electric flux generates a thermal variation of 5.8 The mechanical formulation used in the present work is based on that proposed by The contact and friction model adopted in this work is based on the frictional–plasticity analogy that has been developed and successfully used in many applications over the last years. The main aspects of this model can be found in The obtained results can be divided in three different topics: the bending process characterization, the electroplastic effects on the relative bending forces and the elastic restoring behaviour. These topics are separately presented and discussed below: The bottom bending process was firstly characterized via experiments and simulation, without considering the effects of electroplasticity. The grey curve reports the effective plastic strain in the bending process. Before the dimensionless time of 0.1, node P does not exhibit any plastic strain (phase A). From 0.1 onwards, significant strain becomes evident at node P, as well as a von Mises stress of 143 In summary, the bending process characterization is defined by four phases. Phase A is characterized by metal-die coupling without noticeable strain. Phase B is marked by metal-die slippery contact and plastic strain initiation. Phase C is characterized by a large plastic strain. Finally, Phase D is defined by stress relaxation behaviour. The finite element simulation enabled to determine properly the material's mechanical behaviour during the bending process. Since the computed load values reasonably fit the corresponding experimental measurements during the whole evolution of the bending process, it is assumed in this work that the computed von Mises stress and effective plastic strain contours and evolutions shown below constitute realistic and representative measures of the material's response.  Initially, the contact surface between the upper part of the die and the test piece is small. However, in the final bending stages the contact section increases. It is at the final stage when the greatest strain occurs due to the die impressing its shape on the sheet metal which leads to the material adopting the V-shape of the die. Two variables of interest are recorded: the average bending force in phase C and the elastic restoring force of the sheet metal occurring in phase D, after the maximum force peak. The forces obtained in a bending process assisted by high density current pulses are compared with those resulting from a conventional bending process performed without current pulses. These two variables are selected because the forces associated with great plastic strain are, in general, very sensitive to high density current pulses. The average bending force in phase C is represented as a relative force. This is the average force within the dimensionless time interval [0.88–1.0 When the process is assisted by high density current pulses, the results of the average force required to bend aluminium decrease. However, the results for stainless steel reveal that further studies with higher densities need to be carried out to confirm the same decreasing trend. This is due to the fact that an apparent force drop is only observed after applying the maximum density considered in this study. The effect produced by the current pulses varies from one material to another. A current density of 25 Overall, the bending strength is inversely proportional to the current density (i.e., if the current density increases, the force required for bending the sheet decreases). The pulse frequency behaves in a similar way (i.e., when the frequency increases, the bending force decreases). For example, for 1050-H18 aluminium, the reduction in bending force can be as high as 18% when assisted by pulses of 50 The difference in the behaviour of materials could be explained either by the different cold work – and the associated density of dislocations – accumulated in both materials, or by the possibility of twinning in steel (due to its low stacking fault energy), as it was deeply studied by The material's yield strength in the bottom bending process, phase D, is estimated from the elastic restoring force. This force is recorded once the universal tensile and compression testing machine used for bending the sheet metal stops working. The elastic restoring force starts off with the damped oscillation associated to the machine coming to a halt. The damping takes less than 1    It is showed that only the 1050 aluminium elastic restoring force is significantly reduced, about 20% on average, when current density is around and above 25 The frequencies used do not show any influence on the elastic behaviour attenuation, because the 100 The mechanical influence of athermal electroplastic effects on the bottom bending process has been addressed. The induced electric pulses do not increase the bulk temperature of the workpiece to any notable amount. A numerical simulation has allowed for the characterization of the different phases defining the bending stages. High current density pulses do not have the same impact on aluminium than on stainless steel. Current density and frequency have a noticeably influence on the bending forces and the springback effect on 1050 aluminium, while stainless steel needs further study with higher current densities. The material's elastic restoring behaviour was lower when the bending process was electrically assisted, especially for densities over 25 The athermal effect has been proved to be effective to reduce the bending force and the elastic restoring force during the bottom bending process. Still this technique presents modest results compared with the technique that combines thermal and athermal effects. Finally, the bending process electrically assisted with short current pulses is a feasible technique that does not require sophisticated equipment. Besides, the power consumed by this novel technique is significantly smaller than that of continuous current assisted techniques. Financial support was provided by the