This article presents a case study concerning a seismic characterization project. Full-wave sonic logging was used to characterize the shallow compressional wave and shear wave velocity profiles in the site. Anomalous values of the Poisson’s ratio derived from the velocity profiles suggested that the boreholes might have traversed slow formations (i.e. with shear wave velocity smaller than the borehole fluid compressional wave velocity or “mud-wave speed”) and that conventional processing of the sonic logs might have misinterpreted the direct arrivals of fluid acoustic waves as arrivals caused by shear wave propagation in the rock. Consequently, the shear wave velocity profiles provided by the contractor were considered to be unreliable by the project team. To address these problems, a non-conventional determination of the shear wave velocity was implemented, based on the relationship between the Poisson’s ratio of the rock formation and the shape of the first train of sonic waves which arrived to the receivers in the sonic probe. The relationship was determined based on several hundreds of finite element simulations of the acoustic wave propagation in boreholes with the same diameter as used in the perforations. The present article describes how this non-conventional approach was developed and implemented to obtain the shear wave velocity profiles from the raw sonic logs. The approach allows an extension of the range of applicability of full-wave sonic logging to determination of shear wave velocity profiles in formations with low compressional wave velocities. The method could be used to obtain shear wave velocity profiles where compressional wave velocity is as low as slightly larger than the mud-wave speed. A sample sonic log in Log ASCII Standard (LAS) format is provided as supplementary material to this paper via Mendeley Data, together with the FORTRAN source code used to process the log following the approach described in this study.The work described in this article originated from a seismic characterization project. Characterization normally requires the shallow shear wave velocity ( One of the techniques selected by the project was the full-wave sonic logging ( The technique is normally considered to be adequate for investigation of compressional wave velocity ( Note that the mud-wave speed is normally in the order of 1500 m/s. Hence, when the borehole crosses geological materials with In the project which motivated the work described in this paper, conventional (semi-automatic) processing of the sonic logs produced anomalous values of the Poisson’s ratio at some horizons, with even negative values in some cases. This led to the suspicion that a slow formation could have been traversed and consequently, that the interpreted For this reason, the project decided to explore the possibility of using the sonic logs to obtain an indirect estimate of As a consequence, an approach which was only suggested by the literature had to be explored: the correlation between the shape of the P-wave packet that arrives at the receivers and the Poisson’s ratio of the formation ( Even though the nature of the problem may be somewhat different, it should be mentioned that significant research has been carried out recently in the field of location of acoustic emission sources based on identification of compressional and shear wave arrivals to acoustic sensors (e.g. Sonic logging was performed in boreholes with nominal drilling diameter of 96 mm and depths between 100 m and 150 m. The probe was a full-wave triple sonic probe manufactured by Robertson Geologging with diameter of 45 mm (RG, UK). It is a 2.45 m long probe, with a single transmitter and three receivers, located at 60 cm, 80 cm and 100 cm from the transmitter, respectively. After each shot of the transmitter, 512 samples were collected by each receiver, separated by an interval of 4 μs. Recorded data samples were sent to the RG Micrologger II console. For performing the logging, the probe was descended into the borehole filled with fluid, up to the lowest point of interest. Then, the probe was lifted at a constant speed of 3 m/min. The transmitter sent a pulse every 1 cm, that is, every 0.2 s. Hence, the raw logs contained a sonic record at each of the receivers every 1 cm along the borehole. Frequency set up in the transmitter of the probe was not reported by the contractor. It has been assumed that a 15 kHz acoustic pulse was used, which is considered to be a standard choice in this kind of field testing. Velocity analysis performed by the contractor was based on the conventional “semblance processing” ( For illustration purposes, The Poisson’s ratio can be obtained from The typical values of Poisson’s ratio for geologic materials are between 0.1 and 0.35 (  If the times of these first arrivals to the closer, middle and farther receivers are designated as  As early as in 1983, researchers realized that the amplitude and duration of the P-wave packet were sensitive to the Poisson’s ratio in the rock formation ( Thus, in cases where the Stoneley waves are hard to identify, the amplitude of the P-wave packet could be used to provide an estimate of the Poisson’s ratio. Direct determination of In this work, the correlation of the P-wave packet shape and the formation Poisson’s ratio was obtained empirically using a battery of finite element analyses. For this purpose, a finite element model of a 100 mm diameter borehole filled with fluid was developed. The model is shown in The fluid was modeled as an acoustic medium, with density of 1200 kg/m Analyses were carried out using ABAQUS/Explicit v. 6.14-2 (  In the sonic logs coming from the field, the first peak is sometimes difficult to identify, due to the relatively low resolution of the records (one point every 4 μs) and the signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) of the signal. Hence, it was decided to use a shape factor based on the other two peaks to correlate the P-wave packet shape with the Poisson’s ratio. After some trials with other possibilities, the shape factor that showed best results was Once the shape factor was selected, i.e. Eq. It can be seen from Similar correlations may be obtained for the other two receivers of the probe. However, the first receiver was used since its signal was stronger (better SNR). Indirect determination of shear wave velocity ( The listing of the FORTRAN program used for processing the records is provided in the supplementary materials. An overall description is provided in the following sections. For each record, the first step of the processing was elimination of the Direct Current (DC)-Offset, which appeared in the time histories as a constant reference value different from zero. A high-pass filter, with a cut-off frequency of 1 kHz was used. After elimination of the DC-Offset, the next step was determination of the first arrival times. The problem was addressed by the identification of Peak 1, Peak 2 and Peak 3 in each of the records (see Peak 1 (the first one) had usually a very small amplitude when compared with the other two. In the records provided by the contractor, probably due to the small time-resolution and SNR, this peak was the most difficult one to be identified; and for many times, it was masked by the noise of signals. The strategy was to identify Peak 3 at first. Peak 3 is the largest one. Once Peak 3 was identified, Peak 2 was found by going back in time until the peak was found. Peak 3 can be easily distinguished from noise by setting a numerical threshold. Once Peak 2 and Peak 3 were identified for the three receivers, estimates of compressional wave velocity ( No semblance analysis was performed, which perhaps could have improved the accuracy of estimates. However, note that the probe had only three receivers, which is in the lower limit to apply the semblance analysis. Hence, a low-quality signal at any of the receivers could prevent the semblance analysis from being performed or, if performed, it could produce misleading results. Using the amplitudes at Peak 2 ( The SF value for the first receiver was selected for computation of the Poisson’s ratio, since it was at the first receiver where the signal was stronger. From this shape factor, the Poisson’s ratio was obtained by linear interpolation using the values given in Shear wave velocity ( Using the approximate correlation given by Eq. A sample raw sonic logging set of data has been provided as supplementary materials so that the interested reader could reproduce the results given in the following section. The raw data set was the one processed by the contractor to obtain the profiles as shown in The set of raw data in the supplementary materials has been provided as a file with LAS format, which can be opened by a regular text editor. After some descriptive lines, the file contains three blocks of data, corresponding to the closest receiver (60 cm), the most distant receiver (100 cm), and the intermediate receiver (80 cm), respectively. Within each of these blocks, each line contains the complete time history of acoustic pressure at a certain depth. The line has 513 numerical values. The first value is the depth at which the record was taken, and the other values correspond to the amplitudes of the sonic record at a 4 μs time step. Origin of depths was always the ground surface and there was a record every 1 cm of depth.  The values of Poisson’s ratio are now within the range of 0.19–0.22, basically all along the depth, which are well within the range expected for geologic materials and also fall within the range where the regression by Eq.    Within a seismic characterization project, an optimistic assumption about the shear wave velocity ( The Poisson’s ratio profiles obtained from the An approach for indirect determination of the Reprocessing of the raw sonic logs using the newly developed approach produced On the other hand, the new approach produced compressional wave velocity ( For the conditions of the project, particularly for the configuration of the sonic probe used in the field work, practical application of the approach presented in this paper extends to compressional wave velocities This work was performed within the time limits of an industrial project. Additional research would be necessary for potential refinement and generalization, for example, to other borehole diameters or other sonic probe designs. The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. The following is/are the supplementary data to this article: Supplementary data to this article can be found online at