The principle, characteristics, pilot testing, and applications of a new sizing technology for moist raw coal were described. This new technology is completely different from the traditional screening in principle. It extracts fine coal from coarse coal by entrainment of an ascending airflow in a vibrated fluidized bed. It has no aperture-blinding problem at all. The classification efficiencies varied from 74.85% to 93.84% for classification at cut-size of 6, 3, 2, 1, or 0.5 mm when the free moisture of coal was in the range of 1.7–9.5%. The ash contents of fine coal products obtained from air classification were 2–3% lower than those of the same size fractions in feed for most cases, which is beneficial to producing lower ash fine coal from raw coal for blast furnaces or pulverized coal firing boilers. The new technology provides a practical solution to the difficult task of sizing moist raw coal at cut-size below 6 mm. It has found wide applications in coal processing and generated considerable economic and environmental benefits.Sizing plays an important role in coal processing. However, the commercially available screens are far from meeting the industrial needs, especially for dry screening of moist raw coal at separation size smaller than 6 mm. There is no feasible technique for dry screening moist coal at −6 mm, which is limited mainly by aperture blinding problem due to the build-up of moist fine coal. To overcome this difficult problem of moist raw coal sizing at the separation size below 6 mm, a new sorting technology of raw coal, referred to as vibrated fluidized bed air classification technology, has been invented and patented by the authors. The vibrated fluidized bed air classifier completely eliminates the aperture-blinding problem, resulting in an effective classification of raw coal at separation size smaller than 6 mm down to 0.125 mm. The vibrated fluidized bed air classification is completely different from the conventional screen in principle. It works essentially based on the principle that particles of different size, shape and specific gravity will settle at different velocities in a fluid, e.g., water or air. In a quiescent fluid, finer, lighter, angular, flat or elongate particles settle more slowly than coarser, heavier and round ones. In a vibrated separating chamber shown in The air distributor is composed of horizontal wedge bars or steel rods, and it is designed to pass air through it with a particularly arranged flow field that is different from the field of conventional fluidized beds that is uniform over the entire cross section of the separating chamber. This is important for enhancing the turbulence of the separating space. The vibrated fluidized bed air classification unit is a partly open circuit. As shown in In the vibrated fluidized bed air classification unit, there is no risk of aperture blinding because air rises through the slots between bars or rods at a high velocity (e.g., 20 m/s). This offers the self-cleaning effect on the slots and makes it unlikely for sticky materials to blind the apertures. As a result, this kind of air classification can be used to effect fine separation even when the feed is very moist and sticky. The separating size can be anywhere below 6 mm, e.g., 6, 5, 4, 3, 2, 1, 0.5 mm, even down to 0.125 mm. This characteristic makes the vibrated fluidized bed air classification superior to screening. A vibrated fluidized bed air classification pilot test system, as shown in (1) effective classifications were obtained at 0.5, 1, 2, 3, and 6 mm. All classification efficiencies vary from 74.85% to 93.84% for feeds containing 1.7–9.5% surface moistures. (2) the ash of fines products obtained by air classification were 0.46–2.83% (or 2–3% for most cases) lower than that of the feed in the same size fraction because of the density difference among particles, which is beneficial to producing low ash fine coal products at low investment and operation costs. The first commercial unit of vibrated fluidized bed air classification came into use in April 2000 at Da An Shan Coal Mine, Beijing, China. It was a vibrated fluidized bed with a cross section of (1) pre-removal of fines from feed in coal preparation plant to optimize the lower size limit of feed, thus reducing slime, simplifying slurry handling system, reducing capital investment and operation cost; (2) separation of lower ash fine coal from raw coal to provide power plants or blast furnaces with high-grade fuel; (3) classification at cut-size of 3 mm in briquetting plants or coking plants; (4) separation of coal into fine coal product and coarse coal product in coal blending plants to meet size specifications of different boilers or furnaces. The vibrated fluidized bed air classification technology is a breakthrough in coal sizing. It separates fine coal from coarse coal by entrainment of an ascending airflow in a vibrated fluidized bed rather than by passing fines through apertures like screen, so it has no aperture-blinding problem and can conduct efficient classification of wet raw coal at cut-size any where below 6 mm. Pilot tests and commercial uses proved that this new technology provides a practical solution to the difficult task of sizing moist raw coal at cut-size below 6 mm. Now scale-up tests for large units of 600–1000 t/h are in conduct for the need of large mines. Obviously, this new technology will play an important role in coal processing.