Introduction
                  The potential value of proximal femoral locking compression plate (PFLCP) for extracapsular femoral fractures has been discussed in several case reports; however, clinical control studies are lacking. Therefore, we performed a case control study to assess: (1) If PFLCP offers better functional results and fewer complications than dynamic hip screws (DHS)? (2) Which kind of extracapsular femoral fractures would benefit from PFLCP fixation?
               
                  Hypothesis
                  The PFLCP fixation offers better functional results and fewer complications than the DHS for the treatment of extracapsular fractures.
               
                  Patients and methods
                  A total of 83 patients with extracapsular femoral fractures were recruited. Forty-one patients underwent PFLCP fixation, and 42 patients underwent DHS fixation. Patient information, operative time, blood loss, functional level (as assessed by Sanders’ traumatic hip rating scale), bone union, and implant complications were compared for the two treatment groups.
               
                  Results
                  Patients with stable intertrochanteric fractures who underwent PFLCP fixation demonstrated shorter bone union time than the DHS fixation group (3.3±0.2 vs. 4.3±0.1 month; P
                     <0.0001); however, both groups had 100% bone union and good to excellent scores on Sanders’ traumatic hip rating scale (P
                     =1.000). Patients with unstable intertrochanteric fractures who underwent PFLCP fixation experienced greater blood loss (619.0±23.9 vs. 474.1±19.8ml; P
                     <0.0001), which was mainly due to the need for open reduction (64.3% vs. 12.5%; P
                     =0.003), compared to the DHS fixation group. No differences were identified with respect to bony union, functional level, or complications. Patients with subtrochanteric fractures who underwent PFLCP fixation demonstrated significantly shorter operative times (82.1±4.3 vs. 102.2±2.2minutes; P
                     <0.0001), less blood loss (751.8±25.4 vs. 987.6±32.0ml; P
                     <0.0001), shorter bone union times (5.2±0.4 vs. 8.8±1.0 month; P
                     =0.006), more good to excellent Sanders’ traumatic hip rating scale scores (92.9% vs. 55.5%; P
                     =0.009), and fewer complications (14.2% vs. 66.6%; P
                     =0.005) than the DHS fixation group.
               
                  Conclusion
                  PFLCP fixation offers better functional outcomes and fewer complications for subtrochanteric femoral fractures but not for intertrochanteric femoral fractures.
               
                  Levels of evidence
                  Case control study, level III.Dynamic hip screws (DHS) have been considered as the standard fixation for extracapsular femoral fracture Proximal femoral locking compression plate (PFLCP) has been developed recently, which merges locking screw technology with conventional plating techniques. Theoretically, this technique could offer optimum fixation of comminuted and highly unstable fractures that are associated with more shearing and pull-outforces Does the PFLCP offer better outcomes (function, bone union rate) and fewer complications than the DHS when dealing with intertrochanteric and subtrochanteric fractures? Which type of fractures will be more suitable for the PFLCP fixation? Between September 2009 and January 2011, 136 patients with extracapsular femoral fractures underwent fixation with either DHS or PFLCP (Libeier, Beijing, China) in our department. The choice of fixation technique depended upon availability of the device and each patient's financial situation. Because the cost was 10,000 Yuan for DHS device and 18,000 to 22,000 Yuan for PFLCP device, most patients from rural areas selected DHS fixation. All the procedures were performed by same surgeons. Inclusion criteria were age The study was approved by the local hospital ethic committee. Because of the retrospective nature of this study, the requirement of informed patient consent was waived. Fracture reduction and fixation were carried out in the supine position. Under general anesthesia, closed reduction was obtained using a traction table. Open reduction was performed when necessary (a total of 30 were done mostly in instable fractures, 12 in the DHS group and 28 in PFLCP). PFLCP fixation was described in a previous report Partial weight-bearing was allowed after surgery. Full weight-bearing was allowed 6 weeks after surgery in cases of stable intertrochanteric fractures (AO/OTA 31.A1), and permitted only when patients have no pain and bone union was confirmed by X-ray in cases of unstable intertrochanteric and subtrochanteric fractures (AO/OTA 31.A2-3 and 32 A3.1, B3.1, C1.1). Patients were seen postoperatively at 6 weeks, 3 months, 6 months, and 12 months. Anteroposterior (AP) and lateral radiographs were performed at each follow-up visit. The following data were collected: patient's demographic information, medical history, causes and AO/OTA classification of each fracture, operation time, blood loss, fracture union, the time to union, osteosynthesis complications, wound infection, deep vein thrombosis, pulmonary embolism, cardiovascular events, and death. Blood loss was calculated as previous report Statistical analysis was performed using SPSS 17.0 statistics software (SPSS Inc, Chicago, IL, USA). Variables were presented as mean A total of 83 patients were included in the study (41 underwent PFLCP fixation and 42 underwent DHS fixation). No significant differences were identified between groups with respect to age, gender, comorbidities, fracture classification, or preoperative medical treatment ( In the patients with stable intertrochanteric fracture, bone union time was significantly shorter in the PFLCP group compared with the DHS group ( In the patients with unstable intertrochanteric fracture ( In the patients with subtrochanteric fractures ( There were 5 cases of wound infection (2 with PFLCP fixation and 3 with DHS fixation), which were controlled by debridement and dressing. No patient in the entire study experienced deep vein thrombosis, pulmonary embolism, cardiovascular or renal events, or death. Theoretically, minimally-invasive PFLCP systems could offer optimum fixation, especially for comminuted and highly unstable fractures, but they have not been extensively studied. In the present study, we compared PFLCP and DHS fixations for the treatment of intertrochanteric and subtrochanteric fractures. Our results suggested that PFLCP fixation was better than DHS fixation when dealing with subtrochanteric fracture, as indicated by significantly shorter operative times, less blood loss, shorter bone union times, higher excellent to good functional level assessed by Sanders and Regazzoni traumatic hip rating scale, and fewer complications. However, no difference was found in patients with intertrochanteric fractures. The present study has several limitations. First, due to the nature of the retrospective study, clinical heterogeneity may have occurred as a result of preexisting medical conditions such as osteoporosis, fixation usage and individual fracture types. However, these differences were not statistically significant and the two groups were matched for age, sex, and comorbidities. Second, the method of fixation was chosen by patients, which resulted in an unequal distribution of fracture types in each group. Again, these differences were not statistically significant. In fact, this reflects the true conditions of medical practice in China. Finally, the relatively small number of patients restricted statistical power. Big scale, multi-center prospective control studies are warranted. Nevertheless, our findings still provide useful information for clinical practice. Similar percutaneous compressing plate systems have been compared with DHS for treatment of intertrochanteric fracture that showed good stability and healing rates Although biomechanical studies have showed advantages of PFLCP in the model of subtrochanteric fracture In conclusion, PFLCP fixation can offer better functional outcomes and fewer complications for subtrochanteric femoral fractures. DHS fixation is preferable for stable intertrochanteric fractures. For unstable intertrochanteric fractures, the value of PFLCP fixation needs to be confirmed by further clinical studies. The authors declare that they have no conflicts of interest concerning this article. 