A detailed analysis of the dynamic adsorption of crude oil components dissolved in produced water onto air bubble surfaces is presented. Nine different crude oils were used to prepare synthetic produced water samples. The total organic carbon content, molecular mass and dynamic surface tension was determined for the samples. The experimental data were applied in a modified version of the Ward–Tordai model, in order to evaluate the adsorption mechanism. This allowed for determination of characteristic diffusion coefficients and investigation of adsorption mechanisms. All the crude oils contained water soluble components within a relatively narrow range of molecular size, but different polarity. The adsorption mechanism was purely diffusion controlled at short time scales regardless of the chemical composition of the crude oil. Further analyses were performed on two of the crude oils by selectively extracting interfacially active components (acids and bases) from the crude oils. Both acidic and basic compounds were present in the produced water samples, but their affinity for the air/water interface varied. There were no correlation between the amount of acids and bases in the crude oils and the solubility and surface activity of the respective water soluble fractions.Produced water is a by-product of petroleum processing and can be a mixture of formation water (i.e., water naturally present in reservoirs), water previously injected into the formation and condensed water ( Gas flotation is a widely used process for removing dispersed oil from produced water streams. The principle of induced gas flotation is attachment of oil droplets onto gas bubbles ( Several studies have focused on detailed characterization of organic components dissolved in produced water, and both polar and non-polar compounds have been identified ( Generally, polar compounds are considerably more soluble than non-polar hydrocarbons in saline aqueous solutions, and the solubility will depend on molecular weight and type of heteroatoms present in the molecules ( Previously, we have reported on how the ionic composition of the water influences the adsorption of water soluble crude oil components onto air–water interfaces ( Simulated brine was prepared by dissolving the analytical grade of NaCl (99.5%, Merck, Germany), Na The water soluble hydrocarbons of the crude oils were partitioned into the aqueous phase by mixing 50% oil and 50% simulated brine with a shaker (HS 501 digital IKA). The mixing speed was 250 Here, the synthetic produced water samples were named PW-A to PW-I, in accordance with the naming of the crude oils. Three parallel samples were prepared in each case. Selective extractions of acidic and basic components were carried out for two crude oils according to methods developed by Simon et al., and detailed descriptions of the procedures can be found elsewhere ( The total organic carbon measurements were performed on an Apollo 9000 TOC combustion analyzer operating in the range of 680–1000 Negative and positive ion mass spectra of the produced water samples were determined by Agilent (Agilent Technologies, Palo Alto, California) 6520 LC/MS Q-TOF system. The molecular masses were determined as the weighted average of the negative and positive ion mass spectra. The measurements were carried out at the mass spectroscopy laboratory at SINTEF materials and chemistry. Dynamic surface tensions were measured by a bubble pressure tensiometer ( The Ward–Tordai equation is commonly used to describe adsorption kinetics at gas–liquid interfaces ( Several analytical solutions of the Ward–Tordai equation that describe the short and long time-scales of adsorption have been reported ( Modifications of the Ward–Tordai equation were suggested by Liu and Messow who solved the diffusion equation for a spherical interface by Laplace transformation ( Eq. The results presented in this paper are calculated from the equations for spherical interface presented above. Calculations using the analogous equations for planar interfaces ( The amounts of total organic carbon (TOC) in the PW samples are compared in The dynamic surface tensions of the PW samples are shown in The surface pressure of the samples (i.e., the difference between the surface tension of the pure surface and the surface tension at equilibrium) is plotted against the corresponding TOC values in Adsorption at surfaces will, in accordance with Eq. The characteristic diffusion coefficients were further used to predict the dynamic surface tension by Eq. In order to further investigate the nature of the water soluble and surface active crude oil components, acidic and basic components were selectively extracted from crude oil A and B before synthetic PW samples were prepared from these crude oil fractions. The total acid numbers (TAN) and total base numbers (TBN) of the crude oils and their acid and base extracted fractions are shown in PW-A and PW-B had high and comparable TOC values ( The dynamic surface tension of the PW samples prepared with the different crude oil fractions are compared in Synthetic produced water samples were prepared from nine crude oils and brine. TOC and dynamic surface tension measurements were used in a modified version of the Ward–Tordai model to evaluate the adsorption mechanisms of the dissolved organic hydrocarbons onto the surface of air bubble. Initially the adsorption process was purely diffusion controlled, while an adsorption barrier occurred after various times (300–1000 The authors are grateful to the industrial sponsors (