A study was made on the dissolution kinetics of metallic copper flat packs using solutions of Cu(II) in a chloride medium which was obtained via reaction between copper sulfate and sodium chloride. The effect of stirring, chloride and Cu(II) concentrations, distribution of Cu(II) chlorocomplexes and temperature were investigated.
                  The leaching data showed the reaction to be under chemical kinetics control, with an activation energy of 28 kJ/mol (7 kcal/mol). Leaching occurred at an apparent order of −1 with respect to the total chloride concentration and an apparent first order with respect to the total copper concentration. The Cu(II) ion was the main active species based on calculation of copper species distribution and the solution kinetics may be interpreted as rate=k[Cu2+]. For ratios of C
                     Cl/C
                     Cu
                     2+ of less than about 8, a layer of CuCl(s) formed which impeded the solubilization process.Processes for the leaching of metallic copper in chloride media have been based primarily on the action of cupric copper in the presence of sodium chloride. Important references on this topic include the studies of The study carried out by On the other hand, the literature describes a process for copper recovery from bronze scrap in which leaching is obtained using 0.28 M CuCl In contrast with results from the preceding brief literature review, the objective of the present research was to study the dissolution of metallic copper with cupric chlorocomplexes generated in situ by reacting copper sulfate with sodium chloride in a hydrochloric acid medium, and then determining if the CuCl Our study determined the effects of the stirring, temperature, as well as the concentrations of total Cu(II), total chloride, and copper chlorocomplexes for postulating the possible controlling stage or stages of the dissolution, and modeling a kinetic expression for the leaching rate. It is broadly recognized in the literature that in the case of dissolution of pure species without formation of insoluble products in surface layers, the only controlling steps can be the mass transfer through the fluid film and the specific chemical reaction ( A diagram of the possible steps is presented as The cuprous chloride is only slightly soluble under these standard conditions, but its solubility increases with increase in the chloride concentration due to the successive formation of CuCl The geometry of the particles used to carry out the present leaching experiments was of small flat-packs, and the conversion model used is described below ( When chloride ion and cupric ion share an aqueous system, the composition of the resulting solution is governed by the following equilibria ( According to values for the formation of chlorocomplexes, the predominant species in this Cu Metallic copper of about 99.99% purity was used in all experimentation. Copper flat packs of about 1×1 mm and 0.105 mm in thickness cut from electrolytic copper sheets were used in the kinetic experiments. The reagents, copper sulfate pentahydrate, sodium chloride and hydrochloric acid, were of analytical grade. A conventional leaching apparatus was used, consisting of a 1200-cm The experiments were designed so that the concentration of both the total chloride as well as total cupric ion could be determined initially. The solutions used in each experiment were obtained by the following methods: a given volume of distilled water was placed in the reactor, followed by given masses of copper sulfate pentahydrate and sodium chloride, and the pH was adjusted with concentrated HCl to the desired value. The system was then made up to 1000 cm The kinetic experiments were initiated once the solution was prepared. Here 2 g of copper flat packs was added at The effect of stirring on the dissolution kinetics of the copper flat packs was carried out fixing the initial concentration of The experimental results are presented graphically in Leaching experiments were carried out by varying the initial copper concentration in the system to determine the effect produced by this reactant on the dissolution kinetics of the copper flat packs in order to subsequently determine the apparent order of reaction (350 rpm, 24 °C,  Leaching experiments were carried out varying the initial chloride concentration of the system to determine the effect produced by this reactant on the dissolution kinetics of copper flat packs and to determine the apparent order of reaction (350 rpm, 24 °C, The experimental results of the leaching are shown in graphic form in   On the other hand, similar plots of rate constant with respect to the calculated CuCl Experimental results of the effect of temperature on the dissolution kinetics of copper flat packs are presented in Copper surfaces attacked with different concentrations of Cu(II) and chloride were studied by scanning electron microscopy (SEM) coupled by energy dispersive microanalysis (EDS). Samples were carbon coated. Observation was performed by secondary electron signal and EDS spectra were recorded at 20 kV. For ratios However, for ratios Based on the kinetics results, the species distribution calculations and the surface studies, it is suggested that the dissolution of copper with Cu(II) in chloride media occurs in the following steps:  The dissolution of metallic copper using solutions of Cu(II) in Cl The leaching rate of copper has an apparent order of −1 with respect to the total chloride concentration and an apparent order of unity (1) with respect to the copper concentration. The correlation of rate constants with the calculated distribution of copper species in solution indicates that the Cu(II) ion is the main active species. Within the interval studied, the equation for the rate is: For total chloride/total copper ratios of approximately less than 8, a layer of cuprous chloride is formed on the copper surface, which inhibits the leaching process. The authors thank the National Fund for Scientific and Technological Research (FONDECYT) for support of the present study (FONDECYT project no. 1030046). The support of the “Serveis Científico-Tècnics de la Universitat de Barcelona” in the surface studies is also gratefully acknowledged.