Objective
                  We review the pathophysiology and possible prevention measures of complications after extracorporeal shock wave lithotripsy (ESWL).
               
                  Methods
                  A literature search was performed with the Medline database on ESWL between 1980 and 2004.
               
                  Results
                  ESWL application has been intuitively connected to complications. These are related mostly to residual stone fragments, infections, and effects on tissues such as urinary, gastrointestinal, cardiovascular, genital, and reproductive systems. Recognition of ESWL limitations, use of alternative therapies, correction of pre-existing renal or systemic disease, treatment of urinary tract infection, use of prophylactic antibiotics, and improvement of ESWL efficacy are the most important measures of prevention. Decrease of shock wave number, rate and energy, use of two shock-wave tubes simultaneously, and delivery of two shock waves at carefully timed close intervals improve ESWL efficacy and safety.
               
                  Conclusion
                  ESWL is a safe method to treat stones when proper indications are followed. The need for well-designed prospective randomised trials on aetiology and prevention of its complications arises through the literature review.Since its first presentation in West Germany in the early1980s In this review we present an overview of the post-ESWL complications, their potential mechanisms and predisposing factors, and various ways to prevent them. A thorough Medline search was performed to review various types of papers such as clinical trials, randomised controlled trials, reviews, meta-analysis, editorials, and letters to the editor. Combinations of the following keywords were used: ESWL; complications; stone fragmentation; failure; residual stones; obstruction; steinstrasse; infection; renal anatomy; renal function; hypertension; vascular; cardiac; gastrointestinal; children; fertility; and pregnancy. We reviewed 3,937 abstracts and read 220 papers in full. Ninety-three of these are sited in the reference list. Incomplete fragmentation, residual stone fragments, steinstrasse, and obstruction are among the problems urologists confront when ESWL fails to completely fragment the stone treated ( Growth of residual fragments <4 Predisposing factors to ESWL failure are stone composition, size, location, and number, as well as renal morphology and shock wave rate and energy Shock wave rate affects stone fragmentation in vitro and in vivo, improved ESWL efficiency occurring at slower rates New generation types of the same lithotriptor design or lithotriptors of different design show variable fragmentation ability. Portis et al. Despite major concerns about potential hazards of ESWL in the growing child, highly satisfactory results are being reported. Overall stone-free rates are initially 37%–52%, and increase to 57%–100% in long-term follow-up after ESWL Complications related to stone fragments can be prevented by realizing the limitations of ESWL for large stone burdens and by using PCNL or ESWL followed by PCNL and repeat ESWL (sandwich therapy), as an alternative. Overall steinstrasse occurs in 1%–4% of patients who undergo ESWL Stenting before ESWL reduces complications caused by residual stone fragments, especially when a large stone is treated More importantly, to alleviate stone fragment problems, ESWL must become more effective. In vitro, in vivo, and preliminary clinical studies indicate that using two confocal, opposing shock wave sources triggered simultaneously could lead to an increased stone comminution compared to using one shock wave tube The renal trauma and vascular disruption associated with ESWL may allow bacteria in urine to enter the bloodstream. Moreover, when infected calculi are destroyed, bacteria are released from the stone into the urine and may be absorbed systemically Bacteriuria has been found in 7.7%–23.5% of patients who undergo ESWL, including 7.7% in a group of patients without infection-related stones Patient symptoms, erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR), white blood count (WBC), and urine and blood cultures are all helpful in detecting post-ESWL bacteriuria and bacteraemia. However, these studies become positive when patient symptoms are already established. C-reactive protein (CRP) measurement on the first and third days after ESWL is useful for early diagnosis of complications, before urine and blood cultures become positive The role of routine prophylactic antibiotics is controversial. Pearle and Roehrborn Renal complications can be subdivided into early effects on kidney anatomy that lead to haematuria and haematoma formation, and late complications that affect kidney function and cause systemic hypertension ( Histopathological examination of human and animal kidneys showed endothelial cell damage to midsized arteries, veins, and glomerular capillaries immediately after ESWL ESWL-induced acute renal damage may also result in severe injury to the nephron, microvasculature, and the surrounding interstitium The most common clinical manifestation of renal trauma is gross haematuria that spontaneously resolves in a few days. Symptomatic intrarenal, subcapsular, or perirenal fluid collections and haematomas are rare and occur in <1% of patients who undergo ESWL Haemorrhage and haematomas may be related to the type of lithotripter used Potential risk factors for haematoma formation are bleeding diathesis, the use of drugs with antiplatelet activity, hypertension, obesity, diabetes mellitus, and the number and intensity of shock waves. In the setting of electrohydraulic lithotripsy none of these factors have been consistently proved to be a risk, although hypertension remains a plausible factor Treatment of the haematomas is conservative in most cases. The most likely outcome is spontaneous radiographic resolution of the haematoma within two years without clinically evident adverse effects on blood pressure or renal function Biochemical evidence of renal injury is apparent immediately after ESWL. Blood and urine markers such as renin, creatinine, N-Acetyl-b-D-glucosaminidase (NAG), b-galactosidase (BGAL), b-2-microglobulin (B2M), and proteinuria return to near-normal levels within a few days Studies on animals and humans Renal function remains unaffected when ESWL is applied to specific clinical situations. Definitive treatment of urolithiasis after relief of obstruction in patients with renal insufficiency further improves renal function Shock wave energy induces transient functional damage of tubular function in children There is evidence that shock wave lithotripsy damage to the kidney is reduced when cavitation is suppressed The incidence of newly diagnosed hypertension after lithotripsy was initially reported to be 8% Systolic hypertension per se has not been shown to be increased after ESWL, but diastolic hypertension has been found in multiple studies To further elucidate the possible long-term association between ESWL and hypertension, Lingeman et al. Patients over the age of 60 may develop hypertension at a higher rate than the control population, which can be predicted by increased intrarenal resistive indices The true cause of hypertension after ESWL is probably multifactorial, and whether there is a direct causal link is unclear. Blood pressure is more commonly affected by either renin-mediated Most of the preceding studies were retrospective and did not stratify patients into at-risk groups or exclude patients with pre-existing hypertension, renal disease, or other risk factors for renal injury after ESWL. Randomised controlled trials failed to reveal any evidence that ESWL causes changes in blood pressure Cardiac arrhythmias during ESWL are not uncommon; the incidence is 1l%–59% ESWL may be performed safely on patients with pacemakers with appropriate precautions Although several patients had abdominal aortic aneurysmal rupture after ESWL In a recent review, 62 of 3,423 (1.81%) patients experienced a documented gastrointestinal injury (GI) complication after ESWL These adverse effects were associated with the increase in the number and energy of shock waves delivered but also with patient position. Most GI perforations occurred when the patient was prone and received shock-waves that exceeded the U.S. Food and Drug Administration recommended numbers There is enough evidence from experimental and clinical studies that ESWL does not have severe permanent effects on testicular and ovarian function ESWL is a safe method to treat stones in the urinary tract when proper indications are followed. Today, 25 years after its implementation, various side effects have been reported and studied, but most are rare and do not hamper the effectiveness of this technique. Preventive measures can be taken to minimize the frequency of these side effects. The authors present an interesting review article summing up the experience of the literature with the complications and potential preventing factors of extracorporeal shock wave lithotripsy. They address in a meticulous manner, controversial issues like “stenting or not stenting”, “prophylactic antibiotics”, “renal trauma”, etc. Twenty five years of clinical experience with extracorporeal shock wave lithotripsy has proved and established its safety and efficacy. Nevertheless, there is an ongoing debate among investigators pertaining to its acute and chronic effects. In the beginning of the 80’s the first Dornier HM3 lithotriptor was introduced and indeed revolutionised the management of lithiasis. Nevertheless, progress with extracorporeal shock wave lithotripsy has been unexpectedly slow since then. Current lithotripters have not reached the potential of the original electrohydraulic device and provided inferior fragmentation rates compared with the original generation. The industry, in an attempt to minimise morbidity, compressed energy and reduced the size of the lithotriptor focal zone The authors finally conclude that there is a need for well designed prospective randomised trials on the aetiology and prevention of treatment related complications. Furthermore, future research for the development of new generation lithotripters, that will be safe for the patients but will also provide a more effective fragmentation rate, is deemed necessary.