This study adopts the log-mean Divisial index (LMDI) method to decompose the changes in the industrial aggregate energy intensity (IAEI) of China into both macro and technological factors: sectoral energy intensity, industrial structure, research and development (R&D) efficiency, R&D intensity and investment intensity. Afterwards we determine the contributions of 36 industrial sub-sectors to IAEI through different factors using attribution analysis. The results show that the IAEI decreased by 38.26% from 2003 to 2015. This drop is predominantly caused by R&D efficiency (−76.01%). The sub-sectors of ferrous metals (−14.94%) and non-metallic mineral products (−13.36%) are the main contributors to the R&D efficiency effect. The sectoral energy intensity effect contributes −27.19%, mainly due to the sub-sectors of ferrous metals (−15.97%) and non-ferrous metals (−5.68%). The industrial structure effect also contributes to a decline of IAEI (−15.06%), of which, petroleum, coking and nuclear fuel (−5.57%) and ferrous metals (−4.73%) are the sub-sectors that contribute the most. Conversely, investment intensity (174.09%) and R&D intensity (52.06%) contribute to increase the IAEI, largely owing to sub-sectors of petroleum, coking and nuclear fuel processing, chemical materials and non-metallic mineral products. Our findings suggest that the combined effects of the policies implemented during the time frame of 2003 to 2015 led to a reduction in IAEI, with investment intensity being the focus of improvement. Nevertheless, different policies and measures should be put forward in different sub-sectors due to their varying degrees of adaptability and policy sensitivity.Over the past three decades, China has experienced a rapid economic growth with accelerating industrialization and urbanization. The expansion of industrialization and urbanization largely depended on the over-consumption of energy resources It is well known that approximately 70% of China’s total energy consumption is derived from the industrial sector Given this context, this paper explores the factors driving industrial aggregate energy intensity (IAEI) in general as well as the contribution of specific industrial sub-sectors, combining the log-mean Divisial index (LMDI) method The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section Given that 80% of CO As the most energy consuming and carbon emitting sector of China, the industrial sector has been extensively studied using the LMDI method, with a focus on both CO Due to the heterogeneity of industrial sub-sectors, it is important to understand the contribution of different sub-sectors to the performance of industrial energy consumption and CO Previous studies of the industrial sector using LMDI are summarized in This paper aims to fill these research gaps by developing a comprehensive model, which integrates an extended LMDI method and attribution analysis into a common framework, in which the IAEI of China in the period 2003–2015 is decomposed into both macro and technological factors. As far as we are aware this has never been done before. The extended LMDI is used to decompose the IAEI into both macro and technological factors. The contributions of sub-sectors to IAEI through each factor are studied based on attribution analysis. The attribution analysis can expose the detailed relationship between the influencing factors and sub-sectors, which is extremely significant to assist policymaking, since the sensitivity and adaptability of industrial sub-sectors to energy and environmental policies are specified. The results thus obtained can be used to test the effectiveness of energy-related policies. We hope that our results may contribute to bring forward effective and practical policy implications to reduce the energy intensity of China’s industrial sector as well as its sub-sectors. Following Shao et al. The last three factors (i.e., other than sectoral energy intensity and industrial structure) are technological factors and rarely considered before. R&D expenditure is the main indicator of innovation inputs to industrial production, as it can be usually required to develop new technologies and products To do so, assuming that there are There are two standard multiplicative LMDI methods, defined by the weights formulae used, the Montgomery-Vartia index (LMDI-I) and Sato-Vartia index (LMDI-II) The detailed description of sectoral energy intensity, industrial structure, R&D efficiency, R&D intensity and investment intensity effects is as follows:      After having quantified the impacts of The data set of this study is related to the 36 industrial sub-sectors ( The single- and multi-period decomposition results of China’s IAEI are illustrated in R&D efficiency was the dominant factor in the decrease of IAEI (contribution of 76.01%). This indicates that there were decreasing returns to scale in R&D expenditure, or that R&D expenditure was primarily targeted at energy conservation instead of expanding the production scale (as reflected in the sectoral energy intensity factor). The single-period decomposition results show that from 2004 to 2013 R&D efficiency contributed to a decrease in IAEI while in 2014 and 2015 it contributed to an increase, indicating that the production resources have been optimized and R&D expenditure exhibits increasing returns to scale. As a response to this trend, the Chinese government is calling in recent years for the shift from an investment-driven to an innovation-driven mode of economic growth Both sectoral energy intensity and industrial structure contributed to a decrease in IAEI from 2003 to 2015 (respective contributions of 27.19% and 15.06%). Herein, industrial structure contributed to mitigate IAEI during the whole study period except in 2007 and 2009, while sectoral energy intensity contributed to increase the IAEI in 2004, 2005 and 2011. The effect of sectoral energy intensity can be explained by the joint effects of a decrease in energy intensity (or improvement in energy efficiency) by industrial sub-sectors. Since 1995, the formulation and strict implementation of energy-conservation policies led to a decrease in the energy intensity of many industrial sub-sectors. The decline in sectoral energy intensity of 30 sub-sectors led to the decrease of IAEI. To understand why sectoral energy intensity contributed to an increase in IAEI in some specific years, it is important to recall that in 2001 China joined the WTO (World Trade Organization), and that in 2008 there was an economic crisis. When China acceded to the WTO and the export market opened up, there was a rapid expansion in the scale of industrial production. The control of energy consumption was not a major governmental concern in those years, and the energy intensity of twenty-two sub-sectors increased in 2004 and 2005. Even though the government began to pay attention to energy conservation and issue policies on the subject around that time, the effects of those policies lagged behind. For example, the policies of “10 Key Energy Saving Projects” and “Differential Electricity Pricing Policy” were issued in 2004 and the “Top-1000 Enterprises Energy Saving Program” and the improvement of energy efficient in industrial processes were issued in 2006 In stark contrast to the above-mentioned three effects, the R&D intensity and investment intensity contributed to an increase of IAEI with the values of 52.06% and 174.09%, respectively. It can be seen from the single period decomposition results that the effects of these two factors were mixed and seemed to improve as time went on. The positive effect of R&D intensity indicates the innovation promoted by R&D expenditure resulted in an increase of production scale. The large and positive impact of investment intensity shows that the investment has grown much faster than economic output during the whole study period: from 2003 to 2015, the IVA tripled, while investment increased tenfold. This suggests that there might have been an inefficient allocation of production factors caused by overinvestment, leading to excess energy consumption. The percent change of sectoral energy intensity can be further attributed to the 36 industrial sub-sectors using attribution analysis. As shown in    The attribution results of industrial structure are illustrated in Most previous studies pointed out that sectoral energy intensity was the dominant factor to determine the evolution of aggregate energy intensity The results obtained can also be used to evaluate the effectiveness of current policies in the industrial sector. From the decomposition results, we find that current policies related to energy efficiency improvement and adjustment of industrial structure in industrial sector have been effective. Furthermore, the results of the attribution analysis can tell us which sub-sectors are adaptable and sensitive to the implemented policies. The program “Top-1000 Enterprises” targeted to industrial sub-sectors of In order to gain a better understanding of the changes in IAEI of China, this study used the extended LMDI method to investigate its driving forces. Then, we went a step further to explore the contribution of industrial sub-sectors to percent change of IAEI through each driving factor using attribution analysis. In addition, technological factors related to the industrial sector and its sub-sectors were also studied, including R&D expenditure and investment. The method in this paper can provide a new perspective for the extension of Kaya identity in decomposition analysis. Attribution analysis can allocate the causes of energy consumption or CO    This paper acknowledges the financial support from the See