Nanoporous composite films of multi-walled carbon nanotubes (MWNTs) and either polypyrrole (PPy) or poly(3-methylthiophene) (P3MeT) were grown using an electrochemical polymerization technique in which the nanotubes and conducting polymer were deposited simultaneously. The concentration and dispersion of MWNTs in the polymerization electrolyte, in addition to any supporting electrolyte used, were found to have a significant effect on the thickness of polymer coated on each MWNT and hence the nanoporosity and MWNT loading in the films produced. It has been shown that in the absence of a supporting electrolyte, increasing the concentration of MWNTs in the polymerization electrolyte decreases the thickness of polymer coated on each MWNT. This relationship made it possible to minimize ionic diffusion distances and improve electrolyte access within the nanoporous MWNT-PPy films produced, thereby increasing their capacitance relative to similarly prepared pure PPy films.The electrochemical growth of MWNT-conducting polymer composites offers the ability to produce three-dimensional nanostructured films that combine the redox pseudo-capacitive charge storage mechanism of conducting polymers with the high surface area and conductivity of MWNTs Given the bearing that the nanostructure of carbon nanotube-conducting polymer composite films has on their electrochemical properties, it is important to develop an understanding of how the film structure can be controlled via manipulation of the electrochemical growth conditions. In this way, it becomes possible to take full advantage of the remarkable properties of these composite films by tailoring their nanostructure as required. The work described here relates to electrochemically grown composite films of MWNTs and conducting polymers (PPy and P3MeT) and how the structure of these films is influenced by the loading and dispersion of MWNTs in the polymerization electrolyte and the presence of a supporting electrolyte. The mechanism by which acid treated MWNTs are able to facilitate polymerization of the conducting polymer without recourse to a supporting electrolyte is also postulated. Carbon nanotube-conducting polymer composite films were grown using an electrochemical method in which MWNTs and either PPy or P3MeT were simultaneously deposited on a graphite disk working electrode (0.33 cm When growing composite films of MWNTs and PPy, an aqueous polymerization electrolyte was used which typically consisted of 0.5 M pyrrole monomer (supplied by Aldrich) and between 0.025 and 0.4 wt% of suspended oxidized MWNTs. The suspended catalytically grown nanotubes (supplied by Hyperion Catalysis International) were oxidized using a 3:1 ratio of sulfuric acid and nitric acid refluxed at 130 °C for 1 h. After deaerating the electrolyte using argon, anodic polymerization of the pyrrole monomer was achieved at the working electrode via the application of a constant potential of 0.7 V (versus SCE) or a constant current of 3 mA cm The net negative charge of the nanotubes, arising from the functional groups attached to the oxidized tube surface (predominately hydroxyl, carbonyl and carboxylic groups), enables them to act as both a supporting electrolyte during polymerization (contributing to conduction in the electrolyte), and to provide some doping for the deposited PPy Composite films of MWNTs and P3MeT were grown using different polymerization conditions to those described above since the growth of P3MeT generally requires the use of an organic electrolyte such as acetonitrile. Since it is not possible to simply redisperse the acid treated MWNTs once dried In addition to MWNTs, the polymerization electrolyte used to grow the MWNT-P3MeT films contained 0.1 M of 3-methylthiophene monomer (supplied by Aldrich) and 0.5 M of lithium perchlorate. The low concentration of suspended MWNTs in the polymerization electrolyte (for both acid treated and untreated MWNTs) meant that effective polymerization could not proceed without the lithium perchlorate supporting electrolyte. To avoid contaminating the acetonitrile polymerization electrolyte with water from the SCE reference electrode, a pseudo-reference electrode (a 1.5 mm diameter silver wire) was used when growing MWNT-P3MeT films. Unfortunately, the potential reported by a pseudo-reference electrode of this kind is influenced by the electrolyte composition. Therefore, potential sweeps were performed in each polymerization electrolyte before growing the composite films in order to determine suitable growth conditions. In this way, variations in the potential reported by the pseudo-reference electrode for different electrolyte compositions were compensated for in the specific choice of potentiostatic or galvanostatic polymerization conditions. The MWNT-P3MeT composite films described here were grown via the application of a constant current of 5 mA cm Once formed, composite films of various film-formation charges (a measure of the amount of film grown) were compared to similarly prepared pure PPy (chloride ion doped) or pure P3MeT (perchlorate ion doped) films using scanning electron microscopy (SEM) and electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS). SEM was conducted on a JEOL JSM6340F field emission gun scanning electron microscope. EIS was performed on a Solartron 1260 impedance/gain-phase analyzer coupled with a Solartron 1287 electrochemical interface employing a sine-wave amplitude of 10 mV and a frequency range of 5  For thicker MWNT-PPy composite films (i.e., film-formation charges > 0.2 C cm The complex plane impedance plots produced from the EIS data obtained for composite films made using various MWNT concentrations in the polymerization electrolyte are shown in Theoretical calculation of the maximum thickness of PPy that is likely to be doped by the negatively charged surface groups along the nanotube backbone (2.4 meg g When dopant anions such as chloride and dodecyl sulphate ions were added to the polymerization electrolyte, the porosity of the composite structures produced was significantly reduced. In the case of dodecyl sulphate ions ( The SEM images of the MWNT-P3MeT composite films grown using untreated MWNTs ( Given the low loading and limited distribution of untreated MWNTs in the MWNT-P3MeT films tested, it is not surprising that the EIS results obtained for these films were essentially the same as those of pure P3MeT films, within experimental error. The use of acid treated MWNTs instead of untreated MWNTs in the MWNT-P3MeT films made little difference to the EIS results. As a result, the low frequency capacitance of the MWNT-P3MeT films tested did not differ significantly from that of similarly prepared P3MeT films. The limited loading and dispersion of MWNTs in the MWNT-P3MeT films represents a significant challenge for the application of this composite growth technique to the large number of conducting polymers that generally require the use of a non-aqueous electrolyte (such as polythiophene and its derivatives). In future work it may be possible to improve the loading and distribution of MWNTs in such composite films via the use of a different solvent or a more robust surface functionalization technique. Nanoporous composite films of MWNTs and either PPy or P3MeT were grown using an electrochemical polymerization technique in which the nanotubes and conducting polymer were simultaneously deposited. The concentration and dispersion of MWNTs in the polymerization electrolyte was found to have a significant effect on the thickness of polymer coated on each MWNT and hence the loading of MWNTs in the films produced. The limited concentration and poor dispersion of MWNTs in the acetonitrile electrolyte used to grow MWNT-P3MeT films gave rise to composite films with low loadings of largely agglomerated MWNTs. The larger concentration of well dispersed MWNTs in the aqueous electrolyte used to grow MWNT-PPy films facilitated the production of composite films with larger loadings of well dispersed MWNTs. In this way, it was possible to minimize ionic diffusion distances and improve electrolyte access within the nanoporous MWNT-PPy films produced. Consequently, electrochemical capacitances per mass and geometric surface area as high as 190 F g