The fast Fourier transform (FFT) has been used extensively in image processing for analyzing periodicity, directionality, and spacing in pattern recognition. This paper describes a procedure for applying FFT technique to images of worn surfaces produced by erosion typical to transport of slurry through tailing pipelines. Rotating cylinder electrode is used for simulating exposure of carbon steel API 5L X65 to flow of different nominal velocities under cathodic protection. Degradation is evaluated by weight loss; whereas the worn surfaces are assessed by scanning electron microscope (SEM). FFT-based analysis of the SEM images reveals that directionality of wear scars evolves with increasing velocity indicating a correlation between erosion wear rate and the condition of the turbulent flow.Solid particle erosion is the process of material removal that occurs when discrete solid particles strike a surface, this generates the progressive loss of material, which can be removed by plastic deformation and/or brittle fracture, depending on the material being eroded away and on the operating conditions It has been well established by numerous experiments, that the extent of wear in solid particle erosion depends on several factors, most notably, the properties of the impacting particles (size, shape, density and hardness), impact angle, concentration and velocity of particles, as well as properties of the target material (hardness, ductility and microstructure) The surface morphology produced during exposure to erosive flow is known to be indicative of the damage mechanisms associated with velocity and the effective impact angle of individual particles The fast Fourier transform (FFT) translates the image form the spatial domain into a two-dimensional complex function in the frequency domain, enabling differentiation of original features by their spatial frequencies In this context, the aim of this work is to quantify the directionality of wear scars at different velocities by means of FFT image analysis, in order to elaborate on the relation between erosion rate evolution in function of flow velocity. In this research, a steel grade typical for slurry pipelines API 5 L X65 The material for the study was a API 5 L X65, hereafter referred to as X65, of chemical composition determined by glow discharge emission spectrometry bulk analysis (Spectruma, GDA 750 h): C 0.06%, Si 0.21%, Mn 1.53%, P 0.01%, S 0.001%, V 0.03%, and Fe balance. Cylinders of 15 mm in diameter and 10 mm in height were prepared by machining and the surface of each sample was polished on the curved surface in the tangential direction using SiC paper starting from 150 down to 1200 grit using a lathe tool to provide a standardized surface roughness (R The erodent used in this study was natural quartz of hardness around 11 GPa, sieved by mesh N°80 (mesh opening 177 µm) and N°200 (mesh opening 74 µm), in order to have a selected particle size distribution. The particle circularity, also referred to as form or roundness factor, was obtained through analysis of SEM images employing open source image processing software, ImageJ Experiments were carried out using a rotating cylinder electrode (RCE), capable of performing in-situ electrochemical measurements of cylindrical samples exposed to tangential flow of slurry, although no electrochemical characterization was part of the present work. The sample is mounted in the lower part of the shaft (15 mm in diameter). The shaft is immersed in a pot filled with slurry (maximum capacity of 300 mL) and the rotation speed is controlled by a frequency modulator. The experiments were performed using 0.1 M sodium sulfate (Na In each exposure run the sample was mounted at the same position to assure its reproducible condition with respect to height of the slurry. Immediately after immersion, cathodic potential of − 0.9 V vs. Ag/AgCl was applied to suppress corrosion. The value of potential was determined in an independent test of potentiodynamic polarization, selecting a value of potential providing cathodic protection without evolution of hydrogen (data not shown). The frequency of rotation was varied for the different exposure runs to produce the desired value of nominal linear velocity at the tangential surface of the test cylinder. Each exposure had the duration of 90 min to generate measurable weight loss. In order to ensure reproducible test conditions, for each exposure, a new sample and freshly prepared slurry were used. Each experimental run was repeated producing duplicate samples for weigh loss measurement and one for SEM analysis. Immediately after each exposure, the sample was rinsed and sonicated first in distilled water and then in acetone, dried by blowing hot air and then weighed to determine the weight loss. Surface of each of the worn samples was subject to analysis by digital image acquisition, followed by processing and finally analysis. Morphology of the worn surfaces was analyzed on the curved surface of the samples by back-scattered electrons (BSE) signal of scanning electron microscope technique (SEM, FEI, Quanta FEG-250). BSE are used to detect topographic contrast between areas with different chemical compositions and depth Each image was handled by the open source software, ImageJ For interpretation of the FFT and FFT-ZT images, low frequencies (close to the center of the FFT image) are associated with sparsely distributed wear scars, whereas, scars close to each other represent high frequencies, far from the center of coordinates of the FFT. It should be noted, that due to properties of the transform, the elongated shape of the object as well as preferred orientation of the pattern in real space are both associated with asymmetrical frequency spectrum, orthogonal to the direction of preferred orientation/elongation in the real space. In order to determine the angle of preferential orientation of the spectrum in FFT-ZT, an algorithm of further processing the FFT-ZT image was implemented using an open source language programming software, Python 2.7 Wear scar orientation is defined as the projection of particle impact direction in the target surface, which is composed by The configuration most used in testing wear behavior is The erosion wear rate determined by weight loss for different nominal flow velocities is shown in The micrographs obtained in SEM are summarized in The horizontally oriented wear scars observed on the non-exposed surface, i.e. the reference, are characteristic to sample preparation through grinding and polishing. Direction of the polishing marks is tangential to the cylinders surface ( The distribution of particle impact directionality is shown in the histograms of Although the trend of wear rate could be approximated by power-law with respect to nominal flow velocity ( On the other hand, the visual observation of surface patterns associated with wear scars is quantified by means of FFT analysis in terms of directionality and average spacing between features observed at the worn surfaces ( Although velocity is a flow parameter, its mechanistic effect on erosion is conveyed through impact of individual particles of the slurry and, to a lesser degree, molecules of the fluid. The negligible wear rate observed for velocities of 0.5 and 1 m/s can be thus interpreted as particles not having sufficient energy to produce a measurable damage by plastic deformation, so that most of the damage can be considered elastic In this context, the dimensionless quantity of the system indicative of turbulent condition is the Reynolds number calculated according to Ref All the Reynolds numbers are indicative of turbulent or turbulent transition regime of slurry flow This preliminary work has shown the potential of FFT-based image analysis for linking turbulence-dependent directionality of flow with rate of erosive wear, but some intrinsic limitations of the method should be considered. For instance, surface damage with significant out-of-plane deformation, e.g., curved and twisted lips, might results difficult for analysis. Also, a standard for image analysis is necessary, in particular resolution of the images to be processed In this study, patterns of erosion wear scars produced on low carbon steel in exposure to high concentration slurry of quartz particles was evaluated for a range of nominal flow velocities by means of image analysis. It is concluded that the technique of FFT employed to SEM generated images of wear scars is applicable for meaningful identification of symmetries in the wear scar patterns. For increasing nominal flow velocity in the system of rotating cylinder, i.e., rotation frequency, evolution of directionality in the wear scars pattern was identified, which is indicative of the condition of turbulence. This preliminary work presents a potential tool for contributing to the understanding of erosion wear by correlating the energy transferred by particles in turbulent flow with the effective wear rate. The method could be furthered to analyze the convolution of impact angle and impact direction in the generation of the wear scar, providing insight into the wear mechanisms of both ductile and brittle materials, including the identification of cracks. Looking even further forward, combining these observations with mechanistic understanding of the underlying degradation processes might provide an alternative approach for better prediction of materials performance exposed to erosive wear. This work has been funded by Comisión Nacional de Ciencia y Tecnología Supplementary data associated with this article can be found in the online version at 