Like all trace elements, fluoride demonstrates biphasic actions in the organism; intakes below the recommended daily dose result in growth and development retardation, while high intakes, such as those associated with long exposure to fluoride from endemic or industrial sources, result in skeletal sclerosis. Pharmacologic doses, 20 to 100 mg/day, cause significant increases in skeletal mass. These observations, along with the recognition that the consequences of osteopenia could be reduced in people who had been exposed to fluoride, led to the suggestion that fluoride could be of therapeutic value in osteoporosis. This chapter reviews and discusses the clinical use of fluoride for established osteoporosis. Fluoride is the only orally active bone formation agent in clinical trials. It causes a large increase in spinal bone density, which is needed to restore bone density to a normal within a reasonable time frame. It increases bone formation at trabecular, as well as corticalendosteal, bone sites, which are sites of bone loss in osteoporosis, and it does not increase bone resorption. Moreover, fluoride acts through a unique mechanism—it inhibits a specific osteoblastic fluoride-sensitive PTP, which leads to potentiation of the osteogenic actions of endogenous bone cell growth factors. Thus, fluoride, in effect, may be considered an inexpensive, orally active, bone-specific growth factor therapy. Accordingly, fluoride therapy would be an attractive anabolic therapy for established osteoporosis. On the other hand, fluoride treatment has several undesirable side effects that significantly reduce its benefit-to-risk profile and, thereby, diminish its therapeutic value. Although most of the side effects of fluoride therapy are manageable, two of these side effects, that is, calcium deficiency and high fluoride deposition, could have detrimental effects on the architectural integrity and mechanical strength of the bone. Consequently, fluoride therapy is a highly controversial therapy for osteoporosis.