In this study, the effect of the transition elements on the microstructure and mechanical properties of rapidly solidified Al–Mg–X alloys was investigated. As a result of the rapid solidification processing, fine equiaxed grains with a mean diameter of 2 μm were observed in these alloys. Many fine particles were found to be distributed rather homogeneously throughout the matrix with relatively big particles occasionally observed at grain boundaries. The ultimate tensile strengths of Al–Mg–X alloys were found to decrease rather remarkably at 150°C although the ductility was not increased, which may result from segregation of β(Al3Mg2) precipitates. Fine dimples were observed on the fracture surfaces for all alloy systems and the variation of the size and shape of dimples was not observed. The ductility at 530°C was found to be ∼100%, suggesting that grain boundary sliding did not contribute despite fine grain size stabilization. The absence of superplastic behavior may be associated with low boundary misorientation in rapidly solidified Al–Mg–X alloys.Recently, a series of active research has been made on the development of light weight metal which provides high strength, good formability, and good weldability, driven by the need to increase fuel efficiency by making light weight automobiles Consequently, it could be expected that the effect of dispersion hardening, as well as an improvement of the tensile property due to the even dispersion of the intermetallic compound and the refinement of the grain size by rapid solidification process. Generally, in order to improve the properties of Al alloys, transition elements such as Cr, Zr, Mn etc. are added, and the commercial 5xxx system of alloys also has a little of these elements added according to its uses. 7xxx and 2xxx System alloys, which are a precipitation hardening type, have been researched adequately on the effect of transition elements, but there is limited information on the effect of transition elements on properties in the 5xxx system. Therefore, in order to develop Al–Mg alloys with better properties, studies on the effect of transition elements such as Cr, Mn or Zr on the mechanical properties in conjunction with the microstructures are necessary. When the content of such transition elements exceeds the solubility, the decrease of elongation is inevitable, but this could be overcome by decreasing segregation of alloying elements using rapid solidification method. In the present work, three alloy powders containing 0.67–0.8% of three transition element, Cr, Zn and Mn based on Al–7wt.%Mg were fabricated by gas atomization, and then subsequently formed to sheet through hot extrusion. The effect of the transition elements on the microstructures and mechanical properties were systematically studied by tensile test and transmission electron microscopic examination. The melts were atomized using a gas atomizer with 12 atmospheric pressure through the convergent nozzle by evaporating liquid N The powders were compacted to 85% relative density and degassed down to 10 The general morphology of extrudate and its microstructure were observed using an OM and an SEM. Small discs, with a thickness of ∼300 μm, were cut from the extrudates for examination by TEM (JEOL-JEM2000FX II). These discs were ground mechanically to a thickness of ∼150 μm and then perforated using a twin-jet electropolisher in a nitric–perchloric/methanol solution, at a temperature of −35°C, with a potential of 40 V, 60–80 mA. The chemical compositions of Al–Mg–X extrudates were analyzed by ICP and given in  It was found that the precipitates were uniformly dispersed along the longitudinal plane of the extrudate, as shown in The tensile strengths of Al–Mg–Cr and Al–Mg–Mn were 438 and 436 MPa at RT, respectively, without any noticeable difference as shown in It has been reported that an extrudate from rapidly solidified powder should exhibit higher tensile and yield strength than that from ingot, because the rapidly solidified materials have fine grain sizes and even distributions of intermetallic compounds Also, no increase of elongation was observed while the tensile strength decreased by ≈300 MPa after a tensile test at 150°C. This result is attributed to the film-type precipitation of brittle Al   The microstructure and mechanical properties of the rapidly solidified Al–Mg–X (X=Cr, Zr or Mn) alloy powders and their extrudates were studied. The conclusions are as follows. Rapidly solidified Al–Mg alloy powder shows dendritic solidification structure due to the rapid cooling rate of 10 According to the TEM observations from powder extrudates, the grain size was around 2 μm and intermetallic particles were distributed randomly throughout the matrix, where as large particles were observed frequently at grain boundaries, suggesting that they are effective in refining grain size. Using XRD testing, Cr Tensile strength of PM extrudates was increased to 450 MPa by homogeneous distribution of particles and fine grain size at RT, but it was decreased to 300 MPa sharply at 150°C with no increasing ductility. After tensile test of Al–Mg alloys at room and high temperature (150°C), fracture surfaces revealed a typical ductile fracture with a distribution of fine dimples. In addition, there was no difference in fracture types between samples tested at RT and 150°C. As a result of tensile testing at 530°C, the elongation was within 100% and superplastic behavior was not observed, because grain boundary sliding did not contribute to ductility.