Objectives. Alterations in the commercially pure titanium (cpTi) surface may be undertaken to improve its biological properties. The aim of this study is to investigate the biocompatibility of cpTi submitted to different surface treatments.
                  
                     Methods. The cpTi surfaces were prepared so that machined and blasted surfaces, either acid etched or not, were compared using rat bone marrow cells cultured to differentiated into osteoblast. For attachment evaluation, cells were cultured for 4 and 24h. Cell morphology was evaluated after 3 days. After 7, 14, and 21 days cell proliferation was evaluated. Total protein content and alkaline phosphatase (ALP) activity were evaluated after 14 and 21 days. For bone-like nodule formation, cells were cultured for 21 days. Data were compared by analysis of variance.
                  
                     Results. Cell attachment, cell morphology, cell proliferation, and ALP activity were not affected by surface treatments. Total protein content was reduced by blasted and acid etched surface. Bone-like nodule formation was significantly reduced by blasted, acid etched, and a combination of both blasted and acid etched surfaces.
                  
                     Conclusions. Based on these results, it can be suggested that cpTi surfaces that were submitted only to machining treatment favor the final event of osteoblastic differentiation of the rat bone marrow cells, evidenced by increased bone-like nodule formation.Major advances have occurred over the last three decades in the clinical use of oral and maxillofacial implants. Statistics on the use of dental implants bear this out; about 100,000–300,000 dental implants per year. In an attempt to improve the quantity and quality of the bone-implant interface, surface treatments such as surface machining, acid etching, electropolishing, anodic oxidation, sandblasting or plasma-spraying may be undertaken to induce chemical modifications associated with alterations of the surface topography. Some studies have revealed that the blasting process in combination with acid etching can increase the rate and amount of bone formation on the implant surface by increasing the bone-to-implant contact. The purpose of this study is to investigate the in vitro biocompatibility of cpTi submitted to different surface treatments. The cpTi surfaces were prepared so that machined and blasted surfaces, either acid etched or not, were compared. The cell culture system used in this study was rat bone marrow directed in vitro to form osteoblastic cells. This culture system contains mesenchymal stem cells that have the potential to differentiate into various cell types depending on culture condition. Discs of cpTi were obtained from commercial bar stock with a diameter of 12 Surface topography was evaluated by scanning electron microscopy (SEM) (JSM-5410, Jeol, Massachusetts, USA). Sequential spectrophotometry of X-ray fluorescence (VRA 30, Carl Zeiss, Germany) was used to evaluate the surface chemical composition, and the average roughness ( Rat bone marrow cells obtained from femora of young adult male Wistar rats (5 week-old, 120 For the evaluation of attachment, cells were cultured for 4 and 24 For the evaluation of morphology, cells were cultured for 3 days on cpTi discs and processed for SEM. Briefly, cells were fixed with 1.5% glutaraldehyde (Sigma) buffered in 0.1 For the evaluation of proliferation, cells were cultured for 7, 14, and 21 days on cpTi discs. The cells were released and counted as described in the Cell attachment section. After enzymatic treatment, cpTi discs were observed under SEM to confirm completeness of cells release from discs surface. Total protein content, after 14 and 21 days, was calculated according to a modification of the Lowry method. The ALP activity was assayed as the release of tymolphtaleine from tymolphtaleine monophosphate using a commercial kit (Labtest Diagnostica SA, Brazil), and specific activity was calculated. Aliquots of the same solutions used for calculating total protein content were assayed for measuring the ALP activity. The absorbance was spectrophotometrically measured at 590 After 21 days in culture, the cells were washed three times with PBS at 37° Data presented in this work are the result of a single culture with Under SEM, it was possible to observe that treatments, either machining or blasting, produced different surface topography ( Cell attachment was not affected by surface treatment neither after 4 The evaluation of cpTi discs with SEM after 3 days showed that cell morphology was not affected by surface morphology and chemical composition of the cpTi ( Cell proliferation was not affected by surface treatment in all evaluated periods: after 7 days (ANOVA: Total protein content was affected by surface treatment after 14 days (ANOVA: ALP activity was not affected by surface treatment neither after 14 days (ANOVA: Bone-like nodule formation was affected by surface treatment (ANOVA: Early in vitro studies of osteoblast–biomaterial interaction were essentially concerned with the effect on cell response of diverse range materials with little attention being paid to the influence of surface characterization. However, it is now understood that the surface properties of biomaterials play a critical role in the establishment of cell–biomaterial interfaces. The present results showed that different treatments produced different topographies of cpTi surface and, consequently, different surface appearance. Despite these differences, the In the present work, two physical surface treatments were compared, namely surface blasting and surface machining, which produce different surface topographies of cpTi. By blasting the surface with particles other than that of the implant itself, the surface composition may be altered and thus, affect biocompatibility. Osteogenesis, induced by osteoblastic cells, is characterized by a sequence of events, involving cell attachment and cell proliferation, followed by the expression of osteoblastic phenotype. The effect of surface features on cells may be the result of the surface topography itself or the result of the reaction that occurs as the material surface is conditioned by the media and serum. Cell morphology and cell proliferation were not affected by topography and chemical composition of the cpTi. This might have occurred because these cell responses are related to differences in surface roughness and not only differences in surface design as showed by Martin et al. In general, cell synthesis activity is sensitive to the type of material and surface topography. ALP activity was normalized by the number of cells to eliminate the effect of proliferation on this parameter, and differences were not observed among the four surfaces evaluated. Lincks et al. Bone-like nodule formation was significantly reduced by blasted, acid etched, and a combination of both blasted and acid etched surfaces. A reason for such reduction of bone-like nodule formation could be the release of Al and other constituent ions of the Ti,