This paper addresses the problem of assessing the risk of deficiency or excess of a soil property at unsampled locations, and more generally of estimating a function of such a property given the information monitored at sampled sites. It focuses on a particular model that has been widely used in geostatistical applications: the multigaussian model, for which the available data can be transformed into a set of Gaussian values compatible with a multivariate Gaussian distribution.
                  First, the conditional expectation estimator is reviewed and its main properties and limitations are pointed out; in particular, it relies on the mean value of the normal scores data since it uses a simple kriging of these data. Then we propose a generalization of this estimator, called “ordinary multigaussian kriging” and based on ordinary kriging instead of simple kriging. Such estimator is unbiased and robust to local variations of the mean value of the Gaussian field over the domain of interest. Unlike indicator and disjunctive kriging, it does not suffer from order-relation deviations and provides consistent estimations.
                  An application to soil data is presented, which consists of pH measurements on a set of 165 soil samples. First, a test is proposed to check the suitability of the multigaussian distribution to the available data, accounting for the fact that the mean value is considered unknown. Then four geostatistical methods (conditional expectation, ordinary multigaussian, disjunctive and indicator kriging) are used to estimate the risk that the pH at unsampled locations is less than a critical threshold and to delineate areas where liming is needed. The case study shows that ordinary multigaussian kriging is close to the ideal conditional expectation estimator when the neighboring information is abundant, and departs from it only in under-sampled areas. In contrast, even within the sampled area, disjunctive and indicator kriging substantially differ from the conditional expectation; the discrepancy is greater in the case of indicator kriging and can be explained by the loss of information due to the binary coding of the pH data.Kriging techniques are currently used to estimate soil properties, such as electrical conductivity, pH, nutrient or contaminant concentrations, on the basis of a limited set of samples for which these properties have been monitored. However, because of its smoothing property, linear kriging is not suitable to applications that involve the conditional distributions of the unsampled values, for instance assessing the risk of exceeding a given threshold. This problem is critical for delineating contaminated areas where a remedial treatment is needed, for determining land suitability for a specific crop, or for planning an application of fertilizer. Determining the risk of exceeding a threshold, or more generally estimating a function of a soil property, can be dealt with either stochastic simulations or nonlinear geostatistical methods like indicator kriging or disjunctive kriging, which have found wide acceptance in soil science ( A Gaussian random field, or multigaussian random function, is characterized by the fact that any weighted average of its variables follows a Gaussian distribution. Its spatial distribution is entirely determined by its first- and second-order moments (mean and covariance function or variogram), which makes the statistical inference very simple under an assumption of stationarity. In general, the available data do not have a Gaussian histogram, so that a transformation is required to turn them into Gaussian values ( A goal of this paper is to find an estimator that is robust to departures of the data from the ideal multigaussian model, in particular concerning local variations of the mean value over the domain of interest. Therefore, the assumption of zero mean is omitted and the following hypotheses are made: the transformed data have a multivariate Gaussian distribution; their mean is constant (at least at the scale of the neighborhood used for local estimations) and equal to their variance is equal to one; their correlogram is known; henceforth, the correlation between the values at locations Let { where In practice, Eq.  Among all the measurable functions of the data, the conditional expectation minimizes the estimation variance (variance of the error). It is unbiased and, even more, conditionally unbiased. This property is of great importance in resource assessment problems ( Despite these nice properties, the estimator is not often used in practice. One of the reasons is the attraction to the mean that produces the use of a simple kriging of the Gaussian data. Indeed, at locations distant from the data relatively to the range of the correlogram model, the simple kriging of To avoid this effect when estimating a spatial attribute, practitioners often prefer ordinary kriging to simple kriging. This way, the mean value is considered unknown and is estimated from the data located in the kriging neighborhood. Several authors suggested a generalization of the conditional expectation estimator, by substituting in Eq. For this reason, although less precise, alternative methods are sometimes used instead of the conditional expectation, e.g. indicator or disjunctive kriging with unbiasedness constraints ( In Eq. Therefore, the conditional expectation of The value of A key result is that In particular, The ordinary kriging weights and error variance are determined by the following system, in which The variance of the estimator is related to the error variance and Lagrange multiplier introduced in Eq. The use of an ordinary kriging in Eq. This expression does not depend on the value of the Gaussian data mean, so the latter can be considered unknown. With respect to the classical conditional expectation, the estimation of a function of Let us introduce the indicator function associated with threshold The ordinary multigaussian kriging of such indicator provides a pseudo ccdf (“pseudo” because it differs from the true ccdf given in Eq. This corresponds to a Gaussian distribution with mean the ordinary kriging of Eq. Contrary to the conditional expectation, ordinary multigaussian kriging [Eq. Ordinary multigaussian kriging is therefore suitable to a locally stationary framework and provides estimates that are robust to variations of the mean value in space. An alternative would be to use a simple kriging with a locally varying mean (in practice, estimated from the data located in the kriging neighborhood) in the conditional expectation estimator [Eq. In practice, the empirical data never conform to the ideal model (stationary random field with known mean), so that a less efficient but more robust estimator is often preferred to the “optimal” estimator ( A limitation of ordinary multigaussian kriging concerns the calculation of local uncertainty measures, such as confidence intervals, local variance or interquartile range. Indeed, formulae In general, the pseudo ccdf understates the dispersion of the true ccdf. For instance, assume that only one datum is available in the kriging neighborhood (under-sampled area): the pseudo ccdf [Eq. Ordinary multigaussian kriging [Eq. Eq. Concerning the precision of ordinary multigaussian kriging, the estimation variance of The advantages and drawbacks of the ordinary multigaussian kriging approach are summarized in In the following, the previous concepts and methods are applied to a dataset which consists of 165 samples quasi-regularly spaced over a 335  Before performing local estimations with multigaussian kriging, it is advisable to check the compatibility of the multigaussian model with the transformed data. In practice, the multigaussian hypothesis cannot be fully validated because, in general, the inference of multiple-point statistics is beyond reach. Usually, only the univariate and bivariate distributions are examined ( However, one difficulty of the model is that the mean value For Consequently, in log–log coordinates, the points that plot the variogram of order The pH of the soil has an effect on its fertility. When it decreases, H    bigaussian disjunctive kriging with an unbiasedness constraint ( In each case, kriging is performed in a moving neighborhood with a radius of 250 m along the direction of greater continuity (N10° W) and 90 m along the orthogonal direction (N80° E), looking for the 48 nearest samples. This number is deemed sufficient for estimating the local means when resorting to ordinary kriging. The results are displayed in The discrepancy between indicator and multigaussian kriging can be better understood on a simple example. The previous methods quantify the risk that soil acidity is detrimental for crops and are useful for soil management and decision-making, such as delineating the areas where a treatment is needed. In this respect, one can calculate the proportion of the entire field whose pH is less than 5.1, either from the data histogram ( Of course, other approaches are possible for delineation. In particular, instead of using the probability maps, one may define a loss function ( Indicator kriging may be tedious if many thresholds are considered, while disjunctive kriging is quite convoluted for most practitioners. In contrast, ordinary multigaussian kriging is straightforward and appears to be a helpful tool for soil scientists who wish to map the conditional probabilities of a soil property and incorporate these probabilities in decision-making processes. The steps required for this approach are the following: calculated declustering weights to obtain a representative histogram of the original data; transform these data to normal scores, using the declustered histogram; check the suitability of the two-point normality hypothesis; model the variogram of the normal scores data; perform an ordinary kriging of these data; estimate the conditional distribution of the normal variable at any unsampled location [Eq. In addition to its simplicity and straightforwardness, ordinary multigaussian kriging provides consistent results and no order-relation correction is needed. If the neighboring information is abundant, it is practically identical to the conditional expectation, which constitutes the “ideal” estimator of the conditional distributions. Furthermore, it is robust to local variations of the mean value over the field of interest, which is advantageous in under-sampled areas since it avoids the attraction to the prior probabilities observed when using simple kriging. For these reasons, ordinary multigaussian kriging is expected to always outperform bigaussian disjunctive kriging, as in practice the conditions to apply both methods are the same. However, the user should beware that the multigaussian assumption, or at least the bigaussian assumption, is suitable to the available data. Otherwise, one should resort to indicator kriging or to disjunctive kriging under an appropriate non-Gaussian model ( The ordinary multigaussian kriging approach provides an unbiased estimation of posterior distributions and transfer functions of a spatial attribute, e.g. a soil property that can be modeled by a Gaussian random field. Although this estimator is theoretically less precise than the conditional expectation and does not allow one to measure the uncertainty prevailing at unsampled locations, it is robust to local variations of the mean value and is therefore suitable when the data do not conform to the ideal stationary model, especially in under-sampled areas. The method is simple and straightforward to apply, since a single variogram analysis and kriging are required. Furthermore, it does not suffer from order-relation problems and provides conditional probabilities that always lie in [0,1]. Like indicator and disjunctive kriging, multigaussian kriging is a helpful method in soil science applications concerned with spatial predictions. In particular, mapping the conditional probabilities of a soil property is of importance for management decisions, which are based on threshold values of this property, such as delineating safe and hazardous areas or identifying zones that are suitable for crop growth and those that must be treated. The author would like to acknowledge the sponsoring by Codelco-Chile for supporting this research, and the French Agricultural Research Centre for International Development (CIRAD) for providing the dataset used in this work. Thanks are due to Dr. Julián Ortiz (University of Chile) and to the anonymous reviewers for their comments on an earlier version of this paper.