The year 2003 marks the anniversary of several important events in the life of Professor Douglas W. Fuerstenau. He celebrates his 75th birthday; He and his wife Peggy celebrate 50 years of marriage; It is the 50th Anniversary of the submission of his DSc thesis at MIT; It is the 30th year of publication of The International Journal of Mineral Processing. These coincidental but significant facts focusing on 2003 make this an appropriate year to honor the many contributions that Professor Fuerstenau has made by dedicating a Special Issue of the Journal to him. The contributions that he has made over such a long time and which he continues to make are truly outstanding. This Special Issue acknowledges in a formal way his many contributions to the discipline of mineral processing. A Special Issue of IJMP in his honor is also an acknowledgement of his role in the creation and ongoing success of the Journal over many years. He was the co-author with J.M. Wei of the very first IJMP paper ever published. He first served as Regional Editor with Pierre Gy as Editor and then for many years as Editor-in-Chief. Professors Fuerstenau, Gy and Cases remain as Honorary Editors-in Chief of the Journal. Professor Fuerstenau's contributions to the discipline of mineral processing cover essentially every area, unit operation or sub-discipline of the field. He has made many varied and significant contributions to research in comminution, pelletizing, agglomeration, flotation practice, flotation machines, flotation chemistry, surfactant science, fine particle processing, fundamental particle science and hydrometallurgy. These contributions have been seminal and lasting. Those of us who are his students or associates can acknowledge that we were privileged to have worked with him and to be one of the extensive cohort of his collaborators around the world. Professor Fuerstenau was elected to the National Academy of Engineering of the United States in 1976. He is recognized worldwide for his contributions to mineral processing science and technology, to education and to his profession. He has been awarded honorary degrees by The University of Montana, USA, University of Liege, Belgium, Lulea University of Technology, Sweden. He has been elected as a Foreign Member of the Russian Federation Academy of Natural Sciences, a Foreign Fellow of the Australian Academy of Technological Sciences and Engineering and a Foreign Fellow of the Indian National Academy of Engineering. During his distinguished career, he has held the Senior Fellowship of the Japan Society for the Promotion of Science (1993), he holds the Legion of Honor Membership of the Society for Mining, Metallurgy and Exploration, AIME (1996). The Fellowship, Consiglio Nazionale Recerche, Rome, Italy (1996) and has been formerly recognized as a Distinguished Alumnus, University of Montana-Montana Tech (2000). He also holds the distinguished title of Honorary Professor, Huainan Institute of Technology, Huainan, Anhui, P.R. China (2000). In 1993, he was awarded The Berkeley Citation of the University of California. During 22 years on the Board of Homestake Mining, he fostered important technological innovations in the global minerals industry. His graduates and associates from more than 42 years at the University of California, Berkeley, hold senior positions in companies and Universities throughout the world. His inaugural Lifetime Achievement Award in 1995 from the International Mineral Processing Congress acknowledges and typifies the respect he has earned from his national and international peers. Douglas Fuerstenau, through more than 400 publications and through his role as supervisor of over 100 graduate student research candidates has a track record in research in mineral science and engineering science, technology and education unequalled by any contemporary scholar. The sustained quality of his research across a wide range of areas of mineral science and technology has been recognized by the American Institute of Mining and Metallurgy (AIME) who awarded him the highest honors it can offer in their Legion of Honor Award (1996), and earlier The Gaudin Award (1978) and the Richards Award (1975). We, his contemporary colleagues, now honor him with this special issue of the International Journal of Mineral Processing. This Preface is presented by an international team of a collaborator, colleague and friend of some 43 years (Tom Healy), a former student (Ken Han) and Peter King, now the Editor-in-Chief of the International Journal of Mineral Processing.