The separation of solutes by means of liquid membranes is based on a simple and well-established idea: two completely miscible liquid phases, separated by a third liquid, immiscible with either of them, can exchange solutes, provided there is a difference between their chemical potentials in the two phases and provided the intermediate liquid is able to transport them. In most cases the two miscible liquids, denoted hereafter as donor and acceptor phases, are aqueous solutions and the third (membrane) phase is an organic liquid. The configuration involving two organic solutions separated by an aqueous membrane is less popular. The growing interest in the recovery and separation of solutes by means of liquid membranes may be related to the advantages of this separation method over the related separation operations – solid membranes and solvent extraction – as well as to the recent development of efficient liquid membrane techniques and contactors. The main advantage of liquid membranes over polymer ones is the higher flux, owing to the very much higher diffusion coefficients of solutes in liquids than in solids. Moreover, some liquid membrane techniques allow a convective diffusion regime instead of a molecular one, which also increases fluxes. Another advantage of liquid membranes is the availability of a great number of substances which, when added to the liquid membrane phase, increase selectivity. A liquid–membrane process can be regarded as a combination of extraction and a stripping process, which take place simultaneously in the same device. In solvent extraction, both the extractant amount and the distribution coefficient of the solute play essential roles for process efficiency, whereas in liquid membrane separation the selectivity is controlled by the kinetics of the transport process. In contrast to solvent extraction, in liquid membrane separation the amount of transferred solute is not proportional to the amount of the solvent used, in this case the membrane liquid. The relatively small amount of the latter permits the use of various highly efficient and selective – even expensive – carriers. Like some of the solid–membrane separation methods, the difference between the chemical potentials of the solute in the donor and acceptor solutions controls the transport of the species. In other words, the concentration difference is the driving force. There are various mechanisms for the selective transfer of solutes in the considered three-liquid-phase system. They can be divided into two groups: nonfacilitated and facilitated, or carrier-meditated, transfer mechanisms. In nonfacilitated processes, the membrane phase is the solvent and carrier of the solute. In facilitated processes, the membrane phase is a neutral medium, dissolving a carrier, which reacts with some molecules or ions and selectively transfers them to the acceptor phase. The carrier reacts reversibly with the solute by binding it in the donor solution or at the interface between this solution and the membrane phase; it transports it across the bulk of the membrane, and releases it at the other interface. When the transfer of a solute is accompanied by an equivalent transfer of one or more other solutes, it is designated as coupled transport. Depending on the direction of the accompanying transfer, the mechanisms are called co-transport and countertransport.   In facilitated transport mechanisms the neutral membrane liquid contains an active substance C, which selectively and reversibly reacts with the permeating solute, forming a complex AC ( In transport processes shown in  These five types of transfer mechanisms do not exhaust all possible schemes for the selective recovery and separation of solutes by means of liquid membranes. Liquid membrane processes have been developed during the last few years on the basis of various transport and reaction mechanisms, including redox reactions. For example, the selective transfer of metals may result from the different solubility of their ions at various oxidation states. Of equal interest are some enzymatic reactions, both in the bulk of the membrane and in the bulk of the acceptor solution. The reader may find further information in the Further Reading section. The main reason for the limited large scale application of liquid membrane processes is the lack of efficient equipment providing simultaneously large contact areas and high fluxes between the phases without deterioration of the membrane over time causing intermixing of the donor and acceptor phases. The realization of stable membranes is an extremely difficult task. In general, liquid membrane techniques can be divided into two groups: techniques in which there is no dispersion of phases and techniques with at least one dispersed phase. The first group includes bulk liquid membranes and the supported liquid membranes, as well as some recent techniques combining elements from both techniques. The second group is mainly represented by the emulsion liquid membrane technique. Several simple contact devices designed for studies of liquid–membrane processes are shown in The laboratory contactor shown in Although the membrane is quite thin, the fluxes across it are very low as a result of the total immobilization of the membrane liquid in the pores, reduced free section and pore tortuosity. This is overcome by the use of large surface area modules such as the spirally wound ( The insignificant amount of membrane liquid required in these modules (10 This instability forced researchers as early as in the 1980s to look for other solutions. The combination of this technique with stable bulk liquid membranes yielded the bulk-supported liquid membranes. In these two variants of the bulk-supported liquid membrane group, as well as in numerous subsequent modifications, the membrane liquid not only fills the pores of two closely spaced porous supports separating the donor and acceptor phase, but also the space between them, as shown in In contained liquid membranes, a technique proposed by Sirkar The latter two membrane techniques provide significantly longer life of the contactors, as the inevitable losses of membrane fluid are compensated by the larger liquid volume. However, fluxes are lower because of higher mass transfer resistance due to the second porous support filled with immobilized liquid and the two additional diffusion boundary layers in the same phase. This drawback is, however, offset by the longer membrane life. A further modification of the contained liquid membrane technique is the separation of the two hollow fibre packages in two modules – one where the donor liquid exchanges solutes with the membrane liquid and a second where the membrane liquid contacts with the acceptor liquid. The membrane liquid circulates between the two devices. This technique, bearing the name two-module hollow fibre supported liquid membranes, differs little from the arrangement in a conventional extraction-stripping unit operation. The technique known as liquid film pertraction attempts to combine the advantages of bulk liquid membrane and supported liquid membrane. In the process all three liquids are in motion and the interfaces between the phase pairs are not immobilized, so that the transport rate in all stages of the transfer process is controlled by convective transport instead of the much slower molecular diffusion. Two devices utilizing this technique are schematically presented in The second technique, rotating film pertraction uses a package of rotating horizontal discs wetted only by the feed and receptor phases. This rotation generates an intensive transfer regime in all three liquids. As Emulsion liquid membranes were first described in 1971 by Li in a paper dealing with the separation of aromatic and aliphatic hydrocarbons by stabilized dispersion of three liquids: the above-mentioned mixture, water and an inert hydrocarbon as a recipient phase. This technique, known as emulsion (or surfactant) liquid membranes, was the first pertraction technique developed to industrial scale. As the name implies, the three-phase system is stabilized by an emulsifier, added to the membrane liquid, in some cases its concentration in the membrane liquid reaches 5% or more. The acceptor solution is dispersed as fine (2–20 In addition to the disadvantages listed above, the added emulsifier contaminates both the donor and acceptor phases, as in some cases its solubility in these phases exceeds that of the membrane liquid itself or of the carrier added. To avoid using surface active substances, other techniques with phase dispersion were recently proposed, two of which are illustrated in Co-axially placed in the vertical tube is a second tube of porous hydrophobic material, e.g. porous polypropylene. As shown in The second arrangement avoiding the use of surface active substances is shown in The liquid membrane processes described above are in principle highly efficient chemical pumps selectively separating and concentrating valuable solutes. These processes have potential applications in a number of industrial areas, e.g. hydrometallurgy, electroplating and galvanic technologies, chemical and pharmaceutical industries. One of the most promising applications is in biotechnology, where pertraction, can be integrated with the basic bioprocess in order to increase process efficiency. A very attractive feature of pertraction processes is their low investment, and in particular, their operational costs. Being a membrane operation, the separation does not involve phase transitions and therefore power consumption is very low. However, unlike solid membrane separations, the costs of lost membrane liquid and the purification of treated solutions sometimes required additionally contribute to the process costs. The Further Reading section lists titles containing more information on various pertraction systems studied in the last 25 years. 