The interactions between particles in the processed ore are a key feature in copper hydrometallurgical beneficiation. The formation of aggregates reduces the performance of some of the stages of the hydrometallurgical trains, in particular solvent extraction. In the case of copper hydrometallurgy, the most abundant colloids are silica and some clays, mostly kaolinite, which are difficult to separate under the typical conditions of low pH and 300 mM ionic strength. In this work a thorough electrokinetic investigation of concentrated suspensions of the two kinds of particles is presented, both individually and in mixtures, in conditions of pH and copper sulfate concentrations typical of the hydrometallurgical processes. The technique used was ESA (Electrokinetic Sonic Amplitude), whereby an alternating field is applied to the suspension and the generated pressure wave is analyzed. In the case of silica, it is found that the (dynamic or ac) electrophoretic mobility is quite low, and so is the best-fit zeta potential of the particles, as the pH gets close to the isoelectric point while the ionic strength is very high (80 mM copper sulfate). Our experiments also reveal that there are no specific interactions between silica and either copper or sulfate ions, which appear to have no other influence than compressing the double layers of the silica/solution interface. In the case of kaolinite, the dynamic mobility results indicate a large effect of the complex structures which are possible in suspensions of this clay (through face-to-face and face-to-edge interactions). Finally, a study was carried out of realistic mixtures of silica and kaolinite, with the aim of possibly predicting mixed structures, which were also ascertained by electron microscope observations. The results at low pH cannot be justified by a simple averaging between the mobility of silica and kaolinite alone, but by a non-trivial association between kaolinite and silica particles, being the latter attached to the former. At pH 5, the silica spheres do not show any preference for edges, and we can expect a predominant attraction towards positive alumina faces. Sedimentation experiments indicate that the conditions described at low pH slow down the sedimentation rate of kaolinite-silica as compared to silica alone, contrary to findings at pH 5.The processes of mineral benefit are designed according to the mineralogical characteristics of the material containing the element of interest and the geological unit to which they belong. Specifically, copper minerals can be oxides or sulfides, and correspondingly the techniques of copper ore beneficiation must be selected according to this case. Currently, approximately 60% of the installed processing capacity in Chile is related to hydrometallurgical processes, due to the fact that initially the material exploited corresponds to oxidized minerals. The processes that make up the hydrometallurgical train are ( For the case of copper ores, sulfuric acid is used as solvent in the leaching process. In this operation, a copper-rich solution called PLS (Pregnant Leach Solution) is generated. Next, the copper contained in the PLS is selectively separated by the solvent extraction operation (SX). In the SX circuit, the PLS is placed in contact with a highly selective extractant, which separates the copper from the impurities through an ion exchange process. In this procedure, two output streams are generated: the first one is a highly concentrated copper solution which is passed on to the next process (electrowinning), and the second one is an impoverished solution called raffinate, which is recirculated to start again the leaching process ( The cost of the SX procedure is increased by the expensive solvents needed, hence one of the major concerns of this industry is focussed on the reduction of the losses of these reagents, mostly due to their drag in the raffinate and in the formation of crud. This unwanted process is favored by the characteristics of the feeding solution in the SX process. It contains impurities such as silica and clays (mainly kaolinite), which are attached to the processed ore and are dragged with the flow of PLS from the leaching pile ( Given the feeding solution composition, it can be understood that its behavior is intimately related to the colloidal nature and characteristics of kaolinite-silica systems under the operational conditions: low pH, and high ionic strength and particle concentration. In fact, in previous works conducted with this system, it is concluded that at pH about 3 the repulsion forces are reduced, promoting the aggregation and the de-stabilization of the system ( In these conditions, colloidal silica can overcome the repulsive energy barrier between particles, bonding together and forming three-dimensional networks. The particles with sufficiently low surface charge density come into contact, favoring the irreversible formation of siloxane bonds that holds them together. Furthermore, the resulting nanoparticles have a low density that makes it difficult to separate them from the aqueous phase. On the other hand, kaolinite platelets [(Al(OH) As summarized above, a deep knowledge about both silica and kaolinite particles has already been achieved. However, a systematic study of their cooperative effects on the stability and electrokinetic behavior when both colloids are present has not yet been reported. In this work, we analyze the electrokinetic properties of the individual and mixed systems in conditions that mimic the actual mining process. We determine the surface (electrokinetic, or zeta) potential by electroacoustic methods, which have been demonstrated to be compatible with the extreme working conditions. We also analyze the correlation of these data with the stability and electron microscope observations. To our knowledge, such a study has never been accomplished, and should contribute to the implementation of improved methods of ore treatment in hydrometallurgical processes based on the electrokinetic characteristics of the mentioned particles. Electrokinetic techniques are the most suitable tools to characterize the electric state of colloidal systems and thus, to solve problems associated with the phase separation process aimed at the depuration of particle-containing solutions. In the case of hydrometallurgical solutions, the concentration of colloidal particles is high, and hence, the particle-particle interaction has to be taken into account to properly describe their behavior. A number of electrokinetic techniques based on electroacoustic methods can be applied in this case. In these methods, either a pressure wave is applied in the MHz frequency range (Colloid Vibration Potential or Current ( The electroacoustic measurements provide the dynamic mobility, The dynamic mobility is related to the size of the particles and their zeta potential. For thin electrical double layers, this relation can be written as ( Hence, in a first approximation, the dynamic electrophoretic mobility will be determined by the zeta potential, and both the dipole coefficient and inertia factor. Note that the dipole coefficient is also frequency dependent, since there are various phenomena contributing to the induced dipole with different time scales. As a consequence, besides the always present high-frequency inertial decay, the dynamic mobility exhibits one or more relaxation phenomena associated to the frequency dispersion of the dipole coefficient ( If the frequency is increased above Finally, the latest event takes place at even higher frequencies: as mentioned fluid and particles cannot follow the field oscillations due to their inertia, and the electrophoretic motion is prevented, no matter how high the particle’s zeta potential is. The electroacoustic methods are particularly suited to concentrated suspensions, so a theory must be elaborated to account for the role of particle interactions in their electrokinetics. Although other methods have been proposed ( In order to simulate industrial conditions, we use high copper concentration and specified contents of silica and clays. The copper source was CuSO In order to characterize the phenomena that occur under the conditions described, we prepared the following suspensions: Colloidal silica suspensions at 2.5 and 5 wt% in CuSO Kaolinite suspensions at 2.5 and 5 wt% in 80 mM CuSO Mixtures of kaolinite and silica, each at 2.5 wt%, in 80 mM copper sulfate solution. In all cases, the pH was varied between 2 and 5. The electrokinetic characterization was carried out in two phases. As a first approximation, the DC electrophoretic mobility of dilute suspensions was measured in the Malvern Zetasizer NanoZS. The dynamic mobility was measured using the AcoustoSizer IIc ESA apparatus (Colloidal Dynamics, USA), in the frequency range 1–18 MHz. In order to evaluate the stability of the suspensions, a sedimentation test was carried out using a 6705 UV/VIS spectrophotometer (Jenwat, United Kingdom). The samples analyzed were the 5 wt% suspensions of silica, kaolinite and silica-kaolinite and pH 2 and 5. The sedimentation was followed by recording the optical absorbance as a function of time. The wavelength was set at 600 nm.  In order to determine the effect of the concentration of divalent Cu The dynamic mobility data and their corresponding theoretical predictions for the case of kaolinite particles in 80 mM copper sulfate are plotted in It can be observed in As mentioned, in the copper mining industry both silica and clay particles are present in the raffinate, and hence, it appears of interest to characterize the interaction between both kinds of particles in hydrometallurgical conditions. With that aim, we performed electroacoustic measurements on the silica/kaolinite mixtures, at different pH values and containing 5 wt% solids at 1:1 silica:kaolinite ratio. It is possible to perform the analysis of the mixtures by considering a model of the dynamic mobility of bidisperse suspensions published elsewhere (  The existence of structures can be substantiated by performing a morphological analysis of the suspended particles, using Scanning Electron Microscope observations, as shown in In contrast, at higher pH, silica particles adhere to the kaolinite sheets mostly maintaining their original spherical shape (see An ideal outcome of this study would be to explore the conditions in which the mixed suspensions can be forced to aggregate and separate from the raffinate. In order to observe such effects on the stability of the colloidal suspensions, sedimentation tests were also carried out. For silica suspensions, no considerable variations were observed during the observation time at the evaluated pHs. In contrast, in the case of kaolinite, it was found that the sedimentation proceeds quite fast, although the zoom shows that it is faster at pH 5, when the aggregation between particles through silica-to-alumina is favored (negative silica faces, positive alumina faces). For the bidisperse suspensions, it can be seen that the sedimentation process shows an intermediate behavior in comparison with the monodisperse ones, consistently with what was observed in electrokinetic measurements and SEM images, because the aggregation between kaolinite and silica is expected. This phenomenon provides some stability to the kaolinite particles, as sedimentation is delayed with respect to pure kaolinite, but accelerated in relation to silica. In agreement with the dynamic mobility data, this interaction between both kinds of particles does not seem to take place at pH 5. Jointly considered, it would appear that a pH around 5 would be ideal for a sufficiently fast sedimentation of both kinds of particles, contrary to pH 2, where the formation of heterostructures provokes a slower sedimentation rate. We have performed an electrokinetic characterization of suspensions of interest in the hydrometallurgy of copper, in conditions close to those found in its mining industry: high copper and sulfate concentrations, moderate concentrations of dispersed solids, mainly silica and kaolinite. The electroacoustic characterization indicates that although both silica and kaolinite display negative electrokinetic charge (even if low, due to the large amount of divalent ions in solution), their size difference makes them well distinguishable in AC fields. The mobilities of their mixtures behave as expected for a weighted average only at pH 5, and at low frequencies for all pHs, showing different degrees of interaction between silica and kaolinite at the pHs tested. On the other hand, electron microscope images and spectrophotometric determinations of stability suggest that the optimum conditions for the kaolinite particles to drag the silica nanoparticles with them occur around pH 5, when silica does not show any preferential adsorption at any specific facet (alumina, edge, silica) of kaolinite. The main novelty of this work lies in the characterization methods applied in extreme conditions with respect to ionic strength and pH, which are valuable tools for finding solutions to the typical operating problems of hydrometallurgy trains and have high potential for application in minerals benefit processes, e.g., thickening, solvent extraction, and separation techniques in general. Financial support by