Introduction
                  Percutaneous retrograde screw fixation of the anterior column has been recommended for the treatment of minimally displaced acetabular fractures. However, proper placement of the screw in anterior column is challenging because of its unique anatomy. There are few anatomic studies on this technique, and the differences between male and female have never been reported.
               
                  Methods
                  We created virtual three-dimensional reconstruction models of the pelvis from CT scan data obtained from 82 adult patients without any bony problems. Virtual cylindrical implants were placed intraosseously both in left and right anterior column. The maximum diameter, length and optimal direction of the virtual cylindrical implant were determined for the screw. The perpendicular distance from the insertion point (P) of virtual cylindrical implant to the pubic symphysis (A) and the rim of superior ramus of pubis (B) were measured respectively. In the same model, cross-sections of the anterior column were created and the diameters of them were measured.
               
                  Results
                  164 (80 males and 84 females) hemipelvis models were obtained. The mean maximum diameter and length of virtual cylindrical implant were 8.16±1.21mm (range: 5.60–10.80mm) and 109.39±8.95mm respectively. The angles of the virtual cylindrical implant to transverse, coronal and sagittal planes were 39.66±3.92°, 20.81±4.58° and 42.66±3.23° respectively. The distance of PA and PB were 18.42±4.82mm and 17.76±2.63mm. Both the differences of the diameter and length of the virtual cylindrical implant, and the distance of PA between the male and female were of statistical significance (p
                     <0.00001). The mean minimum cross-sectional diameter of anterior column was larger than the mean diameter of the virtual cylindrical implant.
               
                  Conclusions
                  The anterior column of a male will accommodate a 6.5mm lag screw very well, but it does not fit all the females. The same direction of screw can be used in both male and female, but the insertion points of the screw are different. In addition, the determination of the size of the screw used for the anterior column cannot be based solely on the measurement of cross-sectional diameter and the virtual three-dimensional reconstruction model might be useful in preoperative planning.Over the last 20 years, open reduction and internal fixation has become the standard method of treating acetabular fractures with displacement of more than 2 However there are conflicts on the safety and accuracy of the insertion of percutaneous retrograde screws into the anterior column, and the size, insertion point and direction of the screw are still debated. Our hypothesis was that the size, insertion point and direction of the percutanous retrograde screw might be different between men and women because of the differences of pelvis structures, so the size of screw cannot be determined by cross-sectional measurement of the anterior column alone. We therefore, created a three-dimensional model of the pelvis from CT scan images, and we used a new method to test our hypotheses to provide an anatomic basis for the use of percutaneous retrograde screw fixation of the anterior column. We collected the CT scan images of 82 adult patients, who underwent continuous 1.25 After the optimal position of the virtual cylindrical implant was decided, the perpendicular distance from the insertion point (P) to the pubic symphysis (A) and the rim of superior ramus of pubis (B) were measured respectively ( All the experimental data (continuous variables) were presented as median and range or median and standard deviation. Independent-samples 164 (80 males and 84 females) hemipelvis models were obtained from 82 pelvis models (40 males and 42 females). The mean age was 49.1 years (range: 18–80 years). The mean maximum diameter and length of virtual cylindrical implant were 8.16 The mean lateral medial diameter of the anterior column cross-sections is depicted in In an attempt to overcome the complications of traditional surgical approaches, percutaneous screw fixation has been advocated for the treatment of non-displaced or minimally displaced anterior column fractures of acetabular, and the preliminary results seemed excellent. The results of our virtual three-dimensional reconstruction study showed that the maximum mean diameter of a screw accommodated by the anterior column were 8.76 The mean distance of PB was 17.76 Although the difference of the maximum length of screw was of statistical significance between sub-population, it is of little value for the clinical application of this technique. In addition, the length of screw should also be determined by the location of fracture line. For instance, in the fracture of the middle part of the ramus, the screw does not have to be extended beyond the hip. Our study provides surgeons with accurate and comprehensive parameters for percutaneous retrograde screw fixation of anterior column fractures of the acetabulum. However, it might still be difficult for surgeons to apply the parameter to patient intraoperative. Nevertheless, besides the use of an adjustable C-arm fluoroscope in operating room, we believe that the design of a fixation targeting device for the screw would improve the safety and efficiency of this technique. In conclusion, our study suggests that the anterior column in males would accommodate a 6.5 The authors confirm that there is no financial conflict of interest in this study. This project was supported by the AADO Research Fund.