 The area should be cleaned with water spray, saline or chlorhexidine without extraction Gingival lacerations should be sutured, if present The position of the replanted tooth should be verified clinically and radiographically A flexible splint should be applied for up to 2 weeks Systemic antibiotics are generally recommended and tetanus boosters may be required For teeth with a Calcium hydroxide should be used as an intra-canal medicament (for up to 1 month) until filling of the root canal is completed If spontaneous revascularization of the tooth pulp in teeth with an  Root surface and apical foramen should be cleaned with a stream of saline Root surface of teeth with an Coagulum should be removed from the socket with a stream of saline, if necessary (do not curette the socket) Fractured socket walls, if present, should be repositioned The tooth should be replanted with slight digital pressure Any gingival lacerations should be sutured The position of the replanted tooth should be verified clinically and radiographically Systemic antibiotics should be administered and a tetanus booster considered The tooth should be stabilized for approximately 2 weeks using a flexible splint For teeth with a Teeth with an Replanted teeth should be monitored once a week during the first month and at 3, 6 and 12 months and yearly, thereafter  Attached necrotic soft tissue should be removed with gauze or after a 3-minute soak in 3% citric acid Endodontic treatment can be completed before replantation (through the Coagulum should be removed from the socket with a stream of saline, if necessary (do not curette the socket) Fractured socket walls, if present, should be repositioned The tooth should be immersed in a 2% sodium fluoride solution for 5 minutes The tooth should be replanted with slight digital pressure Any gingival lacerations should be sutured Position of the replanted tooth should be verified clinically and radiographically Systemic antibiotics should be administered and a tetanus booster considered The tooth should be stabilized for approximately 2 weeks using a flexible splint Replanted teeth should be monitored weekly during the first month and at 3, 6 and 12 months and yearly, thereafter After a motor vehicle collision (MVC), subjects should be evaluated for the presence of possible dental, oral, and jaw-related injuries in addition to the medical evaluation and treatment. Persons should be carefully questioned about any new symptoms affecting the head, neck, or dentition as well as the details of the MVC relative to orofacial areas. Careful extraoral and intraoral examinations are then conducted. If the history or physical examination reveals hard-tissue involvement, appropriate diagnostic imaging is indicated. Magnetic resonance imaging is used for possible soft-tissue injuries. If the subject is missing crowns, prostheses, or teeth, radiographs of the periapical tissues, chest, abdomen, and perioral soft-tissues are also needed. If the mandible or maxilla is fractured, surgical treatment is conducted soon after injury. With condylar fractures, observation and physiotherapy may be needed. Suturing of lacerations in intraoral and perioral areas is also accomplished early in the post-MVC period. Dental trauma and other oral-related sequelae to MVCs as well as their treatment are outlined. Common traumatic dental injuries seen in patients after MVCs include infraction, fractures, concussion, subluxation, luxation, avulsion, and resorption. Their occurrence and treatment are discussed.  In uncomplicated crown Complicated crown fractures involve pulp, enamel, and dentin. Radiographs are still needed, as is pulp sensitivity testing. For young patients, pulp capping or partial pulpotomy with calcium hydroxide or mineral trioxide aggregate will preserve pulp vitality. Endodontic treatment is preferred for adults, although capping and pulpotomy are also options. Pulp necrosis may occur if treatment is delayed for 1 month or more. Follow-ups are scheduled after 6 to 8 weeks and 1 year. Root fractures can be complicated by pulp exposure and require radiographs from more than one angle or cone beam computed tomography (CT) for detection. Pulp sensitivity tests are usually positive. Treatment is the same as for complicated crown fractures. Loose tooth segments may be stabilized using bonding until definitive procedures are done, but the decision depends on the specific injury. Follow-up is performed as for crown fractures. If the coronal segment is mobile and displaced in a root fracture, the tooth may be tender on percussion. Pulp damage may be transient or permanent, requiring monitoring. The crown may also appear discolored transiently. Root fractures in the horizontal plane are generally detected on a regular 90° radiographic image with the central beam through the tooth. If the fracture plane is more diagonal, common in apical or middle-third fractures, occlusal views or cone beam CT may be needed to visualize the fracture. With a displaced coronal segment, repositioning is the first step, along with confirmatory radiographs. A flexible splint is applied for 4 weeks to stabilize the tooth; this can be extended to 4 months as needed. Healing is monitored for the first year. If the patient develops pulp necrosis, the coronal tooth segment should have endodontic treatment, with clinical and radiographic follow-up after 4 weeks, 6 to 8 weeks, 4 and 6 months, and 1 and 5 years. Necrosis is usually detected after 2 to 5 months. If the fracture line communicates with the oral cavity, the coronal fragment is removed. If it does not and is not mobile or displaced, follow-up should be sufficient. Pulp that becomes necrotic and infected is removed from the fracture site, followed by apexification procedures using calcium hydroxide or mineral trioxide aggregate. If alveolar bone fractures extend to adjacent bone, causing segment mobility and dislocation, the dentist should look for misalignment of the fractured alveolar segment, which manifests as a change in occlusion. The pulp may be sensitive. Radiographs can locate fracture lines. Repositioning and splinting of the displaced segment is done after 4 weeks, then follow-up proceeds as for root fracture. In  When a tooth is extruded apically from its socket but there is minimal damage to the socket wall, it is called extrusive Laterally luxated teeth are displaced palatal-lingually or labially and are accompanied by fracture or comminution of the socket wall. Percussion yields a high, metallic sound, but the tooth is not mobile. Pulp sensitivity testing is usually negative, but revascularization is common in immature teeth. The widened periodontal ligament space can be seen on eccentric or occlusal exposures or cone beam CT images. These teeth are gently repositioned as soon as possible and stabilized in a flexible splint for 4 weeks. Common complications include pulp necrosis, pulp canal calcification, and root resorption. Follow-up, including radiographs, is needed after 2 weeks, 6 to 8 weeks, 6 months, 1 year, and annually for 5 years. Endodontic treatment is done in case the pulp becomes necrotic. Pulp necrosis and root resorption are likely to develop in intrusive luxation, depending on its extent. These teeth are not mobile but react with a high, metallic sound to percussion and have negative pulp sensitivity tests. Radiographs show absent periodontal ligament space from all or part of the root. Teeth with complete root formation should be repositioned orthodontically or surgically as quickly as possible. Revascularization is possible in immature teeth. Spontaneous repositioning should be permitted to occur in teeth with incomplete root formation. If such movement does not occur within 3 weeks, either rapid orthodontic or surgical repositioning may be needed. It is likely that the pulp will become necrotic, and endodontic treatment with calcium hydroxide is recommended to retain the tooth. Splinting can be used for up to 4 weeks. Pulp necrosis may occur years later in open-apex teeth, but generally is seen in the first 6 months after injury. About 50% of cases have progressive root resorption. Follow-up at 2 weeks, 6 to 8 weeks, 6 months, 1 year, and annually for 5 years is advised. Most surviving intruded immature teeth show pulp calcification. An adverse outcome is common. The approach to The primary cause of loss of replanted teeth is inflammatory root Pain in the muscles of mastication can be referred to the teeth, particularly the posterior teeth. Other sites from which referred pain can originate are the maxillary sinuses, nasal mucosa, cardiac tissues, migrainous/vascular sources, neuropathic sources, or psychogenic origins. After a direct blow to the area that causes soft-tissue damage or injury to the third trigeminal nerve, patients may complain of numbness, either extraorally or intraorally. Chronic neuropathic pain in the head and neck areas can also develop. Temporal bone fracture can cause facial paralysis along the distribution of the eighth cranial nerve. MVCs are frequent causes of orofacial injury, which may not be immediately apparent. It is important to examine such patients, looking for the presence of possible injuries and addressing the trauma appropriately. The guidelines offered can be useful in handling orofacial injury and dental complaints after MVC trauma.