A facile low-temperature synthetic method of growing semiconductor mesoporous single-crystal of anatase TiO2 directly on FTO substrate was developed. The templated hydrothermal synthesis approach was employed to make mesoporous single-crystal TiO2 that contains pores tens to hundreds of nanometres in size under low temperature, which opens a potential way to produce useful functional thin film photoanodes by one-pot approach for fabricating cheap and highly efficient optoelectronic devices. This method is based on seeded nucleation and growth inside a pre-formed mesoporous silica film template immersed in diluted precursor solution. The electrochemical characterizations showed that the directly grown mesoporous single-crystal thin film on FTO substrate has substantially higher conductivity and electron mobility than conventionally deposited TiO2 thin films by printing techniques. Hence, using the as-synthesized mesoporous single-crystal thin film baking at 150°C as photoanodes, an encouraging 5.83% solar to electricity conversion efficiency was achieved. It is expected that the developed mesoporous single-crystals on FTO substrate may find broader applications in many different technologies. This generic synthetic strategy extends the possibility of mesoporous single-crystal films directly growing to a range of substrates. Moreover, this approach could work at lower temperatures below 150°C, which could considerably minimize the environmental impact and production costs of high performance mesoporous materials.During the past decade, mesoporous semiconductors have proven to be promising functional building blocks for low-cost and efficient solar conversion systems ( With the report by Henry J. Snaith’s group in Nature ( There are numerous reported strategies for the synthesis of metal oxide mesoporous single-crystals in which precursors of the target material are mixed with structure-directing agents (e.g. surfactants, block copolymers) ( The fabrication procedure of mesoporous single-crystal nanosheet is shown in The prepared films with a sensitized area of 0.15 The morphology of the prepared films was characterized by using scanning electron microscope (JEOL 890). SEM images were taken under a high vacuum with platinum coating on the samples. X-ray diffraction (JEOL 890) was carried out in order to investigate the phase of each sample. Transmission electron microscopy (TEM, JEOL 4010) were employed for the crystalline analysis. The surface area were measured by using Tristar® II 3020 system. The Oriel solar simulator coupled with a Keithley 2400 model was employed for the photovoltaic measurement and the The surface morphologies and cross-sectional view of prepared films are characterized by scanning electron microscope (SEM). SEM images in The crystallinity of these low-temperature processed products was investigated by X-ray diffraction (XRD) spectrum as shown in For characterizing the performance of the prepared mesoporous single-crystals in solar conversion applications, we demonstrated the promise held by the resulting products for dye-sensitized solar cells (DSSCs). The as-synthesized single-crystal samples sensitized with N719 dye as photoanodes were assembled into DSSCs sandwiched with a platinum counter electrode and I DSSCs of the mesoporous single-crystals with 10 The light harvesting efficiency is normally characterized by the film reflectivity by the diffuse reflective spectrum ( We further use the electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) to analyze the charge transfer process in the mesoporous single-crystal films compared to the porous nanoparticle films. Electron lifetime ( In conclusion, we have successfully developed a desirable mesoporous single-crystal films directly growing on FTO substrate via a low-temperature (<150 This work was financially supported by the