Bone is a dynamic tissue that is strongly influenced by endocrine factors to restore the balance between bone resorption and bone formation. Bone formation involves the mineralization of the extracellular matrix formed by osteoblasts. In this process the role of vitamin D (1α,25(OH)2D3) is both direct and indirect. The direct effects are enabled via the Vitamin D Receptor (VDR); the outcome is dependent on the presence of other factors as well as origin of the osteoblasts, treatment procedures and species differences. Vitamin D stimulates mineralization of human osteoblasts but is often found inhibitory for mineralization of murine osteoblasts.
                  In this review we will overview the current knowledge of the role of the vitamin D endocrine system in controlling the mineralization process in bone.The skeleton plays a fundamental role in the human body by providing structural support, allowing movement, protecting vital internal organs, harboring stem cells, and storing minerals. Bone tissue is highly dynamic and undergoes continuous remodeling throughout life. After bone resorption, new bone is formed by osteoblasts producing osteoid (extracellular matrix (ECM)) that becomes mineralized. This process is tightly controlled by endocrine factors, of which 1α,25-dihydroxyvitamin D Indirect effects occur via control of calcium and phosphate absorption in the intestine and renal reabsorption of calcium ( Moreover, human osteoblasts express 1α-hydroxylase (CYP27B1) as well as the vitamin D binding protein receptors cubulin and megalin to metabolize 1α,25(OH) Direct effects of 1α,25(OH) In in vitro cultures using murine osteoblasts, data are less uniform. Studies show an inhibition of osteoblast differentiation and mineralization after 1α,25(OH) The discrepancies between the effects of vitamin D seen in in vitro mice studies could be partly explained by the source of osteoblasts used. Different parts of the skeleton differ in origin, osteogenesis and function. Calvaria are formed by intramembranous formation, long bones by endochondral formation. The widely used MC3T3 cell line is of calvarial origin. When comparing murine osteoblast cultures from different skeletal sites, mineralization was not changed after 1α,25(OH) Variations in the effects of vitamin D on mineralization between murine and human cultures may be explained already by the different effects of vitamin D on genes involved in differentiation of osteoblasts. In human osteoblasts, 1α,25(OH) Most studies using rat osteoblasts resemble studies using human osteoblasts in response to vitamin D treatment ( Mineralization defects in humans may be the consequences of vitamin D deficiency, leading to osteomalacia in the long term and an increased risk for fractures. Supplementation with vitamin D increases bone mineral density, decreases bone turnover and decreases fracture incidence. As reviewed by Lips et al. ( Mineralization of bone is a well-regulated multistep process. Since the early 70's of the previous century it is known that osteoblasts, chondrocytes, and odontoblasts mineralize their extracellular matrices initially via the formation of hydroxyapatite (HA) crystals in nano-sized extracellular matrix vesicles (EVs). In a second phase HA is propagated outside these vesicles with a resulting buildup of mineral in the extracellular matrix ( More recently, proteomic analyses of extracellular matrix vesicles revealed a large number of proteins that may further contribute to the mineralization process ( The biphasic formation and deposition of HA crystals in the extracellular matrix is balanced via promotors and inhibitors of mineralization. An important promotor is alkaline phosphatase (ALP) ( Important inhibitors are pyrophosphatase phosphodiesterase 1 (NPP1) and ankylosis protein (ANK). NPP1 generates pyrophosphate and the transmembrane protein ANK allows pyrophosphate to pass through the plasma membrane to the extracellular matrix therefore inhibiting HA formation in the extracellular vesicles (  Woeckel et al. showed that 1α,25(OH) Direct effects of vitamin D on osteoblasts are exerted by binding to the nuclear VDR ( Upon 1α,25(OH) Important for the effect of vitamin D on osteoblast differentiation and mineralization is the interaction of the VDR with RUNX2, a key transcription factor of osteoblast development. This interaction has been shown to regulate the expression of the non-collagenous proteins osteocalcin and osteopontin in rat osteoblasts ( Studies aiming to show the importance of the expression of the VDR for bone development gave contradictory results. Transgenic mice with osteoblast-specific overexpression of the VDR had an increased bone mass ( The observed osteoblast differentiation stage dependent effects of vitamin D on osteoblast differentiation and mineralization may also be explained by the differential impact of 1α,25(OH) In addition to the classical nuclear VDR, a membrane-bound receptor for 1α,25(OH) Both via indirect and direct effects, vitamin D (1α,25(OH)