The investigation is aimed at evaluating the performance of a Multi-Gravity Separator (MGS) in terms of rejecting graphite from a lead rougher flotation concentrate. The effect of change in different process variables on concentrate lead and graphite grades, lead recovery and graphite rejection values is studied. The results indicate that among the variables considered in this study such as drum rotation, inclination, wash water, amplitude and shake frequency, feed percent solids and feed flow rate, the change in drum revolutions influences the metallurgical results most. A suitable mathematical model for predicting the metallurgical performance under different design and operating conditions has been developed. The model included a set of equations relating the variables and the lead grade in the concentrate, lead grade and lead recovery, lead recovery and graphite rejection, and finally, the lead recovery and the graphite grade in the concentrate.The lead–zinc ore from Rajpura Dariba deposit of Hindustan Zinc, India, is processed by flotation to obtain separate lead and zinc concentrates. The major lead- and zinc-bearing minerals in the ore sample are galena and sphalerite, respectively. In addition to gangue minerals like tremolite, muscovite, phlographite, quartz, talc, dolomite, calcite, siderite and baryte, the ore also contains graphite in considerable amounts A schematic diagram of a Multi-Gravity Separator (MGS) is presented in Lead rougher flotation concentrate was collected from the operating stream at Rajpura Dariba mines of Hindustan Zinc. The slurry sample was filtered and dried and further used as feed for the test work on the MGS. This feed sample contained 19.6% lead and 9.8% graphite. The size analysis of the sample indicated that all the material passed through a 150-μm opening sieve, and 70% of the material was finer than 25 μm in size. X-ray diffraction analysis of the sample indicated that the major lead-bearing mineral was galena. Graphite and quartz were abundant gangue minerals. Microscopic study on the feed sample has indicated that the graphite is present in the form of flakes at relatively coarser sizes than galena particles, which is similar to the finding by The experimental setup used for the present study is presented in The aim of the test work was to study the effect of different variables on the metallurgical performance of the MGS both by qualitative and quantitative means. The experimental conditions and test results obtained are presented in The effect of wash water was studied at three different flow rates, i.e. 2, 3 and 4 lpm. It can be observed from The data also indicate that the effect of wash water rate is more pronounced at lower drum revolutions than at higher drum rotations. For example, an increase in wash water flow rate at 2, 3 and 4 lpm at 240 drum rotations (Experiments 4, 5 and 6) produced lead concentrates containing 22.0%, 22.8% and 25.0% lead and 4.8%, 4.4% and 4.2% graphite, respectively. A similar increase in the wash water rate at 160 drum rotations (Experiments 22, 23 and 24) produced lead concentrates containing 32.0%, 35.0% and 36.8% lead and 2.0%, 1.9% and 1.5% graphite, respectively. The marginal increase in lead grade and graphite contents in the concentrate at higher drum revolutions may be due to the formation of compact layers of the solid bed and, thus, smaller effects of the push of fluid on the lighter bed. The effect of drum inclination was studied at three levels, i.e. 3°, 4° and 5° to the horizontal. It can be noted from The drum revolutions were studied at three levels, i.e. 160, 200 and 240. The concentrate lead grades obtained in Experiments 1–27 are presented as a function of the graphite content in The graphite grades are higher and the lead grades are lower; The improvement of lead grade is less as the effects of wash water and inclination are minimised due to higher centrifugal forces on particles; Graphite, due to its flaky nature, is selectively getting rejected more compared to other gangue. The shake amplitude was studied at three levels, i.e. 12.7, 19.0 and 25.4 mm. It can be observed from The shake frequency was studied at three different levels, i.e. 4.0, 4.8 and 5.7 cps. An increase in the drum shake frequency was associated with an increase in the concentrate lead grade and a decrease in the graphite content. For example, at constant levels of other variables, an increase in the drum shake frequency from 4.0 to 4.8 to 5.7 cps (Experiments 30, 29 and 31) increased the concentrate lead grade from 35.3% to 45.1% to 60.0% and decreased the graphite content from 1.7% to 1.3% to 0.6%, respectively. The effects observed may be explained as follows: At a higher shake frequency, the frequency of bed dilation and contraction increases; Due to increased frequency of bed dilation and contraction, concentration takes place mostly based on initial accelerations of particles; As heavy particles have higher initial accelerations, the concentration at a higher shake frequency is mostly based on relative density differential between particles It can be observed from It can be observed from With the metallurgical data obtained at different design and operating conditions, a model for predicting the MGS performance was developed adopting a simple methodology. The model is based on the following relationships. The equation relating the MGS variables and the concentrate lead grade is as follows: The actual and predicted values of the lead grades obtained using the above equation are presented in The lead grade in the concentrate is plotted as a function of the actual lead recovery in The graphite rejection is plotted as a function of lead recovery in The graphite content in the concentrate is plotted against lead recovery in Lead concentrate with less than 2% graphite content could be obtained by processing in an MGS. In addition to graphite, silica and other gangue minerals can also be efficiently rejected by processing the rougher flotation concentrate in an MGS. Concentrates with graphite contents below 2% are obtained at different lead grade and recovery values. For a graphite content at the stipulated limit of 2% and at a reasonably good lead grade of about 40.4%, a maximum lead recovery of 75% with a graphite rejection of 93.9% was obtained. It was found that all the design and operating variables excepting feed flow rate affect the metallurgical results to a considerable extent. Within the study range, the most significant variable affecting the performance of MGS is drum rotations and the variable with minimum significance is feed flow rate. The following model equations predict the metallurgical performance of MGS for treating lead rougher concentrate: Pb Pb G G The authors wish to thank Hindustan Zinc for sponsoring the research project and for giving permission to publish this paper.