Complex sulfide ores are difficult to process and often require multi-stage sequential flotation. Process outputs such as grade and recovery in each stage are affected by various sub-processes in the system, and it is crucial to monitor the performance in order to maximize the production. In this work, we have proposed and implemented a dynamic monitoring scheme using fundamental modeling and an online soft sensor network for real-time measurements of grade and recovery. Dynamic fundamental models for lead and zinc recovery were developed to represent the multi-stage rougher flotation for lead-zinc sulfide ores. A soft sensor network was built to measure the grade and recovery in real-time using support vector machine classification and regression on multivariate image data. A factorial design with feed particle size, collector dosage in the lead rougher flotation stage, and collector dosage in the zinc rougher flotation stage as the design variables was used to obtain diverse process conditions for validation. Successful validation at the entire range of process conditions demonstrates the potential of the technique for use in process control and monitoring applications. Changes in the collector dosage were monitored in the lead and zinc rougher flotation stages using state and parameter estimates of the fundamental model structure. The process monitoring framework can be extended to monitor other key variables in the process.Froth flotation is the most used separation process in the mineral industry ( Flotation has been practiced for the beneficiation of sulfide ores for over 100 years ( Various attempts have been made to model the flotation processes and develop an accurate mathematical treatment. The majority of the studies deal with fitting first order kinetic models to the experimental data ( Real-time or online process measurements are another vital component to complete a monitoring and control framework. Grade and recovery are the key measurements for the flotation processes. Traditional offline procedures of obtaining the grade measurements using analytical methods in the laboratory are not suitable for dynamic operations due to their long sampling and measurement times. Recently developed online sample analyzers (online X-ray Fluorescence) have been implemented in various plants to measure the grade with better response time. However, their high maintenance, high initial cost, inaccurate data, and difficulty in calibration demand a better solution for process control purposes ( The objective of this work is to develop a process monitoring scheme using fundamental models and online measurements from a soft sensor network for complex lead-zinc sulfide ores. The fundamental model was updated in real-time using online process measurements and state and parameter estimation. Factorial design of experiments (DOE) was used to generate a set of multi-stage flotation operating conditions using two levels of each of three factors: the dosage of Xanthate collector in the lead stage of flotation, the dosage of Xanthate collector in the zinc stage of flotation, and the particle size distribution of the feed. The monitoring framework was used to estimate the rate of attachment in real-time and identify disturbances introduced in the collector dosage. Furthermore, to demonstrate other applications of the image-based soft sensor network, results from factorial DOE were used to analyze the effects of design variables on online process measurements. Feed samples in the form of lead-zinc sulfide ore were obtained in the crushed form from the Red Dog Mine, Alaska. X-ray diffraction was used to analyze the feed ore and identify the minerals present as galena (lead sulfide), sphalerite (zinc sulfide), pyrite (iron sulfide), quartz (silicon dioxide), and barium oxide. Galena and sphalerite were the value minerals to be recovered while pyrite and quartz were identified as the gangue minerals. Lead and zinc content in the feed ore were found to be 3.52% and 18.12%, respectively, using atomic absorption spectroscopy (AAS) and classic zinc titration. A comminution circuit was designed for 500 g of the homogenized sample. A jaw crusher and wet ball mill (65% solid density) were used to obtain two types of feed streams with different particle size distributions of P Rougher flotation of lead and zinc ores requires several chemical reagents for efficient separation. Lime (CaO) was used to modify the pH of the slurry to the specific pH requirements. Potassium ethyl xanthate (C Lead-zinc ore requires sequential flotation with galena being floated first, followed by the flotation of sphalerite. In a typical industrial flow-sheet ( A 1.5 L JKTeck flotation cell was used for the batch flotation of lead and zinc ores, and was equipped with the VisioFroth package to acquire images of the froth ( Depressants used for the flotation of galena were added to the grinding circuit with zinc sulfate and sodium sulfite dosages at 500 g/t and 400 g/t, respectively. The pulp solid density was fixed at 35% using 500 g of the feed ore and added water. Agitation was started at 1000 rpm to condition the pulp with the lime to maintain the required pH at 9. It was followed by adding the required dosage of KEX and mixing for 2 min. MIBC with 0.1 ml/L dosage was further added to the slurry and agitation was continued for 1 min. Lead flotation was initiated with the addition of air at a controlled flow rate of 10 L/min using a rotameter. The concentrates were collected at every 10 s for 150 s, followed by collection at 270 s, 280 s, 290 s, 590 s, and 600 s. More frequent samples were collected at the beginning to capture the fast initial dynamics. The collected froth was dried, weighed, and stored for further analysis. After the lead rougher flotation was completed, makeup water was added to the slurry for the zinc rougher flotation to maintain the required slurry volume. The pH was again regulated and maintained at pH value of 10.5 using lime. The required dosage (400 g/t) of copper sulfate was added to the pulp, followed by the required dosage of KEX. The slurry was conditioned for 2 min with an agitation speed of 1000 rpm. Air was added with a flow rate of 10 L/min to start the zinc flotation. Froth samples were collected with the same sampling times described above for lead stage flotation. Image features were acquired with a sampling time of 5 s. Make-up water, mixed with the required amount of MIBC, was used to maintain the froth height for both lead and zinc stages. Lead and zinc flotation were characterized by fixed and variable process parameters. The fixed parameters are summarized in The monitoring scheme shown in An online soft sensor to measure process outputs. A fundamental model to describe various sub-processes and their relationship to process output measurements. State and parameter estimation to update the fundamental model in real-time using the online process measurements. State and parameter estimates were then used to monitor the performance of the process. Disturbances in the process can be identified by the changes in these estimates. Image features (summarized in A data set consisting of images from nine flotation tests was constructed with 22 image features as the inputs, and lead or zinc stage as the classes of outputs. The complete data set was divided into two parts: training and validation. The training data set contained 8896 sample points (chosen randomly), while the validation set contained 1569 randomly selected samples. Image features at any given discrete time sample ‘ A support vector machine (SVM) was used to develop the image-based classification model. The SVM was chosen based on its robustness and ability to handle noisy data and outliers. Unlike other classifiers that are based on minimizing the error on prediction, the SVM algorithm minimizes the maximum allowed misclassification cases on the prediction ( Support vector machines use the kernel technique to handle linearly non-separable problems. The kernel technique consists of transforming the data into higher dimension using a kernel function followed by construction of a linear hyperplane ( Regression models were developed using support vector regression (SVR). The same data selection scheme was used for the mineral (lead and zinc) grade models for lead and zinc concentrates (ML1, MZ1, ML2, MZ2). Offline output measurements were obtained for flotation run 2 (defined in Solids recovery is defined as the percentage of solids in the feed that are collected in the concentrate. Offline measurements were obtained from all nine experiments (defined in    Finally, the results from the image-based soft sensors were used to predict lead and zinc recovery for both flotation stages. The cumulative solid recovery prediction ( The same procedure was applied for lead and zinc stage flotation. It was assumed that there was no material loss, and mass balance was complete between feed, concentrates, and tailing for total solids, lead, and zinc content. The models trained using offline measurements from run number 2 (defined in A dynamic modeling framework was previously proposed by us for single stage pure mineral flotation ( Capture the dynamics of the process; Describe micro-scale sub-processes in the flotation (attachment and detachment); Describe macro-scale sub-processes in the flotation (transfer of material from pulp to froth, and froth to the concentrate); Connect the micro-scale sub-processes to the macro-scale sub-processes. The model framework is described in Recovery for the galena mineral is given in the following equation: The dynamic mass balance for the sphalerite particles in compartment 1, 2, and 3 is given below in Eqs. Recovery for the sphalerite mineral is given in the following equation: Eqs. These equations were used to calculate initial values of the kinetic parameters for estimation. Further details about the probability calculations are given in our previous work ( The dynamic fundamental models described in Section State estimation is a technique used to estimate the important physical variables of a system (states) that are not measurable using instrumentation. The Kalman filter (KF) and extended Kalman filter (EKF) have been applied for various industrial applications ranging from chemical industries to battery systems ( The fundamental model framework can be converted to four sets of state-space equations, each with one output and three states. These are summarized in The general state-space model described in Eqs. The EKF algorithm is an iteration of the following two steps (   This is a measurement update step and uses the online measurement to correct (update) the state and covariance estimates ( In the next stage, the actual process measurement is used along with the calculated Kalman gain to estimate the state in a feedback orientation. Finally, the error covariance is estimated according to the following equation: The models were reconciled in real-time with the online data and updated using the EKF. The constant model parameters are summarized in Offline measurements were used to train (i.e. calibrate) the image-based soft sensor models for solids recovery, lead grade, and zinc grade. Solid recovery measurements were obtained for all the nine experiments. Lead and zinc grade measurements for both lead and zinc stages were measured for run 2 using AAS and classic zinc titration (defined in Froth images were first used to classify the stage into lead or zinc flotation. Sample froth images are shown in Regression models for online lead and zinc grade measurements were developed for the individual stages of batch flotation. Results for the selection of SVM models parameters based on the grid search optimization are summarized in Offline solids recovery measurements from nine runs were used to train the support vector models for regression. Individual models were obtained for the lead and zinc stages of the flotation. Model parameters obtained from the grid search algorithm are given in Online predicted values of solids recovery, lead grade, and zinc grade were further used in the complete soft sensor network ( The effects of the DOE design variables (feed particle size (P50), collector dosage in the lead stage, and collector dosage in the zinc stage) on the process outputs (lead recovery in the lead stage, lead grade in the lead stage, zinc recovery in the zinc stage, and zinc grade in the zinc stage) are plotted in Eqs. The theoretical effects of the collector dosage on the attachment sub-process were used to monitor the attachment sub-process. Online lead and zinc recovery measurements obtained through the soft sensor network were used to update the fundamental models by state and parameter estimation. Online estimates of lead and zinc recoveries from the soft sensor network were used as the measurements in the EKF algorithm. Monitoring of the change in collector dosage in lead stage: Lead recovery was used as an online process measurement to estimate the attachment rate constant ( Monitoring of the change in collector dosage in zinc stage In this case, online process zinc recovery measurements were used for state and parameter estimation. The attachment rate constant for sphalerite mineral, Thus, monitoring of the attachment sub-process through estimation of a fundamental model parameter ( A monitoring scheme was proposed to observe the performance of the Pb and Zn sulfide flotation process. A fundamental model framework was extended for use in a multi-stage flotation process for flotation of a lead-zinc sulfide ore. Froth images were used to develop soft sensor models (based on support vector regression) for online measurements of solids recovery, lead grade, and zinc grade. Separate models were developed for lead and zinc concentrates. A classification model (SVM) was also developed to detect the flotation stage (lead or zinc concentrate) for automatic implementation of the respective concentrate regression models. Online estimates from the regression models were used to calculate online lead and zinc recovery using mass balances. A set of batch flotation experiments were designed to train and validate the soft sensor network. A 2-level factorial design was used with feed particle size and collector dosage in the lead and zinc stages of flotation as design variables. Online data from the image-based soft sensor network was used to update the fundamental models in real-time by applying an EKF for state and parameter estimation. The attachment rate constant was estimated in real-time to observe the attachment sub-process for lead and zinc concentrate. Finally, a disturbance in collector dosage was created for both lead and zinc concentrates to test the ability of the estimation and monitoring algorithm to capture the changes in attachment and their effect on the concentrate recoveries. It was observed that the attachment rate constants increase in real-time with the increase in collector dosage. It was demonstrated that the disturbances in process conditions can be identified using real-time estimation and used for process monitoring. The authors thank the