Having knowledge of the ore mineralogy and texture can provide valuable information for effective design of a concentrator flowsheet. Specifically, these characteristics help in setting the appropriate grind size to achieve liberation and minimise overgrinding, and assist in identifying suitable flotation parameters to achieve optimum separation. This paper aims to obtain an understanding of the flotation behaviour of an ore by examining its mineralogical and textural features, particularly grain size distribution. Four samples with varying copper recoveries were obtained from different locations in a copper porphyry deposit. The samples were crushed to −4mm and measured using a Mineral Liberation Analyser to determine the mineralogical characteristics of each. The mineralogical characteristics that were found to vary included: copper deportment and grain size and copper mineral association. This information was used to interpret batch flotation behaviour particularly copper recovery.It has been recognised that mineralogy of an ore significantly influences process variables such as recovery and throughput ( The existence of automated imaging systems such as the MLA ( This paper uses measurements of intact texture to interpret the flotation behaviour, in particular copper recovery, of different ore classes from a copper porphyry deposit. Texture will focus primarily on the grain size distribution and mineral association of the copper sulphides. Despite the challenge in interpretation of measurements, this paper aims to give emphasis on the importance of having knowledge of the textural features of coarse materials to achieve liberation and separation ( Four drill core samples, at least 10 The drill core samples were treated as individual ore samples, and were measured and analysed individually. The drill cores were crushed to −4 The copper and total copper sulphide (i.e. chalcopyrite Samples A and C, and Samples B and D have similar copper deportment and relative flotation behaviour, in particular copper recovery. Samples A and C contain more copper sulphides with chalcopyrite as the predominant copper mineral and resulted to higher copper recoveries. Samples B and D have bornite as the predominant copper mineral and also contain digenite–chalcocite which are not present in the other two samples. Grain size distributions of the copper sulphides in the ore samples are illustrated in All ore samples exhibit a wide range of grain sizes for the copper sulphide minerals as indicated by the shape of the curve. A shift to the right indicates that Samples A and C, which have similar copper deportment and contain more copper sulphides as shown in One of the trends observed from the data was the apparent relationship between the abundance and grain size distribution of the copper sulphides. Samples A and C, having more abundant copper sulphides tend to exhibit coarser grain size distributions of the copper sulphides. The grain size distributions of chalcopyrite and bornite in Samples C and D shown in The observed correlation of mineral abundance and grain size distribution suggests that grain size of the minerals can be used to infer whether the mineral head grade will be relatively higher or lower which may in turn influence recovery. This can be graphically illustrated in The grain size was measured based on equivalent circle diameter from the MLA DataView software. It has been reported that phase specific surface area (PSSA) provides an unbiased and most reliable estimate of mineral grain size ( Sample A and Sample B belong to the same class. Based on geometallurgical characterisation, both samples have similar geological and mineralogical characteristics which include alteration, average copper, gold and sulphur grades. However the two samples vary in copper recoveries. The same is true with Samples C and D. As shown in The grain size distributions of copper sulphide minerals in the four samples are illustrated in The flotation behaviour of an ore depends on several complex factors ( The recovery performance of an ore is also affected by the association of copper sulphides with the gangue minerals ( The trends observed indicate that both grain size and mineral association are contributors to the recovery response. The results from analysis of the batch flotation tests and textural features of the coarse particulates measured indicate fine grind is necessary to further liberate the copper minerals to enable the production of a suitably high grade concentrate. The grain size distribution can be used to estimate the target grind size particularly the regrind size for cleaner flotation. There is historical evidence suggesting an optimum target product size of at least 80% mineral liberation for efficient separation performance ( The observed correlations are based on measurements from four samples only. More work should be done to validate the correlation between mineral abundance, grain size distribution and recovery. Texture measurements should be done on flotation feed and products to confirm the influence of copper sulphides grain size and mineral association on liberation, and consequently on copper recovery. However, the results of this work provided an indication of the potential flotation behaviour of the ore deposit given the textural feature observed from the four samples. Having knowledge of the texture of the coarse ore provides valuable information to predict concentrator performance which then enables effective design of flowsheet. In the geometallurgical characterisation of the deposit, logged metal and mineral grades were used to create predictive models of copper recovery which are subjective and are therefore prone to error. It is apparent, from the results of this work that the texture of the ore particularly the grain size distribution and mineral association of copper sulphides have significant influence on copper recovery. This suggests the importance of describing texture in characterising a deposit. Incorporating texture in geometallurgical characterisation will then create more accurate predictions of copper recovery and more relevant to the actual concentrator performance. Geometallurgical characterisation of the deposit also facilitated effective sampling to ensure selection of drill core samples that represent the variable characteristics of the deposit. This will then allow texture analysis of the entire deposit and will enable effective design of flowsheet in the early stages of a mining project development such as prefeasibility/feasibility stage. Examination of the intact texture allowed a better understanding of the flotation behaviour of the ore. The measurements provided an indication of the influence of grain size distribution and mineral association of copper sulphides to copper recovery. The coarser grain size distribution of copper sulphides tends to result to higher copper recovery. Having knowledge of the textural features of the coarse particulates (feed to concentrator) provides valuable information to predict concentrator performance which then enables effective design of concentrator flowsheet. The authors would like to express their gratitude to Cathy Evans, German Figueroa, staff of MLA facility and pilot plant at the