The chelating dithioether 1,2-bis(2-methoxyethylthio)benzene, a novel solvent extractant for Pd(II), is aimed to be utilised in the selective recovery of palladium from spent automotive catalysts. For that, the extraction system has been further customised, including the choice of an appropriate diluent (1,2-dichlorobenzene) as well as an effective stripping agent (0.5M thiourea in 0.1M HCl), which both have been selected from a number of potential agents. It is shown in batch experiments that the selectivity for Pd(II) is maintained when the organic phase (10−2
                     M 1,2-bis(2-methoxyethylthio)benzene in 1,2-dichlorobenzene) is used several times to extract an oxidising leach solution. According to the McCabe–Thiele plot two theoretical stages are needed to extract more than 98% of the Pd(II) contained in that solution. The calculation of the thermodynamic quantities ΔΗ°, ΔS° and ΔG° reveals that the reaction is entropy driven — the temperature has only a slight influence on the extraction yield. It is demonstrated that the mono-oxidised extractant has a catalytic effect on the extraction kinetics when the aqueous phase contains highly concentrated hydrochloric acid. HPLC measurements prove the presence of small quantities of 1-(2-methoxyethylsulfinyl)-2-(2-methoxyethylthio) benzene in the organic phase.In 2011 the gross demand for palladium has been expected to be 8.89 The most common automotive catalysts consist of ceramic monoliths, that are mainly coated with aluminium oxide but also rare earth and base metal oxides as well as alkaline earths. Furthermore platinum group metals (PGM) are fixed at the surface of that washcoat. Besides palladium, these are particularly platinum and rhodium ( General requirements of a solvent extractant suitable for use in commercial operations have been specified by Recently we have reported on the synthesis and characteristics of unsaturated chelating dithioethers and their corresponding Pd(II) complexes ( The objective of this study was to further adapt the SX system and to examine the influence of several parameters on its performance in order to investigate the capability of dithioether All aqueous solutions were diluted with deionised water (Elga, Purelab ultra). In order to prepare the Pd(II) model solutions, a 1000 The synthesis of the extractant 1,2-bis(2-methoxyethylthio)benzene 1,2-Benzenediol (50 Yield: 4.66 1,2-Bis(2-methoxyethylthio)benzene (9.7 Yield: 1.41 Recently also the crystal structure of compound 3 was determined ( NMR spectra were recorded with a Bruker Avance-300 spectrometer. The In all extraction and stripping experiments equal volumes of the aqueous and organic phases (usually 2.5 The stripping yield S When only Pd(II) was contained, the determination of the metal concentrations in the aqueous samples was performed with a cross-flow nebuliser and a Ryton Scott spray chamber. A Mira Mist nebuliser and a cyclonic spray chamber were used to analyse the samples originating from the automotive catalyst and the corresponding loaded strip liquors (see The HPLC chromatograms were recorded with a Shimadzu system consisting of a SIL-10AF autosampler, a LC-10AT vp pump (we used a flow rate of 1 One of the main advantages of dithioether This can be caused by a different mechanism additionally occurring under those conditions. It is known that outer sphere coordination involving ionic mechanism is generally very fast. According to In solvent extraction technique the organic phase is reapplied for many cycles. For this reason it is treated with a stripping agent, which back-extracts the metal in an aqueous phase. Thiourea (tu) is long known to be a soft ligand and in mixture with hydrochloric acid widely used as a stripping agent for Pd(II) ( Thus it was possible to test the reusability of the organic phase in five successive extraction/stripping cycles. The aqueous phase was a solution obtained by leaching an automotive catalyst. Despite the oxidising characteristic of this solution (1.09 Although it is common to use chloroform in basic research extraction studies it is not suitable for commercial operations. According to A number of different diluents were tested with a 10 The temperature at which a process runs can have a considerable influence on the extraction rate and yield. In order to investigate the impact of this parameter on the dithioether  R is the gas constant (8.314 There are a number of substances that are often used as stripping agents. Of course, the choice mainly depends on the characteristics of the extractant. High stripping yields and high stripping rates are particularly targeted, but also costs and safety factors play a considerable role. If the extraction stage is selective, there is no need to use a selective stripping agent and consequently strong nucleophilic ligands can be used to substitute the extractant at the metal centre. Recently, Back-extraction was carried out with several stripping agents from a loaded 1,2-dichlorobenzene phase containing 5.4 Of these three, the thiourea solution exhibits the best stripping performance for palladium. Even in much higher concentrations the Pd(II) recovery with the other two is less efficient. In a 35% solution of ammonium sulfite (= With the neutral thiourea a cationic complex [Pd (tu) The ability of dithioether Mass transfer operations in countercurrent cascades can be calculated with the help of McCabe–Thiele plots ( As already mentioned in the In a 5 In the samples, that came into contact with water and 1 After our recent study concentrating on basic research ( An unexpected acceleration of the extraction rates in highly concentrated hydrochloric acid media was indicating the presence of small amounts of oxidised extractant. It could be shown that at higher concentrations of hydrochloric acid 1-(2-methoxyethylsulfinyl)-2-(2-methoxyethylthio) benzene This study is paving way for a follow-up testing of extractant We thank the