Indium is one of the key components in an LCD. In this work a potential recycling method involving leaching and solvent extraction was studied. Leaching of crushed LCD glass was investigated using HCl, HNO3, or H2SO4. Results of leaching kinetics showed that nearly complete leaching of indium can be achieved using 1M HCl and 1M H2SO4 in less than 8h. A screening test was performed for the extraction and separation of indium from HCl or H2SO4 with DEHPA, TBP, and Cyanex 272 or Cyanex 923. More than 99% of indium from the aqueous feed can be recovered with a purity of 90%, by extracting metal ions from 1M or 0.1M H2SO4 to 0.1M DEHPA diluted in kerosene, and back-extracting with 1M HCl.Over the past decade, the usage of liquid crystal displays (LCDs) has been steadily increasing, and currently LCD is one of the most dominant types of display on the market ( Due to the scarcity of indium and the growing popularity of LCD TVs and monitors, the recovery of indium from secondary sources has been gaining more and more attention. Examples of secondary indium sources include: ITO waste formed in the production process, due to only 30% of ITO is deposited onto the LCD glass during the sputtering process, as well as waste LCDs themselves. Typically, the ITO layer in LCD has a thickness (d Various methods for recovery of indium from secondary sources have been proposed. For instance, in an earlier work ( Studies on the distribution of indium by various types of extractants began as early as in the 1960s. Since the first step in such a recycling process usually involves the removal of the ITO coating by acid leaching, the organic extractant needs to be able to extract indium from acidic (pH From these previous papers, it can be seen that the research on solvent extraction of indium has been done based on various contexts, such as zinc refinery residues and ITO from manufacturing waste. However, there has been little study on the recovery of indium from discarded LCDs by solvent extraction, where the metal composition can be quite different from that which was investigated in previous studies. In the present work, the potential of recycling indium from crushed LCD panel glass by acid leaching and solvent extraction has been investigated. The leaching kinetics of indium, tin, iron, and aluminum in HCl, HNO The LCD samples used in the experiments were industrially shredded LCD glass provided by a local recycling company (Stena Technoworld). The polarizing films were not removed from the glass before shredding. Material characterization of the LCD waste was done by leaching in aqua regia over 2 Following the leaching experiment, a solvent extraction screening test was performed for some of the commercially available extractants and diluents. The aqueous phases were prepared by dissolving InCl Since the types and amounts of metals other than In and Sn that can be leached from LCD glass are unknown, and indium content in an LCD varies depending on manufacturers and models, samples were first leached in aqua regia to identify the metal species present. The results of leaching in aqua regia are given in It can be seen that other than the Sn that is present in ITO; Fe, Cu, Al and Zn are also present as metal impurities. In addition, metal concentrations can vary greatly, especially for Al, Cu, Fe, and Zn. This could be partially due to the inherent inhomogeneity and partially due to factors such as how well the glass was mechanically separated from other parts of the LCD. Since the glass sample was obtained from shredding the entire LCD, the mixing of LCD glass with other electronic parts during shredding could have contributed to most of the metal impurities shown in SEM image and EDX analysis ( The results of leaching of LCD glass with HNO From By comparing the data from the figures, it can be seen that the dissolution kinetics of indium oxide is the fastest in chloride media at acid concentrations of 1 With respect to the dissolution of indium oxide and polymeric film on LCD glass, it was concluded that either 1 An increase in indium concentration compared to leaching at S/L ratio of 0.1 Based on previous results, HNO The initial metal concentrations in the aqueous phase are given in The distribution ratios calculated from the measurements are presented in The obtained D-value for indium agrees reasonably well with an earlier work where indium extraction with DEHPA from nitric, hydrochloric, and sulfuric media was investigated ( An example of the effect of diluents on metal extraction can be observed in The results in Another important purpose of the screening test was to assess the feasibilities of different extraction systems in a separation process to recover indium. From With respect to leaching and extraction efficiency, different strip conditions were tested for two systems, namely 0.1 It is clear from the results that H""Cl is much more efficient at stripping indium from loaded organic phase than the other acids tested. In the paper by Virolainen et al. ( In a similar work ( From the results of screening experiments, it was shown that both 1 It can be seen that the main impact of increasing the number of stages is that a larger fraction of metals in the initial feed was transferred to the aqueous outflow of strip stage. However, this resulted in reduced separation of indium from other metals. The effect of lowering θ A screening study to evaluate the potential of a robust process that could be applied in the recycling of indium from crushed LCD glass was performed. In the leaching experiments, it was observed that the kinetics of indium dissolution were the fastest in HCl at an acid concentration greater than 1 The project was funded by the HÅPLA (Sustainable Recycling of Flat Display Panels) project financed by VINNOVA, Sweden.