The author has been active in the area of mineral processing, particularly fine coal preparation for many years. This has placed him in a unique position of being able to produce a text in this important commercial operation which links the industrial outcomes with the underlying science and engineering. The first chapter sets the scene by linking coal surface chemistry with processes such as flotation and coal/water mixtures. Then the coal characteristics related to coal preparation are presented with a good summary of recent work. Coal surface properties are dealt with in a manner which will provide future researchers an excellent summary of the techniques that have been developed over a long period of time and critically examine their positive and negative aspects. A solid review of the development and use of coal floatability techniques and a comparison of their results are then provided. The next section discusses reagents associated with coal flotation and provides a sound summary of the work carried out in this area, particularly with regard to the classic work done in the USSR after WWII. The Flotation Technology section considers a number of system issues such as pulp characteristics, the use of reagents under industrial conditions, desulphurisation flotation, effect of flocculants and saline water. This is followed by a review of the research conducted on a number of circuit concepts to overcome some of the issues discussed in the previous sections. The last section on flotation is an excellent summary of the machines which can be applied. The description of the recent development of column flotation for coal is excellent. The author then considers the potential for size enlargement of fine coal which has been an area of industrial interest for many decades. Oil agglomeration, flocculation, pelletisation and briquetting are discussed in detail and its quality is obviously an outcome of the author's own research efforts in this area. The last chapter then moves into aspects of fine coal utilisation which are impacted by coal surface chemistry issue. Handleability has been important and remains so as the transport chain from plant to end user is under pressure to reduce costs. Spontaneous combustion is an important safety issue and the understanding of the factors influencing this phenomenon is well explained. Coal water mixtures are potentially a product of the future and being able to control their behaviour is crucial. In conclusion, this is a well-written text which needs to be available to people involved in this area of coal preparation.