In this study, flotation behavior of scheelite and calcite was investigated using mixed cationic/anionic collectors of dodecylamine (DDA) and sodium oleate (NaOL). Individual NaOL or DDA was also tested for comparison.The flotation results of single mineral and mixed binary minerals demonstrated a high selectivity and recovery for the flotation of scheelite from calcite at pH 7 using mixed DDA/NaOL collectors. The adsorption mechanism of the selective separation was analyzed through zeta potential measurement.Scheelite CaWO Dodecylamine (DDA), a common cationic collector, shows some selectivity for the separation but relatively poor collecting power for scheelite ( In this work, the flotation behavior of scheelite and calcite using mixed cationic/anionic collectors of DDA/NaOL was investigated by flotation experiments using single mineral and mixed binary minerals. The adsorption mechanism was analyzed through zeta potential measurement. Pure calcite was taken from Changsha, China; and scheelite from Qinghai, China. The X-ray powder diffraction spectrums showed that scheelite and calcite samples were 95% and 99% pure, respectively. Both minerals were ground in ceramic ball mill. The fraction sized +38–74 Analytically pure DDA and sodium silicate (SS, Na Flotation tests using single mineral and mixed binary minerals were carried out in an XFG flotation machine at a spindle speed of 1700 Zeta potential measurements were conducted at 20 A series of flotation results showed that using DDA/NaOL could achieve an efficient separation of scheelite from calcite. The preferred order of collector addition was DDA and then NaOL. The results of effect of molar ratio of DDA/NaOL and pH level on the flotation separation were presented in  Zeta potential values of pure scheelite and calcite at pH 7 were measured to be −19.2 It can be observed that the addition of 300 For calcite, the addition of 300 It is tenable to conclude that SS and DDA could successively adsorb on each mineral surface, and there is a much stronger adsorption of SS on calcite surface (confirmed by XPS results of Mixed cationic/anionic collectors of DDA/NaOL at 2:1 molar ratio, show stronger collecting ability and higher selectivity to scheelite flotation than individual collector. The preferred order of collector addition is DDA and then NaOL. The mixed DDA/NaOL collectors with SS at pH 7 could achieve selective flotation of scheelite from calcite. Owing to the lower dosage and higher selectivity, the mixed DDA/NaOL collectors exhibit great potential for industrial application in scheelite flotation. This work is financially supported by Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at 