The liquid–liquid extraction of Ni(II) from aqueous H2SO4 medium and its separation from Zn(II) were studied using dibutyldithiophosphoric acid (DBDTPH) as an extracting agent in three different diluents (CCl4, CHCl3 and isobutylmethyl ketone, IBMK). Distribution curves, which are shown as the plots of Ni(II) concentration in the organic phase vs. its concentration in the aqueous phase, indicated similar extraction patterns among the three diluents studied; however, their positions were displaced from one diluent to the next. CCl4 provided a higher partition (i.e., a better extraction) than did the other two. For the separation factor, the results are presented as the plots of molar fraction of Ni(II) in organic phase vs. its molar fraction in aqueous phase. Separation factor was strongly dependent on the diluent. While a poor separation was achieved when using IBMK as diluent, CCl4 and CHCl3 resulted in a good separation of Ni(II) from Zn(II), which were similar to each other. For a better result in the liquid–liquid extraction of nickel using such complexing agents as DBDTPH, diluent properties have to be consulted.Dialkyldithiophosphoric acids have received growing attention for the purpose of indication and/or extraction of heavy metals DBDTPH, the extracting agent, was prepared (by adding A standard solution of Zn(II) was prepared by dissolving 16.145 g anhydrous zinc sulfate in water and taking it up to the volume in a 1-l volumetric flask and was assumed to be 0.1000 M. The concentration of the standard EDTA solution (0.0980±0.0004 M) and consequently those of all nickel solutions as well as the other zinc solutions were associated with the 0.1000 M standard solution of zinc sulfate using a reversed complexometric titration method in the presence of dithizone as indicator Solutions of 0.402 M DBDTPH in the diluents were used to study the effect of dielectric constant on the Ni(II) distribution ratio. Before preparation, the diluents were saturated with distilled water (to avoid the extraction of water from aqueous acidic solutions) and 20% (v/v) From an 88.0 g/L stock solution of nickel (II), eight groups of diluted Ni(II) solutions were prepared at 5.28, 7.08, 8.80, 10.56, 12.32, 14.08, 15.84, and 17.60 g/L concentration levels, respectively. Solutions in each group were prepared at five different concentration levels of sulfuric acid (0.0, 5.0, 10.0, 15.0, and 20.0 g/L); i.e., a total of 8×5=40 different solutions were prepared. This range of concentrations was selected to simulate the practical solutions that may be obtained when dissolving different minerals in sulfuric acid. Equal volumes of the extracting organic solution and aqueous acidic Ni(II) solutions, 20.00 ml each, were pipetted into an Erlenmeyer flask, stoppered and shaken under a flow of water at 25.0±0.1 °C for 10 (in case of CCl Primary stock solutions of each of nickel sulfate and zinc sulfate at 1.514 M were prepared. These solutions along with a 100.0 g/L solution of H Preliminary experiments were performed to obtain an estimate of shaking period for all of the extractions of this part In the liquid–liquid extraction by dialkyldithiohposphoric acids (HL), it has been shown that Ni(II) is extracted as the NiL  The distribution ratio of Ni(II),  Although similar patterns were obtained in the partition curves of Ni(II) in the three diluents, these curves were displaced when using different diluents or at different concentrations of sulfuric acid. For each diluent, as the concentration of acid was increased, the extractability of Ni(II) declined, which could be justified by a shift in the equilibrium The separation factor is a quantity that represents the tendency of two species towards separating from each other, which can simply be calculated by dividing the distribution ratios of the two species in a given liquid–liquid extraction system. The closer the separation factor is to unity, the more reluctant the two species are to separate. It has been very well established that the complexes of both Ni(II) and Zn(II) with dibutyldithiophosphoric acid under various acidic conditions and in different diluents including the diluents used in this study are divalent To study the effect of acid concentration on the separation factor, the data for three different concentrations of original sulfuric acid (10.0, 20.0, and 30.0 g/L) were plotted as the changes of the molar fraction of Ni(II) in organic phase vs. that in aqueous phase. The results for CCl To study the diluent effect, similar plots as above were drawn for the three different diluents at [H Gratitude is expressed to P. Ashtari, A. Shafighi, G. Khatibi, M.A. Pazokian and M.R. Rezvanianzadeh and to the faculty and the staff in the Chemistry Department of Tehran University, who did not spare any to help proceed this project. The financial assistance provided by the Ministry of Culture and Higher Education of Iran is gratefully appreciated.