In previous studies Blackburn In the present study, we investigate the damping capacity of a γ→ϵ martensitic Fe-25%Ru alloy and evaluate the damping mechanisms. In addition, the damping capacity of a γ→α′ martensitic Fe-13%Ru alloy is investigated in comparison with an Fe-25%Ru alloy. Fe-13%Ru and Fe-25%Ru alloys were prepared using a high frequency induction vacuum furnace. The ingots were homogenized at 1200°C for 24 hours in a protective atmosphere, and hot-rolled into plates with 2mm thickness. From these plates, the specimens for damping measurements and microstructural observations were prepared by subsequent rolling and machining. The specimens were solution-treated at 1100°C for 1 hour, and then quenched into water at room temperature. In order to obtain various amounts of ϵ martensite in the Fe-25%Ru alloy, the specimens were cooled to different temperatures between R.T. (25°C) and liquid nitrogen temperature (−196°C). Transformation temperatures (M The damping capacity was measured at room temperature in a range of 2×10 For optical micrography, the Fe-13%Ru and Fe-25%Ru specimens were electro-polished in 7%HClO  The damping capacity of the Fe-Ru alloys in as-quenched state is given as a function of strain amplitude in   Above 4 × 10 Meanwhile, it is assumed that the ϵ/α′ interface is hardly movable and does not contribute to the damping capacity of the Fe-25%Ru alloy, since an amount of 4.8% volume expansion during hcp → bcc martensitic transformation might be accommodated elastically in part but almost plastically, hence, ϵ/α′ interface is incoherent. The damping capacity of the Fe-13%Ru and Fe-25%Ru alloys was investigated. The Fe-13%Ru alloy with α′ single phase shows a poor damping capacity, whereas the Fe-25%Ru alloy containing ϵ martensite possesses a high damping capacity and exhibits a prominent damping dependence on strain amplitude. The damping capacity of Fe-25%Ru alloy is raised continuously with increasing ϵ martensite content below 3 × 10 This work was performed by the Research Fund for Advanced Materials given by the Korean Ministry of Education in 1996.