A novel composite film of nickel oxide hollow spheres (NiOHSs)–reduced graphene oxide (RGO)–nafion (NF) modified glassy carbon electrode (NiOHSs-RGO-NF/GCE) was successfully fabricated via a facile, effective and general strategy and applied in the sensitive and selective determination of glucose. The synthetized nickel oxide was characterized by the hollow spheres with porous surface. The composition, morphology, and structure of the as-prepared NiOHSs-RGO were characterized by the techniques such as Raman spectroscopy, powder X-ray diffraction, energy-dispersive X-ray spectrum, scanning electron microscopy and transmission electron microscopy. Compared with the bare GCE, RGO-NF/GCE, and NiOHSs-NF/GCE electrodes, the NiOHSs-RGO-NF/GCE had higher catalytic activity toward the oxidation of glucose. Under the optimal conditions, selective detection of glucose in a linear concentration range of 0.6246μM–10.50mM was obtained with the limit of 0.03μM (3S/N). Moreover, the proposed method was successfully applied to determine glucose in real serum sample with satisfactory results. The results showed that the modified electrode exhibits an excellent catalytic activity, good selectivity, reproducibility, and long-term stability.Diabetes mellitus is one of the most common chronic diseases in nearly all countries, and continues to increase in numbers and significance, as economic development and urbanization lead to changing lifestyles characterized by reduced physical activity, and increased obesity. Patients with diabetes are suffering from metabolic disorder, also exposed to significant long-term risks of complications, including heart disease, kidney failure, and blindness Tremendous efforts have been made over the last few decates to detect it, such as high performance liquid chromatography method Graphene, emerging as a new two-dimensional single layer carbon material, has achieved extensive attention of scientists due to its specific properties of high electrical conductivity, excellent mechanical strength, large unit surface area and high transparency NiO is a very promising electrocatalytic material due to its low cost, environmental benignity, and high electric catalytic performance. Many graphene–NiO composite materials have been investigated in recent years Graphite powder, potassium permanganate, concentrated sulfuric acid, ethanol and nickel chloride were purchased from Sinopharm Group Chemical Reagent Co. Ltd. (Shanghai, China). 5% Nafion ethanol solution, All electrochemical experiments were carried out on a CHI 660E electrochemical workstation (Shanghai Chenhua Instrument Co. Ltd., China) using a three-electrode system, where a saturated calomel electrode (SCE) served as the reference electrode, a platinum wire electrode as the auxiliary electrode and a GCE coated with NiOHSs-RGO-nafion film as the working electrode. Raman spectroscopy patterns were obtained using a confocal microprobe Raman system (HR800, Jobin Yvon). The structure of the as-prepared samples were characterized by X-ray diffraction (XRD, X’Pert PRO) at the scan rate of 2° The synthesis routes of RGO, NiOHSs and NiOHSs-RGO are illustrated in The synthesis of NiOHSs-RGO was achieved using a solution-based ultrasonic co-assembly process, which can be described as follows: 2 The GCE (2 Synthesis of NiOHSs-RGO-NF/GCE composite film: 1   The morphology and structure of the as-obtained RGO, NiOHSs and NiOHSs-RGO hybrid materials were studied by field emission scanning electron microscopy (SEM) and transmission electron microscopy (TEM). The electrochemical responses of glucose at GCE, RGO-NF/GCE, NiOHSs-NF/GCE and NiOHSs-RGO-NF/GCE were examined using CV in 0.1 Apparently, the NiOHSs-RGO-NF/GCE shows much higher electrocatalytic activity than the NiOHSs-NF/GCE, as is evidenced by a higher peak current response at the NiOHSs-RGO-NF modified electrode. This is probably due to that the well dispersed reduced graphene oxide in the NiOHSs provide a two-dimensional network for electronic transmission and the large surface area for the electrode, which would improve the connectivity of NiOHSs particles, the electrical conductivity of the composite, and the electrochemical utilization of the pristine NiOHSs during the electrochemical activity. The influence of scan rate on glucose oxidation at the NiOHSs-RGO-NF/GCE was also investigated. The electrocatalytic activity of NiOHSs-RGO-NF/GCE toward oxidation of glucose was studied by CV technique in 0.1 Firstly, Ni Secondly, glucose could be catalytically oxidized to gluconolactone by Ni Finally, gluconolactone was turned into gluconic acid by hydrolysis: It should be noted here that the cathodic peak current decreased with increasing concentration of glucose, which can be attributed to the consumption of Ni The applied potential can affect the response of an electrochemical biosensor, so it is of importance to choose the optimal working potential. The amperometric response of NiOHSs-RGO-NF/GCE at various potentials with successive addition of 0.5 The amperometric response of GCE, NiOHSs-NF/GCE and NiOHSs-RGO-NF/GCE measured at 0.45 Moreover, the linear range of other electrodes listed in The avoidance of endogenous interfering species is a big challenge in non-enzymatic glucose detection. Ascorbic acid (AA), uric acid (UA), The determination of glucose in blood serum samples was also performed on the NiOHSs-RGO-NF/GCE. In brief, five blood samples obtained from the hospitalized patients were first diluted with 1 In this work, a non-enzyme glucose sensor based on the hollow spheres with porous surface of NiO and RGO was fabricated by solution-based ultrasonic co-assembly process. Both the hollow micro-structured and porous surface with large surface areas offer particular advantages to electrochemical performance due to their large specific surface areas, and graphene could improve the ability of electronic transmission. The resulting electrode, exhibited two ranges of linear response to glucose from 0.6246 The author gratefully acknowledge the financial support by