Grain boundary relaxation (GBR) in nanocrystalline materials is an approach to reduce the excess free energy of the material without any change in the grain size of the material and is carried out through controlled heat treatments at relatively low temperatures. In this work, we are investigating the effect of grain boundary relaxation on the corrosion behaviour of nanocrystalline Ni-P, a topic which has not been explored before. Nanocrystalline Ni-P foils were produced using the pulsed electrodeposition route using the modified Watts bath and were characterized by X-Ray Diffraction and Transmission Electron Microscopy. Differential scanning calorimetry (DSC) characterization technique was used to establish the GBR regime, and the same was validated by measuring the grain size post the grain boundary relaxation treatment. Once the relaxation regime was established, systematic heat treatments at a temperature of 473 K were carried out, which enhanced the hardness of the nanocrystalline material without any change in the initial grain size. Corrosion studies using potentiodynamic polarization test and electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) test were performed to understand the effect of GBR. The corrosion studies revealed an improvement in corrosion resistance of the relaxed structure vis-à-vis the as deposited nanocrystalline Ni-P. An increase in E
                     
                        corr
                      and a decrease in i
                     
                        corr
                      and i
                     
                        p
                      were found for the relaxed structure. The EIS tests too revealed an improvement in the polarization resistance for the relaxed structure.The interest in nanocrystalline materials with grain size Conventionally, the corrosion resistance of materials is improved by the use of protective coatings, sacrificial anodes, impressed current methods or by adding inhibitors into the corroding medium [ Several studies have reported that in their as-deposited or as-prepared state, the grain boundaries in nanocrystalline metals are in a non-equilibrium state characterized by either excess dislocations, excess free volume or misfit regions [ Rupert et al. [ The improvement in hardness of the nanocrystalline material without any change in grain size during grain boundary relaxation is an interesting observation and has implications for the improvement of several other properties of nanocrystalline materials such as creep resistance, wear resistance and corrosion resistance. Since it is now agreed that For this study, the nanocrystalline material chosen is Ni-P with phosphorous concentration at 0.5 wt%. The approach adopted is as follows. We first evaluate the Nanocrystalline Ni-P specimens with a nominal thickness of 300 μm were produced by pulsed electrodeposition technique using a sulfamate bath having a pH of 1.2. The contents of the salts used for the preparation of the foil are shown in Grain size analysis was performed on the as-deposited and heat-treated samples by X-Ray Diffraction (XRD) technique using Bruker D8 advance diffractometer (Billerica, United States) having the Cu Kα radiation source operated at 40 kV and 30 mA. The XRD patterns were used to determine the grain size of the nanocrystalline Ni-P using the Scherrer’s equation following the subtraction of the instrument broadening from the full width at half maximum of the (111) peak. The grain size determined by XRD was verified by transmission electron microscopy (TEM) studies. The grain size measurement was performed on the as-deposited, and heat-treated sample using JEOL JEM 2100F operated at 200 kV. The TEM samples were prepared using the twin jet electropolishing method. Initially 3 mm diameter disks were punched from the foils of the as-deposited and heat-treated foils. These disks were then polished down to a thickness of approximately 30 μm using coarse emery paper of 80 grit size. These disks of very low thickness were then subjected to twin jet electropolishing using the Struers TenuPol-5 system at an operating voltage of 20 V using a 20% perchloric acid and 80% methanol electrolyte. The temperature of the electrolyte was maintained at 243 K during the electropolishing process. The electropolished disks with a tiny perforation in the center were then studied in the TEM. Both bright field images and diffraction patterns were captured from the samples. The microhardness of the as-deposited and heat-treated samples was also evaluated. The samples were first ground with 2000 grit sand paper and subsequently polished to mirror finish with 0.25 μm diamond paste. Hardness measurements were carried out using the Zwick-Roell (Indentec) microhardness testing equipment at a load of 50 gf with a dwell time of 10s. Each hardness value was obtained by taking the average of 10 data points. For the corrosion study, samples heat treated at 473 K for a duration of 60 min were studied and compared to that of the as-deposited samples. The corrosion tests were conducted on polished samples with a nominal size of 10 mm by 10 mm in 3.5 wt% NaCl aerated solution using a PGSTAT302 N potentiostat from Metrohm – Autolab. An Ag/AgCl reference electrode was used for the corrosion tests. Before starting the corrosion test, the samples were wiped with a cotton swab dipped in acetone to remove any traces of grease etc. Both potentiodynamic polarization and electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) tests were performed to evaluate the corrosion behaviour of the as-deposited and heat-treated samples. The samples were equilibrated for almost 60 min in the electrolyte for the determination of the open circuit potential (OCP) and after that the potentiodynamic polarization was carried out at a scan rate of 1 mV/s. The cathodic and anodic polarization regions were covered by scanning from −280mV to +220 mV with respect to the OCP. The EIS tests were carried out by scanning from 10   There are a few small peaks that appear before the major peak in DSC thermogram. These are observed between 573 K and 873 K and the origin of these peaks can be attributed to Ni As grain boundary relaxation is described as a process which leads to overall reduction of the energy of the system without any change in the grain size of the material, the grain size of the material was determined post the isothermal heat treatment at 473 K. The XRD pattern in The change in hardness of the material post the heat treatment at 473 K is shown in A comparison of the corrosion behaviour of the material heat treated at 473 K for 60 min to that of the as-deposited material is shown in the potentiodynamic polarization plot in The lower values of passivation current density in the heat-treated samples can be correlated to the SEM micrographs of the samples subjected to the potentiodynamic polarization tests. The backscattered electron SEM images taken from the passivated surface of the as-deposited and heat-treated samples are shown in The improvement in corrosion resistance of the heat-treated material is also evident from the impedance measurements. Increase in hardness following grain boundary relaxation in nanocrystalline materials has been previously observed by Rupert et al. [ In certain studies, change in crystallographic texture was considered as a possible cause of grain boundary relaxation [ As shown in In the above equation The improvement in corrosion resistance of the material following heat treatment can be attributed to grain boundary relaxation. The reordering of the grain boundary with the concomitant release of energy during grain boundary relaxation is causing the material to be more corrosion resistant as is evident from the Since the corrosion test were carried out in an aerated 3.5 wt % NaCl solution, the samples developed a passivating layer at higher anodic polarizations. The passivating layer is probably an oxide or hydroxide of Nickel. Corrosion studies were carried out by Qin et al. [ The higher  Electrodeposited Ni-0.5P with a nanocrystalline structure was produced. The initial grain size and hardness of the material was evaluated and found to be 22 nm and 6.4 GPa as measured by TEM and microhardness measurements respectively. The grain boundary relaxation regime of the material was estimated through DSC studies. The DSC studies suggested that heat treatments at temperatures lower than 573 K would lead to grain boundary structure relaxation without any change in grain size Heat treatments were conducted at 473 K for different durations and the hardness of the annealed samples was determined. An increase in hardness with annealing time was observed. After 60 min of annealing, a 14% improvement in hardness without any change in grain size of the starting material was observed. Potentiodynamic polarization and EIS tests revealed that the samples heat treated at 473 K for 60 min had higher corrosion resistance compared to the as deposited samples. The improvement in corrosion resistance was attributed to grain boundary relaxation. The heat-treated samples provided higher pitting resistance compared to the as deposited sample and this was considered as the reason for the lower passivation current density of the heat-treated material compared to the as deposited material.  The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper.