Difficulties in the densification as well as the low fracture toughness of the resulting polycrystalline materials have delayed the application of boron suboxide as a superhard material in industry. In this work, efforts have been made to improve the fracture toughness and densification of these materials by incorporating suitable secondary phases. Possible candidates are transition metals, which form under sintering conditions a liquid phase. Therefore different Co containing additives (metal, oxide and boride) were used to densify boron suboxide powder by hot pressing. The resulting materials have a significantly improved fracture toughness (3.9MPam1/2) and still high hardness (HV5
                     =28.6GPa.).Currently, only diamond and cubic boron nitride (cBN) based materials are used in industry as superhard materials Recent investigations of boron suboxide (B Boron suboxide exhibits a similar structure as B Previous hot pressing studies concerning the densification of boron suboxide powders, made from mixing amorphous boron with boron oxide or with zinc oxide, have produced B Recently it was shown that B The B This paper aims to investigate the possibility to densify B The starting B The milled B The B Pure B After sintering the materials were ground to clean their surface from reaction products with the hBN lining. The density of the samples was determined using Archimedes principle. Cross-sections of the materials were polished using diamond slurry and were characterized using X-ray diffraction (PW1830; Philips; Cu Kα radiation, 2 Microstructure observations were carried out using scanning electron microscopy (Philips, XL30 SERIES) with attached EDX system. TEM characterization was performed on the material containing precipitated Co. TEM foil preparation followed standard ceramographic techniques, including cutting, grinding, polishing and dimpling down to 10 The thinned samples were lightly coated with carbon (Edwards Auto 306) to minimize charging under the incident electron beam. TEM characterization was performed with a FEI CM20 microscope (FEI, Eindhoven, Netherlands) operating at 200 The Vickers hardness (H The densities and properties of the materials are given in The density of all materials containing additives was more than 96% theoretical density. The theoretical densities of hot pressed materials were calculated on the basis of the rule of mixtures of the phases formed. The value 2.55 The densities obtained were higher than those of pure B The distribution of the boride phase is similar for both the near surface and the centre of the samples. Homogeneity of the CoB within the B The data in The density of B The B The lowest density of the materials with Co additives was measured for the material with the initial CoB addition. This material exhibits also the most inhomogeneous distribution of the additives. The data therefore reveals that the use of Co, CoO and CoB as sintering additives resulted in improved sintering behavior. The reason for the improved sintering is the formation of a stable B–Co containing liquid phase at temperatures above 1460 The Vickers hardness of the hot pressed B The hardness of the composites is slightly lower to that of the pure B In this study, the addition of cobalt containing additives produced materials with improved fracture toughness comparable to that of the materials with mixed oxide additions B The authors acknowledge Element Six and National Research Foundation Centre of Excellence in Strong Materials, for financial support.