The present paper shows the results of gamma-activation assay system development as well as its commissioning in a gold mining industrial complex. The system uses an electron accelerator with energy up to 8MeV and flux power 5kW. A precision two channel gamma- spectrometer based on multi-crystal HPGe detectors was used to register spectra emitted from the sample. The detection limit for gold in 15s of measurements was 0.08–0.20g/t depending on barium and hafnium content. The registration sensitivity for 1g/t per 15s of measurement time was 500–650 pulses. The weight of the analyzed samples is 500±70g. The research results point to the capability to determine the concentrations of multiple associated elements in ore samples: Au, Ag, As, Ba, Br, Cd, Er, Ge, Hf, Hg, In, Ir, Lu, Pb, Pt, Rh, Se, Sn, Th, U, Y, W. The ore assay system has the capacity to perform analysis of over 120 gold ore samples per one hour period.Gold-mining companies have traditionally used fire assay analysis methods to analyze gold ores ( Among various nuclear physical methods applied for ore analysis, the application of gamma activation method is recognized as being particularly useful for analyzing gold ( high penetrating power of gamma-radiation allows the analysis of samples with dimensions of several mm in diameter; due to the short half-life of excited gold nuclei the analysis duration does not exceed 20–30 the gamma activation method provides sufficient sensitivity, accuracy, selectivity, representativeness, and big quantity of analysis per hour; the induced activity of the sample decreases to background levels in several minutes after the analysis is finished; From the above it is clear that the gamma activation analysis method is powerfully suited to assay ores from gold mining activities. The advantages listed above were determined in the first industrial laboratory of gamma-activation analysis based on linear electron accelerator and scintillation spectrometer, which was put into service in 1977 at the one of the world’s biggest open pit mine located at Muruntau, Uzbekistan ( The purpose of the current project was the development and realization of the basic principles for the creation of industrial gamma activation complexes for gold analysis and associated elements in ores for their further application in the mining industry ( The samples transfer and processing system was the same as in ( A linear electron accelerator with fixed energy 8 The external view of the measurement part of the gamma activation system is shown in The developed industrial gamma activation ore assay system also includes several auxiliary systems to enable automatic operation. The auto calibration system in the device compensates for radiation source parameters drift and measurement equipment variation. The device control system controls all sub-systems and their time coordination. To validate the detection system’s performance, measurements were made of reference standards (certificated by TsNIGRI (  Promising results have been obtained in the development of an industrial gamma-activation gold ore assay system. The system uses an electron accelerator to excite atoms in ore samples and a precision two channel gamma-radiation HPGe spectrometer to register spectra that are emitted. The detection limit for gold in 15