Spent sulphite liquor is a lignocellulosic residue obtained in the acid sulphite pulping process after the digestion of hardwood chips, and composed mainly by lignosulphonates and hemicelluloses. The aim of this work is to study the main process variables at different digestion conditions: maximum temperature, heating rate, and total SO2 content, which affect the delignification process of hardwood chips to obtain dissolving pulp and to increase the total amount of fermentable sugars and lignosulphonates presented in this lignocellulosic waste. The best results are 210.5g/L of lignosulphonates and 47.26g/L of total monosaccharides obtained at higher temperatures of 1.058T and 1.072T, low heating rates of 0.334R and 0.285R, and total SO2 content of 6.20%. Furthermore, concentrate-acid hydrolysis of the liquor with sulphuric acid was performed in order to study the evolution of the sugar content and the release of the inhibitors. Temperature, acid concentration, acid/liquor ratio and time were modified, showing that acid/liquid ratio is the most influential variable. Although increase in the content of sugars in neither case, a notable furfural and acetic acid concentration decrease is registered, 97.88% and 36.57% respectively, at 20°C, 60% (w/w) sulphuric acid and acid/sample ratio of 1/0.1 (v/v).The evolution of oil prices and the geographic distribution of energy reserves have determined energy choices for decades. More recently, environmental concerns, the intense growth of emerging countries, the effect of inflation on the primary energy prices and the liberalisation of energy sector in Europe, have characterised the new framework for implementation of energy policies ( Lignocellulosic biomass is plentiful, cheap and it has high carbon content, low humidity and ash content. The lignocellulosic materials are basically composed of cellulose (20–50%), hemicellulose (20–35%), polyphenolic lignin (10–35%) and other components. Therefore, the process for converting the lignocellulose to fuel ethanol requires: (1) delignification to liberate cellulose and hemicellulose; (2) depolymerisation of the carbohydrate polymers to produce free sugars; and (3) fermentation of mixed hexose and pentose sugars ( Among the lignocellulosic biomass, residues from pulp and paper industry with high organic load play an important role. In spite of changing the technology is expensive; nowadays many factories of pulp and paper are trying to convert the lignocellulosic materials into bioethanol and other bioproducts which fits well to the biorefinery concept aiming to decrease the dependence from fossil resources and to improve the economic sustainability of these pulp mills ( There are four broad categories of pulping processes: chemical, semi-mechanical, chemi-mechanical and mechanical. Chemical pulping methods rely on the effect of chemicals to separate fibres, whereas mechanical pulping methods rely completely on physical action ( As it has been cited before, with the purpose of valorising the main compounds of the SSL, it is necessary to accomplish the two next objectives at the same time: (1) improve delignification step of the hardwood chips avoiding sugar denaturation and the inhibiting compounds for the biological conversion of free sugars into ethanol, and (2) complete depolymerisation of carbohydrate polymers. The first one is possible to achieve by modifying cooking variables and controlling pulp properties; to achieve the second objective, it is necessary to ensure a complete degradation of carbohydrates into monosaccharide form. In this case, an acid hydrolysis as post-treatment can be carried out. Acid hydrolysis is a chemical process that uses an acid catalyst to break the polysaccharide chains into basic monomers. Depending on the acid concentration employed, there are two kinds of acid hydrolysis: diluted-acid hydrolysis at high temperatures (80 The goal of this work is to study the delignification step of the acid sulphite process to manufacture dissolving pulp and taking into account not only the pulp properties, Kappa index, intrinsic viscosity and α-cellulose, but also the composition of LS and fermentable sugars of the SSL in order to valorise all the main compounds of the hardwood. Furthermore, some external hydrolysis steps have been studied to improve the process into bioethanol.  The fresh liquor employed for the wood digestion was based on magnesium hydroxide and sulphur dioxide. The composition requirements have been determined according to a titration method with iodine and sodium hydroxide based on TAPPI 604 ( The hardwood, With the purpose of studying the operation variables that affect the final quality of pulp and SSL composition, some digestion trials at different cooking conditions were realised. Cooking tests have been carried out in two 1 Eight trials were carried out at different digestion conditions. The main variables and values have been obtained from literature and industrial experiments: temperature from 140 SSL was hydrolysed at different temperature, time, acid concentrations and acid/SSL (A/S) ratios. In this study, only concentrated-acid hydrolysis was studied because after the cooking stage hemicelluloses are probably hydrolysed into simple sugars. For this work sulphuric acid as a hydrolysing agent was chosen, because it is the most common acid in the hydrolysis of lignocellulosic waste ( Factorial design in Stat Graphics software with four experimental factors (A: temperature, °C; B: A/S ratio; C: acid concentration, g/L; and D: time, min) and three response variables (variable 1: sugars concentration, g/L; variable 2: inhibitors concentration, g/L; and variable 3: LS concentration, g/L) was made to determine hydrocarbon deconstruction capacity in SSL. A total of 2 Pulp quality control and SSL characterisation were performed. In the case of SSL, both waste materials, the one obtained in the cooking step and the hydrolysed SSL were analysed. The quality grade of cellulose pulp was evaluated by means of Kappa index according to TAPPI 236 standard ( Physico-chemical characterisation of the SSL was carried out. Density and viscosity at room temperature were evaluated using a Gay-Lussac picnometer and viscometer Fungilab Alpha L series, respectively. Dry matter was measured by drying at 103–105 The main step in the digestion process is the cooking phase with a ramp rate to maximum temperature and then a constant temperature phase ( Cooking time ( In the case of Kappa tc’ In the case of Kappa tc’ In the case of Kappa tc’ Finally: Where: tc is cooking time; tc’ is corrected cooking time to achieve Kappa Only for the experiment C8 with high temperatures, low heating ratio and 6.20% of total SO In order to study the influence of the maximum temperature, it was necessary to compare C1 ( Viscosity and Kappa index are the main variables of the pulp regarding the depolymerisation and delignification reactions. By means of the cooking results, it is observed that extending ramp (decrease heating rate) selectivity and consequently maximum intrinsic viscosity increased, because only lignin, hemicelluloses and short-chain polysaccharides are broken down. The process is selective to the delignification reaction and attacks less cellulose chains, therefore the maximum value of viscosity increases. For the same value of viscosity, Kappa index is higher in pulps obtained using shorter digestion ramps. At high heating rates, not only lignin but also hemicellulose and cellulose are degraded. It is also observed that maximum temperature affects decreasing dwell time but also decrease cellulose yield and selectivity which are not desirable ( The results of the physico-chemical characterisation of SSL obtained at the end of the cooking are presented in On the other hand, the nature of the liquor used as an extracting agent is made of magnesium hydroxide and therefore, the magnesium salts are the major inorganic components in SSL. Other inorganic components determined are calcium, potassium, sodium and iron.  The results of total sugar and ash content at 900 Regarding the chemical characterisation, SSL consists mainly of LS and sugars. Taking into account LS and sugars on SSL for its valorisation options, the best results are C6 and C8 trials obtained at maximum temperatures (°C) of 1.058 Depending on the operational and inlet cooking variables, cellulose extraction could be more effective and consequently chemical composition of SSL could be different in each case. High contents of α-cellulose in pulp involves a good extraction of cellulose therefore, high levels of sugars (resulting of hydrolysis of hemicelluloses) and LS (resulting of lignin and bisulphite acid combination) in the SSL should be found. Relationships between the quality properties of pulp and composition of SSL are shown in Kappa index is related to the delignification degree and shows an indirect way of determining lignin content. A high Kappa index implies a low degree of delignification which gives a low LS content in the liquor. This is due to the fact that LS have not been dissolved in the liquor and therefore they remain in the pulp. Intrinsic viscosity is related to the polymerisation degree and high viscosity involves lower hydrolysis grade which gives a low presence of monosaccharides in SSL. All of these conclusions are corroborated in In order to improve the fermentable sugar content in SSL a post-treatment is necessary to depolymerise the polymer compounds into sugar monomers which could be fermented into ethanol ( Except for the hydrolysis experiment of 1 Degradation products that are potential SSL fermentation inhibitors are basically acids and furan derivatives. Furan derivatives can be furfural which is formed from the degradation of pentoses and Hidroxy-Methyl Furfural (HMF) which is obtained from the degradation of hexoses ( As can be seen in A multiple regression analysis was carried out to obtain the relation among all the variables and this is presented in Eqs. The regression coefficients have been Equations determine that in all cases, total sugars, inhibitors and LS are strongly dependent on A/S ratio but not on the hydrolysis time, acid concentration or temperature. On the other hand, the inhibitor concentration is related to the sugar content as can be observed in Digestion experiments were developed to obtain not only cellulose pulp with dissolving grade but also fermentable sugars for bioethanol and lignosulphonates as much as possible at different cooking conditions. Different process variables were modified with this purpose: total SO Concentrated-acid hydrolysis of the liquor with sulphuric acid was studied using a factorial design of experiments and multiple linear regression adjustment. Temperature, acid concentration, acid/liquor ratio and hydrolysis time were modified. The acid/liquor ratio is the most influential variable in all of the experiments. In most hydrolysis experiments, monomers are degraded into carboxylic acids and other volatile compounds which mean that, it is not possible to depolymerise hydrocarbons into monomers by means of acid hydrolysis after acid sulphite cooking process under conditions tested. Depending on the desired goal on each case, a compromise between sugar content and inhibitors is recommended in this paper for the valorisation of the spent sulphite liquor into bioethanol production. We wish to thank Alicia Pérez for her collaboration in hydrolysis experiments and Rafael Mendivil and Ana Portilla for their collaboration in cooking trials. The authors gratefully acknowledge the financial support for this research by the EUCAFUEL 23.H031.64003 research project under the framework of the