To gain insight into the effect of oral processes on perception, we defined a set of five specific oral manipulations and investigated their effects on the perception of low and high fat versions of two semi-solid foodstuffs, vanilla custard desserts and mayonnaises. Behavior modifications ranged from simply placing the stimulus on the tip of the tongue to vigorously moving it around in the mouth. Sensory ratings for mouth-feel and flavor attributes were made 5s after placing the stimulus in the mouth, and after-feel attributes were rated immediately after swallowing. Most attributes showed a similar pattern, with lowest attribute ratings where the tongue's movement was restricted and gradually increasing ratings with increasing complexity of the tongue movements. An individual's normal oral processing behavior typically resulted in the most intense sensations of flavor and mouth-feel. Residence time for all mouth-feel attributes, except prickling, was determined by the time required for tongue movements. The exact tongue movements required for sensations appeared to be related to food groups and individual foods, rather than to specific mouth-feel attributes.Once placed in the mouth, food is subjected to a complex series of manipulations by the tongue, teeth, lips and cheeks, during which it is converted into a form suitable for swallowing. Sensory assessments of food begin prior to ingestion when the food is seen, handled and smelled ( Sensations are gathered during each phase of oral food processing. Initial perceptions occurring at low shear rates include attributes related to touch (e.g. perceived homogeneity based on the presence, size, and shape of particles), and those requiring only small deformations (elasticity, stickiness to the palate, and viscous behavior) (  Information on details of the oral process is a prerequisite if physico-chemical measurements of foods are to be made under realistic conditions. For example, apparent viscosity, the stimulus property responsible for thickness sensations, depends on the shear rate applied in the mouth since most foods are non-newtonian. These shear rates vary from 0.1 to 1000 Details of oral processes have been gathered primarily for solid foods using a wide variety of techniques, ranging from observations of muscle activity ( Common findings are that the following steps are involved in oral processing of solid food: (1) food is placed onto the anterior 1/3rd of the tongue; (2) the tongue is elevated, compressing the food against the palate; (3) the tongue is depressed, transferring solid foods to the post-canine teeth; (4) comminution; (5) swallowing; and (6) clearance. For semi-solids, oral processes are less well characterized, possibly because those processes require primarily tongue movements, which have proven to be difficult to monitor instrumentally without restricting masticatory movements. Data on oral processes have also been gathered using introspective techniques. Certain attributes, such as coldness and thickness, can be assessed soon after ingestion. Others, such as smoothness and prickling, require longer residence times ( Twenty-one subjects (aged between 21 and 34 yrs) participated in the study using vanilla custard desserts, and fifteen in the study using mayonnaises and dressings (aged between 22 and 31 yrs). Most of the subjects participated in both studies. All subjects had previously been screened for olfactory and taste disorders and had received extensive training in the description of sensory mouth- and after-feel attributes for semi-solid foods. The subjects were paid for their participation. Testing took place at the sensory facilities of TNO-Nutrition and Food Research in Zeist, The Netherlands. Commercially available full (3.0% fat) and low fat (<0.5%) vanilla custard desserts (AH vanille vla, Albert Hein Corp., Zaandam, The Netherlands and Euroshopper vla, Creamex Corp., Rijkevoort, The Netherlands), and full (72% fat) and low fat (36% fat) mayonnaises (Calvé full and half-full mayonnaise, Van der Bergh Corp., The Netherlands) were used in both studies. Panelists were seated in sensory booths with appropriate ventilation and lighting. Subjects were trained over four 2-h sessions during which they were presented with samples of custard desserts and mayonnaises using a sub-set of sensory attributes previously generated by another panel ( Testing took place over two 2-h sessions for each product group. Samples were presented in random order with instructions as to which manipulation the subject was to perform. Three replicates were performed for each experimental condition. The attributes appeared by category on a monitor placed in front of each panelist, listing attributes on the left with a 100-point response scale, anchored at the extremes, on the right (FIZZ The effects of modified behaviors on sensory attributes were analyzed using a repeated measures ANOVA ( Averaged ratings are shown per product, attribute, and modified behavior in As indicated in A cluster analysis based on all attributes and products returned two clusters of modified behaviors based on sensory effects. One cluster consisted mainly of the still condition and the compression-related conditions (tongue up, and tongue up and down), whereas the other cluster consisted of the compression plus shear-related conditions (suck, smear, and normal conditions). To further quantify the effects of behavior modifications, the percentage difference between the ratings of the least complicated condition (still condition) and the normal condition were calculated by product group across fat levels ( The averaged results in Forthly, mouth- and after-feel effects indicate that low fat products may be more affected by behavior modifications than high fat products. Finally, for mouth-feel attributes, especially in the case of mayonnaises, attributes that showed the smallest effects of behavior modification were typically the ones capable of being rated soonest after ingestion. One exception was prickling, which showed a small effect of behavior modification but was rated last by the QDA panel ( This study investigated the effect of specific masticatory movements on flavor, mouth- and after-feel sensations for high and low fat versions of two semi-solid foods, mayonnaises and vanilla custard desserts. The results indicated a gradual increase in the intensity of sensations, in particular those of mouth-feel and flavor, with the complexity of intra-oral movement. Typically, normal oral processing resulted in the most intense sensations. The classification of normal oral processing behavior of consumers for semi-solids (see Results also indicate that the sensation of virtually all flavor and mouth-feel attributes requires at least some tongue movement. These manipulations mix food with saliva and, thereby enhance mechanical and chemical breakdown, and position the food relative to the sense organs. The effects of tongue movements on flavor sensation can be explained by increased flavor release during food breakdown and by the redistribution of the food over a larger area of the tongue. Since flavor is a combination of retro-nasal olfaction and taste, movement of the tongue pumps volatile compounds into the nose thereby enhancing flavors ( The general effect of tongue movements on mouth-feel attributes defined as the percentage difference in ratings between the least complicated and normal conditions, was related to specific attributes. The attributes least affected by tongue movements were typically those rated soonest after ingestion ( Temperature (or coldness) perception requires little or no tongue movement and relatively short residence times in the mouth, and this is one of the first attributes that can be rated. The sensation may arise during the initial moments of contact between the product and the oral tissue, when the temperature difference is at its maximum ( It is not possible to categorize mouth-feel attributes by the type of movement required for sensation (e.g. attributes related to compression-only movements versus those related to compression plus shear movements). The exact nature of these movements does not appear to be related to specific mouth-feel attributes but rather to product group and even to individual products. For example, thickness ratings for mayonnaises showed a considerably larger effect of tongue movements than corresponding ratings for custards, and low fat mayonnaises showed a larger effect than high fat ones, which only increased with the tongue-up movement and remained virtually stable thereafter ( These results suggest that there may be multiple ways to establish ratings for mouth-feel attributes. This was also suggested by the panelists themselves who define, for example, thickness by the food's compression behavior as well as by its spreading behavior, depending on its viscosity ( In summary, an individual's normal oral processing behavior typically resulted in the most intense sensations of flavor and mouth-feel. Oral residence time for all mouth-feel attributes, except prickling, was determined by the time required for tongue movements. The exact tongue movements required for sensations appeared to be determined by product groups and individual products, rather than by specific mouth-feel attributes. Special thanks to Ilse Polet, MSc and Ing. Rudi van Doorn for their able assistance in conducting the study and to Drs Hugo Weenen and Frits Bosman for their useful comments on the manuscript.