The flotation of celestite (SrSO4) with the anionic collector sodium dodecyl sulfate has been investigated in solutions with and without carbonate species through electrokinetic and microflotation studies. The surface transformation of celestite to strontium carbonate in aqueous carbonate solutions has been studied through electrokinetics, mineral dissolution, IR spectroscopy and mineral/solution equilibria. Celestite is effectively floated with dodecyl sulfate in solutions free of carbonate species in the pH range of 3–11 due to collector chemisorption. Strontium dodecyl sulfate is formed on the celestite surface. Aqueous carbonate species convert the surface of celestite to strontium carbonate at pH 7.8 without affecting flotation at the onset of transformation. The flotation of celestite is depressed only above pH 10, due to the specific adsorption of HCO3
                     − and CO3
                     2− species that inhibit the adsorption of dodecyl sulfate on the carbonated surface of celestite.Celestite is produced largely in Mexico, Turkey, Spain and Iran. This mineral is the main source of strontium carbonate, the most commonly used strontium compound Celestite ores commonly occur with barium and calcium sulfates, and calcium carbonate In flotation of celestite ores, fatty acid collectors are used ( This work is an investigation on the mechanism responsible for flotation of celestite with sodium dodecyl sulfate. The surface transformation of celestite to strontium carbonate by aqueous carbonate species has been also studied to delineate its effect on flotation. The role of aqueous carbonate species on flotation has been investigated for determining the effect of these species resulting from dissolution of atmospheric carbon dioxide and calcite in the flotation pulp. Natural crystals of celestite from San Luis Potosı́, Mexico, were used in this study. The crystals were hand-ground using an agate mortar to produce 250×149 μm (−60+100 mesh) and −37 μm (−400 mesh) particles. These particles were leached with concentrated acetic acid solutions to remove calcium carbonate. The acid-leached particles were then repeatedly washed with freshly boiled deionized water until the conductivity of the washed water was low and did not vary. Assays by atomic absorption spectrophotometry reported no calcium in the particles. Microflotation studies, carried out with the 250×149 μm particles, were performed with a modified Hallimond flotation cell using 1 g mineral and 100 ml solution. The mineral was conditioned at the desired pH and dodecyl sulfate concentration for 30 min under nitrogen atmosphere. The suspension was next transferred to the flotation cell for flotation, which was carried out for 1 min using 30 ml/min nitrogen gas. When sodium carbonate was used, the mineral was conditioned first with this reagent before adding the collector. The conditioning step was performed open to the atmosphere. The electrokinetic studies were carried out with −37 μm particles (0.1% solid suspension). The mobility values were converted to zeta potential through the Smoluchowski equation Spectroscopic studies were carried out using an FTIR spectrophotometer, Nicolet 205. A pellet made of a mixture of 10 mg celestite particles (−37 μm in size) and 10 mg KBr was prepared for these studies. To determine carbonate species on the surface of celestite, 100 mg celestite particles were conditioned in a 0.01 M Na Tests were also carried out in which the electrophoretic mobility of celestite and the concentration of total sulfate in solution were determined in suspensions of varying sodium carbonate concentration. In these tests, 100 mg of −37 μm celestite particles were conditioned in 100-ml solution at the desired initial sodium carbonate concentration at pH 9 for 30 min. The pH value was maintained constant through the addition of dilute solutions of sodium hydroxide and nitric acid. After conditioning, 80 ml of the suspension was taken for electrophoretic mobility measurements and 20 ml for dissolved sulfate concentration measurements. This 20 ml suspension was centrifuged for solids removal before determining the total sulfate concentration as described by When celestite is introduced into an aqueous solution, dissolution occurs with the formation of Sr The flotation response of celestite, as a function of pH at various concentrations of the anionic collector sodium dodecyl sulfate, is given in The mechanism responsible for the surface of celestite becoming hydrophobic by dodecyl sulfate adsorption was investigated through electrokinetics. The zeta potential of celestite in solutions of different sodium dodecyl sulfate concentrations was determined with electrophoretic mobility measurements, and the results are given in The increase in the negative zeta potential of celestite by the addition of dodecyl sulfate has also been reported by The carbonate species transform celestite to strontium carbonate. A process has been suggested to produce strontium carbonate through treatment of celestite in aqueous carbonate solutions Because aqueous carbonate species are present in the flotation pulp from the dissolution of both atmospheric carbon dioxide and carbonate minerals commonly in the ore, the role of these species in the flotation of celestite ores is important to be determined. The theoretical pH for the onset of strontium carbonate formation in a celestite/aqueous solution system open to the atmosphere was determined through mineral/solution equilibrium computations, based on the equilibria given below. The p Mineral/solution equilibrium computations were performed by taking 10 The surface transformation of celestite to strontium carbonate at pH 7.8 was investigated through electrokinetics. The zeta potential of celestite as a function of pH in aqueous solutions free of carbonate species and also with 10 The conversion of celestite surface to strontium carbonate was investigated further by spectroscopic and dissolution studies. The spectroscopic results, given in  In Next, the effect of the surface transformation process on the flotation of celestite with sodium dodecyl sulfate was investigated. Aqueous carbonate species depress the flotability of celestite at pH values higher than 10, conditions well above the pH for initiating surface transformation. This indicates that dodecyl sulfate adsorbs not only on the bare surface of celestite but also on the carbonated surface of celestite if the concentration of the CO Celestite is effectively floated with the anionic collector dodecyl sulfate in solutions free of carbonate species over the broad pH range of 3–11. This is due to chemisorption of the collector, which leads to the formation of strontium dodecyl sulfate on the surface of celestite. In solutions with aqueous carbonate species, the surface of celestite is converted to strontium carbonate at pH 7.8. Celestite is depressed at pH above 10 because of the significant concentration of CO A. López-Valdivieso and A. Robledo-Cabrera thank Prof. Douglas W. Fuerstenau for the Riddick Zeta Meter for electrokinetic measurements. The authors also acknowledge FAI-UASLP for its partial financial support of this investigation.