Bamboo shoots are regarded as potential sources of sterols. The effects of genetic variability, parts and harvest seasons on the sterol content and composition in the bamboo shoots have been determined using a novel ultra-performance liquid chromatographic atmospheric pressure chemical ionisation mass spectrometer method. The results showed that the representative sterols in bamboo shoots were β-sitosterol, campesterol, stigmasterol, ergosterol, cholesterol and stigmastanol; exception stigmastanol, the significant differences were observed in the sterol content of different species (112.4–279.6mg/100g dry wt), different harvest seasons (195.3–279.6mg/100g dry wt) and different parts (253.6–321.8mg/100g dry wt); the sterol composition was similar in different species and different harvest seasons, however, it was significantly different between shoot bodies and shoot shell. The genetic variability, parts and harvest seasons could significantly affect the sterol composition in the bamboo shoots. The spring shoot shell of Phyllostachys pubescens contained the highest sterol content (321.8mg/100g dry wt).Sterols are members of the ‘triterpene’ family and more than 200 types of sterols are known to be found in nature ( Bamboos are giant, woody grasses growing in tropical and subtropical (cosmopolitan) climate, with distribution ranges covering wide areas of Asia, Africa, the Caribbean and Latin America ( Bamboo shoots have a long history of being used as a source of both food and medicine in China and Southeast Asia ( In this paper, the sterol content and composition in bamboo shoots of four species ( Bamboo shoots of four species ( Based on the UPLC-APCI-MS method ( Separation, identification and quantification of sterols were performed using a coupled liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry system consisting of an ACQUITY Ultra-Performance Liquid Chromatography (Waters, USA) and a Quattro Ultima Pt (Micromass, UK) tandem mass spectrometer. An ACQUITY UPLC BEH C18 column (2.1 The mass spectrometer was operated with APCI interface in selective ion monitoring (SIM) mode. Interface parameters were set as follows: probe temperature, 500 6-Ketocholestanol, desmosterol, ergosterol, cholesterol, lanosterol, cholestanol, stigmasterol, campesterol, β-sitosterol and stigmastanol, were identified based on both retention time and characteristic ion peaks in mass spectra. Quantitative analyses were carried out by internal standard calibration. All analytical experiments were performed in duplicate. Results were averaged from the analytical data of three samples. For further studies, mass spectra under APCI mode were acquired using direct sample infusion by FIA (flow injection analysis) at 10 The effect of different species on the sterol content and composition in bamboo shoots was investigated using the UPLC-APCI-MS/MS method. The bamboo shoots of four species ( As shown in Overall sterol compositions are shown in The spring shoots of The content of the particular sterols were different in different parts, but the predominant sterols still were β-sitosterol, campesterol, stigmasterol, ergosterol, cholesterol and stigmastanol. As shown in The results (see The effect of the harvest seasons on the sterol content and composition in bamboo shoots was investigated using shoots of  The results also ( β-Sitosterol, campesterol, stigmasterol, ergosterol, cholesterol and stigmastanol were confirmed in bamboo shoot of The authors thank Zengxuan Cai for his technological and Carsten Carstens for his linguistic support. The work was supported financially by the 111 Project (B06014) and China doctoral science foundation (20070421198).