The ease with which data may be entered into, and extracted from, electronic databases using Internet based applications is providing new opportunities for understanding and modelling of complex systems. An expert system for solid–liquid separation equipment selection and elimination, using an Internet based interface coupled to such a database, is described. Also, a database containing filtration constants for a variety of different minerals is provided and an illustration of how these constants may be used in mathematical simulations of filtration processes is given. A simple experimental procedure, which can be performed using only a single test where the pressure during filtration is incrementally increased, can provide the necessary filtration constants for the simulation procedure. Hence, the database of filtration constants can be easily expanded using experimental data from this, or similar procedures. An experimental technique that measured the in situ concentration of the forming filter cake, via electrical conductivity measurements, was used to compare the simulated local cake concentrations, using the filtration constants, against the measured ones. The agreement between the simulated cake concentrations and the measured ones was excellent.filter area, m solid volume fraction, – dry mass of solids per unit volume of filtrate, average dry mass of solids per unit volume of filtrate, cake depth, m exponent on Eq. exponent on Eq. instantaneous filtrate rate, m filter medium resistance, m mass fraction of solids in slurry, – time, s cumulative filtrate volume, m height, m pressure difference, Pa specific resistance to filtration of filter cake, m average specific resistance, m conductivity of mixture over conductivity of clean liquid exponent in Eq. liquid viscosity, Pa density kg over filter cake constant value solids Solid–liquid separation equipment selection can be split into two: the equipment type to consider and the design requirement. For the first, design charts and an engineer experienced in solid–liquid separation can help, or that experience embodied within an ‘expert system’. For the second, some simple tests are helpful; even a single experimental test may suffice, followed by some modelling. The confidence in a limited number of tests is greater when there is easy access to information on filtration characteristics of a number of minerals, as the results may be verified against known existing data. Furthermore, the expanding use of electronic databases, and the Internet, for information storage and retrieval is leading towards the convergence of data for both equipment selection and design. This should result in a more comprehensive consideration of different types of solid–liquid separation options and more reliable throughput calculations, or performance prediction. The solid–liquid separation site: Rule based selection of equipment has developed over many years. An early computer based system was provided in 1985 by The output in In most cake filtration simulations the conventional differential equation describing the process can be written as, The two variables in Eqs. The influence of pressure on specific resistance can be described by an empirical power law function with the cake forming pressure Eq. At any instant in time cake depth can be calculated from a material balance, or from an application of Darcy’s law to the compressible filter cake If the filtration forms an ‘incompressible’ filter cake, then Eq.  There is a very significant difference between the pressure drops given in Eqs. The simulation work reported here compares the two approaches for a mildly compressible material, coarse grade kaolin, where the simple approach of using the total filtration pressure in Eqs. An incremental approach to filtration modelling has been used in previous studies: The material employed in the experimental study was kaolin, with a true solid density of 2650 kg The kaolin was filtered onto a planar surface at the bottom of a vessel of 44 mm diameter at constant pressures of: 0.55, 1.0, 2.0 and 2.8 bar. Slurries of 34% by mass were prepared and the vessel was filled to a height of 190 mm. As one objective was to discover if a single test could be relied on for the data acquisition, as described previously by A full description of the experimental equipment for in situ concentration monitoring has been provided elsewhere, The voltage was measured when a mixture (slurry or filter cake) was present between the electrodes, and at least one set of electrodes measured the voltage when clean liquid (filtrate) was present. Thus it was possible to calculate the conductivity ratio ( During filtration the cumulative filtrate volume was also recorded automatically by the PC via the balance. This provided data on the filtrate rate and information on the local solid concentration with respect to filtration time. These data were used to assess the reliability of the filter simulations. Average filtration parameters, specific resistance and dry cake solids per unit volume of filtrate, were determined using the conventional filtration analysis technique represented by Eq. The agreement between the data representing the individual filtration tests and the single pressure incremented test is reasonable, up until the final constant pressure filtration at 2.8 bar. The deduced values for cake specific resistance come from the gradient of the lines shown in The time at which the pressure was incremented to a new value is evident in The deduced values for the filtration constants, using the individual filtration data in In Dry solids throughput was deduced by the product of the filtrate volume ( A similar productivity comparison was performed to compare the importance, or otherwise, of iteratively deducing the pressure forming the filter cake; for use in Eqs. Under the selected conditions for the simulation, there is no significant difference in results from the more complex simulation, using the iterated values for cake forming pressure in Eqs. The pressure drop over the filter cake rapidly increases from zero, at the start of the filtration, to about 54 kPa after 100 s. After 300 s, the cake forming pressure is at 58 kPa, which is still marginally below the full pressure drop applied to the filtration of 65 kPa. Thus it appears that about 80–100 s are required for the pressure forming the filter cake to stabilise and that about 12% of the total pressure difference is required to force the filtrate through the filter medium. The filter cake specific resistance follows the cake forming pressure profile, in accordance with Eq. In The height of the filter cake after just 10 s of filtration can be seen to be only 2 mm, which is unlikely to give satisfactory cake discharge. Furthermore, the rheology of cakes, pastes and suspensions is such that it is usual for cakes to be very loose up to a threshold value of concentration. Above that threshold the cake would be firmer and discharge more readily. In the absence of some testwork it would be impossible to say if this material is above or below that threshold after 10 s filtration, but if that value is known, or can be estimated, then the simulation could be used to investigate suitable operating conditions required to achieve that condition for adequate cake discharge. Two further filtration times are considered: cake form times of 30 and 60 s, corresponding to drum speeds of 0.5 and 0.25 rpm respectively. When filtering a material such as that illustrated it can be seen that very slow drum speeds are required in order to obtain filter cake heights suitable for discharge by a scraper. The slow drum speed also results in a greater cake concentration next to the filter medium, enhancing the likelihood of the right rheological properties for easy cake discharge. A rule based expert system for solid–liquid separation equipment selection and elimination, which is freely accessible via the Internet, has been described. It has an expanding database of equipment types and links to another database of appropriate equipment suppliers. Equipment simulation, or modelling, is facilitated by another database of filtration constants, reproduced in Simulation of the kaolin filtration showed that the local concentration profile of the forming filter cake could be reliably predicted, as the calculated profile matched that obtained by experimental analysis using an electrical conductivity technique for in situ concentration measurement. A simple and single filtration test, in which the filtration pressure started at a low value and was incrementally increased up to the highest cake forming pressure, provided sufficient data to give a reasonable estimate of the filtration constants, such as those shown in A comparison of simulations, using a complex approach in which the filter cake was built up layer-by-layer, and the filter cake properties ascertained at each layer by an iterative procedure; was compared to the simple approach of using an average value of cake specific resistance and average cake concentration valid over the entire filtration process. In the latter case, these averages were determined by assuming that all the pressure drop for the filtration acted over the filter cake. In the former case, the pressure drop over the cake was iteratively deduced. For productivity calculations, such as dry cake mass, or filtrate volume, as a function of time over large filtration periods the simple average value approach was adequate. There was only a negligible difference in predicted throughputs using these two different approaches. However, for detailed analysis of the local cake concentration, with respect to height, the incremental and iterative approach is to be preferred. The approach based on average values will always provide the same dimensionless concentration profile, in accordance with Eq. The filtration constants provided in