Two interstitial free high strength (IFHS) steels of comparable chemistries but processed through batch annealing and continuous annealing routes have been studied. The near absence of FeTiP and presence of a large volume fraction of TiC are considered to be primarily responsible for the sharp {111} texture in the CA steel. The steels for this study were industrially prepared and their chemical compositions are given in The as-received steel samples were studied using an optical microscope and a scanning electron microscope (SEM) equipped with an energy dispersive spectrometer (EDS) to reveal overall structures and bigger size precipitates (>0.5 The mechanical properties, such as yield strength, tensile strength and percentage elongation, along with the average Optical micrographs ( The next important precipitate observed is TiC. Both the steels reveal the presence of TiC precipitates. However, the number and size of these precipitates vary between the two steels. Steel 1 reveals the presence of a smaller number of TiC precipitates of sizes ranging between 200 and 300 Very often precipitation of FeTiP takes place over TiC particles in steel 1, suggesting that FeTiP can form only after TiC formation. This can be seen in  A general observation that can be made from the SEM and TEM micrographs is that TiN is the most common precipitate in both steels, and the particles are much bigger in size compared with the other precipitates in these steels. TiC is the next important precipitate present in the steels. TiC particles are larger in steel 1 (∼200–300 The main difference in precipitation behavior between these two steels arises with respect to the precipitation of phosphides. Steel 1 shows a large volume fraction of FeTiP precipitates with an Fe:Ti:P ratio close to 1:1:1. These precipitates are found to be present inside the grains as well as on the grain boundaries. In contrast, in steel 2, fewer FeTiP-type compounds have been identified, and invariably the P content in these is very low or practically nil. Probably at a high annealing temperature, as in the case of steel 2, Fe and Ti instantaneously form some clusters and P starts diffusing in slowly. However, there is not enough time for the P atoms to diffuse completely, resulting in Fe–Ti compounds with very little or no P. In contrast, in steel 1, there is time for the P atoms to diffuse in and this ultimately results in the formation of FeTiP precipitates. A comparison of the texture data of these two steels reveals that steel 2 possesses a higher The much better properties of steel 2 as compared with steel 1 can be attributed to the following: In steel 1, TiC precipitation is not complete because of a higher volume fraction of FeTiP precipitation. FeTiP is said to have better stability than TiC at the batch annealing temperature As FeTiP precipitates are often found to exist on the grain boundaries of steel 1, it appears that these precipitates may restrict the growth of {1 In summary: CA IFHS steels show better properties as compared with their BA counterparts with almost identical chemistries. The size of the TiC precipitates in BA IFHS steels is normally bigger as compared with CA IFHS steels. FeTiP precipitates may hinder the growth of {1 Either or both of the above phenomena may play a vital role in the deterioration of the deep drawing characteristics of BA steels. FeTiP, strictly speaking, is not a chemical compound. Rather, it is a solid solution of Fe, Ti and P with extended solid solubility for the different elements.