Aiming at improving the efficiency of cavitation treatment, this work investigates characteristics of acoustic streaming and cavitation generated in water by dumbbell-shaped sonotrodes with plane, truncated and conical tips. The main emphasis was placed on elucidating the effects of tip shape and vibration amplitude ranged from 40 to 60 
                        
                           μ
                           m
                        
                     . The PIV technique and Weissler reaction were used to measure flow pattern and velocity of acoustic streaming, and cavitation efficiency, respectively. To provide a theoretical explanation to the experimental results, a self-developed mathematical model was used to simulate the acoustic streaming and predict the size of cavitation zone numerically.
                  Both the experimental and numerical results revealed that the sonotrode tip shape affects the acoustic streaming significantly, altering the flow magnitude and direction from fast and downward under the plane and truncated tips to relatively slow and upward near the conical tip. Besides, the conical tip provides a more efficient cavitation treatment in comparison with the plane and truncated tips. The simulation results showed that widening of cavitation zone and altering of acoustic streaming velocity and direction near the sonotrode tip are responsible for the enhancement of cavitation treatment efficiency.It has been long recognized that most of the effects of ultrasonic radiation in liquids is related to two phenomena: acoustic cavitation and acoustic streaming. There is a vast number of studies that has investigated acoustic cavitation both experimentally and theoretically. Examples include but not limited to such fields as sonochemistry, cleaning, wastewater treatment, biotechnology, medicinal treatment, polymer and mineral engineering, metal casting. The results of these investigations have been published in a number of books It is well known that the sonotrode design must meet resonance conditions which impose constraints on the size, shape, and material that can be employed in designing the sonotrodes. These constraints are especially severe for high-temperature applications, because in these cases the sonotrode material must resist well cavitation erosion, thermal shock, and high temperature oxidation. For example, in the ultrasonic casting of aluminum alloys, the choice of sonotrode materials is limited to refractory metals such as niobium or advanced ceramics such as silicon nitride and sialon In most cases, such a rod-type sonotrode is submerged into the liquid from the top to generate a cavitation field underneath the sonotrode tip. This inevitably causes acoustic streaming which is defined as a steady fluid motion caused by attenuation of the energy of the ultrasonic waves in fluids. Generally, there exist three types of acoustic streaming differing in their scale, L compared to the length of the ultrasound wave, λ: large ( As the acoustic streaming is directed away from sonotrode tip surface, it can affect residence time of liquid in the zone of intense cavitation. This may cause both favorable and adverse effects on the cavitation treatment efficiency. Therefore, measures should be taken to control the liquid flow near the sonotrode tip. Particularly, in continuous ultrasonic processing, i.e., when liquid can pass through the cavitation zone only once, the control of liquid flow near the sonotrode tip is one of the most significant factors that affect the process efficiency. In batch or semi-batch ultrasonic processing, the large-scale acoustic streaming causes circulation of liquid in a vessel used for the treatment. It is well known that in such areas as sonochemistry, nanoparticle synthesis or dispersion, the ultrasonic effects are strongly dependent on cavitation intensity and time during which the liquid flows through the cavitation zone. In this case, the best conditions can be expected either when liquid flows slowly through the zone of intense cavitation, or when liquid flows fast but repeatedly pass through this zone during the treatment. Therefore, in batch and semi batch-type processing too, the control of acoustic streaming driven flow inside the treatment vessel is also one of the key factors influencing the processing efficiency. Several aspects of acoustic streaming in sonicated liquids have been investigated in recent years. In these studies, ultrasonic vibrations at frequencies of 17–20 kHz were introduced in water or other transparent liquids through rod-type sonotrodes with flat tips. Particle Image Velocimetry (PIV), laser Doppler anemometry (LDA) and numerical simulation have been used as tools to measure or predict the velocity of acoustic streaming in vessels of different geometry Thus, although recent studies have suggested a close interrelationship between cavitation and acoustic streaming, key factors controlling both the cavitation activity and acoustic streaming characteristics are still far from being well understood. It has been reported that most of the ultrasonic energy is dissipated in 2% of the total volume of the liquid just below sonotrode The ultrasonic system used in this study was designed on the basis of a commercially available ultrasonic installation (DG2000, Telsonic). Three types of ultrasonic dumbbell sonotrodes were applied to introduce ultrasonic vibrations in a liquid bath. The sonotrodes had plane, truncated conical and full conical tips. The tip dimensions are shown in the left part of The sonotrode was connected to a piezoceramic transducer powered by an ultrasonic generator which had a unit for automatic tracking and tuning of the resonance frequency in the range of 18.9–21.2 kHz. The displacement amplitude of the sonotrodes tip were in the range of 25–70 Two kinds of experiments were carried out using the above ultrasonic installation. The main series of experiments was aimed at measuring the acoustic streaming velocity under the sonotrode tips. Another series of experiments was conducted to examine the cavitation intensity under various experimental conditions. Below is a detailed description regarding the experimental setup and procedure. Particle Image Velocimetry (PIV) was used to measure the velocity of acoustic streaming in the present study. The experimental setup is schematically shown in Besides, the presence of bubbles in the projected area may affect the PIV measurements. Observations revealed that two kinds of bubbles exist in cavitation zone: fine cavitation bubbles and larger bubbles which probably formed as a result of fine bubble coalescence. The large bubbles reached several hundred microns in size and were observed to move faster than tracer particles. It is to be noted that the similar phenomenon has been documented by other researches The potassium iodide (KI) dosimetry was used to evaluate the cavitation treatment efficiency in water. This technique has been widely used in sonochemical investigations It is to be noted that although acoustic streaming is considered to be a steady flow, ultrasonic vibrations and cavitation bubbles make it highly turbulent. These phenomena have been well documented in the relevant literature First, acoustic streaming velocities, generated under various tip sonotrodes were measured and compared at a constant amplitude of 40 Under the truncated tip ( Acoustic streaming generated under the conical tip is most slow among all others. Thus, an important point to be noted from  It is particularly remarkable that the above dependences between In this part, an effect of vibration amplitude on cavitation treatment efficiency was investigated. Details on the experimental procedure and measurement technique have been given in the above section. During these experiments, careful attention was paid to make the ultrasonic irradiation surface of sonotrodes as equal as possible. For this purpose, in the experiments using the conical tip, the sonotrode was positioned so that the conical part was fully submerged into the liquid bath. In the experiments using plane and truncated tips, the submerged depths were set as 12.9 mm and 8.2 mm respectively, that made the areas of wetted surface the same, about 3647 mm Typical measurement results are shown in As it is clear from the above results, at the same vibration amplitude, the conical tip yields a higher efficiency of cavitation treatment compared to the plane and truncated tips. At the same time, the velocity of acoustic streaming is significantly lower than that for the other tips. In this section, an attempt is made to find out reasonable explanations on the obtained results. For this purpose, a simplified model was developed to predict the size of cavitation zone and pattern of acoustic streaming under the sonotrode tip area. The main simplifications and assumptions of the model can be formulated as follows Time variation of bubble size due to oscillation rectified diffusion and coalescence is ignored. Therefore, all computations were performed with a constant size of cavitation bubbles (hereinafter simply referred to as “bubbles”). However, the above phenomena were taken into account indirectly by setting an enlarged bubble size. Details will be described later. Axisymmetric geometry. It is to be noted that similar simplifications have been made by other authors. For example, Jamshidi and Brenner In the present study, numerical simulation was performed at a frequency of 20 kHz and ambient pressure of 1.013 × 10 As mentioned in the introduction section, high intense cavitation zone is formed in the immediate vicinity of sonotrode surfaces, with the intensity decreasing with distance from the surface. It is well known that the acoustic cavitation can occur if the vibration amplitude and corresponding acoustic pressure, Propagation of acoustic wave in a bubbly liquid can be described by the linearized Helmholtz equation as follows The resonant frequency of bubble where The above equations were solved numerically using the freely-available package OpenFOAM. To eliminate the complex conjugate (OpenFOAM restriction), Eq. According to Ref. The Eqs. The boundary conditions at the free surface of water bath and the vessel walls were set taking into account the reflection coefficient of sound wave calculated from the impedance mismatch for water-air and water-glass, respectively. Since the calculations revealed that the reflection coefficients are close to 1, the full reflection condition was set at all surfaces involved in the numerical analysis as follows 3) At the sonotrode surface, the amplitude of acoustic pressure was defined as where The bubble size, The simulation was performed for the plane and conical tips. The irradiated surfaces used in the CFD are the whole conical surface in the case of conical sonotrode and the end surface in the case of plane sonotrode. Some comments should be made regarding the values of bubble volume fraction, In order to show more clearly how the sound pressure varies with the distance from the sonotrode tip, the predicted pressure distribution is presented in It is assumed in the present model that the main origin of acoustic streaming is the Bjerknes force acting on bubbles in an acoustic field. It should be stressed that in a strong cavitation field where enormous number of bubbles exist, ultrasound waves are rapidly attenuated that causes a gradual reduction in the sound pressure with distance from the sonotrode tip. As a result, the net Bjerknes force is always directed away from the sonotrode tip forcing cavitation bubbles to move along the direction of wave propagation. These moving bubbles entrain the surrounding liquid into a stream motion, which is commonly termed acoustic streaming. It is noteworthy that this hypothesis has often been used to explain the acoustic streaming phenomena Bjerknes force, Details of derivation of this equation are given in Taking into account that the number of bubbles in a grid cell, Therefore, the volumetric force, This force was inserted into the Navier–Stokes equations to determine the flow pattern of acoustic streaming. The direction of force is directly calculated by the pressure gradient, which is calculated by solving Eq. The two-phase fluid (liquid and bubbles) is assumed to be a single-phase fluid because the bubble volume ratio is very low. The physical properties are independent of the bubble volume ratio and temperature. The fluid is assumed to be incompressible and Newtonian. The dynamic deformation of free surface is neglected. The above numerical model was also solved by an open-source software OpenFOAM. The solver for the newly developed equation is implemented into the software.   Thus, despite a number of simplifications, the present model provides a satisfactory agreement with the experimental data regarding cavitation and acoustic streaming phenomena. The sonotrode with plane tip produces a comparatively small cavitation zone underneath the tip with a steep acoustic pressure gradient in the vertical direction across the zone. These results in relatively fast acoustic streaming also directed vertically. In the case of conical tip, the acoustic pressure distribution is quite different. Because ultrasound is irradiated from a wider and inclined surface, the cavitation zone formed is wider than that under the plane tip. The pressure gradient across such a zone is gentler that makes the liquid to flow slower. Moreover, as the pressure values and its gradient direction are slightly changed along the tip surface, this causes a suction effect of liquid at the cone point. As a result, liquid flows upward through the cavitation zone near the tip surface. Thus, introduction of ultrasonic vibrations in liquid through the sonotrode with conical tip allows creating a synergetic effect resulting in significant improvement of cavitation treatment efficiency and suppression of acoustic streaming. Since this approach is simple and requires only changing the shape of sonotrode tip, it is expected that the results of this investigation could be of practical use for ultrasonic processing which uses immersed sonotrodes. In this paper, acoustic streaming and cavitation generated by ultrasonic sonotrodes with plane, truncated and conical tips were investigated experimentally and numerically. The main emphasis was placed on elucidating the effect of vibration amplitude on the flow pattern of acoustic streaming and cavitation treatment efficiency using the PIV technique and Weissler reaction, respectively. A self-developed numerical model was used to simulate the above phenomena. The main conclusions drawn from this study are as follows. The sonotrode tip shape affects the acoustic streaming significantly. The plane and truncated tips produce downward-directed acoustic streaming under the tips, the velocity of which is increased with vibration amplitude. The conical tip generates slower and more complicated streaming. In the central part below the tip, the streaming is directed upward. This tendency is especially apparent under the smallest amplitude examined, 40 Cavitation treatment efficiency is higher for the conical tip than for the plane and truncated tips. This difference is especially significant at smaller vibration amplitudes and becomes less as the amplitude increases. The numerical results are in reasonably good agreement with the experimental observations. Particularly, the size of cavitation zone near the conical tip is predicted to be significantly larger than that near the planar tip. Also, the numerical simulation is capable of predicting the downward acoustic streaming under the planar tip and upward one near the conical tip. The above two phenomena, namely widening of cavitation zone and altering of acoustic streaming direction near the sonotrode tip are responsible for the enhancement of cavitation treatment efficiency. It is expected that, due to its simplicity, the proposed approach is well suited for practical application to ultrasonic processing which uses immersed sonotrodes. This work was supported by As indicated by O. Louisnard In the present study, the sound pressure is expressed as the sum of the real and imaginary parts, Preliminary simulation showed that As reported by T. J. O. Louisnard