An extraction of a basic dye, Malachite Green (MG) from synthetic and real wastewaters solution was carried out by using polymer inclusion membrane (PIM). The PIM consists of poly(vinyl) chloride (PVC) as base polymer, bis-(2-ethylhexyl) phosphate (B2EHP) as extractant and dioctyl phthalate (DOP) as plasticizer. The composition of the components were varied to determine the optimum composition of the membrane with better extraction ability. After optimization the composition of PIM, the average extraction efficiency achieved was >98% for MG concentration of 20–80mgL−1. The PIM was characterized by Fourier Infrared Spectroscopy (FTIR), Thermogravimetric Analysis (TGA) and Scanning Electron Microscopy (SEM) methods PIM produced in this study is mechanical and chemically stable. Finally, the PIM was applied to remove MG in the wastewater samples. Results showed that average percent extraction achieved for MG were >98% and >96%, for both wastewater samples of 50 and 100mgL−1 respectively.In 21st century, numbers of synthetic dyes are used in many industries, for example paper, rubber, textile, cosmetic, plastic, food pesticide and leather for colouring their product or other different purpose due to their ease and cost effectiveness in synthesis, firmness, stability in light and resistance to aerobic bio-oxidation compared to natural dyes As a dye, malachite green (MG) is commonly used in the production of textiles materials and paper products Thus, it is environmentally crucial to remove the colour synthetic organic dyestuff from waste effluents. It is rather difficult to treat dye effluents because of their synthetic origins and their mainly aromatic structures, which are biologically non-degradable In recent studies, several method of physio-chemical decolorization have been developed, for instance membrane separation, electrochemical, flocculation–coagulation, reverse osmosis, chemical oxidation and photocatalytic processes, adsorption and liquid-liquid extraction Among membrane technologies, liquid membranes have acquired a prominent role for their use in separation, purification or other analytical applications such as biomedicine, ion selective electrodes, effluent treatment and hydrometallurgy There are several main types of liquid membrane, namely bulk liquid membranes (BLM), emulsion liquid membranes (ELM), supported liquid membranes (SLM) and polymer inclusion membranes (PIM). SLM extractions process can selective removes the selected analyte in single step and hence, it has great potential for large scale application In recent years, PIM has proved to have properties making them extremely attractive for application to a wide range of separation problems In addition, PIM is better than SLM because it incorporates a liquid extractant which acts as a carrier but differ in that the carrier is held within the membrane polymeric structure instead of being dissolved in a diluent and held by capillary forces within the relatively large pores of a polymeric support. This proves that PIM has a longer lifetime and greater stability with respect to the loss of the membrane liquid phase to the aqueous phase than SLM The objective of this study is to investigate the PIM consisting of PVC as base polymer, bis-(2-ethylhexyl) phosphate (B2EHP) as extractant and ioctyl phthalate (DOP) as plasticizer for extracting the basic cationic dye MG from wastewater solution. The composition of the PIM and the initial dye concentration have been optimized. Poly(vinyl) chloride (PVC), bis-(2-ethylhexyl) phosphate (B2EHP), dioctyl phthalate (DOP), nitric acid (65%) were obtained from Aldrich. Tetrahydrofuran (THF) and Malachite green (MG) were obtained from QRëC. The structure of MG is given in The PIM prepared in this study is similar to that prepared by Suah et al. Next, the casting solution was spread evenly on a 9 A static batch cell consists of two electrolyte compartments of dimensions 4.7 The batch cell consists of two phases which were feeding and receiving phases ( The second stage of the experiment was extraction of MG using the optimized PIM. At this stage, the experiment was carried out by varying the concentration of feeding solution, MG to 20, 40, 60, 80, 100 Aliquots of feeding solutions were sampled every 30 The analysis of raw materials of the PIM were carried out with Perkin-Elmer FT-IR in range 600–4000 Scanning Electron Microscopy (SEM) (Leo Supra 50 VP Field Emission) was used to study the surface morphologies of PVC membrane, PVC: DOP membrane and PVC: B2EHP: DOP membrane. The membranes were cut into a size of 5 The raw materials of making PIM and the PIM were tested with thermal gravimetric analysis by using METTLER TOLEDO model Thermal gravimetric analysis (TGA) with a temperature range from 0 The experiments were carried out by varying the PIM compositions. A volume of 100 Initially, aliquots of 2.5 The procedure in 2.7.1 was repeated but the feeding solutions used were 20, 40, 60, 80, 100 The wastewater containing dye was provided by a textile company located in Pulau Pinang, Malaysia. The physico-chemical characteristics of MG wastewater are presented in FTIR spectral characterization was used to determine functional groups present in each samples. The spectra of PVC, B2EHP, DOP and PIM I were shown in One important aspect of PIM was the microstructure of the membrane materials that identified the distribution of extractant in the polymer matrix and affected the membrane transport efficiency. The results of SEM consistently showed the influence of the polymeric composition on the membrane morphology From the SEM results shown in The change in membrane structure PIM is one of the factors driving the increase in the movement of ions across the membrane as B2EHP seeks to provide micro channels in the membrane structure to accelerate the movement of ions. In addition, the PIM showed the physical properties such as homogeneous and soft. Also, DOP increase the mechanical strength of membrane since it bound to PVC, indicating PIM contained good mechanical strength. TGA measures the amount and rate (velocity) of change in the mass of a sample as a function of temperature or time in a controlled atmosphere. The measurements are used primarily to determine the thermal or oxidative stabilities of materials as well as their compositional properties In this study, TGA analysis was done by measuring the weight loss of PVC, B2EHP, DOP and PIM (PVC: B2EHP: DOP) as a function of temperature in a controlled atmosphere. The calorimetry TGA (% of weight loss against temperature) for PVC, B2EHP, DOP and PIM (PVC: B2EHP: DOP) each showed a different in the curve since PIM had three main steps to lose weight while the other components had only one or two steps to lose weight. According to the thermogram of PVC ( The thermogram of PIM ( Transport in PIM was carried out by an extractant that is essentially a complexing agent or an ion-exchanger. The complex or ion-pair formed between the ion and the extractant was solubilized in the membrane and facilitates ion transport across the membrane Hence, cationic forms of dyes are extracted across the hydrophobic membrane with high values of the extraction efficiency. The cationic dye formed a neutral ion pair complex with the anionic carrier as shown in equation below indicating the exchange between H The PIM was prepared in five different compositions, (I) PVC 50 Among the five types of membrane, the one which had the highest percent of extraction (E%) was PIM I with composition of PVC 50 Result from The effect of initial concentration on the extraction efficiency was studied on PIM I. The concentration of MG was varied from range 20 Theoretically, the percent extraction decrease with increasing initial dye concentration due to the membrane saturation and lower efficiency membrane area. However, the E% for PIM I was almost constant in the interval 20 to 80 pH of the feeding solution is very of important parameter in the extraction experiment. Here, the effect of pH on the extraction percentage of MG from the aqueous solution was studied (from pH 3.0 to 9.0). It was found that the extraction of MG is highest at pH 5.0 ( Finally the prepared PIM was tested with the MG from wastewater samples. The MG wastewater sample were diluted to 50 and 100 An easy, effective and cost effective method was presented for the extraction of MG from the wastewater. The present work has shown that the extraction process was carried out successfully. This method used the PIM consisting PVC as base polymer, B2EHP as extractant and DOP as plasticizer. The extraction process is based on the use of B2EHP that transfer quantitatively MG species from an aqueous feeding phase into another aqueous receiving phase through a solid organic phase, PIM. The efficiency depended on three parameters, i.e. the optimization of membrane, the initial dye concentration and pH of the feeding solution. By using the best PIM with a composition of PVC 50 Authors would like to thank