Mechanical Biological Treatment inert reject (MBTr) is mostly composed by recyclable glass. Yet, it is usually sent to landfills because, due to the small particle size and high level of particle surface organic contamination, the processes commonly used in glass recycling, like optical sorting, are inefficient in the separation of glass from contaminants. This paper presents the results of a study undertook to characterize MBTr, aiming at the subsequent separation of recyclable glass from contaminants.
                  A representative sample of the reject from a MBT plant was collected. The particle size analysis was carried out and the composition of the different size fractions was determined. It was found that the MBTr sample was composed by almost 80% of recyclable glass. The product is quite fine. About 80% in weight of the product has a particle size lower than 10mm. However, the size fraction below 2mm is insignificant since it represents less than 3% in weight and contains less than 1% of the recyclable glass in MBTr. Using methods of image analysis, the shape of each individual particle, separated by material class and by size fraction, was evaluated. It was observed that the average shape of the particles of “stone”, the main contaminant, is significantly different from the shape of other materials, including recyclable glass. Gravity concentration methods may take advantage of the shape of the particles and are thus potentially adequate to recover recyclable glass from MBT.Mechanical Biological Treatment (MBT) is widely used today to process Municipal Solid Residues ( Optical sorting, widely used in the selective deposition stream processing and in a few MBT plants to separate recyclable glass in coarse fractions (above approximately 10 Due to the similar density of most of the materials that compose MBTr, gravity methods of separation are normally not considered. However, beyond the distributions of particle size and materials density, particle shape plays a chief role in gravity concentration. For example, particle shape is commonly used as a differentiating property in coal beneficiation ( The aim of this study is to characterize the MBTr product in terms of particle size fraction and particle shape, both globally and by type of material, for evaluation of the potential to recover the recyclable glass by gravity concentration. Concerning particle shape, surface shape factors can be estimated by different techniques such as microscopy, sedimentation and elutriation ( A representative sample of MBT reject, weighing approximately 60 When received at the laboratory, the sample was quite wet and the particles were covered with a thin layer of organic matter. After some days and sample manipulation the particles became dry and cleaner. Firstly, the particle size distribution and the composition analysis were carried using one of the sub-samples, and then the process was repeated with the other. As the results matched, there was no need to replicate the analysis using any of the other 15 fractions previously put in reserve. A Fritsch Analysette 3 Spartan apparatus was used in this task. The dry particle size analysis was carried out using the DIN 4188 sieving series with 16.0, 11.2, 8.0, 5.6, 4.0, 2.8 and 2.0 The particle composition was determined by manual sorting. The following eight classes of material were considered: recyclable glass (RG), “non-recyclable glass” such as lamps and plain glass (NRG), ceramics (Cer), stones (St), bricks (Br), metals (M), plastic (Pl) and “other” (Ot). In the fractions with particle size larger than 2.0 The −2.0 The evaluation of the shape of each particle was carried out by means of an image analysis procedure, similar to the one developed for studying sediments (    The choice of the number of particles to examine is always a key issue for statistical significance which relies in the characterization of a large number of particles. In this study, due to the small amount of particles in some composition/size classes of particles, no prior sampling was made before image analysis and the whole composition/size class was used. This means that the average values were calculated with different numbers of particles. As can be observed in  From the analysis of particle size distribution and composition, it is quite obvious that the fraction with particle size below 2.8 Undoubtedly, fractions with particle size higher than 4.0  The scatter-plot shown in  On the contrary, particles of glass (recyclable and non-recyclable) that exhibit well-marked angular edge patterns have, accordingly, lower values of both indexes indicating that they are less circular and isotropic. The two types of glass particles belong to the same morphological cluster. The results obtained show that a significant difference in particle shape exists between the “recyclable glass” and the contaminant occurring in higher percentage, the “stones”. The minimum difference in CI values between these two classes of materials is of 13%, in the 8.0–11.2 It should be pointed out that the sample studied is representative of the reject from the Tratolixo MBT plant. The composition of the feed of the different MBT plants and, consequently, of the respective rejects can be quite different depending primarily on the solid waste management policy, particularly, if there is an adequate selective deposition system. If this is implemented and works correctly, promoting the recovery of packaging glass, it should obviously be expected that, for instance, the MBT plant reject contained a minor percentage of glass. But this depends on other important factors too, such as location (urban or rural) and citizen behavior, which is mostly determined by educational policies and economic issues. Furthermore, the upstream processing, namely sorting, screening and handling, affects the physical properties, namely particle size and shape, and the composition of the MBT inert reject. Therefore, the study presently carried out will be continued with the analysis of the products of other MBT plants. Experimental work was carried out in the characterization by particle size and shape and material composition of the inert reject from a standard Mechanical and Biological Treatment plant (MBTr). It was found that MBTr is a product highly rich in recyclable glass (approximately 80% content), and as such represents a high amount of material that today is sent to landfills due to the lack of technical and economical solutions. The fraction of MBTr with particle size below 4.0 The main conclusion is that the use of techniques that are new to the recycling field, such as image analysis, can provide a more complete characterization of the MBTr materials and thus contribute to a higher recovery of recyclable glass. The authors acknowledge Tratolixo for supplying the sample used in this study.