Bacterial leaching of the copper dust emanating from smelting furnaces of Sarcheshmeh Copper Mine has been studied. The present procedure to treat the dust which consists of about 30% copper is included in its collection and sending back to the furnace. Regarding the considerable amount of copper oxide minerals in the dust, a sulphuric acid leaching process was performed prior to bacterial leaching. Shake flask experiments were run using a mixed culture of thiobacilli and the effects of some parameters such as culture medium and pulp density on copper extraction were studied. Copper recoveries in 5% pulp density of inoculated and control flasks after 22 days incubation were 87% and 38%, respectively.Reverberatory and converter smelting furnaces in Sarcheshmeh Copper Mine produce nearly 50 The samples for bioleaching experiments were taken from furnace dust collectors. Particle size analysis of dust by screening and syclosizer showed that about 80% of dust particles are finer than 80 Copper dust bioleaching experiments were started in 500 To investigate the effect of nutrient medium composition on copper extraction, some of the most common nutrient media were used. Results of influence of nutrient medium on the redox potential of pulp in different media are shown in  Copper dust emanating from the Sarcheshmeh furnaces was a suitable substrate for bioleaching process and as chalcocite was the main copper mineral, mesophilic bacteria degraded it easily. Increasing the pulp density created a condition with higher toxicity and shear stress and decreased the mass transfer, all of that resulted in slowing down the process rate and copper recovery. There for by increasing the solid weight percentage in the pulp, more microorganisms and richer nutrient medium are needed. In optimum conditions nearly 87% of copper was recovered from Sarcheshmeh furnaces dust within 22 days. Consequently, biotechnology as a powerful and cost-effective technology is able to solve many environmental problems by converting the polluted materials to valuable species.