Multi-objective differential evolution (MODE) is used to optimize an industrial styrene reactor considering productivity, selectivity and yield as the main objectives. Two reactor configurations (single bed adiabatic operation and steam injected pseudo-isothermal operation) and four combinations of objectives consisting of 5 and 7 variables respectively are considered. Pareto optimal solutions are obtained for all combinations of objective functions for both the configurations. The results are compared with those reported in the literature and an industrial operating point. For all the cases considered, MODE is able to give a Pareto front better (in terms of wider range and a better spread) than that obtained using NSGA for both the configurations. Steam injected reactor configuration is better than the adiabatic reactor configuration in terms of performance. The Pareto optimal solutions obtained from such studies provide a wide range of optimal operating conditions from which an appropriate operating point can be selected based on the requirements of the decision maker.Styrene, C Optimization is use of specific methods/tools to evaluate the most efficient and cost effective feasible solution to a problem. The need for finding such optimal solutions in a problem comes mostly from the extreme purpose of either designing a solution for minimum possible cost of fabrication, or for maximum possible profit and/or reliability, or minimum waste generation, or maximum yield/selectivity, or others. Because of such extreme properties of the desired objectives, the optimization methods are of great importance in practice, particularly in the engineering design, the scientific experiments and the business decision-making. Most of the traditional optimization algorithms based on the gradient methods (e.g. Newton's method, Steepest Descent, Quasi-Newton method, etc.) ( In the recent years, non-traditional search and optimization methods based on the natural phenomena, such as simulated annealing (SA), genetic algorithms (GA), differential evolution (DE), self organizing migrating algorithms (SOMA), particle swarm optimization (PSO), tabu search (TS), scatter search (SS), and ant colony optimization (ACO) have been developed to overcome the problems associated with the traditional optimization methods ( The expected outcome of MOEAs is that it should result in a set of solutions which are non-dominated with respect to each other. A solution The solution The solution Some of the popular MOEAs are non-dominated sorting genetic algorithms (NSGA) ( Differential evolution (DE), which was originally developed by developed by MODE was found to give a better Pareto front ( Capturing a better set of non-dominated solutions (local Pareto front vs. near global or the global Pareto front) with better spread. Improved diverse set of non-dominated solutions with appropriate Euclidean distance and covering a wider range. More number of non-dominated solutions on the Pareto front. Adiabatic dehydrogenation is the most widely used technology for the production of commercial grade styrene ( The major aromatic byproducts from the dehydrogenation of ethyl benzene are benzene and toluene. The light gases produced from the reaction include hydrogen, carbon dioxide, carbon monoxide, methane and ethylene. The main reaction in the styrene reactor is the reversible endothermic conversion of ethyl benzene to styrene and hydrogen (Eq. The flow in the reactor is considered to be Plug flow for simulation of both adiabatic and pseudo-isothermal configurations. Axial dispersion is neglected in pseudo-homogeneous model and any limitation of mass or heat transfer to the catalyst pellet or diffusion within the pellet is lumped into the rate constants. Simultaneous maximization of three-objectives namely styrene productivity ( For the optimization of styrene reactor, the decision variables were chosen from the operating variables of existing plants and from the key decision variables of the reactor ( So, for adiabatic operation five decision variables namely, feed temperature ( Apart from two additional decision variables are considered for steam injected reactor configuration, ( Constraints are incorporated into each of the objective functions mentioned above and handled using the penalty approach ( Three cases of two-objective optimization (Eqs. Pseudo-homogeneous model considered in this study consists of six equations from the material balances, one equation from the energy balance, and one from the momentum balance. All the kinetic data and model equations are taken from the literature ( The model equations for single bed and steam injected operation of styrene reactor were solved using Pentium IV, 3.33 The multi-objective optimization study of the industrial styrene reactor is carried out for the adiabatic and the steam injected operation using the multi-objective differential evolution algorithm (MODE). The values of the catalyst properties such as bulk density, particle diameter, and void fraction, etc. were used as constants, whereas the values of the inlet fluid composition and the state variables were used as the basis for deciding on the range of decision variables. The inlet temperature ( In this case, simultaneous maximization of The optimum operating conditions and the values of the objective functions for case 1 for different configurations are reported in The dependence of both the objective functions on the decision variable SOR is apparent from the trends in In case of the adiabatic operation, the optimal value of the decision variable reactant flow rate is found to touch the upper bound. As per material balance, the higher value of The multi-objective optimization of the industrial styrene reactor assuming the injection of steam at a particular location along the length of the reactor is also studied in the present study. The values of the objective functions, optimal operating parameters, the fraction of the reactor bed where steam is injected, the fraction of steam distributed and the calculated value of the third objective for steam injected operation is shown in  A profit function which considers the cost of the major feed materials (cost of ethyl benzene and steam) can be used as a further guideline for choosing the appropriate non-dominated point from the Pareto front. For this purpose, a simplified profit function (   With an increase in the number of objectives in the optimization problem, the complexity of the algorithm also increases. More meaningful and practical results can be expected, if all the objectives (such as   Multi-objective differential evolution (MODE) algorithm is used to simulate and optimize the industrial adiabatic and steam injected reactor configurations. Four sets of objective function are used for each configuration. Pareto optimal sets were successfully obtained for all the cases of both the configurations. Steam injected and adiabatic operations results are compared with industrial data and NSGA results (previous study) for two and three-objective optimization study. Based on the results obtained, the following conclusions are drawn: The Pareto front obtained using MODE algorithm is found to be better than that obtained with NSGA. The trends of decision variables obtained with respect to the objective functions are explained qualitatively and quantitatively for all the cases under consideration. Such quantitative results makes simulation results (obtained using MODE algorithm) more reliable and plant engineer can select any one of the optima depending upon his/her interest from the Pareto set in order to get maximum returns from a particular objective. Using the combination of optimum decision variables obtained using MODE found to give better values of objectives such as productivity, yield and selectivity; and a better value of profit when compared to the existing operating conditions (combination of decision variables) in the industry. The dominant decision variables responsible for obtaining the Pareto set in case 1 (Maximization of The decision variable The outcome of MODE algorithm (stochastic algorithm) largely depends upon the nature of objective space [case 3 (Maximization of Some improvements are required in MODE algorithm for obtaining a well diverse set of sufficient minimum number of solutions for the decision maker to choose from, especially in case of problems having a complex search space. Any stochastic algorithm which has limitations with respect to a method of preserving the good solutions and a greedy selection strategy may face such difficulty. The hybrid algorithms which involve combination of stochastic method (for global search) with deterministic method (for local search) may prove to be a better option to overcome such difficulty.  Six main reactions occurring in the styrene reactor are: The rates of reaction are as follows ( The six material balance equations are given by: The Ergun equation ( The molar heat capacities ( The additional data for equilibrium constant of ethyl benzene is found from the literature ( Differential evolution (DE), a real variable based optimization technique, is simple, robust, and faster in optimization among the population based search algorithms that are stochastic in nature. MODE is an extension of DE to handle multi-objective optimization problems. The flow chart for MODE is given in