Anatomic total shoulder and reverse total shoulder arthroplasties are excellent treatment options for various glenohumeral joint pathologies. Specific shoulder conditions require a tailored approach with each presenting unique technical challenges. Although infrequent, complications in shoulder arthroplasty can be complex to manage and the cause of significant patient morbidity. The presented cases provide a brief overview of the diagnostic dilemmas and treatment options for common and uncommon disorders encountered in shoulder arthroplasty.A 76-year-old male was evaluated in clinic for left shoulder pain and stiffness. He states the pain has become progressively worse over the past year and now impairs his activities of daily living. He is an active individual who previously participated in recreational sports including hockey, skiing, tennis, and swimming. Of note, the patient had a staple capsulorrhaphy performed by Dr. Harris McLaughlin on the contralateral right shoulder in the 1960s and has no complaints of pain on that side. On physical exam, the left shoulder has forward elevation of 130°, active external rotation to 30°, and internal rotation to L5. Strength testing demonstrates an intact rotator cuff with the absence of internal and external lag signs, and his neurological exam is unremarkable. His right shoulder can forwardly elevate to 160°, externally rotate to 40°, and internally rotate to T12. Standard radiographs of the right shoulder are shown in Total shoulder arthroplasty (TSA) is an excellent treatment option for the older patient with advanced glenohumeral osteoarthritis, with 95% of patients reporting significant pain relief, improved function, and increased satisfaction. In TSA, aseptic loosening of the glenoid component is the most common reason for reoperation and is responsible for most unsatisfactory results. The most common method to recreate the anatomic version during glenoid resurfacing is eccentric reaming of the anterior glenoid surface to the level of the posterior surface, thus restoring the normal center of rotation of the humeral head. Although commonly used, consensus on the maximum degree of correction during eccentric reaming remains unclear as removing excess bone can create a more severe glenoid deficiency compromising component stability and position. Most biomechanical studies defining this critical limit estimate that retroversion >15° cannot be safely corrected without compromising bone stock or leading to glenoid peg penetration. Initial treatment of the patient׳s left shoulder consisted of rotator cuff-strengthening therapy, a single glenohumeral corticosteroid injection, and regular use of anti-inflammatories. After a failure to provide significant pain relief, a left total shoulder arthroplasty was offered as definitive treatment. The patient underwent a standard deltopectoral approach utilizing subscapularis tenotomy, with a press-fit humeral component, and a cemented, pegged all-polyethylene glenoid component ( An 83-year-old female was assessed in the shoulder clinic after suffering a mechanical fall from standing height and an isolated left shoulder injury. The patient leads an active lifestyle, and her past medical history is otherwise unremarkable. On physical exam, her skin was intact with axillary ecchymosis and shoulder swelling. She was neurovascularly intact, and range-of-motion testing was deferred due to pain. Radiographic imaging demonstrated a complex 3-part proximal humerus fracture with involvement of both the anatomic and surgical necks ( Proximal humerus fractures account for nearly 5% of all fractures and are the third most common fracture type in individuals over the age of 65 years. Locking plate technology has been developed to address challenges encountered in osteosynthesis of osteoporotic bone. Pre-contoured, fixed-angled plate designs provide a mechanical advantage compared to traditional plating in fractures with metaphyseal comminution that lack bony contact opposite the plate. Indications for reverse total shoulder arthroplasty (RSA) now extend beyond the treatment of rotator cuff arthropathy. This includes the management of irreparable massive rotator cuff tears, acute fractures and their sequelae, chronic instability, revision arthroplasty, and other salvage procedures. Despite only being a 3-part proximal humerus fracture in this case, the degree of comminution is critical and, in the experience of the senior author, associated with poor outcomes when treated with hemiarthroplasty. Therefore, the patient was treated with a reverse total shoulder arthroplasty with osteosynthesis of the tuberosity fragments ( A 78-year-old retired nurse was seen in consultation for right shoulder pain. She describes a 2-year history of anterolateral shoulder pain that has acutely worsened and now wakes her from sleep. She denied any infectious symptoms. She is very active and regularly enjoys playing golf and kayaking. She has had several intraarticular corticosteroid injections in the past, which have now decreased in efficacy. Physical exam reveals 60° of forward elevation and 10° of active external rotation, both associated with crepitus. Strength testing demonstrates the absence of internal or external lag signs, and she is neurovascularly intact. X-rays of the right shoulder show humeral head deformity and cystic changes, a loss of glenohumeral joint space, and the absence of osteophytes ( Preoperative bloodwork showed a mild elevation in baseline erythrocyte sedimentation (ESR) of 28 Infections of the native adult shoulder are uncommon. Septic and indolent shoulder infections are difficult to diagnose and require a high index of suspicion and early evaluation by the clinician. Patients are often elderly and have associated medical conditions or systemic disorders including liver disease, alcoholism, and malignancies. Intraoperative findings may not be overtly suggestive of infection, especially when less virulent organisms such as This patient׳s indolent infection was unanticipated at the time of surgery. Upon further probing, the patient acknowledged receiving an intraarticular steroid injection 3 weeks earlier in the operative shoulder. Postoperatively, she underwent consultation with an infectious disease consultant and was treated with a 6-week course of parenteral antibiotics. Inflammatory markers at the first postoperative visit were 52 A 77-year-old retired physician was seen in consultation for worsening left shoulder pain over a period of 2 years. She experienced only transient relief from an intraarticular injection of her glenohumeral joint and physical therapy, and anti-inflammatories failed to control her pain. Physical exam revealed active forward elevation to 40° and active external rotation to neutral. Strength testing of the rotator cuff demonstrated 5/5 power and the absence of internal and external lag signs. Radiographs showed advanced glenohumeral osteoarthritis, flattening of the humeral head, and inferior osteophyte formation ( The postoperative course was uncomplicated, and the patient achieved a range of motion of 170° forward flexion, 60° external rotation, and internal rotation to T6. Two years after the procedure, the patient suffered a mechanical fall and an isolated posterior dislocation of the left total shoulder arthroplasty. A closed reduction was successfully performed under conscious sedation in the emergency department. She subsequently developed symptomatic posterior instability with several episodes of subluxation during sedentary activities such as elevation from a seated position. Physical exam of the left shoulder revealed a full range of motion with 5/5 strength with resisted external rotation and forward elevation. Belly-press and lift-off maneuvers were negative. In the supine position, exam was notable for significant laxity with posterior load and shift and a positive posterior jerk test. There was no evidence of fracture, component malalignment, or loosening on plain radiographs. A CT arthrogram demonstrated a disruption of the posterior soft tissue and capsular compromise ( Traumatic posterior instability in a previously well-functioning total shoulder arthroplasty is a rare occurrence. A systematic approach is required when evaluating the patient with posterior instability after total shoulder arthroplasty. Multiple etiologies exists, including improper glenoid version or size, excessive humeral retroversion, and excessive posterior capsular redundancy. Although uncommon, arthroscopy can be a useful diagnostic and therapeutic tool in evaluating the painful TSA. Advances in instrumentation and implants have expanded the pathology that can be safely and effectively managed arthroscopically. This includes the treatment of periprosthetic infection, instability, stiffness, rotator cuff tears, subacromial impingement, arthrofibrosis, and acromioclavicular joint disease. Arthroscopic posterior capsulorrhaphy has been described in the treatment of new-onset posterior instability in TSA. The patient was brought to the operating room, and exam under anesthesia revealed 3+ posterior glenohumeral translation. Diagnostic arthroscopy demonstrated a capacious posterior capsule with an extensive posteroinferior capsular tear ( A 74-year-old man was evaluated for persistent right shoulder pain for one and a half years. He had difficulty sleeping and performing overhead activities despite several glenohumeral corticosteroid injections and regular use of anti-inflammatories. The range-of-motion testing demonstrated forward elevation of 140°, 10° of external rotation, and internal rotation to L5. Physical exam was also notable for a chronic proximal biceps deformity and an intact rotator cuff. X-rays of the right shoulder were consistent with advanced glenohumeral osteoarthritis with glenoid erosion and osteophyte formation ( The deltopectoral approach in TSA requires mobilization of the subscapularis tendon to gain access to the glenohumeral joint. Traditionally, a subscapularis tenotomy or peel has been the most commonly described surgical techniques for its management. A tendon-sparing lesser tuberosity osteotomy (LTO) was introduced to avoid subscapularis muscle dysfunction postoperatively with a goal of more reliable healing and improved functional outcomes. Anterior glenohumeral instability after TSA is a challenging complication. Excessive humeral anteversion, anterior deltoid dysfunction, and subscapularis insufficiency are the main contributing factors, with the latter being the most common. The patient was taken to the operating room acutely to attempt a subscapularis repair. The subscapularis tendon was avulsed from the lesser tuberosity, and a small supraspinatus tear was also present. Intraoperative frozen sections were negative for infection and cultures were taken. Rotator cuff repair of the subscapularis and supraspinatus tendons was performed, and the humeral head size was decreased from a 52 × 19 mm to 46 × 19 mm. Despite the above treatment, the patient continued to have symptoms of pain and instability 12 weeks after the revision procedure. The distal extent of the surgical incision was erythematous, and an aspiration demonstrated a WBC in excess of 10,000 cells/μL. An elevation in inflammatory markers (ESR, 32.1 Shoulder arthroplasty is an excellent treatment modality for a variety of arthritic, traumatic, and infectious pathologies of the glenohumeral joint. The treating surgeon should be familiar with the technical challenges encountered with each indication and the potential postoperative complications. A systematic approach combined with a high level of clinical suspicion is required when evaluating the painful shoulder arthroplasty, as the diagnoses can be ambiguous and the management complex. We would like to thank Dr. Christopher Ahmad and Dr. Charles Jobin from Columbia University Medical Center for their contributions to the operative cases referenced in this article.