The quest for new nanomaterials that can efficiently catalyze reduction reactions using green transfer hydrogenation process is an important current area of research. Conventionally, NaBH4, which is both expensive and toxic, has been the reducing agent for the model catalytic reduction of p-nitrophenol (Nip) to p-aminophenol (AP). The present communication studies the application of Ag-Cu bimetallic nanoparticles (Ag-Cu BNPs) stabilized by poly-vinylpyrollidone (PVP) as catalysts for this reaction with glycerol as the green hydrogen source. Bimetallic nanoparticles with different compositions were prepared using three different ratios (1:1, 2:1 and 4:1) of precursor silver and copper salts in appropriate amount of ethylene glycol and PVP. While the XRD patterns of these nanomaterials clearly show the formation of both pure silver and copper phases, the analysis of the data obtained from their LSPR and SEM EDX elemental mapping point to the formation of phase-separated nanostructures with adjacent Ag and Cu domains. The catalytic activity of these nanomaterials with glycerol and NaBH4 as the reducing agents are investigated. Catalytic activities of these bimetallic nanoparticles in terms of turnover frequency changes with composition variation. Synergistic catalytic activity with respect to composition was observed whether NaBH4 or glycerol was used as the reductant.Discovery of nanocatalysts over which transfer hydrogenation can take place using more ecofriendly or green hydrogen sources, is at present a research area of high relevance. Glycerol is a byproduct of biodiesel industries and other industrial processes involving biomass such as during the conversion of cellulose and lignocellulose Literature suggests that few nanomaterials like Ni, Ir, Rh, Fe Catalytic activities of nanoparticles are a function of their size, shape, composition and nanostructure Bimetallic nanoparticles like Ag-Ni, Ag-Pd, Au-Cu, Pt-Ni, Ag-Cu, etc We first report the synthesis of Ag-Cu BNPs by a polyol synthesis protocol and the effect of precursor salts composition on the shape and size of bimetallic nanoparticles. These bimetallic nanoparticles are then utilized as catalysts for reducing Nip by glycerol. Reduction of Nip by NaBH Materials used for the synthesis of Ag-Cu bimetallic alloy NPs were AgNO The reaction was carried out in a standard quartz cuvette (of 1 The absorption spectrum of this reaction mixture was recorded after every 30 2 The UV–vis absorption spectra of diluted bimetallic nanoparticle sols were measured from 350 to 1100 X-ray diffraction patterns of the nanoparticle powder samples S1, S2 and S3 show five peaks at 38.18°, 44.40°, 64.66°, 77.07° and 81.25° corresponding to the [111], [200], [220], [311] and [222] planes of FCC silver. The patterns also display peaks at 43.23 and 51.02 which agree with [111] and [200] planes of FCC Copper ( To understand the nanostructure formed in bimetallic samples S1, S2 and S3, we did HR-SEM EDX elemental mapping (  UV visible spectra of Ag-Cu bimetallic nanoparticle sols are shown in At first an experiment without any catalyst (blank) was done. It was found that, whether the reducing agent was NaBH An important feature of the kinetics plot for Nip reduction by NaBH The general rate equation for Nip reduction is written in the following form. The slope of the linear fit of To find the activation energies of Nip reduction by different reducing agents (NaBH The activation energy ( The values found are given in When NaBH On the other hand, when glycerol is the reducing agent then the activation energies decrease from S1 to S3, that is, with increase in Ag component content in the Ag-Cu BNPs. The Although S3 has smallest average nanoparticle size among the three Ag-Cu BNPs, still its TOF value is the lowest. In contrast to this, the TOF value of S4 for this reaction is greater than that of S3, and nearly the same as that of S2. This set of observations may be explained by the following model. At 1:1 ratio, the micro phase-separated Ag-rich and Cu-rich domains are evenly surrounded by each other. In other words, there are more Ag-Cu phase boundaries in this nanostructure. It appears that these junctions or phase boundaries give rise to catalytic active sites. Hence, S1 has more phase boundaries and the maximum density of catalytically active sites, which result in highest catalytic activity. The density of such phase boundaries decreases as the BNPs composition changes from 1:1 to the Ag rich side. A second factor affecting the TOF results may be the anisotropic shapes that are available in S1 and S2 but not in S3. The number of active sites contributed due to anisotropic shapes decreases with increase in size of the nanoparticles as we go from S1 to S2 To sum up, the highest catalytic activity of S1 Ag-Cu BNPs for Nip reduction by NaBH As already mentioned, very few reports are available for Nip reduction with this green hydrogen source. Ag-Cu bimetallic micro phase separated nanoparticles of three different compositions have been prepared by a polyol method. Anisotropic shapes were also observed in samples consisting of Ag:Cu ratio of 1:1 and 2:1. There is synergistic increase in catalytic activity when Ag:Cu ratio is 1:1 whether Nip is reduced by NaBH One of the authors (ADV) acknowledges financial support received from Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at The following is Supplementary data to this article: