A deconvolution method that combines nanoindentation testing with finite element analysis was developed to determine elastic modulus of thin films in a film-substrate bilayer system. In this method, an iterative deconvolution approach was developed to optimize the load–displacement curve obtained from a finite element nanoindentation model towards the experimentally measured curve. The method was verified by using SiNx/Si and Ni/Si film/substrate bilayer systems fabricated under different deposition conditions. The results obtained from this method agree very well with those from an empirical method.Thin solid films are extensively used as structure materials in manufacturing, bioengineering and microelectronics industries. For structural uses, accurate measurement of mechanical properties of the films, such as elastic modulus, is essential. Among the various methods for characterizing mechanical properties of thin film materials, nanoindentation is commonly used Finite element method (FEM) analysis has been widely used to model contact problems involved in nanoindentation In this work, we investigated a deconvolution method that combined FEM optimization analysis with nanoindentation measurement. Of particular value was that the developed method utilized the nanoindentation load–displacement curve as the optimization target, rather than modulus value that is conventionally used, which significantly improved the simulation accuracy. Moreover, a multi-loop iteration was used in the finite element optimization procedure, which was able to update the targeted parameters independently, further improving the accuracy of the deconvolution method. The deconvolution method includes three modules: Experiment, FEM and Optimization, as shown in The deconvolution process can be summarized as follows. First, the mechanical properties of the substrate and the bilayer system were measured by means of nanoindentation. Second, the FEM model was initialized by using the measured data. The substrate properties, the optimization target and the testing conditions including contact depth, normal load, and indenter geometry, were input into the FEM model as constant parameters. The film property was the only variable being adjusted, based on the comparison between the target and the simulated load–displacement curves. During the FEM simulation, according to the compared result, the optimization algorithm could generate a set of the film's mechanical properties, so the FEM model could start a new simulation of indenting. The FEM simulation and the optimization worked iteratively until the difference between the measured and the simulated load–displacement curves was smaller than a pre-set tolerance value. As a result, the elastic modulus of the film could be obtained directly, and hardness could be calculated by using the existing methods In this module, nanoindentation tests were performed on a Nanomechanical Testing System (TriboIndenter™, Hysitron Inc.), with a Berkovich indenter of a tip radius of 100 SiN Nanoindentation tests were performed on Si substrate and two film/substrate bilayer systems. For Si substrate, over 20 indents were made on the substrate at loads ranging from 0.5 to 10 ABAQUS™ software package was used for FEM analysis. The previous research  Mesh studies were performed to test the accuracy of various mesh types and sizes. As mentioned previously in this section, the optimization module is an algorithm interacted with the FEM module. This algorithm was to achieve an optimized During the initialization, the optimization module divides the curve into segments, S      By the use of FEM modeling, the stress–strain relationship of the film can be achieved though no direct hardness value is resulted from. The accuracy of the FEM deconvolution method was investigated by comparing with the other FEM methods reported previously A FEM deconvolution method was developed to determine the elastic modulus of thin films deposited on a substrate. The method was tested by using the PECVD SiN HH and YTG are grateful for the financial supports from the