The paper examines the effects of preoxidation and sintering on the phase composition, specific surface area, morphology and reducibility of ilmenite concentrates. Samples were preoxidised in air or sintered in argon by temperature-programmed heating to temperatures of 600–1400°C at a ramping rate of 300°C/h. In the concentrates preoxidised at temperatures up to 800°C, ilmenite formed an intermediate product, Fe2O3·2TiO2, which decomposed into Fe2O3 and TiO2. At temperatures above 800°C, pseudorutile was transformed into ferric pseudobrookite and rutile. Haematite recombined with rutile to form pseudobrookite at temperatures above 1000°C. When samples were heated in an argon atmosphere, ferric–ferrous pseudobrookite solid solution was formed from ilmenite and pseudorutile. Preoxidation and sintering at temperatures above 600°C caused a sharp decrease in the specific surface area of samples. The specific surface area decreased by more than 97% when samples were heated to 1200°C.
                  Preoxidation enhanced while sintering retarded the reduction of iron oxides in ilmenite concentrates by methane–hydrogen gas mixtures in the temperature range of 550–800°C. Both preoxidation and sintering increased the temperature required to reduce titanium oxides. At high temperatures, such as 1200°C, the effects of preoxidation and sintering on isothermal reduction of ilmenites were negligible.Ilmenites are upgraded to synthetic rutile, with further processing to produce titanium dioxide white pigment via the chlorination process It is well recognised that preoxidation and sintering of ilmenites affect their reducibility, but literature data on this matter are inconsistent. Preoxidation increases the attainable extent of reduction of ilmenite to metallic iron and rutile; however, its effect on the reduction rate is not well established. Inconsistency among researchers and their interpretations are associated with the differences in physical structure and chemical composition of raw materials, pretreatment regimes and use of different reductants. This paper examines the changes of phase composition and the morphology of ilmenite concentrates in the preoxidation and sintering processes, and their effects on the reduction behaviour. The raw materials studied were ilmenite concentrates provided by Westralian Sands, Australia, labelled as primary ilmenite, secondary ilmenite and HYTI 70. The ilmenite compositions are given in The materials were heated to different temperatures at a constant ramping rate of 300°C/h. The heating was performed either in air for preoxidation or in argon for sintering. Preoxidation was performed in a muffle furnace with an air stream continuously blown into the furnace, and sintering was done in the reactor used for reduction experiments, with an argon stream continuously purged through the sample bed. Some samples were quenched immediately when temperature reached the predetermined values, while others were held for 3 h (2 h at 1400°C). Reduction experiments were performed in a fixed bed reactor heated in a vertical tube furnace. The schematic of the reactor and experimental procedure are described elsewhere Phase compositions of samples were analysed by powder X-ray diffraction (XRD) (Siemens D5000). The specific surface area was measured by the single-point BET technique. The sample morphology was observed with a scanning electron microscope (SEM) (Hitachi S4500). Chemically stoichiometric ilmenite, FeTiO The XRD patterns of preoxidised primary ilmenite are shown in     Reactions during preoxidation of ilmenites are summarised as follows:Oxidation of ferrous iron with the formation of an intermediate Fe Fe  Similar to primary ilmenite, the main constituent of secondary ilmenite is pseudorutile. Because of the higher degree of natural weathering, the ilmenite content is less than that of primary ilmenite while the rutile content is higher. Phase transformation of secondary ilmenite during preoxidation was also similar to the phase changes in the primary ilmenite. The new Fe With further heating the sample from 1200°C to 1400°C, rutile peaks became weaker, and the pseudobrookite peaks became remarkably stronger. Under the experimental conditions, Fe The ilmenite HYTI 70 was heavily weathered. It is mainly composed of rutile and pseudorutile phases, initially consisting of 40% rutile and 50% pseudorutile. Ilmenite content, according to chemical composition analysis, is only about 5%, and is undetectable by XRD analysis. Similar to primary and secondary ilmenites, the intermediate phase of Fe  The rutile peaks strengthened with an increase in temperature up to 1000°C, and became weaker with further increases in temperature. When heated to 1400°C and calcined for 2 h, rutile became undetectable Two weak peaks corresponding to ilmenite peaks were detected in the sample heated to 1400°C and calcined for 2 h. It is not expected for ilmenite to exist at such a high temperature. The presence of an unidentified phase cannot be excluded.  Phase changes during preoxidation and sintering were accompanied by a significant decrease in the specific surface areas (SSA). The SSA of primary and secondary ilmenites and HYTI 70, preoxidised and sintered at different temperatures, are plotted in The reduction in SSA was relatively independent of the heating atmosphere The morphology of ilmenite concentrates was observed with a scanning electron microscope (SEM). All three ilmenites investigated had very similar morphologies, as shown in Heating samples in air or argon caused a sharp decrease in their specific surface areas. The effect of pretreatment on the reducibility of ilmenites was examined by temperature-programmed reduction and isothermal reduction experiments, using methane–hydrogen–argon gas mixtures as reducing gas. Reduction of ilmenites by hydrogen was also examined by isothermal method. The extent of reduction is defined as the fraction of reducible oxygen removed from the ilmenite samples. Reducible oxygen is associated with iron and titanium oxides.  Raw, preoxidised and sintered secondary ilmenite were reduced at a constant temperature of 1200°C by a gas mixture containing 5 vol% CH  (1) Preoxidation of ilmenites at temperatures up to 800°C oxidised the ilmenite phase into an intermediate phase, Fe (2) When samples were heated in an argon atmosphere, ferric–ferrous pseudobrookite solid solution was formed. Rutile was dissolved into the solid solution phase. (3) Preoxidation and sintering of ilmenites at temperatures above 600°C sharply decreased specific surface area of samples. (4) In temperature programmed reduction, preoxidation enhanced reduction of iron oxides at lower temperatures, while sintering made reduction of iron oxides more difficult. Preoxidation and sintering increased the reduction–carburisation temperature of titanium oxides. (5) In isothermal reduction, hydrogen reduced only iron oxides from ilmenites. At a high reduction temperature of 1200°C, the effect of preoxidation and sintering on the reduction of ilmenites was insignificant.