A novel technology was developed to remove impurities from crude lead with high impurities by vacuum distillation. Refined lead (purity over 99%) was achieved through vacuum distillation using crude lead (92.88%) with high impurities as input material under a dynamic vacuum of 5–15 Pa. The results show that vacuum distillation should be taken to obtain lead from crude lead matrix, in which low-volatile impurities namely Cu, Sn, Ag and partial Sb are concentrated in residue at the first fraction stage of 1373 K. Volatilized lead containing high-volatile impurities such as Zn and As is distilled to remove these impurities at the second fraction stage of 973 K. But the property of impurity Bi is similar to lead that can not be separated from crude lead. The separation coefficient (β
                     
                        i
                     ) and the activity coefficient (γ
                     
                        i
                     ) of impurity elements are calculated according to the experiments to fill the inadequate data of the thermodynamics.Crude lead produced by the traditional pyrometallurgy processes usually needs to refine that can be extensively used in lead-acid battery industry, industrial chemicals, anticorrosive materials in the field of metallurgical devices, protective materials in the area of the devices of atomic industry and X-ray instrument, etc. Fire refining process and electrolytic process are normally applied for refining of crude lead. At present, fire refining has been used in more lead smelters, accounting for about 70% of the world's refined lead production, only some smelters use electrolytic process in Canada, Peru, Japan and China Herein, this paper investigated systemically the performance for the refining of crude lead with high impurities via vacuum distillation to provide a simple, green, efficient and referential way for the removal of Cu, Sn, Ag, Zn, As and Sb from crude lead. The impurities can be removed from crude lead by vacuum distillation, mainly depending on the different property of impurity elements contained when vaporizing and condensing. The difference in saturated vapor pressure of impurities in the pure state is the basic principle of crude metal vacuum distillation at different temperatures. According to Van Laar Equation Using the values of  The schematic details of the vacuum distillation furnace were shown in The vacuum distillation results for common impurities in crude lead in high concentration have been studied. The impurity content in the raw material and the vacuum distilled lead were given in It was observed that most of the impurities, except Bi, had been removed in varying degrees. Low-volatile impurities such as Cu, Sn and Ag were easily removed, and the removal rate of Cu was very close to 100% during first fraction stage. The impurities such as Zn and As were found difficult to be removed from crude lead matrix and volatilized into vapor phase along with lead at the high temperature. The reason was the differences of the vapor pressures. In addition, first distillation of high-volatile Zn and As followed by distillation of lead at the higher temperature of 1373 K was carried out in preliminary experiment, the removal results of Zn and As were given in After the two-stage vacuum distillation, the yield of refined lead was calculated to be 95.69%. The direct yield of refined lead was much higher than that of traditional processes The efficiency of the removal of impurities from crude lead with high impurities using vacuum distillation depends on evaporation rate, vapor transportation, condensation and solidification. In addition, vacuum level, heating and cooling cycles of distilled lead also play a major role in deciding optimum distillation process parameters. The initial evaporation rate The actual average evaporation rate ( Herein the distillation system used, the evaporator and the condenser were inside the chamber of the furnace and the condenser was placed above the evaporator, which eliminated vacuum drop between the evaporator and the condenser. The distance between evaporator and condenser was 16 cm. The mean free path  The evaporation coefficient ( Then the activity coefficient The activity coefficient ( The separation coefficient ( The purity over 99% of lead was obtained from crude lead with high impurities by the two-stage vacuum distillation method under dynamic vacuum of 5–15 Pa. Low-volatile impurities such as Cu, Sn and Ag and part of the Sb can be removed by concentrating in the residue obtained during first distillation at 1373 K. High-volatile impurities such as Zn and As can be removed at a lower distillation temperature of 973 K. Bi can not be separated from crude lead due to the separation coefficient of Bi was approximately equal to 1 at any temperatures. The separation coefficient ( The authors are grateful for the financial support from the