Near stoichiometric cordierite (2MgO–2Al2O3–5SiO2) glasses doped with 6.3, 8.3 and 10.1 weight percent (wt.%) TiO2 were plasma sprayed onto SiO2-based refractory concrete substrates. Substrate temperatures were controlled such that the maximum surface temperature exceeded the crystallization temperature during plasma spraying. Only the cordierite powders containing 8.3 and 10.1 wt.% TiO2 produced crystalline coatings. For compositions with less than 8 wt.% TiO2 the crystallization is believed to be controlled by surface nucleation at imperfections. Surface nucleation became more difficult with increasing preheat temperature and is related to improved wetting between coating splats. Bulk nucleation-controlled crystallization was observed at compositions above 8 wt.% TiO2 and the presence of Al2TiO5 was detected in these compositions.Investigators commonly refer to a wide range of magnesia-alumino-silicate compositions as cordierite even though many of these compositions are outside the cordierite primary phase field. Stoichiometric cordierite has a chemical formula of 2MgO–2Al In general, the devitrification, or crystallization, of cordierite-based glasses begins with precipitation of a metastable β-quartz, a solid-solution phase often designated as μ-cordierite. Crystallization ends with one or a combination of two polymorphs, indialite or cordierite or both. Although distinctions are seldom made between the two polymorphs, indialite is actually a disordered hexagonal phase while α-cordierite is ordered orthorhombic Although the devitrification of cordierite glasses is not yet fully understood, some conclusions can be drawn from the literature Surface nucleation rate is increased by the addition of TiO Plasma spraying has become a widely accepted method for producing ceramic coatings. The plasma spraying process consists of introducing a powder into a high temperature flow of ionized arc-gas. The powder particles are partially to completely melted and propelled towards a substrate by a carrier gas, often the same as the arc-gas. Upon impact the molten particles form lamellae or splats that adhere to the substrate by mechanical bonding to surface imperfections. The primary element that sets plasma spraying apart from other coating processes is the ability for a wide range of materials to be deposited onto a very broad range of substrates. Nearly any material that can be produced in powder form can be deposited by plasma spraying. Herman et al. Scientific grade powder oxide components were batched in the approximate stoichiometric molar ratio of 2MgO–2Al To determine the crystallization behavior of each glass composition, simultaneous thermal gravitometric analysis (TGA/DTA) were performed using a Netzch, Inc. model STA 409. For each composition, the glass was ground by hand in a sapphire mortar and pestle to less than 38 μm. A 240±2 mg sample was weighed out of each batch, and placed in an alumina crucible. A 240±2 mg powder sample (<38 μm) of pure corundum (Al All TGA/DTA results were obtained by heating in air from 35 to 1500 Air plasma spraying was conducted using a Praxair SG-100 gun operating at 390 A and 25 kW. Argon was used as both the powder carrier gas and the arc gas at approximate flow rates of 13 and 50 l min The maximum surface temperature of the ceramic substrate was determined by embedding a series of K-type thermocouples at different depths into cylindrical (64 mm diameter×70 mm height) specimens. These cylinders were heated in a resistance furnace to 300, 500, and 700 In an effort to better understand the crystallization behavior of the coating, a series of coupons was coated using substrates pre-heated as high as 800 Powder X-ray diffraction patterns were used to characterize the structure of the coatings. Powder samples of the coating were ground using a sapphire mortar and pestle to less than 38 μm. A collimated X-ray beam utilizing a 45 kV, 40 mA X-ray tube producing Cu–Kα radiation of 1.5406 Å wavelength irradiated the powder samples. To characterize the samples in this study, the experimental powder diffraction patterns of each sample were compared with patterns from the International Center for Diffraction Data Joint Committee on Powder Diffraction Standards to determine the phases present. Chemical analyses of the materials used in this study are reported in DTA results are shown in The maximum coating–substrate interface temperature obtained during plasma spray coating was determined from a heat flow analysis of the sprayed concrete cylinders. The maximum temperature recorded from each thermocouple was plotted as a function of thermocouple depth. This allowed for an estimation of the maximum temperature reached during the coating process by extrapolating a trend line to the substrate surface. The maximum surface temperature increased significantly as the substrate preheats temperature increased and these results are shown in Plasma spray experiments were conducted at room temperature and preheats of 300 and 700 In an effort to determine why the lowest TiO The surprising aspect of this study is that bulk nucleation appears to control the crystallization behavior of plasma sprayed coatings. It is well known that these coatings are often porous and contain many defects related to the coating process. These defects include trapped spherical powders that were not molten at the time of impact and interfaces between the individual splats that make up the coating thickness. The resultant coating should have ample nucleation sites to promote surface crystallization of the glass. However, this was not always observed in the present study. Instead, it was found that when TiO One possible explanation for the sluggish transformation of the 6.3 wt.% TiO The degree of crystallinity of as-sprayed coatings was found to be controlled by preheat temperature and TiO The authors are grateful to Boeing Commercial Aircraft for financial support of this research. The technical monitors at Boeing were Martin A. Peterson and Dan Sanders.