Development of characterization tests for ascertaining the purity of precious metals was an important task and skill in antiquity. The statement of Kau·tilya (Fourth century B.C.) on the characteristic features of pure silver is presented and discussed. According to Kau·tilya, if the cast silver pieces or ingots are of white colour like that of coagulated milk or curd, and have projections similar to a cock's comb on its surface, it should be considered as pure. It has been shown that the projections formed on the surface of cast pure silver are due to the evolution of dissolved oxygen during the solidification of the air-melted silver. The results of macro- and microscopic examinations of a cast pure silver surface are also presented, showing the observation made by Kau·tilya.One of the important uses of silver in early times was as a source of concentrated wealth and a medium of exchange in trade and commerce. Cast silver in the form of pieces and mini-ingots were used in business transactions. The value was fixed by weight. However, the value of the silver pieces depended on its purity. One of the important tasks before ancient assayers was to develop a method for testing the purity of silver. Kau·tilya (Fourth century B.C.) was the key advisor to the Indian king Candragupta Maurya. He was a statesman and philosopher of high repute, and was also known by the names of Cānakya and Visnugupta. He wrote the famous treatise called The paper reports and discusses the characterization methods used for testing the purity of silver, as stated by Kau·tilya. Results of the experimental study of the method are presented and explained. Microstructures showing the crests produced on silver as a test of purity are also presented. Kau·tilya discussed the mineralogy and metallurgy of silver in Prakarana 29, Chapter 13, entitled ‘The Superintendent of Gold in the Workshop’ in his  [English translation: That (silver pieces or ingots) in which there are projections like that of a cock's comb, which is clear and shinning, and of the colour of coagulated milk or curd, is pure]. Kau·tilya stated two qualitative tests for ensuring the purity of silver. The first test is based on the colour of silver. Pure silver should have white colour similar to that of coagulated milk or curd. This test would be valid for both cast and wrought silver. If its colour is splendid white, it would give a shinning appearance. The second test is that the surface of the cast pure silver ingots or pieces should exhibit an appearance of projections similar to a cock's comb. In other words, the top surface of the pure silver ingot has a rising appearance at certain places. In fact, this is a reference to spitting and sprouting behaviour of silver. This test is with reference to cast silver, as shown later. The second test of Kau·tilya is scientifically more interesting, and will be discussed in detail. An experimental investigation was conducted to study the spitting and sprouting behaviour of pure silver. Approximately 125 g of silver of 99.99% purity was melted in a refractory crucible, used by a goldsmith, in a gas fired furnace. The silver was kept in a molten state for about 30 min. Subsequently, the crucible containing the molten silver was taken out of the furnace, and the silver was allowed to solidify in the crucible in open air. A hemispherical mini-ingot having a top surface diameter of approximately 45 mm, and a central height of approximately 15 mm was obtained. The top surface of the cast silver ingot was found to be rough. An interesting observation was also the formation of a large pore and several small sized pores on the top surface of the mini-ingot ( The colour of silver depends on its purity. Pure silver has a splendid white colour. In early times, silver obtained after extraction from the ores, was further purified by the addition of lead, and the process was called ‘Cupellation’. If silver is not purified properly during cupellation, it would contain some residual lead. The colour of such silver would have a black tint. Copper has been a common alloying element in silver for increasing the hardness. Such recycled impure silver can also be purified by the cupellation process. If the copper present in the silver is not removed completely, the colour of the resulting silver will not have a splendid white colour. The deterioration in the white colour of silver depends upon the amount and nature of the impurities present in it. Thus, the statement of Kautilya on the colour of pure silver is understandable. This test would be valid for both cast and wrought silver. The spitting behaviour of silver for testing the purity of silver as described by Kautilya can be explained as follows: Oxygen dissolves readily in molten silver. In 1909, Siverts and Hagenacker Siverts and Hagenacker Silver melted in air is, therefore, a silver–oxygen alloy. An important effect of the dissolution of oxygen in molten silver is to depress its freezing point, and also to cause freezing to occur over a temperature range. Furthermore, the depression of the freezing point is also influenced by the pressure of oxygen in the atmosphere above the molten silver. Allen In common practice, silver is melted in air. From the above discussion one can find out the amount of oxygen dissolved in molten silver from air. Assuming that air contains 21 vol.% of oxygen, it can be deduced from As discussed earlier, silver melted in air is actually a silver–oxygen alloy. During its solidification, crystals of silver, comparatively free from oxygen, separate out first, while the oxygen content in the residual liquid increases. This process continues as the temperature decreases during solidification, until the composition of liquid is such that the pressure of oxygen that would be in equilibrium with it is not less than the external pressure. Bubbles of oxygen are then given off, resulting in “spitting” at the free surface. As a result, liquid silver from the interior is ejected on the surface of the ingot and a shape similar to a cock's comb is formed on solidification. There is possibly another way that small sized combs or protrusions can form. If the pressure of oxygen generated in silver just below a solidified skin on the free surface is sufficient to deform the metal surface, protrusions or bubbles would form and an appearance of a rising surface will result ( If small amounts of copper or other base metals are present in molten silver, the dissolved oxygen will combine with these metals to form respective metal oxides. In such a case, oxygen will not evolve during the solidification of silver and the top surface of the ingot would be smooth and no spitting and sprouting would occur. In ancient times, silver was refined by the process of cupellation, which used lead. Improper refining would result in silver containing small amounts of lead. In such a situation, the phenomenon of spitting would not be observed. Also, if the refining of copper-bearing silver scrap was not carried out to the fullest extent, the recycled silver would contain some copper. Such silver would also not exhibit the spitting phenomenon. The value of precious metals has been greatly dependent on its purity since early times. Different types of tests were developed in different times for testing the purity of precious metals. Kaut.ilya recognized the specific features present on the surface of cast pure silver, which was formed during the solidification of air-melted pure silver. Oxygen from air dissolves in molten silver, and it evolves during solidification leading to the formation of crests or combs on its top surface. He used this behaviour of silver to formulate a test for its purity. According to him, the surface of the cast pure silver should exhibit a feature similar to a cock's comb. The above statement of Kaut.ilya has not been discussed in literature. A scientific explanation for the phenomenon is presented for the first time in this paper. An experimental replication of the casting of a pure silver ingot shows the formation of such projections of different heights. The surface also shows pores of sizes ranging from big to small. This phenomenon is due to the unique property of silver of dissolving about 9 volumes of oxygen per unit volume of silver, when melted in air. When such a silver–oxygen alloy is solidified, the solidification occurs over a temperature interval. Most of the oxygen evolves vigorously just before the solidification is complete, giving rise to the phenomena of spitting and sprouting. Kaut.ilya is the first classical writer to consider the presence of spitting and sprouting as an index of the purity of cast silver. If impurity metals, such as copper and lead are present in the silver, the oxygen will combine with these elements and form respective oxides. The surface of such impure cast silver will not exhibit a feature similar to a cock's comb. Kaut.ilya also recognized the effect of impurities on the colour and the shining appearance of silver. The residual copper and lead give a blackish tint to the colour of cast or wrought silver, and as a result it will not have a splendid white colour.