The management of pilon fractures remains challenging owing to the high-energy axial loading mechanism that produces comminution of the articular surface, displacement of tibia metaphysis, and severe soft tissue injury. How to preserve the vitality of soft tissue and achieve anatomic reduction has become a timely issue. We report and evaluate the effect of a modified staging treatment for AO Foundation/Orthopaedic Trauma Association (AO/OTA) 43C1 pilon fracture accompanied by distal fibular and posterior lip of the distal tibia fracture. We performed a modified 2-stage treatment of type C1 pilon fracture with distal fibular and posterior malleolar fractures. In the first stage, the posterolateral incision was used for simultaneous reduction of fibula and posterior malleolus, and the tibia was fixed with an external fixator. In the second stage, the external fixator was removed, and the medial malleolus and tibia were fixed after the edema of soft tissue had subsided. The following data were collected: Foot and Ankle Outcome Score (FAOS), American Orthopaedic Foot & Ankle Society (AOFAS) score, Short Form 36 (SF-36) score, Burwell-Charnley fracture reduction score, and postoperative complications. Twenty-seven patients were monitored for an average of 31.70 ± 7.38 months. The Burwell-Charnley fracture reduction scores had anatomic and fair ratings of 92.59%. SF-36 physical component score was 42.94 ± 12.47 and mental component score was 48.73 ± 9.79. Score data from the multiple scales of FAOS included pain, 88.79 ± 8.59; activities of daily living, 91.89 ± 7.50; quality of life, 90.26 ± 10.52; sports, 87.93 ± 11.64; and symptoms, 85.32 ± 8.65. The AOFAS ankle-hindfoot scores were 87.30 ± 13.45. Complications were reported in 5 patients (18.52%). Our study provides a good alternative to the existing protocol for type C1 pilon fractures with distal fibular and posterior lip of the distal tibia fracture and effectively reduces soft tissue complications.Pilon fracture is articular fracture of the distal tibia, which involves the weightbearing part of the ankle joint, and usually is caused by high-energy injury combined with direct axial impact. Within the AO Foundation/Orthopaedic Trauma Association (AO/OTA) classification, type C belongs to total articular fracture and represents the complex type of pilon fracture ( High-energy pilon fracture is often accompanied by fibular fracture and severe soft tissue injury ( An increasing number of orthopaedic surgeons advocate 2-stage ORIF for high-energy Pilon fracture. The first stage is reduction and fixation of the fibula, as well as EF for the tibia, and the second stage is reduction and fixation of the tibia and ankle joint ( However, in pilon fracture patients with severe soft tissue injury and posterior malleolus fracture, there is a problem of how to fix the posterior malleolus in the second stage after the first-stage operation ( The primary purpose of our study was to adopt a modified 2-stage operation for the treatment of AO/OTA 43C1 pilon fracture with distal fibular and posterior lip of the distal tibia fracture. In the first stage, a posterolateral incision was used for simultaneous anatomic reduction of the fibula and posterior malleolus, and the tibia was fixed with an external fixator. In the second stage, the external fixator was removed after all swelling subsided, and the rest of the tibia and medial malleolus were reduced and fixed. In this technique, the posterior ankle was fixed in the first stage to avoid skin and soft tissue necrosis due to the additional incision to fix the posterior ankle in the second stage, also ato void the risk of instability of the posterior ankle caused by the anteroposterior screw fixation. After approval by the institutional review board, we performed a retrospective clinical study. Thirty-two patients with closed fracture were enrolled in our hospital between July 1, 2012, and August 1, 2016. Radiographs and computed tomography (CT) scans were performed before surgery ( The inclusion criterion was all patients with distal fibular and posterior malleolar fractures, as well as fracture displacement type C1 pilon fractures. Specific patient exclusion criteria were as follows: (1) patients in whom preoperative evaluation showed that the displacement and comminution of posteromedial fracture of ankle were obvious, and effective reduction could not be achieved by posterolateral approach alone; (2) pediatric patients (<18 years old); (3) patients with multiple fractures of the ipsilateral lower limb; (4) patients with long injury time (>8 hours) or severe swelling with blisters in whom the incision may not be effectively closed after ORIF; (5) patients with a history of previous foot surgery or trauma; (6) cancer patients receiving chemotherapy and radiotherapy or with bone metastases; and (7) patients with severe orthopaedic comorbidities (severe coxa-arthrosis, gonarthrosis, rheumatological diseases or psoriatic arthritis, diabetic foot neuropathy, or vascular insufficiency). The first-stage emergency operation was performed within 8 hours after injury. The second-stage operation was performed after all edema resolved and wrinkles appeared on the skin, within 11.31 ± 3.67 days (range 8 to 12). All surgeries were performed by the same surgical team led by an experienced chief doctor. Under general anesthesia, lumbar anesthesia, or combined spinal-epidural anesthesia, the patient was positioned on the lateral aspect of the healthy side of the body. After the posterolateral incision of the ankle joint was performed, the fibula fracture was first reduced and fixed, then the posterior malleolus was fixed. Experience suggested that the posterior malleolus fragments were usually reduced after the distal fibula anatomic reduction. If not, the fragments were reduced with Weber clamps and temporarily fixed with Kirschner wires. After C-arm fluoroscopy showed that fracture reduction was satisfactory, the fibula was fixed with a plate and screws, and the posterior malleolus was fixed with 2 or 3 hollow compression screws. The wound was closed definitively after fibular and posterior malleolus fixation. The patient was repositioned to supine in the same sterile field, and the tibia was fixed with EF. In the view of the C-arm machine, the position and direction of the EF screws were positioned, then 2 screws were placed at the proximal tibia and 1 screw each was placed in the calcaneus and talus. After adjusting the external fixator to the appropriate height, the screws were tightened ( After the edema of soft tissue had subsided and the skin wrinkle test was positive, we performed the second operation. Under general anesthesia, lumbar anesthesia, or combined spinal-epidural anesthesia, the patient was placed in supine position and the external fixator was removed. We made an anteromedial incision along the tibia to the ankle to expose the anterior margin of the ankle joint, medial malleolus, and inferior tibia segment. Finally, we restored the flatness of the articular surface with talus as template. Autologous or allogeneic bone grafting was performed if bone defect was obvious after reduction. Fracture reduction was confirmed by fluoroscopy and fixed with an anatomic locking plate and screws. The Cotton test was performed after fixation, and no significant instability of the distal tibiofibular syndesmosis was found in any patients ( After each operation, cefuroxime sodium or clindamycin hydrochloride was given intravenously for anti-infection. Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory analgesic drugs or opioid analgesic oral drugs were administered for analgesia, and hypodermic injection of low-molecule-heparin for anticoagulation. Postoperative functional exercise was allowed during bed rest without restriction of limb movement, but weightbearing exercise was prohibited. After 8 weeks (mean 8.7 ± 1.4, range 8 to 12), gradual partial weightbearing exercise of the lower limb was carried out under the guidance of the attending physician. Based on patients’ wishes and treatment needs (e.g., chronic osteomyelitis), the implants were removed after the fractures healed ( X-ray and CT examinations were performed at 24 to 48 months’ follow-up. Meanwhile, outcome score questionnaires were obtained when the patient returned to the outpatient clinic. To quantify pain and functional disability, the Foot and Ankle Outcome Score (FAOS) and the American Orthopaedic Foot & Ankle Society (AOFAS) ankle-hindfoot scale questionnaire were used ( Statistical analysis was performed with Statistical Package for the Social Sciences version 18.0 (IBM Corp., Somers, NY). Statistical significance was defined at the 5% ( Twenty-seven patients (84.38%), including 19(70.4%) males and 8(29.6%) females, made regular postoperative follow-up visits for periods ranging from 24 to 48 months, average 31.70 ± 7.38 months. The overall mean age was 38.63 ± 12.00 years (range 19 to 62). Twelve patients had traffic accident injuries, 8 were injured from falling, 5 had sports injuries, and 2 were injured by impact from blunt force trauma of a heavy object ( Based on Burwell-Charnley criteria ( Complications were reported in 5 patients (18.52%): 2 cases had superficial infections that responded to antibiotics without further surgical treatment; 3 cases developed traumatic arthritis, including 1 case of osteomyelitis and delayed union of fracture; and 1 case of skin necrosis which was successfully treated by debridement and skin grafting. None of the patients suffered from compartment syndrome or secondary bone necrosis. Pilon fractures are usually caused by high-energy injuries and are accompanied by severe soft tissue injuries. Barei et al ( Clinical studies have shown the surgical effect of 2-stage treatment is better than the primary ORIF of the tibia and fibula ( Reduction of posterior malleolus fractures has become a topic of discussion among scholars. Bartoníček et al ( In pilon fracture patients with severe soft tissue injury and posterior malleolus fracture, however, there are some issues in the management of posterior malleolus fracture in the traditional 2-stage operation ( Biz et al ( Philip et al ( This research was a small case series without a control group; however, we compare and analyze our data with other published articles in the Discussion. The conclusions derived from these data therefore need be interpreted with some caution. We lost 5 patients to follow-up, and we were not able to obtain preinjury functional scores. Moreover, this treatment was not suitable for fractures of type C2 and C3 with severe smashing of the distal tibia metaphyseal fractures, because once the posterior malleolus fragment was fixed, it was not conducive to the reduction of anterior lip of the distal tibia. In conclusion, our method provides a good alternative to the existing protocol for type C1 pilon fractures with distal fibular and posterior lip of the distal tibia fracture, and effectively reduces soft tissue complications.