This paper describes the densification response and microstructural homogenization of W–Cu composites sintered by using microwave irradiation. Compared with conventional sintering, microwave sintering shows a superior capability in promoting W–Cu densification at higher heating rate. Near theoretical density can be achieved under optimum conditions. Additionally, microwave sintering generates non-aggregated and homogeneous microstructure, while coarsened tungsten grains are presented in the microwave-sintered samples. The present work implies that microwave sintering is a promising and time-saving approach to W–Cu materials manufacture.W–Cu composite materials are typical pseudoalloys combining the intrinsic properties of both W and Cu constituents and therefore, exhibit good thermal and electrical conductivity, as well as appropriate mechanical properties. These materials are widely used as electrical contacts, electroerosion segments, and heat sinks in various industrial fields. The density is among the key factors determining the physical and mechanical performances of W–Cu parts which are ordinarily manufactured through powder metallurgy technology. Generally, owing to the mutual insolubility and high contact angle, W–Cu composite shrinks mainly via W particle rearrangement and therefore has difficulty in achieving high densification by liquid-phase sintering Microwave sintering has gained growing attentions during the past decade, due to its tremendous advantages over conventional sintering technique. Mainly stemming from direct microwave energy deposition in the volume of a material, these advantages including a higher heating rate, a reduction in sintering time and energy consumption are of significance to fabricate high-performance sintered parts at lower cost Herein, we describe the experimental results of the systematic study on sintering W–Cu composites using microwave energy. It is evident that microwave sintering plays a positive role in consolidating W–Cu alloys with uniform microstructure. In the present work, reduced W powders (size 1–2 Microwave sintering was carried out in a tube microwave furnace (MW-T0316V, Changsha Syno-Therm Co., Ltd., China), as shown in Dimensional sizes of all the samples were measured before and after sintering to evaluate the volume shrinking behavior. The density of sintered bodies was characterized using Archimedes principle. X-ray diffraction (XRD) data for phase analysis was collected on a Rigaku D/max 2550 diffractometer with Cu K  Besides sintered density, volume shrinkage (VS) was used to characterize the densification behavior of green compacts, expressed as And also, a densification parameter (DP) was introduced to evaluate the sinterability, expressed as  W and Cu exhibit negligible solubility for each other, so densification during liquid-phase sintering of W–Cu composites is limited to rearrangement of the W particle and solid-phase sintering of the W skeleton  In the present work, the relative density was increased notably when conventionally sintered at higher temperature or for longer soaking time, as shown in In summary, the present work demonstrates the feasibility of microwave sintering technique in consolidating W–Cu composites. Experimental results indicate that microwave sintering promotes substantially the densification of W–Cu compacts at an overall heating rate as high as 40 The authors wish to appreciate helpful suggestion from Prof. Zhao Muyue. This project was supported by China Postdoctoral Science Foundation and Postdoctoral Science Foundation of Central South University.