The aim of this study was to probe the limits of hardness elevation with increasing compressive strains under dynamic plastic deformation (DPD) conditions in an austenitic stainless steel of low stacking fault energy. 316L was compressed at a strain rate of 80s−1 at engineering strains ranging from 20% to 80%. A combination of twin boundaries, dislocation networks and grain refinement led to a hardness increase of 150% at a compressive strain of 80%. However, the strength versus strain behavior was observed to be asymptotic and thus did not provide benefits of strength elevation with strain at strains beyond 60%. At such high strains, strong texture development towards {110} plane was observed in this study. This texture has a low Schmid factor for deformation twinning. Twin formation and twinning induced grain size refinement was experimentally observed to have saturated with higher strains verifying the critical role of Schmid factor in limiting the deformation by twinning. Dislocation activity was found to level off at strains beyond 60%. This implies that beyond an optimum value of strain, no significant strengthening can be achieved with additional straining under DPD conditions in 316L. Moreover, texture development has serious implications for the mechanical and corrosion properties of 316L.Materials for structural and other high performance applications require an optimal combination of high strength and toughness. Refining the grain size to nanoscale (d<100 Deposition techniques like electrodeposition and magnetron sputtering have been used in the recent past to synthesize high purity nanotwinned structure However, there is no rule of thumb regarding the minimum strain rate required for achieving a good combination of strength, ductility and corrosion resistance using deformation twinning in austenitic stainless steels. The range of strain rates for DPD treatment ranges from 10 In the current study, we have compressed 316 AISI 316L stainless steel of chemical composition as shown in X-Ray diffraction (XRD) of annealed and deformed specimens was undertaken to examine the phase fraction and texture development during deformation using PANalytical Empyrean. Detailed characterization of nanotwinned structure was done using electron backscattered diffraction (EBSD) on a Nova NanoSEM 450 and transmission electron microscopy (TEM) on a JEOL JEM-2100F instrument operated at 200  Microstructural characterization of the deformed specimens along with annealed specimens has been done using EBSD orientation maps and TEM. Annealed specimens have randomly oriented grains with average grain size of 45–50 TEM was used to investigate the finer features of the microstructure.  Strain rate of 80 EBSD analysis was done to characterize the surface microstructure and texture. After annealing heat treatment, randomly oriented grains are obtained with an average grain size of 45–50 GAM analysis ( Twin boundaries hinder the motion of the dislocations similar to grain boundaries and it has been shown for electrodeposited and magnetron-sputtered specimens that the strength achieved in NT metals is similar to the strength of NC materials if the twin-lamellar spacing in the former and grain size in the latter is comparable Significant grain refinement has occurred owing to dislocation sub boundary formation as well as fragmentation of twins and shear bands by new deformation twins. The grain refinement reaches saturation at around a compressive strain of 40% (≈30  The role of deformation strains in microstructural refinement to enhance the strength of 316L has been studied through systematic experimental studies at a strain rate of 80 The authors acknowledge the financial support from