To satisfy the property requirements for biodegradable medical implants, Zn alloyed with low levels of Mg (≤0.8 wt%) has attracted increased research interest. In the present study, deformation twinning was observed in tensile tests and twinning appears to have an adverse impact on ductility. The profuse twinning in the as-cast Zn-Mg alloys accelerated crack growth in tension due to twinning impingement which caused local stress concentrations and initiates cracking. As-rolled Zn-Mg alloys have better ductility than their as-cast counterparts due to the inhibition of twinning by the refined Mg2Zn11 intermetallic phase and the finer grain size.Metallic medical implants are implanted into the body in order to improve human life by maintaining the function and/or healing damaged tissue [ Alloyed Fe and Mg, have been extensively investigated as good candidates for BMs because of their good biocompatibility [ To improve the suitability of Zn-based BMs for medical implants in respect to their mechanical performance, various approaches including alloying, different forming techniques and surface modification have been investigated [ Also, the inadequate mechanical properties of Zn and its alloys due to their low formability in the deformation processing, which is attributed to their hexagonal close-packed (HCP) crystal structure and lack of sufficient slip modes in plastic deformation [ Pure Zn and Zn-Mg alloys were prepared by melting pure Zn (99.99%) and a Zn-30 wt%Mg alloy in a clay graphite crucible (dimension: 35 mm (bottom) x 65 mm (top) x 85 mm (height)) in a furnace at 500 °C, and the liquid metal was removed from the furnace and poured into moulds after 15 min of melting. Subsequently, the hot rolled Zn and Zn-(0.4, 0.8) wt% Mg (1 mm in thickness) were fabricated by multiple rolling passes at 250 °C. Electrical discharge machining was used to prepare specimens for tensile testing (Dimensions: gauge length ∼ 25 mm, width ∼ 6 mm and thickness ∼ 5 mm (as-cast Zn) and gauge length ∼ 25 mm, width ∼ 6 mm and thickness ∼ 1 mm (hot-rolled Zn)) and while specimens for compression testing were machined from the as-cast materials with an ASTM standard (diameter of 13 mm and length of 38 mm) [ A Struers Optical micrographs of as-cast samples are shown in The microstructure of the hot-rolled Zn-Mg alloys is shown in The mechanical properties of the as-cast pure Zn and Zn-Mg alloys are shown in The impacts of hot rolling on the properties of the pure Zn and Zn-Mg alloys are revealed in  Grain refinement observed in the cast samples with the addition of Mg is attributed to the growth restriction imparted by the Mg solute and to the promotion of heterogeneous nucleation on intermetallic particles formed in the melt during cooling [ There was no significant changes in ductility with the addition of Mg to the as-cast alloys. The brittle and hard intermetallic constituent of the eutectic phase is reported to negatively impact on the ductility of the Zn-Mg alloys [  The significant improvement in the strength of the as-rolled specimens is primarily due to effective grain refinement and the elimination of the casting defects [ Investigations on the role of twinning in tensile deformation of Zn-Mg alloys and consequent effects of twinning on mechanical properties in the present study reveal the following findings: In the as-cast Zn-Mg alloys, the propensity for twinning is reduced significantly with increasing levels of Mg addition (≤0.8 wt%), because of the smaller grain size and significant volume fraction of eutectic phase which inhibits twinning. Deformation twinning has adverse effects on the ductility of as-cast Zn-Mg alloys. There is no twinning in the initial stages of tensile deformation, and the propensity for twinning increases suddenly at around 1% strain and twinning impingements are observed. With further strain, the propensity for twinning and impingements increases and profuse twinning and impingements are observed on fracture (strain to 1.6%). The associated compressive strain in tension facilitates {10 As-rolled Zn-Mg alloys have much better strength and ductility which is attributed to grain refinement, elimination of casting defects and grain boundary sliding, respectively. Additionally, the presence of a eutectic intermetallic network, strong grain boundaries and small grain size inhibit twinning in tensile deformation which otherwise would initiate cracking. With the addition of Mg contents >0.4 wt%, the brittle and hard Mg Authors are grateful to Mr. Nagasivamuni Balasubramani and Ms. Lihui Zheng for their assistance for materials and metallographic samples preparation.