Kure-Bakibaba pyritic copper ore of Turkey is easily altered and, therefore, is not floated and separated readily from gangue minerals, in particular from pyrite. During alteration first iron sulphates are formed which have presumably depressing effects on copper minerals flotation.
                  Flotation tests were carried out with additions of CaCO3, and CaO separately during grinding and with CuSO4 addition in flotation. Flotation tests with improved results were obtained.Kure-Bakibaba copper ore consists of mainly chalcopyrite and in lesser amounts covellite, chalcocite, bornite, digenite, and pyrite minerals. Ore contains about 20% gangue minerals consisting of mainly quartz Iron sulphides are altered in the order of pyrrhotite, marcasite and pyrite as follows Pyrrhotite Marcasite and pyrite Among copper sulphide minerals, chalcopyrite is altered most difficultly according to following reactions: Strong alteration of chalcopyrite and alteration of chalcosite and covellite are realized according to following reactions: Iron sulphide minerals present in the ore contribute to the alteration of copper sulphide minerals through alteration products such as Fe Some of the alteration reactions yield sulphuric acid, and all of them affect pH in acidic direction; therefore, if we measure pH of the slurry during grinding and flotation operations, we can easily follow the direction of the alteration process. This phenomenon can be explained from the following reactions: The tests were carried out with ore samples of 1/2 A Denver Sub2A laboratory type flotation machine with 2 pH measurements were performed with a standard probe type pH-meter. Analysis of the flotation products was conducted with atomic absorption spectrometer. pH of the slurry was measured after 80 and 95% minus 200 mesh grinds with 15 The results are given in pH of the pulp was measured after 80 and 95% minus 200 mesh grinds with aerations in a Denver type flotation cell. The results are given in As it is seen in These results clearly show the positive effects of the aeration in alteration. There are three possible effects of CaCO Neutralization of sulphuric acid in the pulp; Dissolved CO The pH of this ampholite is calculated in the following formula As a result, if there is no other compound affecting pH, the pH of the pulp under the effect of CaCO Oxygen consuming and depressive effects of FeSO With the additions of 5, 10, 25, 50, 75, and 100 It is clearly seen from With the additions of 5, 10, 25, 50, 75, and 100 It is clearly seen from Following standard flotation test conditions were used in the present investigations Test conditions: Solid concentration of the pulp = 20%. Amyl xanthate addition = 150 Conditioning time = 5 Dowfroth 250 addition = 50 Rougher flotation time =10 Cleaning time = 5 The addition of CaO to the flotation cell after grinding had no positive effect on the flotation performances. Therefore, CaO was added during grinding and better results were obtained after these additions. The results are given in As it is seen from The beneficial effects of CaO addition during grinding may be due to following reactions: The formation of ferric and ferrous oxides is not soluble in basic pH ranges, so depressing effects of ferric and ferrous sulphates are prevented The addition of CaCO The addition of 150  Here, addition of CuSO The addition of CaCO  The pH values of the pulp might change due to alterations of copper and in particular iron minerals according to the above reactions CaO addition during flotation has no visible positive effect on performances. The formations of FeSO The use of CaO afterwards during flotation cannot remove depressing effects of these compounds once they are formed. If we add CaO during grinding, we can prevent the formation of those harmful alteration products, such as FeSO CaCO CuSO The authors acknowledge the help of KBI (Karadeniz Copper Works) for providing samples and chemical analyses.