This study focuses on the environmental impact assessment through Life Cycle Analysis (LCA) of two innovative 10kW pellet boilers. In particular, the second boiler represents a technological evolution of the first one developed to improve its performance in terms of efficiency and environmental impact. For both boilers, emission factors measured during laboratory tests (full load tests and specific load cycle tests representative of real life boiler operation) have been used as input data in the life cycle analysis. The SimaPro software (v.8.0.4.30) was used for the LCA and the ReCiPe Midpoint method (European version H) was chosen to assess the environmental impact of all boilers (according to LCA ISO standards). In addition, the ReCiPe Endpoint method was used to compare the final results of all 5 boilers with literature data.
                  The pelletisation process represented the most relevant share of the overall environmental impact followed by the operational phase, the manufacturing phase and the disposal phase. A sensitivity analysis performed on the most efficient pellet boiler evidenced the variation of the boiler’s environmental impact as a function of PM10 and NOX emission factors with respect to emission factors monitored during boiler full load operation. Moreover, the reduction of the boiler’s weight and the adoption of new electronic components led to a consistent reduction (−18%) of its environmental impact with respect to the previous technology. A second LCA has been carried on for a 15kW oil boiler, a 15kW natural gas boiler and a 15kW pellet boiler, representative of the state of the art of EU technology, to finally compare all LCA results. Results showed the environmental impact reduction of BW10 and BW10 2 pellet boilers with respect to fossil fuelled boilers mainly due to their reduced impact on CC (reductions by 86–90% and 88–91% with respect to the NG and oil boilers respectively), NLT (reductions by 77–79% and 86–87% with respect to the NG and oil boilers respectively) and FD (reductions by 89–92% and 90–93% with respect to the NG and oil boilers respectively) ReCiPe Midpoint subcategories.The use of biomass instead of fossil fuels for residential heating contributes to CO Concerning PM emissions, epidemiological and experimental studies evidence a correlation between wood smoke particles and health impacts like decreased lung function, reduced resistance to infections and increased incidences of acute asthma Only few literature studies aimed at evaluating the environmental impacts of domestic pellet stoves or boilers Most of the LCA research studies available in literature are only focused on specific phases of a pellet boiler life cycle: forestry operations This work presents the evaluation of the environmental impact of small scale pellet boilers tested in the framework of the EU FP7 “BioMaxEff” project. The novelty of the present research in comparison to the state of the art consists in the identification of the environmental impact of all the different life cycle phases included in the system boundaries with respect to all the impact subcategories foreseen by the chosen life cycle impact assessment method. Actually, at present the ReCiPe Midpoint method in our field, apart from the already mentioned Ref. The innovative pellet boilers under investigation are two 10 Both boilers consist of a steel body with a fully insulated cladding. The boilers can modulate the power output in the range between 30% and 100% of the nominal power. The burner pot is made of high-temperature-resistant stainless steel and equipped with two automatic ignition and automatic ash removal systems. A speed controlled vacuum fan regulates the primary and secondary air supply. Hot flue gases generated during combustion pass through a vertical heat exchanger, which is automatically cleaned by a spiral mechanism and deliver heat to the circulating water. The control concept of the combustion process is based on the flue gas temperature, which is measured directly at the exit of the combustion chamber (i.e. thermo-control combustion control concept). The pellet boiler BioWIN 10 (BW10) has a fully automatic pellet feed system and its stainless steel burner ensures low pellet consumption and high efficiency. The main feature of the BioWIN 10 2 (BW10 2) is a new ignition element that is extremely durable, maintenance free, and ignites silently. Even the direction of secondary air inlet nozzles is optimized to improve combustion efficiency. Quality labels such as the Blaue Engel A series of laboratory tests was performed on the pellet boilers BioWIN and BioWIN 2, according to two different test methods. The first method consisted of a steady state test at nominal load according to EN 303-5 CO, VOCs, NOx, and PM emission factors (expressed in mg/MJ of fuel input) as well as boilers efficiencies were determined with both test methods. Full load tests results have been compared to LCA results associated to three standard boilers (pellet, natural gas and oil boilers) since load cycle tests emission factors were available only for the pellet boilers tested during the project. In particular, the standard pellet boiler is representative of the European state-of-the art technology with automatic fuel supply and automatic control technique. The JetWIN 155 (JW155) model is a non-condensing oil boiler with a very efficient and innovative burner technology manufactured by the Austrian company Windhager Zentralheizung Technik GmbH. The NG boiler is a non-modulating natural gas boiler with natural draught burner. It represents the average European state of the art technology.  The laboratory tests were conducted using ENplus certified wood pellets manufactured by the Austrian company RZ Pellets GmbH The SimaPro software (version 8.0.4.30) has been used to perform life cycle analysis since it is a widespread and accredited LCA tool and its transparent life cycle inventory (LCI) data are regularly updated According to the ReCiPe Midpoint method the environmental impact has been quantified on its 18 impact subcategories (Climate Change, Ozone Depletion, Terrestrial Acidification, Freshwater Eutrophication, Marine Eutrophication, Human Toxicity, Photochemical Oxidant Formation, Particulate Matter Formation, Terrestrial Ecotoxicity, Freshwater Ecotoxicity, Marine Ecotoxicity, Ionising Radiation, Agricultural Land Occupation, Urban Land Occupation, Natural Land Transformation, Water Depletion, Metal Depletion, Fossil Depletion). In this study we considered a pelletisation process representative for the Central EU case. In particular, raw biomass comes from saw dust (57%), wood shavings (15% hardwood and 15% softwood) and wood chips (13%). It is thus important to underline that even according to the most updated Ecoinvent database (v.3.1, Allocation recycled content) the environmental impact of forestry residues use as raw biomass for pellet production is overestimated since a weighed contribution due to the “forest impact” (that takes into consideration forest planting, management and land use) is included in the calculations 1 Five different life cycle phases have been analysed:  The detailed LCI for boilers construction is reported in S1 (     A summary of LCA input data related to the BW 10 2 boiler is reported in  Focusing on the best technology emerged (BW10 2), its overall environmental impact has been splitted according to the main different life cycle phases investigated: pelletisation, boiler construction, transport phase, boiler operational phase and boiler and ashes final disposal phase ( Considering load cycle (LC) tests emission factors for BW10 2, the pelletisation process contributes most (about 57%) followed by the boiler operational phase (about 29%) and the boiler manufacturing phase (about 14%).The contributions due to the boiler disposal phase and the transports phase are almost negligible ( The high contribution of the pelletisation phase is mostly linked to the database that has been used (Ecoinvent v.3.1) since local data were not available: actually, as already anticipated in the methodology section, since we want to represent a European case study (where most of wood biomass comes from industrial and forestry residues), we have assumed that forests are not intensively cultivated thus reducing the overall pellettisation impact (mainly on the ULO ReCiPe Midpoint subcategory). Other studies available in literature show integrated contributions of the operational and pelletisation phases In Considering the boiler construction phase, important contributions from 56% to 74% are ascribed to the NLT and MD subcategories. Relevant contributions (in the range 10–24%) are also given by the CC, FE, HT, FET, MET, ULO and FD subcategories. In the pelletisation phase, important contributions from 30% to 98% are ascribed to the CC, OD, TA, FE, ME, HT, TET, FET, MET, IR, ALO, ULO, NLT, FD subcategories where ALO plays a dominant role, followed by ULO,IR, OD, FD, CC. Even on all other subcategories (POF, PMF, MD with the exception of the WD subcategory that was always neglected in all our LCA results) the pelletisation phase present relevant contributions from 20% till 24%. The detailed contributions of single pelletisation processes to specific Recipe midpoint subcategories is reported in S2 ( Concerning the boiler operational phase, important contributions from 38% to 68% are ascribed to the TA, FE, ME, HT, POF, PMF, TET subcategories. Relevant contributions (in the range 14–25%) are also given by the CC, OD, FET, MET, FD subcategories. The boiler transports phase, was characterized by negligible contributions on all subcategories. Finally, for the boiler and ashes disposal phase, the only relevant contributions (6–7%) are ascribed to the FET and MET subcategories. Considering the boiler construction phase, the variation of the quantity or quality of materials in BW10 2 with respect to the quantities and/or qualities of the standard boiler ones (BW10) lead to an overall environmental impact reduction for BW10 2 by 18% (see Considering the BW10 2 pellet boiler, a sensitivity analysis was performed on LCA results and different sensitivity tests have been carried on changing some key parameters (i.e. PM10 and NO Interesting results in terms of potential NO As can be seen in Focusing the attention in LCA results of BW10 and BW10 2 boilers were finally compared to the overall environmental impact of the standard (pellet, oil and natural gas) boilers cited in the methodology section considering 1 The ReCiPe Midpoint subcategories that contribute most to the overall boilers environmental impact depend on the boiler technology considered ( The environmental impact reduction of pellet boilers with respect to fossil fuelled boilers is mainly due to their reduced impact on CC (reductions by 86–90% and 88–91% with respect to the NG and oil boilers respectively), NLT (reductions by 77–79% and 86–87% with respect to the NG and oil boilers respectively) and FD (reductions by 89–92% and 90–93% with respect to the NG and oil boilers respectively) ReCiPe Midpoint subcategories. Even pellet boilers impact on TA subcategory is lower than that of fossil fuelled boilers (reductions by 18–42% and 60–72% with respect to the NG and oil boilers respectively). For all other subcategories impacts of pellet and fossil fuelled boilers are similar (OD, ME, TET, IR, MD) or pellet boilers show slightly higher impacts (HT, FET, MET, ALO, ULO and FE, the latter just with respect to the oil boiler). Our better results related to pellet boilers with respect to LCA results of Fantozzi and Buratti From the comparison evaluated using the ReCiPe Endpoint method ( Further figures and tables with details of LCA results for both the innovative pellet boiler technologies and standard (pellet, oil and natural gas) boilers are reported in S2. In this study a life cycle analysis was performed on two innovative small scale (10 For pellet boiler technology, it was found that the pelletisation process contributes most to the overall environmental impact (on average 57%) followed by the boiler operational phase (about 29%) and the boiler manufacturing phase (about 14%). The boiler disposal phase and the boiler transports phase always represented a negligible contribution. A critical result related to the pelletisation phase impact is due to the assumptions of the most updated available version of the Ecoinvent database (v.3.1) that associates to forestry residues use a weighed impact coming from forest planting, management and land use. In our work we assumed the exclusion of practices related to forests intensive management: actually, according to an updated residential market analysis Considering the two innovative pellet boilers construction phase, the variation of the quantity and/or quality of materials in BW10 2 with respect to the quantities and/or qualities of the standard boiler ones (BW10) evidenced the overall environmental impact reduction for BW10 2 by 18% with respect to BW10, mainly due to the reduced boiler (mainly metals) weight and to the adoption of different electronic components. In particular, summing up these last two contributions a minimum of 13% to a maximum of 27% reduction of the environmental impact emerged from single subcategories that contribute most to the construction phase analysis (CC, TA, FE, HT, PMF, FET, MET, NLT, MD, FD). The sensitivity tests performed on the best pellet boiler technology (BW10 2) were focused on the boiler operational phase and in particular showed an increase or decrease of both PM10 and NO The environmental impact reduction of pellet boilers with respect to fossil fuelled boilers is mainly due to their reduced impact on CC (reductions by 86–90% and 88–91% with respect to the NG and oil boilers respectively), NLT (reductions by 77–79% and 86–87% with respect to the NG and oil boilers respectively) and FD (reductions by 89–92% and 90–93% with respect to the NG and oil boilers respectively) ReCiPe Midpoint subcategories. BW10 and BW10 2 boilers in particular evidenced the lowest environmental impacts and BW10 2 was recognized as best technology. The research leading to these results has received funding from the European Union Seventh Framework Programme (FP7/2007-2013) under Grant Agreement n°268217. We also thank Juergen Brandt, Werner Granig and Michael Kerschbaum for having supplied most of the input data linked to boilers construction, transports and disposal phase. Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at 