Flotation tests show that the floatability of kaolinite is much better in an acidic than in an alkaline medium containing cationic collectors. The (001) basal planes of kaolinite are found to adsorb cationic collectors favorably, which render the surface hydrophobic. The (001̄) planes interact with macromolecules carrying groups containing –O–, –N–, and/or –F– of high electronegativity, and the resultant flocculation minimizes the exposure of hydrophilic (001̄) planes. As a result, the cationic flotation of kaolinite is enhanced by the addition of these types of macromolecules. The zeta potential measurement and macromolecule adsorption study indicate that the adsorption of anionic PAM on kaolinite is dominated mainly by hydrogen bonding interactions.Kaolinite is a hydrated aluminum silicate mineral of general chemical formula Al Diasporic bauxite is a major source for aluminum oxide production in China. The diasporic bauxite ores in China are characterized by their low Al In the diasporic bauxite, the valuable mineral is diaspore, which accounts for about 70% of the total mass. The main gangue minerals are kaolinite, pyrophyllite and illite with a small amount of titanium and iron impurities. Direct flotation has been developed for the beneficiation of the diasporic bauxite. With the direct flotation method, the Al In order to effectively remove aluminosilicate minerals from bauxite, it is necessary to understand the basic surface properties and flotation behavior of the aluminosilicates in bauxite. Because the silicate minerals occur as gangue mineral in many ore deposits, they are often depressed in flotation. Extensive research has been devoted to understanding this aspect of silicate flotation ( In reverse flotation of diasporic bauxite, the kaolinite, pyrophyllite and illite are floated while the diaspore is depressed. Since the gangue clay minerals all have broken Al–O bonds, they react with flotation reagents in a similar manner as diaspore, presenting a major challenge to selective reverse flotation of diasporic bauxite ores. The surface properties such as the layer charge density, cation-retention capacity and wettability resulting from adsorption of flotation chemicals on the aluminosilicate minerals have been studied extensively ( During comminution, kaolinite cleaves along basal planes (0 To confirm different reactivities of amine with (0 The idea to enhance kaolinite flotation by cationic collectors is to minimize the exposure of hydrophilic (0 Hand-picked kaolinite, taken from Ping Ding Shan, Henan province in China, was crushed and ground in a porcelain mill. The −0.098 mm size fraction was used in flotation tests. The purity of kaolinite was determined to be above 90%. Dodecylammium acetate (DDA) of analytical quality was used as collector. HCl and NaOH were used to adjust pulp pH. Double-distilled water was used in all the tests. The polyacrylamides (PAM) were derivatized in our laboratory following procedures described by Single mineral flotation tests were carried out in a micro-flotation cell. The mineral suspension was prepared by adding 3-g of minerals to 40 ml of solutions under agitation. The pH of the mineral suspension was first adjusted to a desired value by adding concentrated NaOH or HCl stock solutions. The prepared flocculant stock solution was added to the desired concentration and conditioned for 3 min. The collector solution was then added and the resultant suspension was conditioned for an additional 2 min without aeration, followed by flotation under aeration for a total of 4 min. The particles which were floated and remained in the suspension were collected separately, filtered and dried in a well-ventilated oven at 120 °C. The recovery was calculated based on solid weight distributions between the two products. Zeta potential was measured using a Brookhaven Zeta plus zetameter (USA). The mineral samples were ground to −5 μm in an agate mortar. The suspensions containing 0.05 wt% solids were prepared with a 1 mM KNO The suspensions containing 1 g of the −98 μm size fraction minerals in 50 ml derivatized PAM (APAM) solutions at a given pH were stirred for 30 min in a 150 ml beaker at room temperature. A sample of suspension was taken and centrifuged at 3000 rpm for 15 min. The residual concentration of the APAM in the separated supernatant was determined using a UV–Vis 3000 spectrophotometer (Shimadu Co., Japan). The difference between the initial and equilibrium concentrations of the PAM was considered as the amount of the APAM adsorbed on the mineral sample.   The zeta potentials of kaolinite as a function of pH in the absence and presence of the derivatized anionic PAM (APAM) are shown in The (0 The authors thank the China's Key Basic Research Program (G1999064901) and National Fund for Distinguished Young Scholar (59925412) to support this research.