Recent attention has been focused on the operative treatment of mid-shaft fractures of the clavicle. This study compares the in-vitro biomechanical properties of a pre-formed titanium clavicle plate (Acumed) to a Synthes 3.5 mm limited-contact dynamic-compression (LCDC) plate using a cadaveric osteotomy model. An osteotomy was performed on 7 pairs of human clavicles and were randomly plated with either a Synthes 3.5 mm LCDC stainless steel plate or an Acumed titanium pre-contoured clavicle plate. After plating, specimens were tested on an EnduraTEC material testing apparatus for axial compression and tension strength, as well as torsional strength in compression and tension. Biomechanical test results for plated specimens are reported for the LCDC plate and the Acumed plate, and the 2 plates are compared.
                  This exploratory study supports investigations with larger sample sizes to determine if the
                  Acumed pre-contoured plate differs from the LCDC plate in biomechanical properties and the
                  clinical implications of such differences.Mid-shaft fractures of the clavicle account for between 69% and 82% of all clavicle fractures. Seven pairs of fresh clavicle bones were obtained from human adult (two male and five female) cadavers and stored at 4 A transverse mid-shaft osteotomy was made in each specimen using a 2-mm hand-held saw. Using random assignment, 1 of the clavicles from each matched pair was plated on the superior anatomic surface, with a 6-hole 3.5 mm stainless steel Synthes USA (West Chester, PA) LCDC plate and the other with an 8-hole, side-appropriate, Acumed (Hillsboro, OR) non-locking clavicle plate. Standard compression drilling and tapping techniques were employed, and appropriate length screws were applied. Because the 6-hole LCDC plate and 8-hole Acumed plate were the same length, only 6 of the 8 holes on the Acumed plates were drilled with screws. The plated construct was then mounted on the test frame, and the axial and torsional stiffness values were determined. Tests were conducted in axial compression and torsion rotational modes. Construct displacement under the influence of load and axial rotation was measured using an axial displacement transducer and angular displacement transducer, respectively. Testing was conducted using alternate cycles of axial compression and torsional rotation. Axial testing was performed in displacement control mode, while torsional testing was done in rotation control mode. The maximum displacement occurred at the point of maximum rotation. Input waveforms for both the modes were ramp waveforms with loads increasing from 1N/s to 50 N/s. In tension mode, the load changed from an initial negative value to a positive value and vice-versa for the compressive mode. The data acquisition system scanned the test parameters at every 0.1 sec; thus the ramp rates were accurately controlled. The load to failure tests were conducted with the saw-tooth waveform, with the magnitude of each subsequent segment being 10% greater than the magnitude of the previous segment. The stiffness tests used a cyclic waveform, 10 cycles in tension and 10 cycles of compression. This part of the test protocol preconditions the specimens to minimize any viscoelastic effects of the soft tissue on the clavicle or its construct. Stiffness is a measure of the resistance of an elastic body to deflection when an external force is applied. Since it is a structural property, stiffness varies both by the sample tested and according to the tension and compression loads applied. The distance the osteotomy deflects under a specific load measures the stiffness of the construct, which was controlled by the axial extensometer. Rotational or torsional stiffness is measured in terms of the ratio of applied torsion moment to the angle of twist. Therefore, smaller displacements or deformation at a given load produce higher stiffness values. For this study, axial tension and compression loads were applied to the plated construct to determine the axial and torsional stiffness. One-way analysis of variance (ANOVA) was used to compare the clavicles with the LCDC and Acumed devices on the axial tension and compression tests and the torsion tension and compression tests. Inferences were made at the .05 level of significance with no correction for multiple comparisons.   Mid-shaft fractures of the clavicle have traditionally been treated nonoperatively with generally good outcomes reported. Recent studies have contributed to our understanding of patient-based outcomes in nonoperatively treated clavicle fractures. A study by Hill et al, A recent meta-analysis found an overall nonunion rate in displaced fractures of 4.8% (37 of 771) with a rate of 15.1% (24 of 159) for displaced fractures treated nonoperatively versus 2.2% (10 of 460) and 2.0% (3 of 152) for displaced fractures treated with a plate or intramedullary pin, respectively. The relative risk reduction for the nonunion of displaced fractures for plating versus conservative treatment was 86%. Our study comparing the in-vitro biomechanical properties of a pre-contoured clavicle plate and 3.5-mm stainless steel LCDC plate on a clavicle osteotomy model found no post-plating differences between the 2 plate types in the 4modes tested. The pre-contoured clavicle plate may afford several potential advantages. It has the anatomic shape of the natural clavicle and, with available right and left clavicle fittings, may decrease operative time. With a lower profile and round ends, compared to the 3.5-mm LCDC plate, greater cosmesis and patient tolerance of the plate are possible. The lower modulus of elasticity of titanium compared to stainless steel may lead to less stress shielding. Further clinical investigations are necessary to evaluate the efficacy and any realized benefits of the Acumed clavicle plate. Among the strengths of our study were the use of an established testing protocol, an osteotomy model, and fresh (unpreserved and non-frozen) bone specimens. Conclusions about the relative effectiveness of the 2 plate types in clinical practice cannot be made. While we found no differences between the LCDC and Acumed plates, with only 7 specimens per group, the post-hoc power to declare the observed differences statistically significant was low (ranging from 6% to 36%). To claim statistical significance for the 2 modes where the largest differences were observed (ie, axial tension and torsional compression), a sample size of 20-22 specimens would be required. If future research is consistent with our exploratory data, then the LCDC and Acumed plates will be shown to have biomechanically equivalent properties in an osteotomy model. Such results would provide empiric support for the use of the pre-contoured clavicle plate as an alternative to a 3.5-mm stainless steel LCDC plate for open reduction and internal fixation of mid-shaft clavicle fractures. In conclusion, with a recognized small sample size, this study found no differences between the previously tested 3.5-mm LCDC plate and a pre-contoured 3.5-mm clavicle plate. No clinical implications can be made, and we recommend further studies to determine if a pre-contoured plate is effective in the clinical setting.