Electrowinning represents a promising methodology for recovery of strategical, scarce metals. In this study, an indium electrowinning process using a sulfate electrolyte on stainless steel, nickel, titanium, aluminum and copper (SS, Ni, Ti, Al and Cu) cathodes was investigated. Firstly, cyclic voltammetry carried out at 15 mV/s scanning rate and 25 °C temperature evaluated the suitability of electrolyte and the surface reactivity on different metal cathodes. Subsequently, indium was deposited using a current density of 25 A/m2 for 22 h at 40 °C and pH 2.3. After electrowinning process, analysis of specific energy consumption (SEC), current efficiency (CE) morphological (SEM/EDX), and crystallographic (XRD) tests on obtained deposits were performed. Cyclic voltammetry results revealed that the chemical reagents of solution stabilize the indium reduction reaction, while Ni cathode showed the highest current intensity for reduction reaction followed by SS, Ti, Cu, and Al. With a significant CE and SEC performance, Ni and SS cathodes reached around 93 % CE and 1.67 kW h/kg SEC, respectively. Referring to Ti cathode, other optimization tests should be performed to enhance obtained results. After deposition process, different surface morphologies and different crystallinity degree can be observed for each deposit, being common the presence of surface defects. The findings of this investigation allowed to determine the most suitable cathode for indium electrowinning from sulfate electrolyte.The increasing demand for indium as indium-tin-oxide (ITO) has led this metal to become a strategic material for the international commercial trade of green energy and audiovisual technologies. Many of these applications comprise flat display screens, optical sensor and optoelectronic systems, semiconductors and photovoltaic solar cells [ In order to facilitate worldwide indium supply, the industrial extraction has commonly been realized from mineral aggregate or by-products in sulfide ores of zinc, copper, tin and lead [ Waste of electrical and electronic equipment (WEEE) has recently been considered an attractive secondary source to be treated [ Nowadays, many studies have proposed the hydrometallurgy as the best methodology to recover indium from WEEE. Hydrometallurgical processes have often focused on ITO leaching from LCD scraps using acid solutions such as HNO Indium recovery attempts via electrowinning have employed nitric and very extensively chloride electrolytes combined with stabilizing compounds. Galvanostatic recovery, using HNO Another important parameter to be taking into account to perform the indium electrowinning represents the electrolyte composition. Indeed, the assistance of supporting additives such as sodium and aluminum sulfate, and boric acid contribute to regulating both deposit quality and CE [ In this research, the utilized electrolyte was 62 g/L In Cyclic voltammetry tests were carried out by using the sulfate solution at 15 mV/s scanning rate to evaluate the metal cathode reactivity response. In In order to recover indium from the sulfate electrolyte, an electrowinning process was proposed. In this electrowinning process, SS, Ni, Ti, Cu and Al were used as metal cathodes to carry out indium deposition, while a lead alloy anode (Pb-0.7Ag) closed the system. The electrodes were then fixed at 30 mm distance for all electrowinning experiments. The reduction process was assisted with a current density (25 A/m After the deposits were obtained on SS, Ni, Al, Ti and Cu cathodes, they were subjected to abundant double-distilled water washes to eliminate the presence of the remaining sulfate salts end then dried. Subsequently, the deposit was weighted and analyzed by using Scanning Electron Microscope combined with energy dispersive X-ray analyzer (Hitachi S-2500, SEM/EDS). Furthermore, X-ray diffraction analysis (XRD) assisted with a Cu Kα source: λ=1.5418 Å was carried out to evaluate the indium deposits crystallinity in the angle range between 30° and 80° with a slow 2θ step size. Finally, the crystallographic phases identification was carried out using the database of Crystallography Open Database (C.O.D).  In all voltammograms a cathodic peak formation is present. Ti, Cu and Al show similar behavior of the reduction process without hydrogen evolution with resulting low peak intensity. Furthermore, all these three metal surfaces present the starting point of plating at -0.65 V. Otherwise, SS and Ni cathodes present greater cathodic reduction peak. Although this could indicate a well-developed concentration gradient near the cathode surface (diffusive conditions), the overlapping of two reduction processes occurs. Thus, a high peak of current intensity is obtained. Ni cathode does not present a well-defined equilibrium potential since the initial cathodic current flowing is due to the HER then at more negative potentials In The Cu cathode shows two crossovers, one is the same starting point previously mentioned, whereas the second one indicates Cu nucleation that was identified at -0.73 V. Besides, on copper voltammogram, starting from 1 V an increase of the current intensity appears as potential decreases showing the two copper reduction peaks: Cu Moreover, other behaviors can be observed in cyclic voltammograms from sulfate solution. The SS, Ti and Al cathodes present similar oxidative behavior with a well-defined indium stripping peak around -0.1 V vs. SCE. Although, all metal supports develop a sharp oxidative peak as the positive potential sweep increases, Ni and Cu supports show additional redox processes. In the case of Ni, after the indium stripping peak, two other anodic peaks are formed at more positive potentials, which could be related to desorption of indium adatoms from In-Ni physical mixture previously deposited [ Two oxidation peaks are also present in voltammetry performed on copper. The one at lower anodic potential (-0.18 V) is related to an overlapping of two peaks, due to copper and indium stripping, while the peak at higher potential (0.15 V) is related to Cu The main electrochemical parameters, for each metal support, obtained by performing voltammetries at 15 mV/s and 25 °C were reported in All the above-mentioned explanation for On the indium electrowinning other parameters are significant: pH, temperature, electrolyte composition, solution conductibility, complexes formation, current density, and so on. The effect of these parameters also requires to be investigated. For instance, boric acid, conventionally, is added in solution baths acting as a local proton source for shifting the rise of surface pH to higher cathodic potentials improving the electrodeposition [ In The In electrowinning was carried out by galvanostatic process on different metal cathodes (SS, Ni, Ti, Al and Cu) in order to evaluate CE, SEC, morphology and crystallographic phases of the obtained deposits. In Regarding CE, a high percentage of around 94 and 95.5 % are reached by Ni and SS cathode respectively. Subsequently, Ti, Cu and Al (85.46 %, 26.40 % and 13.92 %) showed lower efficiencies. After each deposition process, the final pH value was around 1.5 as a result of the contribution of the H The cell voltage of the electrowinning process performed at 25 A/m It could say that, at a fixed current density, for having low SEC values it needs, merely, to choose a cathodic support presenting a lower overvoltage. However, another crucial factor influencing SEC values is the related CE. For instance, due to the great HER, Cu has a CE higher and SEC lower than Ti. In order to have high re-melting efficiency, the deposit aspect and its quality in term of porosity roughness and relative density represent important factors influencing the hydrometallurgical processes. Those parameters together with SEC and CE have the same importance for indium productivity.  Likewise, the obtained deposit on Ni cathode shows a lamellar morphology ( In the same experimental conditions, deposits on Ti showed an irregular grain morphology (  Based on the results obtained, a real influence of the material cathode on indium electrowinning processes has been observed: From voltammetric test, SS and Ni cathodes present higher reactive surface. From long duration galvanostatic tests SS and Ni show the highest CE values with lowest SEC. Different morphologies of indium deposit suggest an influence of the type of cathode at the same experimental conditions. The Ni deposit presents the most compact morphology, while aluminum the most porous one. The most crystalline deposit has been obtained on SS followed by Ni and Ti, while on Al it has the lowest crystallinity. Finally, it is possible to state that Ni and SS are the most suitable cathodic supports for indium electrowinning from sulfate solution, nevertheless Ti cathode also present significative results and could be employed for further optimization investigations.  The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper.