Selective separation of copper and nickel from ammoniacal/ammonium carbonate medium was carried out by using LIX 984N diluted with deodourised kerosene. The study of the influence of equilibration time, equilibrium pH, extractant concentration and selective stripping of copper and nickel has been optimized. It was found that both the metal extractions were unaffected by the changes in pH. Nickel extraction equilibrium was reached at a longer contact time than that for copper and nickel extraction depends greatly on the extractant concentration in the organic phase. Co-extraction, ammonia scrubbing and selective stripping of copper and nickel were performed for a solution containing 3 g dm−3 each of copper and nickel and 60 g dm−3 ammonium carbonate. The extraction and the percentage of stripping for nickel and copper were almost quantitative.A number of hydrometallurgical routes have emerged as potential methods for the processing of lean grade ores and reserves. The most preferred one is the ammonia leaching system by which the desired elements like nickel, copper, cobalt etc. are brought into leach liquor as their ammine complexes and then processed for their separation and recovery ( Solvent extraction helps in the separation and recovery of these metals from their complex metallic solutions. Oximes and beta-diketones have been used for the extraction of copper and nickel and have attracted much interest in recent years ( The present work deals with the co-extraction of copper and nickel from the ammoniacal/ammonium carbonate solution using LIX 984N ( Copper and nickel solutions were prepared by dissolving the corresponding sulfate salts in ammoniacal/ammonium carbonate aqueous solution. The chelating extractant LIX 984N obtained from COGNIS— Ireland Mining Technology Ltd. was used as received. Distilled kerosene (b.p 160–200 °C) was used as the diluent. The aromatic and aliphatic contents (obtained by NMR) were 3.6 and 9.5% respectively. Doubly distilled water was used throughout the experiments and all chemicals used were of AR grade. Solvent extraction experiments were carried out by contacting equal volume of the aqueous phase (containing 3 g dm The extraction of copper and nickel by LIX 984N in ammoniacal medium, presents a stoichiometry of one metal to two extractant molecules ( Where M represents the corresponding metal, HR the extractant molecule and aq and org denote the aqueous and organic phases, respectively. The influence of the equilibration time on copper and nickel extraction was studied by contacting equal volume of the aqueous solution (pH The influence of this parameter on the co-extraction of copper and nickel was studied over the pH range of 7 to 9, by using equal volume of the aqueous and organic phase (10% v/v LIX 984N), equilibrated for 20 min at room temperature. It is found that the extraction of both the metals remained the same over the range of pH studied. Cognis' performance specification for 10% v/v LIX 984N is a maximum copper loading of 5.1 g dm As observed from From The ammonia present in the loaded organic phase, as the oxime reagent picks up some ammonia ( The ammonia from the organic phase can be removed by a single stage pH-controlled scrubbing operation. The scrubbing tests were carried out at a 1:1 volume phase ratio with scrub solutions of different initial pHs. The raffinates were analyzed for copper, nickel and ammonia and the results are given in The ammonia free loaded organic phase obtained as described above, was used to carry out selective nickel stripping. Nickel stripping was studied by using different concentrations of sulfuric acid at a 1:1 volume phase ratio. From The organic phase free from nickel is stripped with an acidic solution containing 180 g dm LIX 984N is capable of extracting both copper and nickel from ammoniacal solutions. Extraction of nickel is very sensitive to the extractant concentration. By using an appropriate concentration of the extractant, both metals are quantitatively extracted from an aqueous solution containing 3 g dm The ammonia from the loaded organic phase is removed by a single stage pH-controlled scrubbing with no loss of either metal. Selective nickel stripping from the ammonia free organic phase was achieved in three stages with nearly 10 g dm We thank Dr. Meera Venkatesh (Radio Isotope Division), Dr. A.V. Reddy (Head, Analytical Chemistry Division), Bhabha Atomic Research Centre, Mumbai, India, for supporting us in this work and Mrs. Sudha, for helping us in the instrumentation work. We gratefully acknowledge Dr. Werner Schwab (COGNIS, Germany) and Mr. Manish Kapadia (COGNIS dealer, BS international, Mumbai) for supplying the LIX 984N sample for the present study.