Phalangeal neck fractures are uncommon and are almost exclusively seen in children. Most paediatric hand fractures are treated conservatively and an excellent outcome is expected in almost all cases. Paediatric phalangeal neck fractures are different mainly because they are unstable and have a high risk of complications. Even minimally displaced phalangeal neck fractures are known to be unstable following reduction and hence k-wire fixation is required. Furthermore, complications such as persistent deformity, nonunion, and avascular necrosis are commonly seen following management of phalangeal neck fractures; such complications are extremely rare in other paediatric hand fractures. The current paper aims to review the diagnosis, classification, management and complications of these fractures in children. The paper also aims to introduce an extended classification of phalangeal neck fractures and to explain the clinical relevance of the extended classification.Over the last two decades, the author has developed special interest in phalangeal neck fractures The search was done using PubMed utilising the key phrase “phalangeal neck fractures”. All 54 hits were studied and cross-referenced. Two types of articles were excluded: articles that mention phalangeal neck fractures as a part of a general review of fractures in children, and articles on phalangeal neck fractures in adults. Out of the initial 54 hits, only 33 articles were relevant to the current review and all of these will be referred to in the current review. Phalangeal neck fractures have also been called “subcapital” Phalangeal neck fractures are relatively uncommon and are almost exclusively seen in children. In one hand centre, a total of 111 phalangeal neck fractures were treated over a 10-year period; and the ratio of adult to paediatric fractures was 1:10 The aetiology of paediatric phalangeal neck fractures varies according to age. In young children, these fractures are almost exclusively caused by “door slams” Clinically, the injured digit is swollen with limited range of motion at the involved joint. Tenderness at the fracture site is present. Skin injury may be seen proximal to the site of the fracture in door slams. The initial impact by the edge of the door causes the skin laceration; and the fracture is seen more distally as the child withdraws the entrapped digit. Documentation of concurrent injury to tendons and neurovascular bundles is essential. Concurrent vascular compromise is usually seen either as reduced capillary refill or a “congested” digit (with or without skin blistering) The accepted classification of phalangeal neck fractures was published by the senior author in 2001 Type I fractures are undisplaced and are considered “relatively stable.” It is important to note that any minor degree of displacement will classify the fracture as type II; which is unstable. Displacement is almost always in a dorsal direction in type II fractures. The definition of type II fractures is displaced fractures with bone-to-bone contact at the fracture site In type III fractures, there is loss of bone-to-bone contact between the proximal and distal fracture fragments. The phalangeal head is rotated 90° in type IIIa fractures and the rotation is 180° in type IIIb fractures There are several unique features of phalangeal neck fractures which dictate the principles of their management. Firstly, these fractures are unstable and hence k-wire fixation is recommended following reduction. Secondly, the phalangeal head in children is primarily cartilaginous and has no tendon attachments. Following phalangeal neck fractures, the phalangeal head loses all its periosteal attachments and hence it is relatively ischaemic. The main source of blood supply is through the collateral ligaments. Hence, certain precautions should be taken to minimise the risk avascular necrosis of the phalangeal head including minimal handling with preservation of collateral ligament attachments during open reduction, and avoiding multiple passes of k-wires which will generate thermal injury. Thirdly, fractured digits from door slams have significant crush injury and oedema. Open reduction with splitting of the extensor tendon frequently results in adhesions and stiffness. Hence, closed reduction is preferred over open reduction. Furthermore, if adequate reduction is not achieved by closed means, the author prefers open reduction through a lateral incision (without splitting of the extensor tendon) rather than open reduction through a dorsal (tendon-splitting) approach Type I fractures are treated conservatively with a volar hand splint for 3–4 weeks. In young children, the author uses a cast because it is difficult to keep the hand immobilised in a splint. Adolescents are more cooperative and digital splints may be used instead of hand splints or casts. Type IIa fractures are the most common and require reduction and k-wire fixation. As mentioned above, every attempt should be made to avoid open reduction. Hence, the appropriate algorithm of management is to start with a trial of closed reduction The same principles of reduction mentioned for type IIa fractures can be applied to the remaining type II subtypes. However, the choice of method of fixation varies with the fracture configuration. Type IIb and IIc fractures are best treated with closed reduction and transverse or oblique k-wire fixation ( The most accepted grading system in the assessment of outcome of management of phalangeal neck fractures is Al-Qattan's grading system shown in An excellent outcome is expected following conservative management of type I fractures. Al-Qattan reported the results of 13 children with type I fractures: twelve were graded excellent and the remaining patient had a good outcome The outcome of type II fracture is generally good and it has been shown to be intermediate between the outcomes of types I and III fractures Completely de-vascularised fingers (distal to the fracture site) should be treated with revascularisation; but the outcome is usually poor probably due to the significant crush-avulsion component (most cases end up with amputation) Many children with paediatric phalangeal neck fractures present late to the hand surgeon with “incipient” malunion Paediatric phalangeal neck fractures are situated away from the epiphysis. Hence, Barton The displacement of type II fractures is usually in a dorsal direction. Hence, malunited fractures of the proximal phalanx may result in a volar bony spur or new bone obliterating the subcondylar fossa of the phalanx. This limits flexion of the proximal interphalangeal joint. When this occurs, removal of the bony block will improve the range of motion in the arc of flexion as shown by Simmons and Peters Nonunion without avascular necrosis following phalangeal neck fractures is usually seen in the thumb Non-union without avascular necrosis in the fingers presents with stiffness and deformity rather than instability Non-union with avascular necrosis of the phalangeal head is usually seen in the fingers and not the thumb Children with avascular necrosis of the phalangeal head of the fingers usually present with stiffness of the affected joint. Al-Qattan recommends conservative management if the joint is in the functional position with no lateral or rotational deformity In conclusion, phalangeal neck fractures in children deserve “respect” and should raise a “red flag”. Management should be done according to a pre-set algorithm. Despite all efforts, phalangeal neck fractures have the highest rate of complications compared with all other paediatric hand fractures. There is no conflict of interest. The research done by the senior author on phalangeal neck fractures was funded by the