In this paper, we consider an event-triggered minimax state estimation problem for uncertain systems subject to a relative entropy constraint. This minimax estimation problem is formulated as an equivalent event-triggered linear exponential quadratic Gaussian problem. It is then shown that this problem can be solved via dynamic programming and a newly defined information state. As the solution to this dynamic programming problem is computationally intractable, a one-step event-triggered minimax estimation problem is further formulated and solved, where an a posteriori relative entropy is introduced as a measure of the discrepancy between probability measures. The resulting estimator is shown to evolve in recursive closed-form expressions. For the multi-sensor system scenario, a one-step event-triggered minimax estimator is also presented in a sequential fusion way. Finally, comparative simulation examples are provided to illustrate the performance of the proposed one-step event-triggered minimax estimators.Event-triggered state estimation, whose aim is to maintain an acceptable estimation performance at a reduced communication cost, has gained significant attention in cyber–physical systems (CPSs). Different from traditional time-triggered systems in which the sensor data are taken by the estimator at every time instant, an event-triggered estimator receives the data via a network only when a predefined event-triggered condition is satisfied. The event-triggered condition defines some importance metric of the data and provides implicit information available to the remote estimator, so that a good tradeoff between communication cost and estimation performance is achieved ( During the last decade, a number of event-triggered schedules and estimators have been proposed. In general, these estimators can be classified into two categories in terms of the designed event-triggered conditions: deterministic event-triggered (DET) estimators ( On the other hand, in CPSs it is usually difficult to characterize exactly the dynamics of the physical plant considered by a mathematical model due to the complexities of systems and some uncertainty factors ( In consideration of the attractive features of the minimax formulation with a relative entropy description of uncertainty, we investigate an event-triggered state estimation problem with a general SET condition under this minimax framework. It is shown that this event-triggered minimax estimation problem can be solved via dynamic programming and a newly defined information state. However, unlike the case of linear Gaussian systems with SET conditions ( The main results and contributions of this paper are summarized as follows.  The framework of the minimax state estimation problem with general SET measurements is formulated. We show that this problem can be solved via DP and a newly defined information state. It is worth mentioning that the information state in this paper is defined in a direct way, which does not need to introduce the concepts of change of measure and Radon–Nikodym derivative used in previous information state approaches (e.g., In consideration of realistic implementability, a one-step event-triggered minimax state estimation problem is formulated and solved. Its solution has a nice feature that resulting estimates can be evaluated recursively in a closed form. The estimation performance can be guaranteed by the corresponding one-step minimax error cost. For the multi-sensor system scenario, a one-step event-triggered minimax estimator is also derived in a sequential fusion way for a general SET condition on each sensor. The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. In Section    Consider the following discrete-time linear time-varying stochastic uncertain system within a time horizon To characterize the admissible perturbed noise processes, it is necessary to specify a nominal assumption of noise processes and the initial state, which are denoted by We further use relative entropy (  Given a constant The relative entropy constraint given by Considering limited energy and communication resources, we introduce an event-triggered strategy to decide whether  Note that rigorously, the random process In this subsection, we present the event-triggered minimax optimal estimation problem considered in this paper. We focus on a causal estimator  Note that though the above minimax problem has the same form as that in time-triggered communication ( By using a Lagrange multiplier technique, the constrained minimax problem   Due to the lack of an explicit expression for the entropy The solution to the optimal LEQG estimation problem with time-triggered communication was presented in Since the expectation in the LEQG cost In this subsection, we present closed-form recursive expressions for a newly defined information state. The principle of constructing an information state is that it should contain allavailable information about the state of the system (p. 79 in  An information state  The information state defined here is more mathematically direct compared with the classical information state approaches to solve the estimation and control problems that involve an exponential cost (e.g., In the sequel, we present the recursive expressions for      See From    By using the result of completing the square for Based on    See By the law of iterated expectations (Lemma 2.4.8 in    Write In DP equations  It is shown in In consideration of realistic implementability, we further look into a simpler yet more interesting one-step event-triggered minimax estimation problem, As we will demonstrate, this formulation allows us to derive a one-step event-triggered minimax estimator in recursive closed-form expressions. The one-step problem is considered as follows. At each time In this case, the optimization problem becomes a forward recursive estimation problem such that the information set  Note that the original event-triggered minimax optimal estimation problem As the formulation of original optimal problem in Section According to the LEQG cost Based on the redefined information state, we present the following result.    The proof is mainly based on the recursive results for According to  The information state    According to From the definition of    Note that  By writing In this section, we extend the estimation results in the previous sections to the multi-sensor system scenario in a sequential fusion way. Consider a set of Now consider that each sensor As in the case of a single sensor, we use a relative entropy constraint to describe the system uncertainty. Likewise, for the multi-sensor case, the analytical solution for the event-triggered minimax optimal estimator cannot be obtained. Thus, we consider the one-step problem as Functions The initial value is given by      The proof can be completed by following a similar procedure as that in the single-sensor case.  In this paper, we focus on a general SET scheme that the transmission probability for sensor In this section, we illustrate the previous proposed estimation results by two examples: the single-sensor and the multi-sensor system scenarios. (1) Single-sensor system. Consider the following second-order uncertain system To show the robustness of the one-step ET minimax estimator, the ET Kalman filter (KF) designed for a nominal system (  In this work, an event-triggered (ET) state estimation problem under minimax formulation with a relative entropy description of uncertainty has been investigated. Since an analytical optimal solution is not able to be obtained, a one-step ET minimax estimation problem is further studied and its solution has a recursive closed form. It is shown that the one-step ET minimax estimator has a similar form with the ET risk-sensitive estimator proposed in One possible future research direction is to explore a tractable ET minimax estimator that has a better robustness than the one-step one. For the minimax estimation formulation considered, it would be of interest to analyze the worst-case dynamics, for which the related problem of minimax control was considered in According to the definition of For We prove this theorem by induction. As in This minimax estimator can be derived following the argument in