The best quality graphite product is coarse-grained (larger than 300μm) and has 98% carbon or higher. It is considered that graphite mineral is easy to float. However, the treatment flow sheets can be relatively complex and depends on the type of ore to be treated. The conventional technology for upgrading graphite ore involves milling followed by flotation, regrinding, and multiple cleaning. In spite of that, graphite floats easily with the middling particles adhering to the graphite flakes are reported to the concentrate. Regrinding of the concentrate also breaks coarse particles of graphite, which represent a problem of producing coarse high-grade graphite.Introduction Graphite deposits Beneficiation of graphite ores Research and development Process for production of coarse flake graphite Graphite beneficiation flow sheet Introduction The flow sheets Graphite producers and its application References The best quality graphite product is coarse-grained (larger than 300 The conventional technology for upgrading graphite ore involves milling followed by flotation, regrinding, and multiple cleaning. In spite of that, graphite floats easily with the middling particles adhering to the graphite flakes are reported to the concentrate. Regrinding of the concentrate also breaks coarse particles of graphite, which represent a problem of producing coarse high-grade graphite. Graphite deposits have been classified in various ways. Cameron and Weis  Disseminated graphite flake deposits are found in carbonaceous sedimentary rocks. The size and shape of these deposits are variable.   Lamp and chip graphite is primarily produced from these deposits found in India, the USA, and England. Although the flotation process is relatively simple, the treatment flow sheet is dictated by the type of deposits. Little research and development work was performed over the years, due to the fact that liberated graphite is naturally floatable using mainly frother (MIBC, pine oil, and fuel oil). In some cases, coal oil is used in place of fuel oil. It has been reported that coal oil is more selective than fuel oil. Depending on the type of gangue minerals, standard depressants used are sodium silicate, lactic acid, and some of the calcite depressants such as lignin sulfonite. In recent years, extensive research work was conducted by the Indian Bureau of Mines on the development of a new flow sheet and reagent scheme for beneficiation of graphite from the Sivaganga deposit assaying 12.5% FC and 21.64% FC (FC In these studies a new collector mixture and flow sheet was developed that is capable of producing a high grade of FC of over 96% C. The new collector IBM/07 is a mixture of different hydrocarbons and terpens The flow sheet developed in these studies is shown in The effect of new mixture and standard reagents (i.e., fuel oil, pine oil) is shown in Using a reagent mixture, high-concentrate grade was achieved at 78% FC recovery. Fuel oil, pine oil produced higher recovery of 91% FC but at lower concentrate grade. The high-grade concentrate obtained using collector mixtures has low impurity levels. Very often particles of waste are attached to the graphite flakes and reports to graphite concentrate resulting in a low-grade concentrate. Ball mill or pebble mill regrind would liberate graphite but would also produce fine graphite. During studies between 1992 and 1993 at MINEC (South Africa) a unique delamination technique was developed that separates graphite flakes and removes attached gangue minerals with little damage to the graphite flakes themselves. This process was tested in Zimbabwe Development Corporation Graphite Mine. Using the new delamination technique, a graphite concentrate grade has been improved from 90% FC to 98% FC Although the reagent scheme used for beneficiation of graphite is simple due to the fact that graphite passes natural flotability, most of the operations around the world One of the main problems during beneficiation of graphite ore is the liberation to avoid production of fine graphite. In a number of cases, gangue particles are attached to graphite flecks and require delamination, to avoid breaking of larger flecks. The highest demand for graphite is coarse high-grade concentrate. The operating plant flow sheets depend on the type of ore to be treated and liberation characteristics of the graphite. The flow sheet can be relatively complex to simple. Several examples of the flow sheet are presented below. A flow sheet for the production of flake graphite is presented in  Using this flow sheet, several concentrates were produced at different sizes, ranging from 90% C to 95% C. The overall recovery of graphite combined concentrates is 88% C.  The concentrator treats high-grade ore assaying 87–88% C. The flow sheet uses open circuit grind followed by rougher flotation and a single cleaning stage. The cleaner concentrate was treated on the table where three different grade concentrates were produced, ranging from 90% C to 95–97% C, and higher than 97% C. Each concentrate is a flake type concentrate. A similar flow sheet has been developed at Merelani operations—Tanzania, where large flake graphite concentrate was produced at a grade ranging from 96% C to 99% C after delamination. Delamination was performed in a low-speed ball mill at low pulp density 30–40% solids. There are more than 100 operating plants in China, Australia, South and North America, Europe, Africa, and the Soviet Union. Each of these operating plants produces different types and quality of graphite that are used in different applications. In general, the flow sheet varies from plant to plant while the reagent does not vary significantly. It should be noted that some operating mines in Norway have introduced polypropylene glycol butyl ether as a frother, which is claimed to improve selectivity and graphite recovery significantly (