A two-step acid decomposition method is proposed to separate tungsten and molybdenum from W(VI)-Mo(VI) mixed solution. The first step is used to precipitate H2WO4 and H2MoO4. The second step is adopted to leach H2MoO4 from the mixed acid precipitate selectively to achieve separation of W(VI) and Mo(VI). The Mo/WO3 mass ratio in a synthetic leach liquor can reach 440 via the above two steps. In addition, thermal decomposition of peroxy W and Mo acid mixed solution was used to separate a macro amount of W and Mo. After separation under experimental conditions, the Mo/WO3 mass ratio in the solution and WO3/Mo mass ratio in the precipitate reached 74 and 4.1, respectively.According to geochemical characteristics, the content of Mo impurity in scheelite (CaWO The Mo(VI) and W(VI) ions have almost identical ionic radii due to lanthanide contraction, resulting in a remarkable resemblance of chemical properties between these two ions [ Although W(VI) and Mo(VI) exist in similar forms of species in alkaline solutions, in acidic solutions tungsten exists in the form of solid tungstic acid, compared to Mo in the form of Mo oxy-cation [ Generally, the Na The tungstate/molybdate mixed solution was prepared by dissolving sodium tungstate (AR) and sodium molybdate (AR) in deionized water. In the mixed solution, the WO In the process of the separation reaction, a certain amount of HCl (AR) was first added into the flask and heated to the required temperature (±0.5 °C). The obtained H A certain mass of H   After first-step acid decomposition, second-step acid decomposition was adopted to leach Mo from the H H The solubility of H  Tungsten metal powder was used as a reducing agent in order to further improve the separation effect, by increasing Mo leaching [  and The results summarized in The above results indicate that the two-step acid decomposition method can separate macro amounts of W and Mo from mixed aqueous solutions. Tungsten and molybdenum acids dissolve in H 4H The formed peroxy W acid and Mo acid will change into W acid and Mo acid by thermal decomposition through the following reactions [ H The newly formed Mo acid can dissolve in acid solution, whereas W acid cannot. Through the above reactions, macro amounts of W and Mo might be able to be separated.  As shown in  A new method, two-step acid decomposition, was developed to separate macro amounts of W and Mo from W-Mo mixed solution. First, first-step acid decomposition is used to precipitate W and Mo from W-Mo mixed solution in the form of H This research was supported by the