In oil and gas extraction operations, water from the hydrocarbon reservoir is brought to the surface along with the oil or gas. This “produced water” contains organics which may be free, dispersed, or dissolved in the water. While certain dissolved compounds may contribute to environmental risk from produced water, current North American discharge regulations only address the dispersed fraction of oil and grease (29mg/L in the US, 30mg/L in Canada). The purpose of this research was to investigate, at bench scale, chemical coagulation with ferric chloride (FeCl3) and adsorption with organoclay (OC) in a completely stirred tank reactor (CSTR) configuration as pre-treatment for dissolved air flotation (DAF) for the removal of dissolved and dispersed oils from produced water. The integrated process was evaluated and compared to the individual processes of coagulation-DAF, adsorption-DAF and DAF without pre-treatment for the removal of dispersed oil, naphthalene and phenol from synthetic produced water. Concentrations of dispersed oil in clarified water were reduced, from an initial concentration of 100mg/L, to concentrations as low as 10±1.6mg/L after coagulation with FeCl3 (FeCl3-DAF), 15±1.2mg/L after adsorption with OC (OC-DAF), and 7±1.4mg/L after the integrated process (OC-FeCl3-DAF). From an initial naphthalene concentration of 1mg/L, both the adsorption (OC-DAF) and integrated process (OC-FeCl3) achieved clarified naphthalene concentrations of 0.11±0.01mg/L, representing a significant improvement over the 0.53±0.03mg/L achieved by coagulation treatment (FeCl3-DAF). However, none of the processes evaluated in this study were found to be effective for phenol removal.Produced water is the name given to the co-produced wastewater stream generated when water from underground reservoirs is brought to the surface during oil or gas extraction Alkylphenols and PAHs are specific classes of aromatic hydrocarbons which have been identified as endocrine disruptors Flotation is a common technology for offshore produced water treatment, but is not considered to be an effective treatment for dissolved components, suggesting that pre-treatment processes may be necessary Organoclay adsorption is typically implemented in fixed-bed adsorption columns, although several studies have been conducted to evaluate the efficiency of this adsorbent in a completely stirred tank reactor (CSTR) design. Moazed and Viraraghavan The overall purpose of this research was to investigate the efficacy of an integrated adsorption-coagulation CSTR process followed by DAF for produced water treatment. The treatment capacity of this integrated process was compared to the individual unit processes of FeCl  Three different treatments for produced water were tested: (1) ferric chloride coagulation-DAF (FeCl A factorial design was developed to investigate the impact of coagulant dose, adsorbent dose, flocculation mixing time and velocity gradients as outlined in Total oil and grease concentrations were determined by IR spectroscopy (Bruker Optics, Ettlingen, Germany) using Standard Method 5520C  In the FeCl In the OC-DAF trials, the low dose of organoclay (i.e., 300 Several studies have investigated the treatment of industrial wastewater or produced water using organoclay as a medium in adsorption columns. Moazed and Viraraghavan The results of the OC-FeCl  Adsorption with organoclay was found to perform better than coagulation for naphthalene removal at all test conditions. The low dose (i.e., 300 The difference between removal of naphthalene and phenol in this study is likely a result of the higher solubility of phenol in water compared to naphthalene. Organoclays are often produced with surfactants containing a long alkyl chain ‘tail’, which form a solvent layer surrounding the clay into which organic molecules can partition Since phenol was not found to be removed in either the FeCl An analysis of variance (ANOVA) test was performed on the results of coagulation and integrated trials to determine if organoclay addition had a significant effect on removal of naphthalene. This ANOVA considered three levels of organoclay addition – 0 During the integrated coagulation–adsorption trials, the lower velocity gradient applied during the flocculation stage (i.e., 20    Overall, all of the processes evaluated in this study resulted in oil and grease removal from synthetic produced water samples. With the exception of the low organoclay/low mixing time adsorption trial, all chemical pre-treatments for DAF resulted in oil and grease concentrations below discharge standards (i.e., 30 None of the treatment processes evaluated in this study demonstrated significant removal of phenol, possibly due to its hydrophilic nature. An alternative adsorbent, such as PAC, or an aromatic-based organoclay may be more effective for phenol removal within the CSTR-based treatment trains evaluated in this study. The addition of organoclay to FeCl Increasing the slow mix velocity gradient significantly improved OC treatment in the removal of both oil and grease and naphthalene, but did not impact the coagulation or integrated treatments for the removal of either contaminant. While increasing the None declared. The authors would like to acknowledge