Quasi tetrahedral agglomerates consist of four spherical primary particles, of which three primary particles generally form a mechanically stable base on which the fourth primary particle is arranged centrally (as in the regular case, where the primary particles have equal radii) forming an apparent trigonal pyramid.
                  The coordinates of the centers of the primary particles are derived for agglomerates composed of monodisperse spherical primary particles (regular tetrahedron) and polydisperse spherical primary particles (skewed tetrahedron). Moreover, the force distribution within the agglomerates at compression is described and an analytical model for elastic contact deformation is derived on the basis of the Hertz model [1].
                  Following, the regular structure of the agglomerates is experimentally analyzed using compression tests and the recorded force–displacement curves are evaluated with the new analytical model. Additionally, mechanical properties like the modulus of elasticity and the yield point of the primary particles as well that as of the tetrahedral agglomerates are also derived.
                  Subsequently, tetrahedral agglomerates are modeled using the discrete element method (DEM) and their compression behavior between two rigid plates is simulated. The received numerical force–displacement curves are compared with the model-based approximated analytical force–displacement curves. Force–displacement curves of agglomerates composed of poly-disperse spherical primary particles are recorded and evaluated as well. It was found that the regular tetrahedron represents the most stable configuration, with an upper threshold force–displacement curve on varying the upper primary particle size and limiting curves on varying the size of one of the lower primary particles.Agglomeration is the generic term for processes of mechanical particle size enlargement, whereby fine primary particles are bonded together to form particle collectives, using different binding mechanisms and forces. The primary agglomeration processes are pelletizing, press agglomeration and sintering. The problems faced in the experimental investigation and theoretical description of the microscopic binding mechanisms and binding forces between primary particles, the micro-mechanical properties and the resulting macroscopic product properties have so far only been insufficiently investigated empirically. Besides, an adequate quantification is not yet established due to the substantial difficulties that hinder the necessary physical description of micro-mechanical properties of the primary particles, fundamental interactions between them and stochastic micro-process dynamics (at stressing) in terms of a desired and guaranteed mechanical product quality. Established experimental methods for measuring the mechanical properties of agglomerates are tension, compression and impact tests. In this context, the strength and fracture behavior are often studied as this knowledge is of vital interest for many industrial applications which strive to minimize comminution effects at processing, transportation and storage. Bika et al. For the investigation of macro-voids and interparticle bond strength on the agglomerate breakage, Subero et al. Furthermore, the compressive strength and fracture behavior of cylindrical agglomerates consisting of macroscopic γ-Al Machii and Nakamura In addition, agglomerates and their micro–macro-interactions are increasingly studied using numerical methods like the finite element method (FEM) and the discrete element method (DEM). For that purpose, the group of Thornton Following, Moreno et al. Khanal and Tomas To study the micro-mechanics of agglomerate breakage, Liu et al. Quasi tetrahedral agglomerates, as shown in A skewed tetrahedral spanning results when the primary particles exhibit different radii ( The coordinates of the centers of the primary particles are represented by the following vectors To derive the vectors for the composition of the skewed tetrahedron, the base area The determination of point Eq. Thus, This expression in turn corresponds to the height of point Using the intercept theorem, Consequently, this expression is equal to the For deriving the coordinates of point Since the radii of the primary particles are equal ( For deriving a generally valid force distribution within the tetrahedron, the tetrahedron is at first transformed into a fixed coordinate system, in which during uniaxial compression, the perpendicularly induced force vector acts along the Points The point of intersection Now, the position vector In the regular tetrahedron with equal sized primary particles, the point of intersection The distance of point The following coordinate transformation of the tetrahedron, whose result is shown in At the first transformation step, the point of intersection Consequently, the new coordinates of the points At the second transformation step, using rotation matrices, the vector In the case that all primary particles of the base area The vector Next, using the angle Correspondingly, Eqs. The new coordinates of point At the third transformation step, the tetrahedron is rotated about the By rotation about the angle In doing so, the rotation angle It follows Furthermore, the coordinates of the points Using a mechanical contact force model, the force distribution resulting in a quasi tetrahedral agglomerate at compression between two stiff plates can be described. The following idealized assumptions are made to describe the skewed tetrahedron: The primary particles are homogeneous, isotropic and perfectly smooth spheres. The primary particles are rigidly bonded to each other by means of solid bridge bonds of binder. All contacts between the agglomerates and the stressing plates are non-adhesive. The mass of the individual primary particles and the binder is negligibly small in comparison to the acting forces. In Then, for decomposition of the forces, the required force balance is shown in The system of linear equations has to be solved to determine the forces ( By considering of the balance of forces at the nodes of the base area ( The acting forces at node The system of equations to be solved are In the regular tetrahedron, see Thereby, Eq. In all particle–particle contacts between the upper and the lower primary particles, the value of the force Due to the rigid bonds between the primary particles, the forces in the According to Between the particles of the base plane and the plate, a force component of During an uniaxial compression test of a quasi tetrahedral agglomerate (consisting of smooth, macroscopic, isotropic, stiff spherical primary particles with comparatively soft contacts) between two rigid plates, contact deformation at the particle–plate and the particle–particle contacts occur. On the particle surfaces, circular contact areas arise whose radius The effective radius The effective modulus of elasticity The displacement Due to the high stiffness of the stressing tool (plates), the displacement of the plates can be neglected. Solid bridge bonds of selected binder material exist at the particle–particle contacts. Nevertheless the acting strain within the particle–particle contacts and the solid bridge bonds remain small due to the comparatively large cross section. With this assumption, and considering the high stiffness exhibited by the solid bridge bonds and particle–particle contacts, the deformation at the particle–particle contacts can be neglected. Using the Hertz equation The contact stiffness The approach of the elastic deformation work done follows as The total elastic deformation work done In a horizontal arranged pelletizing pan with a rotating base plate, spherical macroscopic primary particles had been agglomerated by adding a liquid binder. As primary particles γ-Al A mixture of agglomerates of different sizes and shapes and, thus, agglomerates with different numbers and configurations of primary particles had been obtained. In the agglomerate product, quasi tetrahedral agglomerates represent a stable and regular geometric shape, next in size after the spherical primary particles. After agglomeration in the pelletizing pan, the agglomerated products had been dried in a drying chamber, during which the binder hardens and solid bridge bonds are generated. One hundred quasi tetrahedral agglomerates had been selected from the product and their mechanical properties had been investigated by uniaxial compression tests. The agglomerates had been uniaxially loaded at a constant loading velocity of At stressing, the agglomerates exhibit a comparatively small initial deformation process during which the binder layers at the surface of the agglomerates as well as the surface asperities are deformed plastically. Subsequently, elastic deformation of the agglomerate advances as a sum of the elastic contact deformation of the upper and the three lower primary particles. This elastic regime can be well described with the derived analytical model according to Eqs. However, to exactly determine the yield point and the yield force, the experimental force–displacement curves can be represented in the coordinates The determined mechanical properties of the primary particles (γ-Al The primary particles exhibit a certain inhomogeneity concerning microstructure, bonds distribution, shape and size. Furthermore, the received agglomerates deviate from the ideal shape and the solid bridge bonds connecting the primary particles are non-uniform regarding shape, size and strength. Due to various statistically distributed parameters, some deviations from the ideal force–displacement behavior of the agglomerates can occur. Moreover, the agglomerates exhibit different breakage behavior. The primary breakage can be initiated at different amounts of stressing and after diverse pre-stressing history like rearrangement to a more stable position and orientation or after consolidation, see The values of the modulus of elasticity and the contact stiffness at yield point of the upper primary particle ( Using the discrete element method (DEM), the compression test of the quasi tetrahedral agglomerates has been simulated. The numerical considerations are based on the commercial software PFC As the contact law of the modeled primary particles, the Hertz law In the performed simulations, the Hertz model The properties of the primary particles were selected according to the properties of the wetted γ-Al The rigid solid bridge bonds generated by the binder between the primary particles are modeled in the simulation by so called parallel bonds. These can be assumed as springs connected in series and distributed around the contact center between the primary particles. A friction element of the contact law, however, remains unaffected by a parallel bond. The approach of parallel bonds has been sufficiently described by Potyondy Parallel bonds are characterized by their cross-sectional area and radius which determine their normal and tangential contact stiffnesses and fracture strength respectively. The stiffness of a parallel bond is described by a cross section related stiffness to consider the size of the bond. The normal stiffness A comparison of the force–displacement curves of the derived analytical model, Eqs. As an idealized assumption, the analytical model assumes high stiffnesses of the solid bridge bonds including the particle–particle contacts in comparison with the stiffnesses of the primary particles, whereby their deformation is neglected. Thus, the analytical model, considering only the primary particles contact stiffnesses without any parallel bond gives a limiting curve which is above the obtained force–displacement curves of the numerical approach. This limiting curve can only be achieved for large stiffnesses of the parallel bonds. However, this curve is the ideal curve and cannot be exceeded. Consequently, for low stiffnesses of the parallel bonds, this deformation cannot be neglected anymore and a relatively large deviation from the analytical curve occurs. When the primary particles in the tetrahedron have different radii, then the behavior resembles as shown in The force–displacement curves obtained by varying the upper primary particle of the agglomerate at compression are shown in With reduction of the size of the upper primary particle, this primary particle increasingly acts like a wedge pressed between the lower primary particles of the base, pushing them apart. As a consequence, the forces acting in the particle–particle bonds of the base On the contrary, an increase of the upper primary particle size causes an increase in fracture force, since the forces acting in the particle–particle bonds of the base area decrease. Consequently, in case of a very large upper primary particle, the forces reduce to zero ( Thus, the regular case of equal sized primary particles gives the upper limiting curve. The influence of different radii of a single primary particle of the base area on the force–displacement curve is shown in On increasing the size of a lower primary particle, the acting compression force is increasingly distributed on both the other smaller primary particles of the base. Moreover, the force in the bond between remaining smaller primary particles increases and the fracture criteria is reached earlier. Thereby, the strength of the agglomerate is much lower. When a lower primary particle's size is reduced, the intensity of the compression force acting on the smaller primary particle is much larger than on both the remaining larger ones and the displacement slightly reduces. Again, the forces in the bonds of the base primary particles are asymmetrically distributed and due to the smaller cross-sectional area of the bonds between the small primary particle and the larger ones, the fracture stress of the agglomerate is reached significantly faster. It is worth to note here that the regular case of equal sized primary particles exhibits the largest strength and requires the highest fracture force, due to the symmetrical distribution of forces acting in the tetrahedral agglomerate. For a quasi tetrahedral agglomerate consisting of macroscopic primary particles with equal and different radii, the resulting configurations and coordinates of the primary particles had been derived. An analytical model in analogy with the Hertzian approach Using a pelletizing pan, quasi tetrahedral agglomerates had been produced from primary particles (γ-Al A comparison between the derived analytical model and results obtained by numerical simulations based on the DEM reveals that the analytical approach represents the limiting curve at high bond stiffnesses. On varying the radius of the upper primary particle, the force–displacement curves of the regular tetrahedron forms an upper limiting curve and on varying the radius of one of the lower primary particles in the base, the regular tetrahedron gives the most stable configuration. From the described results, the force–displacement behavior of complex agglomerates consisting of spherical macroscopic primary particles can be studied. In future, the derived analytical model for elastic contact deformation will be extended with bonds having equivalently low stiffnesses, in which the contact deformations of the primary particles dominate. Subsequently, the model will be extended with bonds having variable stiffnesses.  We thank our students (Zheni Radeva, Laura Schneider, Christoph Scheer and Philipp Lindner) whose works have contributed towards this paper.