Production data analysis impacts assets value and financial decisions significantly. Naturally fractured reservoirs exist widely around the world. A common method to represent naturally fractured reservoirs is dual-porosity model. Intrinsic characteristics of dual-porosity systems and their unique rate-transient profile require models able to capture well behavior and to achieve production data analysis, which is a proven difficulty for dual-porosity gas system and not completely solved. Moreover, past studies on dual-porosity systems assume constant bottom-hole pressure (BHP) or constant rate production, which impose significant constraint to production data analysis.
                  Recently a density-based approach for analyzing production data was proposed for single-porosity system, which has been proven to successfully describe gas well behavior under boundary-dominated flow (BDF). Using depletion-driven parameters, 
                        
                           λ
                            and 
                           β
                        
                     , this state-of-the-art approach circumvents pseudo time. It was then extended to variable-pressure-drawdown/variable-rate gas systems and proven successful.
                  In this study, we adopt a rigorously derived interporosity flow equation for gas, which captures viscosity-compressibility change of matrix outflow. Based on that, a density-based, rescaled exponential model for variable pressure drawdown/variable rate production was developed for dual-porosity gas system. Also, we explore straight-line analysis for convenient prediction of OGIP and production rate. The density-based model is tested in a variety of scenarios to showcase its validity.
                  Moreover, based on Warren and Root model, a density-based exponential model for variable pressure drawdown/variable rate in dual-porosity liquid system is proposed and fully verified. A straight-line analysis is proposed to enable explicit OOIP prediction and convenient future production calculation. Moreover, a convenient double-exponential decline model under constant BHP is developed for liquid.
                  To summarize our work, we developed rate-transient analysis method for two types of reservoirs-naturally fractured gas reservoir and naturally fractured oil reservoirs-producing at arbitrary type of production scenario in boundary-dominated-flow stage. The proposed method can evaluate reserve in a convenient and accurate manner. Moreover, the method to predict production using the theory is also provided. An explicit equation correlating dimensionless production rate and dimensionless time is also developed for dual-porosity liquid system producing at constant bottomhole pressure in both early transient stage and boundary-dominated-flow stage.Production data analysis on naturally fractured reservoirs has been conducted for decades. Associated reserve estimates and production forecast have key implication in oil and gas development. Naturally fractured reservoirs could be described by dual-porosity models.   Several studies on production analysis in Devonian Shale utilized Applying pseudo-functions is a common technique to approach gas system. However, this technique had been found unable to accurately match dual-porosity system behaviors in past studies.   In this study, a density-based, rescaled exponential model for variable pressure drawdown/variable rate production in dual-porosity gas system is proposed as well as straight-line analysis for OGIP prediction and production rate forecast. An appropriate interporosity gas flow equation that model gas flow between matrix and fracture is used in the development process. The density-based model is tested in a variety of scenarios in order to showcase its validity. A density-based exponential model for variable pressure drawdown/variable rate in dual porosity liquid system is developed based on Warren and Root model. On the basis of the exponential model, we introduced the straight-line analysis for dual-porosity liquid system. Moreover, a double exponential model for constant bottom-hole pressure production is developed with the aid of Mathematica 9, which is proven a more convenient tool than previous analytical solution in Laplace space ( We derive rescaled exponential model and formula for reserve prediction using deliverability equation and material balance in this section. A flow chart for the analytical-model development process is presented in Deliverability equation for dual-porosity gas system is derived by Equation Substituting Equation The tank material balance model can represent gas production rate in terms of average reservoir density change with time during BDF: Substituting Equation Substituting Equation Multiplying both sides of Equation Substituting Equation We know material balance equation at time Also, we define drawdown ratio Following Substituting Equation Equation Substituting Equation Substituting Equation We now have production rate forecasting model for dual-porosity system based on density, which doesn't employ pseudo-time concepts. It applies to variable rate/variable pressure drawdown systems. For variable rate system, Equation Substituting We have derived rescaled exponential model, Equation In the first step, Secondly, we used the Thirdly, the difference between We can use Equation Knowing horizontal-axis coordinate Calculate corresponding Calculate Attaining Calculate Calculate Calculate time using Repeat steps 1 to 8. We suggest a sensitivity analysis on the effect of The above methods are strictly applicable to naturally fractured gas reservoirs producing in the second decline stage, demonstrating dual-porosity behavior without desorption effects. To identify the stage they are in, flow rate against time should be plotted in a semi-log coordinate system. Per our experience, the second decline stage is signified by the starting point of a sharp decline following steady transition stage or, if no palpable transition zone exists, the point with highest curvature on the first concave section in the semi-log production profile. Due to adopting a more appropriate interporosity flow equation other than that in Warren and Root model used in dual-porosity gas systems, we establish an in-house dual-porosity simulator, in-house simulator 1, to simulate naturally fractured reservoirs. The configurations are described in previous work ( The original-gas-in-place is 119.9 Bscf. A variable pressure drawdown production is run on in-house simulator 1 using reservoir and fluids settings tabled in  Gas rates generated from the two methods are observed to match each other in the second decline stage, in which production is mainly supported by matrix fluids and reservoir flow is boundary-dominated. Mismatch between gas rates lies in the assumption of boundary-dominated flow and negligible fracture storage capacity in exponential and density models. It is important to note that the analytical models may predict deviated gas rate at the end of the second depletion stage due to increasing error of approximating matrix average pressure as average reservoir pressure in the analytical models. The error tends to be eliminated with decreasing storage capacity of fracture system. With the applicability of exponential and density-based decline model to dual-porosity systems validated, we utilize Equation We use an identical dual-porosity gas reservoir for validation of density-based model at constant As explained in Equation We then plot We apply density-based model to a variable rate scenario detailed in  We then utilize We will derive exponential model and reserve-evaluation equation for liquid by combining deliverability equation and material balance in this section. A flow chart for the development process is provided in For a circular dual porosity reservoir in radial system, the diffusivity equation for liquid system could be written symbolically as follows: Equation In This equation is equivalent to Warren and Root model. To prove this equivalency, we write interporosity flow equation in Warren and Root model first: For slightly compressible fluids, we have For Substituting Equation Integrating Equation Substituting Equation Substituting Equation Equation Multiplying both sides of Equation Provided that bottom-hole pressure stays constant in this period, integrating on both sides of Equation Substituting Equation We know material balance equation at time Drawdown ratio With Equation Substituting Equation For a well subject to a constant drawdown scenario, Equation Equation Substituting Equation Substituting By substituting Equation Equation Till this stage, the density-based, exponential model and associated rate-transient analysis methodology are developed for liquid dual-porosity system and applicable at variable rate/pressure-drawdown conditions at second decline stage. The models are strictly applicable to naturally fractured liquid reservoir producing in the second decline stage. No desorption is considered at this stage. Users can identify the second decline stage by locating the turning point for the second decline in production rate after the first decline stage and transition stage or the point with the largest curvature on the first concave signature, which is the start of boundary-dominated-flow stage or shortly after this stage. A special case of variable pressure-drawdown/rate production is constant bottom-hole pressure production. In a circular reservoir with a centered well, accurate liquid rate prediction for dual-porosity system is solved from governing equations and boundary conditions. Dimensionless flow rate produced at constant bottom-hole pressure in a bounded circular reservoir in Laplace space ( Obtaining the exact value requires transforming liquid rate from Laplace space to real space. A common way of this inversion is Stehfest algorithm, which is computationally intense along with other techniques.  In the next section we apply the double-exponential decline model, density-based decline model, and rigorous analytical model to a constant bottom-hole pressure production scenario for validation purpose. The reservoir described in  Liquid rates generated from density-based model and analytical solution are observed to match each other in the second decline stage. This observation is in accordance with the assumption that production is mainly supported by matrix fluids in the density-based model. Original Fracture fluids contribute to the majority of production at the first decline stage. Reservoir flow, both fracture flow and interporosity flow, should be boundary-dominated to satisfy density-based model. Both double-exponential model and density-based model are fully verified for constant We target to validate density-based model developed for liquid dual-porosity systems at variable The same reservoir with liquid is considered. The matrix and fracture are assigned 1E-14 Bottom-hole pressure schedule described by  Similar to the density-based models for gas, the density-based models for liquid may predict distorted liquid rate as matrix pressure closely approaches fracture pressure. Decreasing pressure difference tapers interporosity flow and removes the dominance of matrix fluids in production, which dissatisfies the assumption of the density-based model. As fracture porosity decreases, the error gradually diminishes. The above study validated the applicability of exponential and density-based decline model to liquid dual-porosity system. Therefore, OOIP prediction could be accomplished using Equation We apply density-based model to a variable rate scenario detailed in  With applicability of density-based model validated, we take This study develops a density-based, rescaled exponential model and proves its applicability for dual-porosity gas system in second decline stage. The validation demonstrates good match between simulation results and the proposed model for a variety of scenarios including variable pressure-drawdown, constant rate, and variable rate conditions. Straight-line analysis for OGIP prediction and production forecast in dual-porosity gas systems has been developed and validated for the same scenarios. Both the rescaled exponential model and the straight-line analysis demonstrate capability to capture pressure change, continuous or discrete, at the bottom hole in second decline stage. The model adopts a pseudo-steady state gas interporosity flow equation, which was rigorously developed for compressible fluids. The density-based model and associated straight-line analysis serve as a convenient tool for production data analysis in naturally fractured gas reservoirs. This study also derived a density-based, exponential model for dual-porosity liquid system, which applies to variable pressure-drawdown/variable rate conditions and, inferentially, constant rate/drawdown scenarios in the second decline stage. By comparing simulation results from CMG Moreover, we propose the double-exponential model for constant bottom-hole pressure production in dual-porosity system. This model produce accurate production rate in decline stage without numerical inversion of analytical solution in Laplace Space ( This model is currently developed for gas systems with dual-porosity effects only. No desorption effects or slippage effects has been considered at this stage. The method incorporating such effects is under development and it can boost this technique's accuracy in prediction to a large extent and expand its applicability. The assimilation of multi-phase effects should be also integrated in this model to further broaden the spectrum of applicable scenarios. The authors would like to thank members of the Unconventional Natural Resources Consortium (UNRC) at the Pennsylvania State University for their support during the work.  radius of spherical matrix,  compressibility, fracture compressibility plus liquid compressibility, Dietz's reservoir shape factor, dimensionless initial decline coefficient for density-based model, 1/t, cumulative gas production, thickness, permeability, rescaling component for dual-porosity system, dimensionless pseudo-pressure, average pseudo-pressure in a reservoir, molecular weight of gas, cumulative oil production, original gas in place, original oil in place, pressure, dimensionless flow rate, dimensionless initial gas rate under full potential drawdown in density-based dual-porosity gas system, initial oil rate under full potential drawdown in density-based dual-porosity liquid system, flow rate at standard condition in dual-porosity liquid system, radius, L, ft external Radius, L, ft wellbore radius, L, ft wellbore-to-initial density ratio, dimensionless molar gas constant, modified density ratio term for variable BHP conditions, dimensionless Laplace variable, dimensionless specific gravity, dimensionless time, t, days temperature, T,  fluid flow rate in porous media, reservoir volume,  shape factor, 1/ time-averaged time-averaged Euler's constant, 0.5772156649  viscosity-compressibility dimensionless ratio, dimensionless space-averaged viscosity-compressibility ratio for single-porosity system, dimensionless viscosity, M/L-t, cp Interporosity flow coefficient, dimensionless density of fluids, M/ average density of fluids, M/ porosity, dimensionless storativity ratio, dimensionless  dimensionless fracture gas initial sequence number in liquid matrix standard condition wellbore condition  average value in the matrix gas We start from diffusivity equation of gas flow in matrix blocks: Substituting Darcy's law and definition of compressibility into Equation For an incompressible homogeneous and isotropic matrix (constant Dividing both sides by Following The fracture is around the matrix. And the fluid density at matrix surface is equal to fluid density in fracture. The initial density in matrix system and fracture system is the same. Also we have inner boundary condition: Taking quasi-steady state assumption, with its definition described in literature ( Long-term approximation truncates to the first term of the infinite series, giving:  Take derivative of Equation Substituting Equation The derived interporosity flow equation in customary units is: With a closed boundary dual-porosity system, comparing dimensionless flow rate under constant  Given large Substitute Equation Equation Inversing Equation 