Recently, the concept of high-entropy-based alloy design has been extended to different ceramic systems including nitrides, oxides, and carbides. The high-entropy nitride systems have been mostly investigated for hard coating applications. High-entropy oxides and diborides have been prepared successfully using a variety of synthesis routes although their properties are yet to be investigated in depth. A number of advanced composites using high-entropy alloys (HEAs) as matrix with different reinforcements or novel cemented carbides using HEAs as binder phase with several attractive properties have also been investigated.HEAs have been extensively investigated because of their great potential in industrial applications. This novel concept has subsequently been extended to develop HECs such as nitrides, oxides, and carbides. Thus, at the present state of development, it is important to recognize the expanding scope of the high-entropy concept transcending metallic alloys. The present chapter attempts to highlight the notable developments in this area. High-entropy nitride (HEN) coatings were first synthesized successfully by The effects of key processing variables, namely, nitrogen content ( The influence of substrate bias ( Substrate temperature plays a significant role on structure and properties of HENs as demonstrated in AlCrTaTiZ ( In addition to potential use as hard coatings with superior tribological properties, HENs received attention for use in other advanced applications. The thermal stability of the AlCrTaTiZr nitride coating was investigated at temperatures between 700°C and 900°C for use as a diffusion barrier for Cu metallization ( The other group of HECs that have received considerable attention is the high-entropy oxides (HEOs).   Perovskite (ABO While the synthesis of different classes of HEOs has gained considerable momentum, the exciting properties of these HEOs are only beginning to be explored. Notably, A series of novel high-entropy diborides (HEDs) of refractory metals were recently synthesized by high-energy ball milling and SPS (  Recently, microstructure and properties of HEA matrix self-lubricating composites were investigated. The composite using CoCrFeNi HEA as the matrix and Ag and BaF Metal matrix composites were also prepared using different HEAs as the reinforcing phases. Cemented carbides and cermets are special composites, which contain hard ceramics together with metallic binders. These are extensively used as cutting tools.  