In this work, mechanochemical reduction of CuO/ZnO powder mixture by Al and C has been investigated. Powder mixture was milled up to 20h in a planetary ball mill. X-ray diffraction, transmission electron microscopy, thermo gravimetric analyzer, and differential scanning calorimeter have been used to study products phases and activation of redox reactions took place during ball milling. Results showed that the highly exothermic reduction reaction caused by aluminum provided the required heat for the endothermic reduction reactions by carbon. Consequently, the oxide powders were entirely reduced during ball-milling process and α-brass–Al2O3 nanostructured composite was obtained after 3h milling. By utilizing the Scherrer‘s method, the mean grain size of the brass was found to be in the nanometer range which was later confirmed by TEM observations.Mechanochemical synthesis (MCS) of metals and alloys is possible during high-energy ball milling (HEBM) through activation of chemical reactions by mechanical energy Redox reactions between metal oxides and metallic reducing agents such as Al, Ca, Mg and Ti (metallothermic reduction) are of the most important reactions during mechanochemical processing. This allows the in situ formation of different hard oxide phases in metal matrix. The advantage of preparing composite by mechonochemical alloying in comparison with other fabrication methods is the ability of synthesis of nanostructured composite with uniform distribution of reinforcement particles in one step. Copper based composites are widely used in various applications such as contact supports, frictional break parts, electrode materials for lead wires, and spot welding In current study, it was intended to activate carbothermic reduction reactions in the presence of aluminothermic reduction reactions and produce α-brass–alumina nanostructured composite by ball milling of a CuO–ZnO–Al–C mixture. By using both metallic aluminum and carbon as reducing agents, activation of carbothermic reduction might be possible due to the high amount of heat generated from simultaneous aluminothermic reduction. In this way, by changing the mole ratio of active metal to carbon, the percent of metal oxide in the final product phase can be controlled and undesired grain growth due to increase in the adiabatic temperature of the entire system can be inhibited. In this work, powders of CuO (96% purity, Merck 102761) and ZnO (99% purity, Fluka 96484) were blended with Al (99.5% purity, Mashhad Powder Metallurgy Co.) and C (99.5% purity, Mashhad Powder Metallurgy Co.). The composition of the powder mixture was chosen according to reaction The blend was subjected to HEBM in a planetary ball mill at room temperature under argon atmosphere and rotation speed of 260 The reduction progress of the ball-milled powders was characterized by means of X-ray diffraction (XRD) with Cu Kα ( The differential scanning calorimeter (DSC) experiments were performed using a Shimadzu DSC-60 instrument under air atmosphere with a heating rate of 10 Thermo gravimetric analyzer (TGA50/50H) with a heating rate of 10 Morphology of the reacted powders was studied by transmission electron microscopy (TEM). For TEM observations, samples were prepared by mixing the powders with ethanol and mounting the suspended powders on a carbon coated grid.  Formation of products phases (α-brass and α-Al The broadening of the peaks and decreasing of their intensity could be related to the decrease in α-brass grain size and increase in lattice microstrain. Average grain size of α-brass after 3 Displacement of the peak to higher Bragg angles is related to the decrease in the lattice parameter caused by the gradual departure of some zinc atoms from the α-brass alloy Reduction kinetics of carbothermic reactions could be recognized from the results of thermo gravimetric analyzer. The TG/DSC curves for 2 The relation between milling time and variations of weight during the TGA has been investigated. Increasing of weight during TGA is due to oxidation of metals in air atmosphere. There is not any weight loss due to carbothermic reactions in TGA curve for sample milled for 3 In order to characterize the microstructure, TEM observation of powder mixture was employed. This distinction in grain size can also be considered due to ignoring the effect of stacking faults on peak broadening and shift of peak positions. Brass alloys have low stacking fault energy, so high density of stacking fault in (1  Solid-state reduction of CuO and ZnO by room temperature milling in presence of Al and C and synthesis of α-brass–alumina nanostructured composite has been successfully performed. After 3