Circular economy strategies encourage, among others, concrete actions to extend the product lifetime. Product’s repair and reuse, and component harvesting for reuse, all require the facilitated access to product components. Consequently, a reduction of the disassembly time and the related costs will increase the economic feasibility of product lifetime extension and therefore increase the viability of a circular economy in industrialised regions. Furthermore, disassembly has the potential to significantly increase the recycling yield and purity for precious metals, critical metals and plastics. For this reason, the European Commission and several ecolabels have considered to include design for disassembly requirements in legislation or voluntary environmental instruments. However, up to date, there is no standardised method to evaluate the ease of disassembly in an unambiguous manner with a good trade-off between the efforts required to apply the method and the accuracy of the determined disassembly time. The article proposes a robust method “eDiM” (ease of Disassembly Metric), to calculate the disassembly time based on the Maynard operation sequence technique (MOST). A straightforward calculation sheet is employed in eDiM to calculate the disassembly time given the sequence of actions and basic product information. This makes the results fully verifiable in an unambiguous manner, which makes eDiM suited to be used in policy measures in contrast to the results of prior developed methods One of the innovative aspects of eDiM is the categorization of disassembly tasks in six categories, which provides better insights on which disassembly tasks are the most time consuming and how the product design could be improved. The proposed method is illustrated by means of a case study of an LCD monitor. The presented case study demonstrates how the proposed method can be used in a policy context and how the calculated disassembly times per category can provide insights to manufacturers to improve the disassemblability of their products. The results also demonstrate how the proposed method can produce realistic results with only limited detail of input data.The European 2020 strategy for smart, sustainable and inclusive growth recognises as essential for the EU to move towards a circular economy ( The EU action plan for the circular economy also expressed the need “to develop standards on material efficiency for setting future ecodesign requirements on durability, reparability and recyclability of products” ( Product lifetime extension strategies, such as repair, reuse and product harvesting for component reuse, all require facilitated access to product components. Therefore, it is crucial to define requirements on the ease to disassemble both the housing components to improve access to internal components for inspection, maintenance and repair and to disassemble commonly failing and valuable components to facilitate repair by replacing failed components and recovery of components for reuse or remanufacturing. Therefore, it is key to define a metric which can assess the ease of disassembly to quantify the extent that it is realistic to disassemble components without destroying the components itself for the purpose of reuse, repair and remanufacturing in line with the vision of a circular economy. Accordingly, a reduction in disassembly time significantly cuts down the efforts and the costs of these activities. Moreover, a decrease in disassembly effort can make product remanufacturing or component reuse the preferred End-of-Life (EoL) strategy over recycling or disposal ( Waste electrical and electronic equipment (WEEE) is one of the fastest growing waste streams ( To stimulate product life extension and improve recycling efficiency of EEE, the Joint European Research Centre (JRC) of the European Commission has discussed the inclusion of maximum thresholds for disassembly times of key components of electronic displays in European product policies ( The present article aims at enhancing circular economy through the development of a method to assess the ease of disassembly of products. The method is intended to be the scientific ground for the development of standards dealing with material efficiency aspects of products and related to the design for disassembly for lifetime extension (repair and reuse) and recycling. The method is intended to be unambiguous and verifiable by a third party subject (e.g. a market surveillance authority). The proposed method is demonstrated through a case study for an LCD monitor for which the disassembly time is calculated with the presented method, and opportunities to improve product design are analysed. The lessons learned from the application of the method, as well as its limitations, and opportunities for the adoption of the presented methodology in policy are discussed. Metrics to evaluate the (degree of) easiness of disassembly or disassemblability can be classified into 1) absolute metrics such as time, energy or entropy and 2) relative metrics such as design effectiveness ( Two alternatives were identified to determine the partial or complete disassembly time: (1) direct measurement and (2) calculation based on product parameters. The most straight forward method is to perform direct measurement of disassembly times of products of the same category by several operators with varying experience. This approach is labour intensive, non-reproducible and influenced by several human factors. In addition, this method does not allow to easily quantifying the effect of product design changes without performing new measurements. Furthermore, a dedicated setup that mimics an average disassembly setup is needed to make the measurement reproducible and verifiable ( In literature two approaches are identified to calculate the disassembly time: 1) based on properties of the product and connectors and, 2) based on basic motions of disassembly tasks. An example of a method of the first type is the U-effort described in Section U-effort was developed by Sodhi et al. ( Philips ECC ( Methods to estimate standard times for manual operations date back to the beginning of the 20th century. They are based on the premise that the variations to perform the same operation are small for different workers with proper experience ( Maynard operation sequence technique (MOST) is another well-accepted work measurement technique to calculate assembly times for a wide variety of products ranging from ships to small electronics. The times modelled with MOST represent the performance of an average skilled operator, working with adequate supervision, under average conditions at a normal pace ( Kroll developed a method to serve as a design tool to highlight opportunities to lower disassembly time ( Desai & Mital developed a method for DfD in which disassembly time is determined taking into consideration five factors: force, material handling, tool utilisation, accessibility of components and fasteners, and tool positioning ( An important drawback of the U-effort method is that the different causal attributes and their weights are unique per connector type. Consequently, for every new connector type, the causal attributes and weights need to be determined, hindering the ability to apply the method for a broad variety of products with different types of fasteners. In addition, the influence of different tools for disassembly cannot be taken into account with the U-effort method. Furthermore, U-effort only accounts for the disconnection time of fasteners and neglects the time needed for changing tools, identifying fasteners and product manipulation. Nonetheless, prior research demonstrates that disconnection time represents less than 50% of the total disassembly time ( Boks et al. ( The main drawback of the Desai & Mital method is that it does not account the time needed for preparatory tasks, such as reaching a tool, picking it up, and putting it back. Therefore, the time estimation is seen as incomplete ( Scientific methods that address the ease of disassembly can be useful supports for the development of international standards, including standards on material efficiency aspects of products under development according to the European mandate M/543 ( The following characteristics (summarised in Balance accuracy and detail of required information: the method should make a good trade-off to facilitate information flow among stakeholders and reduce administrative burdens. Ease of application: minimise labour intensity of implementation for manufacturers and market surveillance authorities, as stipulated in the Ecodesign Directive ( Flexible: applicable to an extensive range of product categories and fasteners, and capable of evaluating partial and complete disassembly as both are commonly applied during the products’ lifetime. Intelligible: the method rationale should be easy to understand and provide a clear link to product design aspects. Therefore, the procedure, metrics, and formulas utilised should be as straightforward as possible. Facilitate product information exchange between OEMs and EoL operators to improve treatment process efficiency; OEMs and market authorities for regulatory purposes. Verifiable: the required experience and equipment, as well as the complexity of verification procedures, should be kept to a minimum to reduce costs, allowing verification of a larger number of products. Reproducible and Repeatable: to be able to be replicated and re-tested by different stakeholders with high precision. Unambiguous: no room for subjective interpretation, to be applicable for product policy and to prevent “creative workarounds”, which do not improve disassemblability. Suitable to set up regulatory requirements: quantitative information on disassembly easiness enables that market authorities can use the method for both verifying that a product achieves a certain threshold and for rewarding “best-of-class” designs. Instruments meant to be applied to product policies need to be quantifiable and measurable ( Aligned with existing regulations to avoid redundancy and contradictions and to facilitate acceptance from stakeholders. Enable evaluation of product design changes. Quantitatively evaluate the influence of modifications in product design to enable providing concrete feedback to designers, encouraging innovations in products. Facilitate communication of product information to consumers to encourage comparison of ecodesign performances between products. Do not hinder technological innovation and provide continuous incentives for ecodesign. Allow cost calculation to facilitate the evaluation of optimal disassembly depth by EoL operators. A novel method to evaluate the ease of disassembly of products is proposed. The method calculates the From the literature review, it can be concluded that all calculation methods come with shortcomings. Not all of the disassembly tasks are considered in the existing methods (i.e., U-effort, Desai & Mital). Therefore, in order to assure completeness of the assessment, the proposed method first establishes a clear division of disassembly categories, which facilitates the identification of opportunities for improving product design. Existing methods are also not generalizable, to evaluate different products (i.e. Philips). The proposed method is instead applicable to a broad range of products, as the time and motion method MOST is used to model the defined disassembly tasks. MOST also offers a good trade-off between accuracy and the effort needed to determine the time for disassembly tasks disregarding the product type ( The scope of the method within this research is focused on non-destructive operations, aiming at fostering product lifetime extension via strategies such as repair and reuse. Adaptation of the method for destructive operations, commonly known as dismantling, is deemed as possible but fall outside the scope of this article. In literature different ways of categorising disassembly tasks were found, as shown in In addition to the categories in The actions pre- and post-disassembly, such as bringing the products, placing the product on the workbench, taking the disassembled components from the table, are not included in eDiM because these are considered to be complementary actions and can mostly not be influenced by the product design. In addition, the proposed categorization does not account for inefficiencies of the disassembly process, such as time for unsuccessful disconnection attempts or unnecessary actions, since these actions are not standard, not repetitive and dependent on the operator experience and motivation. Moreover, these inefficiencies are related to the process and not the product. Therefore, to account for this, the calculated disassembly time should be multiplied by one plus the inefficiency rate, which has been documented to account for up to 30% of the actual disassembly time in large recycling facilities ( Each of the six determined disassembly tasks, Tool change, Identifying, Manipulation, Positioning, Disconnection, and Removing, are modelled using MOST to determine the time needed to perform these tasks, taking into account both product and connector properties. MOST is suited for analysing operations with slight variations in the basic motions, as it is the case for disassembly operations ( Regarding the category Disconnection, MOST models exist for commonly used connectors and tools. However, for non-standard connectors, either the time has to be calculated by summing up the time needed for individual actions that have to be performed to unfasten a fastener or a time motion analysis needs to be conducted to model the disassembly time ( The category identification relates to the time needed if connectors require extra time for identification, so not automatically done within the task positioning. Ease of identification is related to the element surface, position, shape, dimensions, and colour ( In order to calculate the disassembly time, eDiM is implemented in a spreadsheet ( With the information provided in the first six columns, the following seven columns can be calculated using the times modelled with MOST and stored in a database. In Column 7, the time required for tool change is calculated if the tool differs from the one utilised for the previous connector. The time required to identify connectors is calculated with the MOST estimation for this task based on the identifiability information in Column 5 and is computed in Column 8. Product manipulation needed for undoing fasteners is registered in Column 9, and it is calculated using the number of manipulations from Column 4 and the time estimation for this disassembly task. Column 10 contains the time employed for tool positioning in relation to the category of connectors used. This value is calculated by multiplying the number of connectors in Column 3 times the estimated time for tool positioning. Column 11 refers to the disconnection time of fasteners, which is calculated by multiplying the number of fasteners in Column 3 with the disconnection time of the corresponding connectors’ category and tool category in the database. The time for component removal is registered in Column 12, which is accounted only once per component. Finally, the summation of times of columns 7–12 is computed in Column 13, and total time needed to disassemble the product or component is calculated with Eq. The selected product category is Flat Panel Displays (FPD), which was identified in previous research as a category that benefits from a disassembly based process ( Based on disassembly experiments in which 28 LCD monitors from the Belgian collection system were analysed, the average weight is 4.6 The disassembly time for the 28 monitors was also measured; the disassembly trial was performed by an experienced disassembler at a recycling facility in Belgium that processes 50 percent of all WEEE collected in the country (approx. 30,000 For detailed analysis, a 14″ LCD Philips monitor from 2002, which was considered to be an interesting model because it was one of the best performers regarding disassembly time, with a mass of 2618 Utilising MOST, a database has been deployed for the case study, which is included in the supplementary material. The database has been built on the following assumptions: The product considered is a small EEE with a weight of maximum 4 The starting position of the product is on a workbench in front of the disassembler. The bins for disassembled components are located within reach of the operator. The disassembly sequence of the product is considered to be known by the operator, so no time is accounted for deciding which task is to be performed next. All the required tools are available and located within reach of the operator and can be manipulated with one hand. The disassembly sequence was set to efficiently extract components, starting with the back of the monitor facing the operator and disassembling first the housing. Screws of the same type were disassembled in sequence to minimise tool change. To estimate the accuracy of the calculations, time measurements of the disassembly process for the case study product were performed in a plant in Belgium. The disassembler was highly experienced with disassembling small EEE. To allow familiarisation with the product first several monitors were completely disassembled during one hour, after that three monitors of the same model were fully disassembled, the times shown in As shown in In addition, the presented time calculations for both complete and partial disassembly, as presented in the supplementary material, demonstrate the generic applicability of eDiM. This is important since complete disassembly is rarely performed at repair, remanufacturing or recycling centres. Instead, selective extraction and/or replacement of relevant components is commonly performed ( Furthermore, eDiM enables evaluating the contribution of each task to the total disassembly time, obtaining better insights on which aspects have a bigger influence on the improvement of disassemblability. This is one of the innovative aspects of eDiM, as it provides quantitative feedback on which type of disassembly tasks can be facilitated and on the effect of product design improvements. For example, from the calculation sheet in  This simplified example demonstrates the applicability of eDiM to provide quantitative feedback on the influence of improvements in the product design. The example was theoretically build to show the potentiality of the method to support choices of designers. However, design for disassembly strategies as the one previously analysed should be carefully checked with manufacturing companies and designer in order to prove its feasibility for the considered product. Furthermore, eDiM can be used to identify other improvements, such as enhanced connector visibility, reduction in the number of components or the use of innovative fasteners, such as the ones proposed in ( The information on disassembly time organised in categories is relevant for disassembly optimisation efforts, automation of disassembly tasks and development of disassembly tools ( Ultimately, the amount of input data required for the calculation and the effort to provide the required information to evaluate ease of disassembly is deemed as acceptable. Leading manufacturers like HP and DELL already provide on their website detailed disassembly instructions, including disassembly sequence, location of connectors and required tools for some products, for example ( Some limitations of the method have been identified. The eDiM does not account for penalties due to factors influencing ease of disassembly in specific product designs. For instance, in the developed database for the case study, extra force required to undo a fastener or limited accessibility in a specific product design are not accounted for. Accounting for these factors would result in a significantly larger database of fasteners and more complex taxonomy. Another issue of accounting additional parameters is that it is not evident to determine measurable parameters for all disassembly categories, which requires a compromise between accuracy and workability. For example, in the case study product, only surface visibility of screws is accounted for the disassembly task ‘Identifiability’. This simplification ignores other factors that influence identification, such as colour contrast. Therefore, the time estimation for this category can be improved. However, a trade-off needs to be made between accuracy and the amount of product information required, as well as the ambiguity of the evaluation. The results obtained are still linked to the case-study product analysed and need to be tested on more products. In order to make eDiM applicable to an extensive variety of products, the deployment of a database with a well-defined taxonomy of fasteners and the corresponding disassembly time is required. For this database it is crucial to define every type of fasteners with easily verifiable parameters as well as the ranges of these parameters used to classify them, a compromise needs to be made between accuracy and efforts required. In addition, a procedure needs to be developed to enable manufacturers to propose the addition of new types of fasteners to the database to assure the applicability of eDiM for both today’s and future product designs. This article describes the development of a method to determine ease of disassembly of products to support the circular economy. The proposed method provides a scientific background to organisations developing standards on material efficiency aspects that include the disassemblability of products and supports OEMs and EoL operators by providing a method to assess DfD for repair, reuse and recycle. Following a literature review of existing methods and practical experiments to determine the main factors influencing disassembly operations, a calculation method is developed using a database with disassembly times determined based on the work measurement system theory MOST and a straightforward calculation sheet. A case study of an LCD monitor is used to demonstrate the applicability of the proposed method. The presented analysis shows how the output of the method can be utilised for evaluating ecodesign improvements regarding disassemblability. One of the key features of eDiM is that it is transparent and easy to use thanks to the basic formulae employed for the time calculation, facilitating its implementation and verification by manufacturers, market surveillance authorities and EoL operators. The method is regarded as reproducible and repeatable as it builds on a widely applied methodology for work measurements, in which the accuracy of time estimations is statistically grounded. Since MOST focuses on basic motions, eDiM could be applied to all product groups and the time needed to remove a specific component by all kinds of manual disassembly tasks could be calculated. In addition, eDiM can be used to model the disassembly time for novel connectors with different types of tools, providing the required flexibility to serve as a generic method for policy measures and to incorporate an extensive range of products and fasteners. Because the classification of fasteners and disassembly tasks is done on the basis of easily verifiable geometric and physical properties, such as dimensions or force, subjectivity in the assessment is minimised. Furthermore, eDiM provides the required flexibility to be applied for complete and partial disassembly. Moreover, the proposed categorization of disassembly tasks provides effective quantitative feedback on the influence of product design adaptations, while the amount of input data remains acceptable. Besides, the required product information utilised as input can be complemented with data on, for example, material content to evaluate the performance of other ecodesign criteria. Therefore, further research should focus on the development of a single input data sheet which enables to simultaneously assess multiple ecodesign performances, such as reparability, remanufacturability, and recyclability. At the same time, robust information systems should be developed to make product information provided by OEMs available to research institutes and companies to anticipate evolutions in waste streams to be able to optimise their EoL processes. This analysis contributes to improve the assessment of disassemblability of products and could also enhance the enforcement of quantifiable requirements within existing product policies. In fact, eDiM was selected as one of the key scientific inputs for the development of the on-going European standardisation activities for the implementation of the Commission's action plan on the Circular Economy ( Overall, quantifiable requirements in product policies supported by such standardised method should allow manufacturers to implement product lifetime strategies for a more circular economy. The views expressed in the article are personal and do not necessarily reflect an official position of the European Commission. This research was supported through the project “Technical Support for Environmental Footprinting, Material Efficiency in Product Policy and the European Platform on LCA” (2013-2016) funded by DG Environment. The authors also acknowledge SENESCYT for partially funding this research and Galloo for their cooperation for the case study. We also thank Ab Stevels for the discussions that fuelled this research. Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at The following is Supplementary data to this article: