Surface modification of carborundum (SiC) particles with a modifying agent, with simultaneous ultrafine comminution in an air jet mill, was studied in this work. The production rate of SiC and the viscosity of the SiC-paraffin oil suspension were used to evaluate the performance of comminution and modification. The experimental results indicated that the modifying agent bonded onto the surface of the SiC to form an organic layer in the integrated process of modification and comminution. The types and content of modifying agents and the temperature of the compressed air have a great effect on the performance of ultrafine modified SiC, and there are some contradictory aspects between modification and comminution in the integrated process. According to the targets of both surface modification and ultrafine comminution, the optimum temperature of compressed air and feed rate of the modifying agent solution was 60°C and 2ml/min respectively, when the modifying agent A-151 was adopted to obtain the modified ultrafine SiC in one step.At present, surface modification is a key process in functional powder preparation and has been applied widely in the treatment of mineral particles, such as mica ( The air jet mill is used commonly for the production of narrow size distribution, high purity, and heat-sensitive material particles below 10 In this study, surface modification of carborundum (SiC) particles with modifying agent incorporated in ultrafine comminution in an air jet mill was studied, and the influence of various parameters on the properties of the modified ultrafine SiC is discussed. Chemicals used in the present investigation include the following: titanate coupling agent tetraisopropyldi(dioctylphosphate)titanate (NDZ-401), silane coupling agent vinyltriethoxysilane (A-151), γ-methacryloxypropyl trimethoxy silane (KH-570), and γ-aminopropyltriethoxysilane (KH-550) purchased from Najing Shuguang chemical group Co. Ltd., Paraffin oil, and ethanol purchased from Beijing Beihua fine chemicals Co. Ltd. All of the chemicals were used as received. Carborundum was a commercial product purchased from Junan Longfa abrasive Co., Ltd., and the sample was pre-crushed to a particle size below 350 The integration of SiC comminution and surface modification was carried out in an opposed jet mill (JFC-5, made in Beijing key laboratory for powder technology research and development, China), equipped with a peristaltic pump and an air heater. The modifying agent was fed into the grinding chamber directly, and the feed rate of the solution was controlled in the range of 1–8 The general sequential steps involved in the present modification–comminution experiments were as follows. The 200 Because the viscosity of powder–paraffin oil suspension is allied to the compatibility and dispersion between the powder and paraffin oil ( In order to confirm that a modifying agent molecular layer was formed, Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy (FTIR) was used to study the changes of the SiC with and without the modifying agent. The FTIR data were collected using a Nicolet Nexus 870 spectrometer. In order to evaluate the grinding efficiency of the air jet mill in this modification–comminution method, the production rate was deduced, which equals the weight of the collected SiC particles in 30 In order to study the effect of modifying agent on the SiC product particle size distribution, the modified ultrafine SiC was measured by a particle size analyzer (Mastersizer 2000E, Malvern Instrument, UK). In the process of modification–comminution, the modifying agent was A-151, the temperature of the compressed air was 20 The characteristic size D From The FTIR spectra of the A-151 coupling agent and SiC with and without A-151 modification are presented in The above experimental results revealed that the viscosity of the SiC-paraffin suspension decreases with increasing feed rate of modifying agent solution. The production rate of SiC increased first and then decreased with increase in the feed rate of modifying agent solution. So in order to achieve a high production rate, a high feed rate of modifying agent solution should not be used. However, in order to obtain better compatibility between the SiC and paraffin, a higher feed rate of modifying agent solution should be used. There are therefore some contradictory aspects in the integrated process. The reason for the decrease in production rate with increasing feed rate of modifying agent solution was analyzed, and the influence of “humidity” in the grinding chamber is the main factor affecting the production rate. If the “humidity” in the grinding chamber is decreased, the production rate increased. With increasing temperature of compressed air, the “humidity” in the grinding chamber decreases. Different compressed air temperatures were therefore studied. In combined modification-grinding, the modifying agent was A-151, the feed rate of the modifying agent solution was 2 In the experiments, the temperatures of the air after the classifier in the pipe line were 18 From In addition, four different liquid modifying agents have been tested in this study. In the process of combined modification-grinding, the temperature of the compressed air was 60 From According to the experiment results and the targets of both surface modification and ultrafine comminution, in order to obtain the modified ultrafine SiC at high production rate, the optimum temperature of compressed air and feed rate of the modifying agent solution were 60 In the integrated process of modification and comminution, the ultrafine modified SiC particles were prepared in an air jet mill in one step. The optimum temperature of compressed air and feed rate of modifying agent solution is 60 The authors acknowledge with gratitude the financial support of the