This paper presents the results of a numerical study on the natural convection in a right triangular enclosure, with a heat source on its vertical wall and filled with a water–CuO nanofluid. The effects of parameters such as Rayleigh number, solid volume fraction, heat source location, enclosure aspect ratio and Brownian motion on the flow and temperature fields as well as the heat transfer rate, are examined. The results show that when Brownian motion is considered in the analysis, the solid volume fraction, the heat source location and the enclosure aspect ratio affect the heat transfer performance differently at low and high Rayleigh numbers. At high Rayleigh numbers, an optimum value for the solid volume fraction is found which results in the maximum heat transfer rate. This is in contradiction to the results of the analysis in which Brownian motion is neglected.enclosure aspect ratio (H/L) specific heat, distance of the heat source from the horizontal wall, m dimensionless distance of the heat source from the horizontal wall (d/L) gravitational acceleration, length of vertical wall of the enclosure, m thermal conductivity, length of horizontal wall of the enclosure, m local Nusselt number on the heat source average Nusselt number fluid pressure, Pa modified pressure dimensionless pressure Prandtl number radius of nanoparticles, Rayleigh number source term in Eq. temperature, K velocity components in dimensionless velocity components heat source length, m dimensionless heat source length ( Cartesian coordinates, m dimensionless coordinates thermal diffusivity, thermal expansion coefficient, solid volume fraction diffusion term in Eq. non-dimensional parameter in Eq. Boltzmann constant, Dynamic viscosity, kinematic viscosity, dimensionless temperature density, maximum stream function cold wall effective fluid (pure) heat source nanofluid nanoparticle Natural convection in triangular enclosures has been a subject of interest in many research studies because of its applicability in various fields such as air-filled attic spaces of sloped-roof-buildings Previous studies on natural convection in triangular enclosures have considered a base fluid with a low thermal conductivity. This, in turn, limits the enhancement of heat transfer in the enclosure. In some applications, such as miniaturised electronic devices, it is required to remove a significant amount of generated heat from the system through very small surfaces. Therefore, an enhanced heat transfer technique should be utilised to maintain the temperature of electronic components below safe limits. An enhanced heat transfer can be achieved by introducing high thermal conductivity nanoparticles into the base fluid within the enclosure It must also be noted that the heat transfer enhancement by means of nanofluids is still a controversial subject and there are contradictory studies reported in the literature that show that the dispersion of nanoparticles in the base fluid may result in a considerable decrease in the heat transfer Recently, many theoretical studies have been carried out and several models have been proposed to predict the effective thermal conductivity of nanofluids. In order to consider the movement of nanoparticles, some researchers have included the contribution of a dynamic component related to particle Brownian motions in their model development The present study has been motivated by the need to determine the detailed flow field, temperature distribution and natural convection heat transfer in a triangular enclosure filled with a nanofluid, where Brownian motion is taken into consideration. To the best knowledge of the authors, no study which considers this problem has yet been reported in the literature. As such, the focus of this paper is to examine the effects of pertinent parameters such as Rayleigh number, solid volume fraction, heat source position, enclosure aspect ratio and Brownian motion on the natural convection characteristics of a triangular enclosure filled with a water–CuO nanofluid. A schematic diagram of the physical domain and the grid distribution considered for the physical domain are shown in The equations that govern the conservation of mass, momentum and energy can be written in a non-dimensional form as shown in Eq. The thermal expansion coefficient of the nanofluid is The effective viscosity The non-dimensional boundary conditions are as follows: The control volume formulation given by Patankar After solving the governing equations for The average Nusselt number is determined by integrating the local Nusselt number along the heat source: A grid independency study has been carried out for The present computation is validated against the results of Akinsete and Coleman The constant properties considered in the computation are as follows: The length of the heat source ( For this part of the analysis, the heat source is considered to be in the middle of the vertical wall of the triangular enclosure ( In order to obtain a better understanding of the flow behaviour and temperature distribution within the enclosure, the The analysis of heat transfer from the enclosure is carried out by examining the variation of the average Nusselt number along the heat source ( For this part of the analysis, an enclosure with AR = 1 and a nanofluid with  In order to clarify this point and to develop a better understanding of the heat transfer performance of the enclosure, the heat transfer rate in terms of Nusselt number is studied. For this part of the analysis, the heat source is assumed to be located in the centre of the left wall (  For this part of the analysis, the heat source is located in the centre of the vertical wall ( This section examines the variation of the ratio of the nanofluid average Nusselt number to the pure fluid average Nusselt number ( Natural convection in a right triangular enclosure, with a heat source on its vertical wall and filled with a water–CuO nanofluid has been studied numerically. The effect of parameters such as the Rayleigh number, solid volume fraction, heat source location, enclosure aspect ratio and Brownian motion on the flow and temperature fields, as well as the heat transfer rate are examined. The results of the numerical analysis lead to the following conclusions. For all values of the solid volume fraction, increasing the Rayleigh number results in a higher heat transfer rate due to strengthening of the buoyancy forces. The location of the heat source proved to affect the heat transfer rate differently at various Rayleigh numbers. At low Rayleigh numbers, as the heat source moves upwards on the vertical wall of the enclosure, a higher heat transfer rate is achieved. However, at high Rayleigh numbers, particularly at The aspect ratio of the enclosure also affects the heat transfer rate differently at various Rayleigh numbers. In fact, an increase in the height of enclosure results in a lower heat transfer rate at low Rayleigh numbers and a higher heat transfer rate at high Rayleigh numbers. A comparison between the two studies of with and without Brownian motion shows that when Brownian motion is considered, the solid volume fraction has dissimilar effects on the heat transfer rate at different Rayleigh numbers. At low Rayleigh numbers, a continuous increase in the heat transfer rate with respect to an increase in the solid volume fraction is found, whereas, at high Rayleigh umbers, an optimum solid volume fraction can be found, which results in the maximum heat transfer rate. When Brownian motion is neglected, the heat transfer rate continuously increases with the solid volume fraction at all Rayleigh numbers.