Dissolved air flotation (DAF) is generally considered more effective than sedimentation (S) in the treatment of algal-rich water. However, the type and dose of coagulant, as well as the coagulation (C), flocculation (F) and DAF operating conditions are key parameters for removing intact cyanobacterial cells. This study compares C/F/DAF and C/F/S performances for removing, without causing damage, cultured cells of Microcystis aeruginosa, a surrogate for overall removal efficiency of cyanobacteria. Two coagulants (alum and an aluminium pre-polymerised coagulant of high basicity (WAC)) and the most relevant operating conditions (velocity gradients for coagulation and flocculation, flocculation retention time and DAF pressurised recycle ratio) were investigated for two scenarios of influent cell concentration, expressed as chlorophyll a (10–35μg/L and higher than 50μg/L). Results showed that C/F/DAF is the best process to remove single cells of M. aeruginosa, yielding very high chlorophyll a removal (93–98%), with no toxin release to water (8–15%), using a low recycle ratio (8%) and lower coagulant doses (3mgAl2O3/L versus 5mgAl2O3/L of WAC), slower coagulation (380s−1 versus 743s−1), stronger but shorter flocculation (8min at 70s−1 versus 15min at 24s−1) than C/F/S. WAC performed better than alum, for both processes. For either coagulants cell removal efficiency increased with the influent concentration, although higher doses were necessary to reach the same residuals.Cyanobacteria (blue-green algae) have been identified worldwide, posing a significant risk to water supplies when they occur in reservoirs, lakes and rivers used as water sources, due to their ability to produce toxins – as well as taste and odour compounds – as secondary metabolites under particular conditions of growth. These cyanotoxins include hepatotoxic cyclic peptides, neurotoxic alkaloids and dermatotoxins, amongst which the hepatotoxic microcystins (and in particular the microcystin-LR variant) are the most commonly occurring cyanotoxins in water sources. As a result of the increasing concern with their health implications, the World Health Organisation has set a drinking water guideline value of 1.0 Therefore, the removal of cyanobacterial cells without causing cell damage has been and continues to be a problem within the water treatment industry. Although such procedure will not avoid the need for further treatments addressing the removal of dissolved toxins, taste and odour compounds (e.g. oxidation, activated carbon, membrane technology Primary clarification involves either sedimentation or flotation of flocculated water. Conventional drinking water treatment trains include coagulation (C), flocculation (F) and sedimentation (S). However, algal-rich waters – especially important during a cyanobacterial bloom occurrence – pose problems to sedimentation, due to the algae tendency to float, its small size, low cell density and negative surface charge. An alternative technique for the clarification of algal-rich waters is dissolved air flotation (DAF) There seems to be some disagreement in the literature regarding the efficiency of conventional treatment (C/F/S, filtration, chlorination) for cyanobacterial cells removal. Some papers report the occurrence of cell lysis, release of intracellular toxins and taste and odour compounds It is consensus that algal cells are negatively charged and must be completely destabilised by charge neutralisation to allow maximum treatment efficiency Coagulants such as aluminium sulphate, ferric sulphate, ferric chloride and polymerised coagulants as polyaluminium chloride (PACI) have been successfully used for treating algal-rich waters. Pre-polymerised coagulants have some advantages over metal salt coagulants: better overall treatment efficiency, better floc separation, wider working pH range, lower sensitivity to low temperatures and lower residual metal-ion concentration As far as the DAF operating conditions are concerned, the effectiveness of the pressurised recycle system has been referred as crucial to the success and economy of the DAF process From the above mentioned literature survey, DAF is generally more effective than sedimentation for treating algal-rich water. However, the type and dose of coagulant, as well as the C/F/DAF operating conditions are key parameters for the overall removal of intact cyanobacterial cells. The objective of this study is to compare C/F/DAF and C/F/S performances for removing cultured cells of The influence of the water background organic matrix is investigated in a subsequent paper (Part II). Similar studies evaluating the removal of   Treatment experiments were performed with tap water spiked with Two different scenarios of cyanobacterial cells concentration were tested to examine the effect of influent cell concentration on DAF performance, namely The characteristics of the tap water (TW) used in the experiments are presented in Stock solutions of alum (Al Samples were analysed for chl_a, turbidity, total and dissolved organic carbon (TOC and DOC), pH, conductivity and extracellular microcystin (MC-LR), all using standard methods of analysis, whenever available. For chl_a analysis, samples were filtered through GF/F filter paper and the chlorophylls were extracted using 10 Turbidity was measured in a HACH 2100N turbidity meter of high resolution (0.001 NTU). TOC and DOC (after 0.45 pH values were measured at 25 Extracellular MC-LR was first isolated from the intracellular and cell-bound fraction by sample filtration through a Whatman GF/F glass microfiber filter. Microcystins were then extracted from the filtered water samples using an isolute C18 solid phase extraction column, 1 Microcystins were analysed by HPLC-PDA using a Dionex Summit system, which includes a high pressure gradient pump Dionex Summit, an autosampler Dionex ASI-100, a column oven Dionex STH-585 and a photo diode-array detector Dionex PDA-100. A C18 column was used (Merck Purospher STAR RP-18 endcapped, 3 C/F/S experiments were performed in a Jar test unit with four paddles, using 500 In the DAF process, bubbles are generated by the release of pressurised recycle water, which has first been air saturated at higher pressure than atmospheric pressure. The air bubbles are released into the flotation tank and attach themselves to the particles. The bubble-particles rise to the surface of the flotation tank and are then removed as floated sludge. When processing flocculent sludges or algal cells, a pressurised recycle should be used, to avoid subjecting the cells to shearing stresses through the pumps and the pressurised system, which might result in cell lysis In the pressurised recycle experiments (R/Q In all experiments the relative pressure was 5 The experimental procedure for the C/F/DAF experiments followed Eckenfelder  As expected, DAF without coagulant addition has no advantages over the natural flotation—it presents low cell removal (expressed as turbidity and chl_a) and total organic matter, and almost no removal of dissolved organics (DOC and extracellular MC-LR) ( These results can be attributed to the lack of destabilised particles – low to non-charged particles and hydrophobic particles – necessary for the effectiveness of flotation process Data obtained in C/F/S experiments with the two coagulants and scenarios of influent It is also evident that, when using alum, the influent cell concentration affects both the removal efficiency and the residual concentration. As reported in literature for other parameters (e.g. turbidity, NOM) Compared to alum, WAC produces bigger flocs with better settling characteristics ( Data in  As already found in C/F/S experiments, WAC is more efficient than alum for removing turbidity and chl_a, and has a superior ability to cope with raw water quality changes, yielding similar turbidity and chl_a residuals for both feed concentrations ( As previously reported by Kempeneers et al. Most important, there is no toxin increase in water after C/F/DAF using both coagulants. Actually, removal efficiencies of extracellular MC-LR vary between 12 and 24% for WAC and 5–22% for alum, higher removal being observed for higher influent cell concentration and with increasing coagulant dose ( Sedimentation and DAF efficiencies for Both processes seem not to promote cell damage under the operating conditions tested as the dissolved MC-LR does not increase in any studied case. WAC always achieves better removals than alum for both processes and levels of influent cell concentration. These results lead to the investigation of WAC C/F/DAF performance under more cost effective operating conditions, since the literature indicates as good or even better DAF results under lower coagulation velocity gradients, shorter flocculation times and lower pressurised recycle ratios Results of As expected from literature data, better results are obtained with weaker coagulation mixing, and stronger but shorter flocculation. Actually, strong flocculation mixing and short flocculation time result in strong and small size floc particles. But large flocs are not necessary for flotation since bubbles and particles need to be attached, and particle-bubble agglomerate density should be reduced to less than water In terms of flocculation velocity gradient ( The highest pressurised recycle ratio studied (50%) yields similar to lower residuals, but equal optimal WAC dose (3 Data corrected for dilution show that there is no performance improvement with increasing recycle, so the lowest value tested (8%) should be adequate, as found earlier by Edzwald et al. This study compared dissolved air flotation and sedimentation performances to remove, without cell damage, single cells of The results emphasised the importance of the coagulation/flocculation on the particle destabilisation and size increase required for cell–bubble contact enhancement, and subsequent formation of flocs of strength and size adequate for effective DAF treatment. The pre-polymerised coagulant of high basicity (WAC) performed better than alum, for both clarification processes (sedimentation and DAF). WAC achieved higher removal efficiencies, lower pH decrease, and lower residuals and optimal dose. In addition, it showed a superior ability to cope with the influent cell concentration increase. For both coagulants, cell removal efficiency increased with the influent concentration, although higher doses were required to reach the same residuals. Both treatment processes, C/F/S and C/F/DAF, could efficiently remove The authors would like to thank the PRODEP Program (no. 2/5.3/PRODEP/2001) for providing a Ph.D. scholarship to Margarida Ribau Teixeira and Teresa Cecílio for her help on microcystins, TOC and DOC analysis. This project was funded by the European project “TOXIC—Barriers against cyanotoxins in drinking water” EVK1-CT-2002-00107 (01/09/2002–31/08/2005).