Cuprous oxides (Cu2O) spheres and octahedron were synthesized through hydrazine (N2H4) reduction to Cu2+ sources using polyvinyl pyrrolidone (PVP) as the capping reagent. Methyl orange (MeO) was used as the target to evaluate the photocatalysis properties. Cu2O particles with sizes ranged in 0.4μm and 0.5μm can be obtained through reducing Cu(OH)2 or brochantite (Cu4(SO4)(OH)6·2H2O) when mole ratio of Cu2+/N2H4 was set at 2.0. Lyophilizing is a critical and fairly good drying method to obtain pure Cu2O. Octahedrons can be obtained at high temperature (60°C), low resources concentrations (NaOH, Cu2+ and N2H4) and small PVP dosage, while the micro-spheres were received at ambient circumstances, higher concentrations and larger PVP dosage. Optical absorption spectra of spherical Cu2O showed the absorption edge at 590nm while octahedrons shifted to 602nm. Photocatalysis results revealed that 95% MeO can be decolorized in 40min by the spherical Cu2O, while the efficiency was 50% for the octahedra.Cuprous Oxide(Cu Nano-scaled Cu Polyvinyl pyrrolidone (PVP) has been widely used as capping agent in preparation of nanomaterials. There exists strong interaction between the surfaces of nanoparticles and PVP molecules through coordination by the O and N atoms of the pyrollidone ring Efforts in this work focused on the shape controlled synthesis of Cu Chemical reduction method was adopted at ambient conditions. All reagents were used as obtained without further purification. In typical synthesis procedure, polyvinyl pyrrolidone (PVP-K30) was solved into NaOH solution. 100 Cu Phase of the as-prepared samples were characterized by a RIGAKU D/max-2550VB Differential scanning calorimetry and thermal gravity (TG/DSC) of the sample was recorded by a NETZSCH STA-449C thermal analyzer at flow air conditions, 11.3 Photocatalysis was proceeded under a 125 Many kinds of reducers such as acetate ions, NaBH Where the ratio of Cu Lyophilization (also called freeze drying) is traditionally used in the field of agriculture and iatrology such as fresh food keeping, bacteria processing and organs keeping. In recent years, it has been introduced into field of nanomaterials preparation because it can keep materials in their suspended sol status, foremost resist oxidation, and could yield the no aggregated nanoparticles.  Through this avenue, the full reduction of Cu Typical SEM images shown in Shape controlled nano-scale materials is a hot spot in recent years. Some ionic or non-ionic surfactants were often involved in the synthesis procedure. As we have mentioned before, PVP is the commonly used capping reagent and shape adjusting chemical in the previous work. The mechanism for the shape controlling in this work should also abide by the selective adsorption on the crystal face of Cu The shape control in the experiments requires not only the changed PVP dosage, but also the adjusted reactants concentrations and temperatures. The competition between formation of Cu On the contrary, the S4 was prepared at high concentration and room temperature. The higher concentration increased the consumption of brochantite and Cu(OH) DSC/TG curves of S2 sample shown in Optical absorption spectrum was often used to characterize the possibility of solar energy transfer of materials. The UV–vis absorption spectra of S2 and S4 (since the two samples seemed to be relatively pure according to the XRD results) in  Cu This work was supported by the