High molecular weight polymers used in flocculation are manufactured mostly as dry granules. The efficiency of solid–liquid separation and polymer consumption are both affected by flocculant solution preparation. In this research, the effects of grain size, grain size reduction and solution ageing of an anionic high molecular weight flocculant on its preparation were investigated. Settling rate with a standard slurry was used as a measure of flocculant preparation effectiveness. The heterogeneity of solutions due to the presence of polymer gels was reduced by filtration. Results indicated that with smaller grain sizes, a shorter ageing would be required to achieve a certain settling rate. Furthermore, it was concluded that size reduction of a coarse grain flocculant could decrease the appropriate time for ageing.Flocculants are used for the aggregation of fine particles to increase the rate of settling in thickeners. Increased settling rate leads to an increase in the capacity of thickeners and the clarity of recycled water is also affected ( Flocculants are usually supplied in the form of dry granules and are prepared by dissolution in water before usage ( The ageing of flocculant has been the subject of a number of studies ( As a result of inadequate ageing some of polymer mass will be left as gel lumps and entangled being consequently ineffective in flocculation. In spite of several studies conducted on flocculants properties such as molecular weight and chain length, the effect of flocculant grain size has not previously been quantified. In this work the effect of flocculant grain size on its preparation was investigated. A commercial anionic flocculant powder (d In preliminary tests it was observed that settling tests results might be in considerable error utilizing a heterogeneous solution containing polymer rich regions obtained from a short ageing. Thus, for each test 200 Settling rate can be used as an indirect measure of the quality of flocculation ( Settling tests were conducted in a 1000 Settling test results suffer from poor reproducibility due to poor and/or inconsistent mixing ( In the early stages of ageing, the formation of swollen polymer gels can lead to heterogeneous flocculant dispersion, with polymer-rich regions present in solutions. These regions may exert an influence on the results of settling tests, thus flocculant dispersions were filtered prior to usage to remove the gels ( Since a small fraction of a prepared flocculant was taken for a test, fluctuations in the settling rate obtained from unfiltered flocculant could be due to the uneven distribution of polymer rich regions. Higher settling rates which were obtained using unfiltered flocculants could be attributed to the polymer chains being released from gels and agglomerated polymers in a short time after addition to the test cylinder. The effect of polymer dispersion passed through and retained over the filter gels on settling rate is illustrated in Since the flocculant grain size may exert an influence on flocculant preparation, a comparison was made between the results of using three separate size fractions (+20, −25 It was found that, with an increase in the flocculant grain size the minimum ageing required to observe the mudline increased, while the resulting settling rate was significantly decreased. As is shown, the settling rate achieved by using the flocculant fraction of −35 mesh grains after 5 In the second stage of ageing, the gels are dissolved and will no longer be visible. The required ageing for the dissolution of visible gels (Gels Dissolution Ageing GDA) was visually monitored during the preparation of flocculant and the time recorded. With a certain ageing, a shorter GDA is an indication of a better preparation. The GDA for −35, −25+30 and +20 mesh fractions were 30, 90 and more than 120 With finer grains the gels would disappear faster. From  In an attempt to investigate the effect of size reduction of flocculant grains on the required ageing, a sample of the +20 mesh size fraction, which needed the highest ageing was ground by using a porcelain mortar ( The preparation of +20 mesh and ground samples did not lead to the generation of large aggregates on flocculation after ageing times of less than 40 and 10 In this work, the effect of grain size on the ageing of flocculant was quantified. The heterogeneity of dispersion due to the presence of gels was reduced by filtration. The filtration of flocculant dispersions prior to settling tests could improve the reproducibility of results. It was found that most of the polymer chains could not be released before reaching to the maximum gel size, which is dependent on the initial flocculant grain size. With increasing grain size the ageing required for flocculant preparation increased. Size reduction of coarse grains resulted in a decrease in optimum ageing times of flocculant solution. The Authors would like to thank