Background
                  Displaced proximal humeral fractures, which used to be treated conservatively in the past, often had compromised functional results. With the advancement of technology, these fractures are now more often managed operatively, fulfilling the demands of an active and productive life style by the patients. The aim of this study was to assess the functional outcome of management of proximal humeral fractures with Philos (Synthes; Johnson and Johnson, West Chester, Pennsylvania, USA) plate fixation.
               
                  Methods
                  In this prospective study, 40 patients aged 18–80 years (mean age 52.4 years) with fractures of the proximal humerus, including two-, three-, and four-part fractures, were treated by open reduction internal fixation with Philos plating. Patients were functionally evaluated based on subjective (35 points) and objective (65 points) parameters as per the constant scoring system.
               
                  Results
                  All these operated patients were followed up for 18–36 months (average 27.3 months). Functional outcome based on the constant scoring system showed excellent results in 20 (50%), good in eight (20%), and moderate in eight (20%) patients. Four (10%) patients had poor functional results. Out of six cases of four-part fracture dislocations, avascular necrosis of the humeral head was observed in two patients. One of these two patients had avascular necrosis of the head along with nonunion of the fragment to the shaft.
               
                  Conclusion
                  Philos plate fixation for proximal humeral fractures provides good stable fixation with good functional outcome and minimal complications.Fractures of the proximal humerus account for 5.7% of all fractures, with an incidence rate of 63 cases per thousand adult individuals per year. This was a prospective cohort study conducted in 40 patients with fractures of the proximal humerus between January 2008 to January 2011 at Central Institute of Orthopedics, Safdarjung Hospital. The indications of operative treatment were based on Neer's classification The standard deltopectoral approach was used in all cases. Two surgeons including the senior author were involved in most of the cases. Fracture fragments were identified and stay sutures were placed in the rotator cuff. After freshening the fracture fragment, fractures were reduced. Temporary fixation with K-wires was performed to hold the fracture reduction. After temporary fracture reduction was achieved, the precontoured locking plate was positioned 5–10 mm lateral to the intertubercular sulcus and 10 mm caudal to the tip of the greater tuberosity. Tuberosity fixation was carried out through plate holes and sutures. Proximal locking screws were extended till subchondral purchase. The distal humeral screws were having bicortical purchase ( An image intensifier was used to check the quality of the reduction, stability of the construct, plate position, and length of the screws to avoid penetration of the locking screws into the glenohumeral joint in all the cases. The range of motion was also checked for any impingement. Once adequate fixation was confirmed, the wound was closed in layers. Postoperatively, the arm was immobilised using a shoulder immobiliser. Wound inspection was performed on the 2 In the present study, maximum numbers of patients were in their 5 The majority of patients (21 cases) sustained injury due to road traffic accidents, followed by fall on an outstretched hand (16 cases) and assaults (3 cases). The majority of the patients (26 patients) attended the Accident and Emergency Department on the day of injury themselves, four others reported the day after, the remaining 10 presented to the hospital with variable delays ranging from 2 days to 13 days. In the present study, 17 patients (42.5%) had associated injuries, namely fracture of trochanter, supracondylar femoral fracture, fracture of ipsilateral tibia, chest injury, and head injury. Fractures of the patients were classified according to Neer's classification. There were 20 (50%) patients with two-part, 14 (35%) patients with three-part, and six (15%) patients with four-part fractures. Most of the cases in this study were operated within a period of 0–7 days from the day of injury. The mean follow-up period was 27.3 months (range 18–36 months). Fractures were judged to be clinically united when painless, unaided movements were possible, and there was no tenderness. Fractures were termed radiologically united when bridging trabeculi were present across the fracture site covering at least 75% of its circumference. The average time for radiological union was observed to be 12.3 weeks. Delayed union was observed in two cases. In both these cases, the union occurred in 18 weeks without any additional intervention. Patients were functionally evaluated based on subjective (35 points) and objective (65 points) parameters as per the constant scoring system. The final outcome of the procedure was graded as excellent, good, moderate, and poor depending upon the scores of 86–100, 71–85, 56–70, and 0–55, respectively. As per parameters of the Constant scoring system, the overall results were assessed to be excellent in 20 (50%), good in eight (20%), and moderate in eight (20%) patients. Four (10%) patients had poor functional results ( No intraoperative or immediate postoperative complications in the form of neurovascular injuries/complications related to general anaesthesia were observed in the present study. Some late complications are listed in Surgical management of displaced proximal humerus fractures aims at restoring the prefracture functional status of the patients, as far as occupational and recreational activities are concerned. In the present series, the fractures were classified radiologically, according to Neer's classification. The majority of cases were having two-part (20 patients) fracture, followed by three-part (14 patients) and four-part (6 patients) fractures. Two-part fracture was observed to be the most common fracture pattern in the present study. Similar observations had also been reported by Björkenheim et al. The average time of union in our study was comparable with that found in related literature ( In our study, at 1-year follow-up, 32 of 40 patients (80%) had no pain and the remaining eight (20%) patients complained of mild pain, which was occasional or associated with prolonged activity involving the shoulder. Fankhauser et al, The ideal treatment of displaced proximal humeral fractures remained controversial for several years. The current trends show a shift towards the use of specially contoured proximal humerus locking plates. The present study indicates that it is a promising implant and provides a good functional outcome in proximal humerus fractures. Along with providing a buttressing effect laterally, it can also provide inferomedial support by locking screws, which prevent varus displacement of proximal fragment in the presence of medial comminution. Superior functional and radiological outcomes in patients with displaced proximal humeral fractures indicate that a proximal humerus locking plate is likely to be a better option in the management of these fractures. The authors declare that they have no financial or non-financial conflicts of interest related to the subject matter or materials discussed in the manuscript.