This research investigates the effect of delay timing on fragmentation. The study reveals that delay timing plays crucial role in the fragmentation. The shorter delay timings were found to yield better fragmentation results in comparison to the longer delay timing in strong limestone benches. Additionally, under the existing field conditions, straight V-type firing pattern provided superior fragmentation results.Delay time between the firing rows is crucial for the systematic utilization of energy associated with burden movement, which is important in maintaining the desired coherence and momentum in any blast round. Compared to the drilling and explosives costs, the delay initiator costs are almost negligible. Proper timing exerts a control on the number of rows and thus on the number of holes to be blasted in a pattern In the instances of short inter-row delay timing, the burden from front row remains in place before the charges from second row are fired resulting in improper relief and excessive confinement to the consecutive rows. This causes upward cratering (vertical uplift) that results in poor fragmentation (with little heave) and tight muck piles close to the face. On the contrary, if the delay time between the rows is too large, the material of the first row fails to act as a screen and thus does not confine the remainder of the blasts, which results in unwarranted lateral scattering, poor fragmentation, fly rocks etc. The situations are illustrated in From the foregoing discussion, it is noteworthy that various researchers have emphasized the role of delay timing in governing the success of any blast design. Thus, cognizant of the importance of this crucial parameter, the present study was undertaken in a limestone quarry to investigate the influence of inter-row delay timing on fragmentation and fragment size distribution in the blasted muck-piles. The main aim of the present research work was to investigate the influence of inter-row delay timing for two different type of firing patterns frequently used in the quarry. It is of consequence to mention here that on the basis of the earlier studies conducted in the same quarry Full-scale blasts were conducted in a limestone quarry of Century Cements, Raipur, India. Total captive leasehold area of the quarry was 2.73 The DTH drills were used to drill holes. The blasted limestone was loaded by 3.2 For the detailed investigation of inter-row delay timing, small-sized, full-scale blasts were conducted by varying the inter-row delay timing and investigating its influence on fragmentation in the muck pile. Inter-row delay timings of 17 It may be worthwhile to repeat that the pilot-scale inter-row delay timing results from the said study Keeping in mind the recommendations proposed by various researchers, and also considering the informative results on inter-row delay timing as provided by the earlier pilot-scale studies in the same quarry To characterize the fragment size in post-blasted muck piles, the state-of-art digital image capturing, processing and analysis technique was implemented. Needless to state that with the use of computerized digital imaging, the quantification process has become largely simplified, quick and relatively inexpensive. The basis of imaging technique is to capture scaled images of the blasted muck pile using a high resolution camera in the field, and then to digitize and measure the delineated fragments to provide a measure of the particle size distribution. In the field-scale, blasted muck piles were documented with scaled images captured from front of the blasted. For fragment size characterization in the blasted muck piles, the commercial state-of-art image analysis software Fragalyst The salient blast design parameters of all the twelve study blasts (B1–B12) along with the fragment size values (K A perusal of An examination of fragment size results (tabulated in All these results can be well understood in light of the fact that in strong and hard formations (as in the present case), the rock fragments between the consecutive rows of the blast round must collide vehemently before their final placement. In other words, greater shattering effect is essential for efficient rock breakage in stronger formations. The shorter delay interval between the consecutive firing rows provides ample opportunities for shattering by inter-rock collisions, before the final placement of the muck piles. On the other hand, longer inter-row delay interval provides adequate relief with fewer opportunities for in-flight collisions. The delay interval was found to be related to the propagation of P-wave velocity in rock media. For stronger formations, the P-wave velocity is higher and thus the delay interval requirement is shorter From the perusal of the results given in Another important feature is absence of any significant variation in the powder factor (PF) values in the blasts. The narrow range of PF values (0.45–0.47 Following conclusions can be arrived at: Digital imaging technique with use of suitable software is capable of describing the fragment size and complete state of fragmentation within the blasted muck piles. Breakage by the shattering effect, necessitated for efficient fragmentation in strong formation, entails shorter inter-row delay timing. The shorter inter-row delay timing, in strong formations, seems to provide good opportunity of in-flight, inter-rock collisions before the final placement of the muck pile. The blasted muck from the adjacent previous blast round acts as a buffer that restricts the free face in diagonal firing rounds. This buffer must be properly excavated before firing the designated blast round in order to ensure 2-clear free faces in the diagonal firing pattern. Due to operational constraints, if it is not possible for the operators to clear the blasted muck buffer, then firing the blast rounds on V-type of firing pattern against a single free face, holds promise in providing good fragmentation results. The authors wish to express their gratitude towards the staff and management of the limestone quarry of M/S Century Cements, Raipur for their permission, co-operation and excellent support. The acknowledgements are also due to Mr. Jung-Gyun Kim and Mr. Young-Hun Ko for the excellent assistance rendered by them.