The detection of pyrrhotite (Fe7S8) by 57Fe NMR spectroscopy in zero applied field is reported. The 57Fe signal of pyrrhotite is detected in zero field using two different methods, with both yielding peak signal at 42.03MHz. The technique and theory of 57Fe NMR spectroscopy of ferromagnetic iron compounds in zero applied field has recently been reviewed, and a zero field NMR ore detection and separation method has been recently described. The method presented here can be suitably adapted for detection and selection of pyrrhotite-containing ore fragments enriched in Fe7S8 in mining applications. The association of pyrrhotite with the Ni-rich mineral pentlandite (Fe,Ni)9S8 enables peak signal detection at 42.03MHzasa proxy for nickel-rich material in ultramafic nickel sulphide deposits.Nickel sulphide deposits are currently responsible for 58% of global nickel production. In ultramafic nickel sulphide deposits, pyrrhotite (Fe In this work we examine the ability of zero field nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) to rapidly detect pyrrhotite using a Pyrrhotite is the commonly used name for a family of iron sulphide minerals with the formula Fe The Fe A The ore specimen investigated here came from the Poseidon Nickel mine at Windarra, Shire of Laverton, West Australia. It was a large (∼300 Inductively-coupled plasma optical emission spectroscopy (ICP-OES) analysis in triplicate was made of powder filed from the ore specimen using a Varian 730-ES. The powder was dissolved in an HCl-HNO Powder X-ray diffraction (XRD) was undertaken using a rotating Cu anode (45 The zero field The ICP-OES analysis yielded Fe (60.0 XRD analysis showed the essentially exclusive presence of pyrrhotite (Fe A review of the Searching around 41.5 It should be noted that, although the pulsed FT NMR line shape exhibited in Two other Australian pyrrhotite containing specimens were also examined. Preliminary XRD analysis indicated the presence of pyrite (FeS Accurate detection and compilation of zero field NMR signals for valuable minerals and co-associated gangue are important for the application of recently reported on-line analysis of mineral phases in bulk volumes We wish to thank Drs. Nick Cutmore and David Miljak of CSIRO Minerals for inspiring the work and for financial support. We thank Dr. John Drennan for the specimen from the Poseidon Nickel mine. Dr. Aaron Seeber is thanked for the XRD. Winston Liew is thanked for the chemical analysis. Steve Tassios is thanked for supplying two other Australian pyrrhotite samples. Drs. Megan Clark, Jim Peacock, and Marcus Zipper are thanked for funding the research through the