This paper examines the natural convection in an enclosure that is filled with a water-Al2O3 nanofluid and is influenced by a magnetic field. The enclosure is bounded by two isothermal vertical walls at temperatures Th
                      and Tc
                      and by two horizontal adiabatic walls. Based upon numerical predictions, the effects of pertinent parameters such as the Rayleigh number (103
                     ≤Ra≤107), the solid volume fraction (0≤
                     ϕ
                     ≤0.06) and the Hartmann number (0≤Ha≤60) on the flow and temperature fields and the heat transfer performance of the enclosure are examined. Prandtl number is considered to be Pr=6.2. The results show that the heat transfer rate increases with an increase of the Rayleigh number but it decreases with an increase of the Hartmann number. An increase of the solid volume fraction may result in enhancement or deterioration of the heat transfer performance depending on the value of Hartmann and Rayleigh numbers.magnetic field strength specific heat, J/kg gravitational acceleration, m/s convection heat transfer coefficient, W/m Hartmann number thermal conductivity, W/m enclosure length, m local Nusselt number on the left hot wall average Nusselt number fluid pressure, Pa modified pressure ( dimensionless pressure Prandtl number ( Rayleigh number source term in Eq. temperature, K velocity components in dimensionless velocity components ( Cartesian coordinates, m dimensionless coordinates ( thermal diffusivity, m thermal expansion coefficient, 1/K solid volume fraction non-dimensional parameter in Eq. diffusion term in Eq. dynamic viscosity, Ns/m kinematic viscosity, m dimensionless temperature ( density, kg/m electrical conductivity, μS/cm stream function cold wall fluid (pure water) hot wall maximum nanofluid nanoparticle The classical problem of natural convection in square enclosures has many engineering applications such as the cooling systems of electronic components, the building and thermal insulation systems, the built-in-storage solar collectors, the nuclear reactor systems, the food storage industry and the geophysical fluid mechanics Ece and Buyuk Most of the studies on the natural convection in enclosures with the magnetic effects have considered the electrically conducting fluid with a low thermal conductivity. This, in turn, limits the enhancement of heat transfer in the enclosure particularly in the presence of the magnetic field. Nanofluids with enhanced thermal characteristics have widely been examined to improve the heat transfer performance of many engineering applications As discussed earlier, the magnetic field results in the decrease of convective circulating flows within the enclosures filled with electrically conducting fluids. This, in turn, results in the reduction of heat transfer. The addition of nanoparticles to the fluid can improve its thermal performance and enhance the heat transfer mechanism in the enclosure. In some engineering problems such as the magnetic field sensors, the magnetic storage media and the cooling systems of electronic devices, enhanced heat transfer is desirable whereas the magnetic field weakens the convection flow field. In order to improve the heat transfer performance of such devices, the use of nanofluids with higher thermal conductivity can be considered as a promising solution. The effect of a magnetic field on the natural convection of a nanofluid has only examined for vertical flat plates  The classical models reported in the literature are used to determine the properties of the nanofluid The effective dynamic viscosity and thermal conductivity of the nanofluid can be modelled by By using the following non-dimensional parameters: Equations The governing equations are subject to the following boundary conditions: The local Nusselt number on the left hot wall can be defined as The average Nusselt number (Nu The non-dimensional governing equations (Eq. The effects of the Hartmann number on the streamlines and isotherms are presented in    An examination of the average Nusselt number ratio (Nu    The variation of Nu  Natural convection in a square enclosure that is filled with a water-Al Stronger flow circulations within the enclosure and intensified isotherms near the vertical walls are evident at higher Rayleigh numbers and at lower Hartmann numbers for a fixed solid volume fraction. The The profiles of the local Nusselt number along the hot wall and the average Nusselt number verify that when the Hartmann number increases, the heat transfer rate decreases. The rate of this decrease is a function of the Rayleigh number. The most significant influence of the Hartmann number on the heat transfer deterioration occurs at Ra The effect of the solid volume fraction on the heat transfer rate strongly depends on the values of the Rayleigh number and the Hartmann number. For Ha