In this work, the interaction behavior and underlying mechanism of coal and kaolinite particles in the presence of agitation was investigated by flotation tests, homo and hetero settling tests, turbidity meter, zeta potential distribution, focused beam reflectance measurement (FBRM) and scanning electron microscope (SEM). The results show that, in the presence of kaolinite, the flotation combustible matter recovery of coal decreases from 0rpm to 1200rpm and then increases from 1200rpm to 2000rpm, indicating that the mild agitation enhances kaolinite-coating and the high intensity agitation mitigates the kaolinite-coating, which is demonstrated by the zeta potential distribution and turbidity measurements. However, the degree of the heterocoagulation between coal and kaolinite is not serious. It is found that the kaolinite particles partially cover on the coal surface by two morphologies includes individuals and aggregates through the size-based scanning electron microscope analysis. In addition, the affinity between fine kaolinite and fine coal particles is more pronounced. The kaolinite-coating enhancement caused by the mild agitation is explained by the Derjaguin–Landau–Verwey–Overbeek (DLVO) theory.Flotation is widely used in coal industry for treating fine coal. This process greatly relies on the distinct interfacial properties between coal and gangue minerals. Good hydrophobicity of the coal surface is the key to ensure the success of the flotation. Unfortunately, nowadays China coal industry is facing the challenge of processing clayey coal as a result of the depletion of high quality coal deposits. According to the literature, clay particles, usually < Originally, Derjaguin–Landau–Verwey–Overbeek (DLVO) theory was developed to interpret the aggregate stability of colloidal particles, and recently researchers used this theory to explain the interaction behaviors of mineral particles in suspension. The DLVO interaction energy and force between coal and clay particles was calculated by some researchers The aim of this work is to investigate the effect of agitation on the interaction of coal and kaolinite in flotation. The interaction behavior and underlying mechanism of agitation on slime coating was investigated by flotation tests, homo and hetero settling tests, turbidity meter, zeta potential distribution, focused beam reflectance measurement (FBRM) and scanning electron microscope (SEM). The results of this research are expected to provide a more detailed description of the flotation behavior of coal-kaolinite system in the presence of kinetic energy input and give a reference for the coal flotation. The pure coal used in this study was obtained by hand-picking the coarse gravity separation clean coking-coal supplied from Huainan coal preparation plant, China. In order to obtain a purer coal, the original coal samples were separated by the heavy liquid of 1.30 Batch flotation tests were conducted using a 1.5 where Settling tests were conducted in 100 The SEM analysis was conducted by ZEISS MERLIN VP Compact field emission scanning electron microscope. Firstly, the pure coal was wet sieved strictly and a size fraction between 74 Mixed solids (5 Zeta potential distribution was measured by CAD Zetaphoremetre IV™ (CAD, France). The Smoluchowski model was used to calculate zeta potentials from the measured electrophoretic mobility. Suspensions containing 0.5 The measurement of FBRM was carried out by METTLER TOLEDO FBRM® Technology G400. The technique allows real-time, in-process measurement of highly turbid samples. The technique uses an inline probe containing a laser that is focused to a point at the surface of the probe window, which is in contact with the process sample. The focused beam is rotated in a circular path at a controlled scan speed, and pulses of backscattered light are detected by the probe as the focused beam passes over particles and agglomerates. The length of these pulses correlates to the distance across each particle and, by multiplying the length of each pulse by the scan speed, the distance across each particle (chord length) can be calculated. High numbers of chord lengths are measured each second, which enable changes in the particle size distribution and particle count to be monitored Firstly, the effect of agitation on pure coal flotation was studied, and the combustible matter recovery of the pure coal as a function of flotation time at different agitation speeds are shown The effect of agitation on the interaction between coal and kaolinite in flotation is shown in No collectors were added or used during the whole process of flotation, as such, the surface hydrophobicity played a critical role in the floating of the coal in this test. Thus, once the kaolinite-coating occurs, the hydrophobicity of the coal surface should be decreased. Therefore, the lower combustible matter recovery observed in the presence of kaolinite as shown in To confirm the presence of slime coating of kaolinite clays on coal surface in the flotation process, the homo and hetero settling tests were conducted at neutral pulp pH same as the flotation solution. The photographs of pure mineral and mixed minerals suspensions after 14 The directly visual images in In order to investigate the effect of agitation strength on particle flocs of the kaolinite-coal suspension, supernatant turbidity of coal-kaolinite suspension after settling for 1 As shown in As shown in The zeta potential distributions of mixed coal-kaolinite systems are shown in The interactions between coal and clay particles based on Derjaguin–Landau–Verwey–Overbeek (DLVO) theory of the aggregate stability of colloidal particles are shown in According to the previous studies, it is known that when flocculation occurs, the chord length value increases Several conclusions from this work are summarized as follows. Kaolinite clays partially cover on the coal surface by two morphologies includes individuals and aggregates. The affinity between fine kaolinite and fine coal particles is more pronounced. The agitation has little effect on the surface electrical property of coal and kaolinite. However, the mild agitation could enhance kaolinite-coating by overcoming energy barrier and increasing collision between coal and kaolinite particles, and the high intensity agitation could mitigate the kaolinite-coating. This finding is expected to be useful to the process involving heterocoagulation such as tailings disposal, water treatment and flotation separation. Financial support to the project was provided by