Changes in rainfall patterns can affect the soil nitrogen (N) cycles. Most studies have focused on the effect of the amount of rainfall, but the effect of the frequency of rainfall has rarely been considered. In this study, we conducted a field experiment in the Zoigê alpine wetland that examined two levels of the amount of rainfall, i.e. 100% or 70% of the natural amounts of rainfall. In addition, we examined three frequencies of rainfall events. First was the natural interval, while the second and third were increases of 50% and 100% of the inter-rainfall dry periods based on the natural interval of the rainfall events, respectively. We found that the amount and frequency of rainfall had significant interactive effects on N mineralization, and thus influenced the concentration of mineral N in the Zoigê alpine wetland. The reduction of the rainfall amount significantly increased N mineralization rate, NO3
                     −-N concentration and mineral N stock in the high frequency treatment, and N mineralization rate, decreased them in the low frequency treatment. The variation of the soil NH4
                     +-N, NO3
                     −-N, and mineral N stock increased with the reduction in the rainfall frequency and the increase in the soil depth. Thus prolonged drought (low frequency of rainfall) and reduced rainfall due to future climatic change may decrease the mineral N concentration and N mineralization rate in Zoigê alpine wetland, which may probably have a profound impact on the alpine wetland ecosystem.Global climate change causes intensive changes in hydrological cycles at both the regional and global scales, which is usually accompanied by an occurrence of extreme drought and heavy rainfall events [ The amount of rainfall affects the balance of soil N pools, including the major biogeochemical processes of the N cycle [ A reduction in the amount of rainfall can reduce the soil moisture and increase the concentration of oxygen in the soil, which can promote nitrification, inhibit denitrification and reduce N The frequency of rainfall influences the states of the soil drying-rewetting cycles [ During the process of the rewetting period in the soil, the nutrients that have accumulated in the soil can migrate rapidly and easily after being dissolved [ Both the amount and frequency of rainfall influence the nutrient cycling processes of ecosystems [ The study area was located in the Zoigê wetland (32°20′-34°00′ N, 101°36′-103°30′ E) at the eastern edge of the Qinghai-Tibet Plateau in China, which is the largest highland peat land in the world and is also a typical representative of an alpine wetland ecosystem in the Qinghai-Tibet Plateau [ The field experiment was conducted in a homogeneous area in the Zoigê National Reserve (33°34′60″ N, 102°56′60″ E) from June 2017 to September 2017, and the experiment lasted for 94 days. The dominant plant species in the study site were After the first natural rainfall at the beginning of the experiment, artificial rainfall was applied to all the plots. The interval between two natural rainfall events was monitored as the interval of high-frequency rainfall. When the natural rainfall ended, the artificial high frequency rainfall treatments immediately followed. Based on the high-frequency rainfall interval, the artificial rainfall intervals in the moderate and low frequency groups were extended to 1.5 times and twice longer, respectively ( Six plastic rain gauges were evenly laid on the periphery of the transparent shelter to monitor the natural amount of rainfall, and the artificial rainfall was calculated based on an average value from the six gauges. Rainwater was sprinkled evenly into each sample using a water can. The water used during the experiment was collected from the roof of the shelter and passed through a drainage channel, and the PVC downpipe system was connected to two 2000 L polyethylene tanks. The soil moisture data were collected using a soil moisture meter (TDR100, Spectrum Field Scout, Spectrum Technologies, Aurora, IL, USA) every week during the experiment. Soil samples were collected at the end of September 2017. Each sampling plot was drilled with a soil auger to collect soil samples from 0–15 cm and 15–30 cm, respectively. A total of 48 samples was collected and stored at −18 °C, and then returned to the laboratory for further analysis. The roots and impurities in the fresh soil were manually removed in the laboratory, and the soil NH The rate of soil nitrification was calculated by the difference of the concentration of NO The calculation formula of soil nitrogen stock (g m To test the variation of soil mineral N concentration in different rainfall treatments, the Orwin & Wardle resistance index A two-way ANOVA was used to examine the effects of rainfall amount and frequency on the soil moisture, the mineral N concentration, net N mineralization and nitrification. Prior to ANOVA, the data were tested for normality and homogeneity of variance. Data on nitrification rate and mineral N at 0–15 cm depth were logarithmically transformed to satisfy homogeneity of variance. All the data were analyzed using SPSS 20.0 statistical software (SPSS, Chicago, IL, USA), and the effects were considered significant if The amount and frequency of rainfall had significant effects on the soil moisture in different layers ( The concentration of NH The reduction of the amount of rainfall significantly increased the stock of NH The rainfall amount and the interaction between the amount and frequency had significant effects on the rates of net N mineralization and nitrification at the 15–30 cm depth ( The reduction in the amount of rainfall had a greater impact on the variation of the pool of soil N at a depth of 15–30 cm ( The concentration of mineral N is an important index to evaluate the supply capacity of the soil available N. Our results showed that alterations in the amount and frequency of rainfall caused changes in the rates of mineral N concentration and N mineralization in alpine wetland soil. The effects varied at different soil depths. A decrease in the amount of rainfall significantly increased the concentration of NO We found a significant interactive effect of the amount and frequency of rainfall on the concentrations of NO The variation in the pool of soil N gradually increased with the increase in soil depth, since the change of mineral N in the deep soil is more sensitive to rainfall patterns. In deeper soil, the concentration of mineral N decreased, and its ability to resist external influences became weaker. Therefore, the concentration was more easily affected by the changes in soil moisture. The resistance of the pool of NO We conclude that the amount and frequency of rainfall could interact the mineral N concentration and N mineralization rate in the Zoigê alpine wetland ecosystem. Prolonged drought (low frequency of rainfall) and reduced rainfall due to future climatic change may decrease the mineral N concentration and N mineralization rate, which probably has a more profound impact on the productivity in the wetland ecosystem. This research was supported by the We declare that we have no conflict of interest exits in the submission of this manuscript, and manuscript is approved by all authors for publication. The authors are thankful to Zoigê Wetland National Nature Reserve Administration for their support of the experiment. The following is the Supplementary data to this article: Supplementary data to this article can be found online at