Avulsion fracture of the tibial tuberosity is an uncommon fracture, usually seen in the adolescent athlete as an isolated injury, that accounts for less than 1% of all physeal injuries. Avulsion fracture of the tibial tubercle usually occurs when the knee is forcibly flexed against contracting quadriceps, or from forceful quadriceps contraction against a fixed tibia. In October 2009, an 11 year old male gymnast experienced sudden right knee pain when he jumped from a standing position to perform a backwards flip. He was immediately unable to extend his right knee and was unable to weight bear with his right lower limb. The patient had no history of previous knee pain and no medical comorbidities. Physical examination of the right knee showed an effusion, significant soft tissue swelling, tenderness over the lower pole of the patella and over the tibial tuberosity, inability to straight leg raise, and inability to extend the knee against gravity. Plain radiographs of the right knee showed a displaced tibial tuberosity fracture with proximal migration of the patella, and a tiny avulsion fracture of the lower patellar pole ( The patient underwent open surgical repair, with confirmation of a displaced tibial tuberosity avulsion fracture in association with avulsion of the proximal patellar ligament insertion as part of a patellar sleeve injury. Open reduction and internal fixation of the tibial tuberosity fracture was undertaken with a subcutaneously buried Kirschner wire and tension band fibre wire suture. In addition, open suture repair of the proximal patellar ligament avulsion was completed ( Postoperatively, the patient was managed in an above knee cast for seven weeks followed by a hinged knee brace allowing a progressive range of motion and weight bearing to tolerance for five weeks. The Kirschner wire was removed five weeks postoperatively. At twelve weeks postoperatively the patient had an active range of motion of 5–130° of flexion, was allowed to gradually return to activities, and commenced physical therapy. At six months postoperatively, the patient had regained a full range of knee motion and had returned to all usual sporting activities with no residual pain. Plain radiographs at this stage showed the fractures to have healed ( Avulsion fracture of the tibial tuberosity is a well described injury, usually seen in the adolescent athlete. Associated avulsion of the patellar tendon is a rare event, and associated proximal patellar tendon avulsion has not previously been described. Tibial tuberosity avulsion fractures can be described using the Ogden In our patient, forceful contraction of the quadriceps against a fixed, flexed knee has resulted in failure of both the tibial tuberosity and proximal patellar ligament insertions. This concurrent failure would seem to imply perfectly balanced forces throughout the extensor mechanism at the time of injury. However, previous authors Previous case reports have documented 15 cases of avulsion fracture of the tibial tuberosity in association with distal patellar ligament avulsion. Four previous bipolar patellar ligament injuries have been described. Two paediatric cases have been reported involving concurrent inferior patellar sleeve avulsions and disruption of the distal patellar tendon insertion with no tibial tubercle avulsion. Diagnosis of avulsion fracture of the tibial tuberosity with associated patellar ligament avulsion requires an accurate history, thorough physical examination and appropriate imaging. To aid diagnosis, Frankl et al. We provide the first description of avulsion fracture of the tibial tuberosity with associated proximal patellar ligament avulsion. We advise that a high level of suspicion is required when faced with the tibial tuberosity avulsion fracture patient in order to detect a possible associated patellar ligament injury. We suggest that avulsion fracture of the tibial tuberosity with associated patellar ligament avulsion should be managed with open reduction and internal fixation. Our patient has done well over the short term with this management.