The 3D structure of zinc arachidate (ZnA) LB multilayers transferred at different subphase pH has been studied using X-ray scattering and FT-IR spectroscopy. The molecular packing in ZnA multilayers shows an unusually strong dependence on subphase pH, not observed earlier in LB multilayers of divalent fatty acid salts. In all four polymorphic phases, α, β, γ and δ with characteristic 3D structures were observed and in most cases, two or more phases were found to coexist. The δ-phase, which corresponds to the largest alkyl chain tilt angle of ∼32°, is stable over the complete range of subphase pH investigated and appears as a single phase at a subphase pH of ∼6.5. It corresponds to a rotator phase like ‘loose packing’ of molecules tilted at an angle of 32° with respect to chain axis, packed in a hexagonal layer cell. The subcell packing changes from hexagonal to orthorhombic and the angle of tilt decreases from 32° (δ-phase) to nearly 0° (α-phase) with increasing pH up to 7.4. The dominant phase at a pH of ∼7.4 (α-phase) has a close packed herringbone structure. However at higher subphase pH, the ‘rotator like’ δ-phase regains prominence. The interface morphology of different polymorphic phases is found to be unique, independent of the subphase pH at which the monolayers are transferred.Organic multilayers deposited by the Langmuir–Blodgett (LB) technique have been the subject of intense research due to the rich variety of organized molecular layered structures they provide In the present work, the 3D structure of the polymorphic phases in ZnA multilayers transferred at nominal subphase pH values ranging from 6.5 to 8.0 has been studied using X-ray scattering and FT-IR spectroscopy techniques. Below a subphase pH of 6.5, the multilayers consisted of a mixture of arachidic acid and zinc arachidate molecules Zinc arachidate multilayers were made by the conventional LB deposition technique using a KSV 3000 LB instrument. Arachidic acid (Aldrich, 99%) with HPLC grade chloroform as solvent (1 X-ray reflectivity measurements were carried out using a Siemens D5000 diffractometer with Cu Kα radiation. Three types of scanning geometries; the longitudinal Grazing incidence X-ray diffraction (GIXD) studies were performed using synchrotron radiation of wavelength 0.155 FT-IR studies were carried out on multilayers transferred on CaF The reflectivity scans (specular and off-specular) from the ZnA multilayers transferred onto quartz substrates at different subphase pH are shown in The specular reflectivity scan ( The longitudinal offset In order to investigate the nature of interface morphology at the different polymorphic phases in multilayers transferred at different subphase pH values, transverse ( The intralayer molecular packing in ZnA multilayers transferred at different subphase pH values was studied using grazing incidence X-ray diffraction. The results are shown in The molecular packing in ZnA multilayers has also been studied by FT-IR spectroscopy. The CH The understanding of molecular packing in LB multilayers has generally been on the lines of the work of Kitaigorodskii The reflectivity scan shown in For the ZnA multilayer transferred at a subphase pH of 6.8, the reflectivity scan shows the dominance of Bragg peaks corresponding to the δ-phase along with weak Bragg peaks corresponding to γ-phase which is characterized by a chain tilt angle of ∼26°. The GIXR and GIXD results of In the case of ZnA multilayer transferred at a subphase pH of 7.3, the reflectivity scan again clearly exhibits two types of coexisting layered structures with bilayer periods of ∼4.7 and ∼5.3 The ZnA multilayer transferred at a subphase pH of 7.4 however shows a drastically different behaviour compared to the above mentioned cases. The reflectivity scan ( For the ZnA multilayers transferred at a subphase pH of 7.6, the reflectivity scan ( The dependence of the 3D structure of various phases appearing in ZnA multilayers at different subphase pH values reveals an interesting pattern. Towards the lower and higher ends of subphase pH range investigated, the 3D structure tends to acquire a relatively less dense, rotator phase like molecular packing. Between the two extremes of the subphase pH range investigated, different 3D structures corresponding to close packed arrangements based on orthorhombic subcells, but with alkyl chains tilted from the layer normal, proposed by Kitaigorodskii, appear. In a very narrow subphase pH range ∼7.4, the ideal close packed herringbone structure dominates, which has not been reported in ZnA multilayers earlier. Such dependence of 3D structure on subphase pH has not been reported in divalent fatty acid salt LB multilayers. These results on ZnA multilayers point towards the limited nature of the correlation between metal ion electronegativity and the molecular packing in multilayers of divalent fatty acid salts. The exhibition of polymorphic phases is possibly due to the complex zinc ion hydrolysis equilibria at different values of subphase pH existing in the monolayer on water surface and its effect on the structure of the transferred multilayer. The 3D structure of ZnA multilayers has an unusually strong dependence on subphase pH, at which the monolayers are transferred. The δ-phase corresponding to the largest alkyl chain tilt angle of ∼32°, appears as a single phase around the subphase pH of 6.5 and is found to be stable over the complete pH range (6.5–8.0) investigated. The other phases, namely α, β and γ appear only in certain ranges of subphase pH. In a very narrow subphase pH range ∼7.4, the α-phase corresponding to the ideal close packed herringbone structure dominates. X ray scattering studies show that the polymorphic phases have characteristic interface morphological features, independent of the subphase pH at which the phase appears. Financial assistance from the Department of Science and Technology, Government of India and the Indo-Italian Programme of co-operation in Science and Technology is gratefully acknowledged. The authors also like to thank Drs. P. Dubcek, H. Amenitsch and S. Bernstorff of Sincrotrone, Trieste for their help in carrying out GIXD measurements.