Extraction of zinc and other metals from aqueous solutions using D2EHPA as an extractant in organic phases has been investigated extensively in the past. Under the conditions of low loading of metal in organic phase, equilibrium behaviour is adequately explained through an interfacial reaction with constant stoichiometric coefficients. Experiments show that as the loading of metal in the organic phase increases, increasingly smaller number of molecules of D2EHPA are required to extract a metal ion. Reaction mechanisms which explain this behaviour through breakup of complexes formed on the interface to release free extractant for further extraction are shown to be untenable as they fail to explain experimental observations on viscosity variation and dependence of apparent equilibrium constant on loading ratio alone. A new reaction mechanism is proposed in this work. It considers that complex formed on the interface aggregates in the organic phase and releases free extractant for increased extraction. The proposed mechanism successfully explains the above hitherto unexplained features of metal–D2EHPA extraction systems. It also quantitatively predicts the extraction equilibria not just for zinc but also for cobalt and nickel, and may characterize other extraction systems as well.Extraction of zinc and other metals using extractant D2EHPA (di-2-ethylhexyl phosphoric acid) has been studied extensively in the literature due to the commercial importance of these systems ( The value of stoichiometric coefficient A decrease in value of In this communication, we propose an alternative mechanism to explain a decrease in Concentration of free extractant in organic phase at equilibrium is not easy to measure, however, under low loading conditions, its value can be taken to be the same as its value initially. Several investigators have therefore conducted experiments in dilute limit to estimate stoichiometric coefficients and equilibrium constant for interfacial reactions. For the specific case of extraction of Zn, different values of Measurements of viscosity of the loaded organic phase, reported by A large number of investigators have considered decrease in  He however permits interconversion between two complexes through  Breakup of complex at high loading suggests that viscosity of the organic phase should decrease with an increase in the loading of metal (assuming that the complex formed on breakup is of nearly the same size as the dimer of the extractant). Addition of free extractant to loaded organic phase should lead to formation of bigger complexes through backward reaction in the bulk, and hence an increase in viscosity of the organic phase. Both of these are not in agreement with the experimental findings discussed earlier. Thus, to summarize, the equilibrium extraction behaviour of zinc–D2EHPA and other similar systems is yet not fully understood. There is a need to explain the experimental findings discussed above along with the equilibrium data in a consistent manner. When aqueous and organic phases containing metal ion Let us now define an apparent equilibrium constant The concentrations [C¯] and [D¯] appearing in Eqs. Eqs. Quantitative predictions for the proposed mechanism require equilibrium constants Following the procedure of  In this section, we discuss the central issue of breakup based mechanism (  Mansur et al. have estimated values of both the parameters of their mechanism (  Variation of non-dimensional concentrations of B¯, C¯, and D¯ with In order to compare the two mechanisms in a consistent manner, we have evaluated the parameters needed for the breakup based mechanism to predict the experimental data of Huang and Juang which were used earlier to estimate parameters for aggregation based mechanism. The new parameters are estimated to be:  We have simplified final equations for breakup based mechanism (Eqs. Constants The reason for small effect of [B¯] The experimental data on viscosity variation ( As the complex formed in the bulk for the aggregation based mechanism is nearly one and a half times as big as [C¯], the viscosity of the organic phase is predicted to increase monotonically with loading ratio for concentration profiles shown in  We envisage that the complexes considered in the proposed mechanism further aggregate with each other to form even larger complexes which are needed to explain the phenomenal increase in the viscosity at high loading of metal ( Thus, the analysis presented above and the experimental observations reported in the literature indicate that the behaviour of extraction systems where the extractant extracts more solute per molecule of the extractant at high loading of solute in the organic phase, can be explained through aggregation of complex in the organic phase and the release of extractant for increased extraction. Breakup of complexes in the organic phase which also releases free extractant for increased extraction is inconsistent with the experimental observations. The present work shows that the attempts made in the literature to explain the equilibrium behaviour, which consider multiple interfacial reactions or breakup of the complex formed on the interface in the organic phase fail to explain interesting experimental observations on viscosity variation and dependence of apparent equilibrium constant on Given the values of equilibrium constants and the values of [ The solution of the above five simultaneous non-linear equations yields values for [B¯], [C¯], [D¯], [M¯] and [M] at equilibrium. The loading ratio at equilibrium is given by [M¯]/[B¯] 