We have deposited poly-Si thin films on Si(100) and glass substrates at growth temperature of below 400°C using a newly developed high rate magnetron sputtering method. To improve the sputtering yield and the growth rate, a high power (10–30 W/cm2) magnetron sputtering system was designed and constructed. Based on the results of computer simulation, we built up the magnetron sputter source with unbalanced magnetron and Si ion extraction grid. The maximum deposition rate reached was 0.35 μm/min due to a high ion bombardment. This is five times higher than that of conventional sputtering methods, and the sputtering yield was also increased up to 80%. The best film was obtained on Si(100) surface using Si ion extraction grid under 9.0×10−3 torr of working pressure and 11 W/cm2 of the target power density. The electron mobility of the poly-Si film grown on Si(100) at 400°C with ion extraction grid was 96 cm2/Vs. In this study, however, we found that the target power density is a more important factor than working pressure to influence the growth rate, mobility, and the film quality. During sputtering, moreover, the characteristics of Si sputter source were also analyzed with an in situ Langmuir probe method and optical emission spectroscopy.After LeComber et al. Among them a magnetron sputtering method by pulse d.c. was our focus to improve the crystallinity and grain size of p-Si thin film grown at low temperature, because pulse d.c. magnetron sputtering has many advantages of high growth rate, low temperature deposition, and good reproducibility. In this study, therefore, we tried to make high quality p-Si thin films at temperature as low as 400°C using a newly designed magnetron sputter source with Si ion extraction grid. Since our developed sputter source can operate at low voltage and high current, it shows high deposition rate and direct p-Si deposition on the large-area glass substrate. Moreover, the sputter source has high sputtering yield, when an ion extraction grid was applied, resulting in high Si ion mobility. Experiments were carried out using a homemade sputtering system with newly developed high rate and high power magnetron sputter source. We used a pulsed d.c. that has 3.333 kHz of frequency and 50% of duty ratio to improve the crystallinity and grain size of p-Si thin film grown at low temperatures below 400°C. Si(100) and Corning 1737 glass were used as substrates, and the substrate was heated by either heater or plasma in the temperature range between 300 and 400°C. The substrate temperatures were measured by using an optical pyrometer. The general growth conditions of p-Si thin films were 5×10 OES is a powerful tool for controlling the sputtering process and for optimizing both the p-Si film layers properties and the deposition process. In this study, therefore, we used the OES as a qualitative in situ plasma diagnostic method.   Highly oriented p-Si thin films have been deposited on Si(100) and glass substrates at growth temperature in the range of 300–400°C using a newly developed high rate and high power sputtering source with Si ion extraction grid. Based on the results of computer simulation, we designed and constructed the p-Si sputter source that has unbalanced magnetron ( One of the authors (J.-H. Boo) would like to thank the Korea Basic Science Institute for a partial support. Support of this research from the Korea Science and Engineering Foundation through grant No. 981-0307-041-2 and the Ministry of Science and Technology of Korea through the G7 project is acknowledged.