We present an electrostatic actuator fabricated on a flexible polyethylene naphthalate (PEN) substrate, which emits acoustic waves at ultrasonic frequencies. The MEMS actuator has a suspended parylene diaphragm which consists of 2–6mm diameter and 6μm gap between the diaphragm and substrate. Driving circuitry consists of voltage controlled oscillator (VCO) and output buffer chain, and was fabricated by Arizona State University's Flexible Display Center-IC process. The fabricated actuator emits ultrasonic waves at 25kHz, and acoustic sound pressure of 27dB SPL (sound pressure level) driven by the hydrogenated amorphous silicon (a-Si:H) circuitry.MEMS (micro-electro-mechanical-systems) acoustic transducers are attractive as they have a potential for economic, sizable strength in fabrication Flexible ultrasonic transducers can be used for non-destructive evaluation (NDE). Bowen et al. We form MEMS ultrasonic actuators on a flexible material, polyethylene naphthalate (PEN), which is a type of polyester, commonly used to form an oxygen barrier  This paper is organized as follows: Section The ultrasonic acoustic wave generated by MEMS actuators propagates through a medium (air) and reaches a sensor; ultrasonic microphone. In order to maximize efficiency of the overall system, the actuator must generate a sufficiently high SPL, display low SPL degradation in the traversing medium, and the receiving microphone must have low equivalent SPL noise. As we focus on the design of the MEMS actuator aimed at producing high SPL, design of the associated microphone is not discussed as a commercial ultrasonic microphone is used to characterize the MEMS actuator. A single MEMS ultrasonic actuator may be considered as a point acoustic source. As a point source, the sound pressure ( Using the acoustic energy loss described by Eqs. When a pressure is applied on the diaphragm, the diaphragm deforms. However, the deflection of diaphragm at each location is different. We use the average deflection to estimate the dynamics of diaphragm under excitation, which could be expressed by The electrostatic force generated by applying voltage between two parallel plates is When the diaphragm moves, it squeezes the air inside the cavity formed by the two electrodes of the actuator and the counter effect is that the air impedes the movement of the diaphragm, which could be modeled as a pressure in the opposite direction to the excitation. Introducing perforations on the diaphragm creates free paths for air and reduces the squeeze film damping. As a result, the pressure ( Following from Eqs.  Design parameters of the fabricated MEMS actuators are listed in  The VCO is made up of a chain of inverters connected in series; an odd number of inverters are used, and the output is fed back into the input such that neither a high nor a low output is stable. The instability of the output coupled with the delay through each stage causes sustained oscillations which have output swing and frequency dependent on the supply voltage. Due to the measurement, the VCO is used for driving circuitry, and it allows the signal generation to transistor based circuit. The VCO in Each inverter in the ring is coupled to ground through an additional current starving transistor. A current source or even a DC voltage bias at the drain of the current mirror establishes a current through each of the current starving transistors. As the current through the inverters is restricted, the delay for each stage increases, thus reducing the frequency and allowing for frequency control. Additional frequency control can be achieved via varying the power supplied to the inverters by varying the voltage supplied to the VCO ( The driver was powered by The MEMS actuator is fabricated on a flexible PEN substrate. The bottom electrode sits on the substrate while the top electrode is embedded in a suspended diaphragm. When electrostatic excitation is applied between the two electrodes, the diaphragm vibrates and generates acoustic pressure at ultrasonic frequency. Air holes are designed to form air paths, which reduce the air squeeze-film damping effect to achieve higher SPL for the actuator. Parylene is chosen as the diaphragm material because it is flexible and non-brittle. It is compatible with CMOS The fabrication process flow of the MEMS ultrasonic actuator is illustrated in The fabricated device was mounted in a dual inline package (Spectrum Semiconductor Materials, Inc., HYB02415) with driving circuitry as shown in We measured SPL from two actuators (6-mm diameter silicon-based and 3-mm diameter PEN-based actuators) as a function of distance and frequency. The acoustic wave was measured by a commercially-available ultrasonic sensor (Avisoft-Bioacoustics CM16/CMPA). Both actuators were driven by The form of the conversion is After several calibrations, the empirical conversion between SPL and dBm is: At 1 The frequency response of PEN-based actuator was characterized at 1 According to Eqs. We characterized two actuators as a function of angle to the ultrasonic microphone; again, the silicon-based actuator has 6 The silicon-based actuator has larger lobes than PEN-based one and allowed detection of acoustic signals at ±90°. The result shows that both types are very sensitive to the angle and the directivity is more sensitive at short distance. For the hybrid system, MEMS actuators are interfaced with ASU FDC-IC driving circuitry instead of a signal generator. The driver has output The hybrid system using the silicon-based actuator and ultrasonic microphone were mounted on a gauged rail to characterize the output SPL along the distance between the actuator and microphone. Using a conversion formula between power and SPL, a plot of the distance vs. output SPL is generated as shown in An ultrasonic actuator on a flexible substrate has been successfully implemented using MEMS technology. The hybrid system with PEN-based ultrasonic actuator emits ultrasonic acoustic waves effectively up to 3 The authors thank CSSER (Center for Solid-State Electronics Research) staff at Arizona State University. This work was supported by Army Research Laboratory under Cooperative Agreement W911NG-04-2-0005.