In this study the functionalized ionic liquid betainium bis(trifluoromethylsulfonyl)imide (HbetTf2N) has been applied directly on leaching bauxite residue, for achieving selective dissolution of rare earth elements (REE) against iron. Several factors have been examined such as leaching temperature, retention time, pulp density and water addition into the ionic liquid. It was found that moderate water addition, elevated temperatures and increased retention time provide up to 70–85% REE extraction yields with respective Fe extraction yield <3%. Sc recovery showed a different leaching behavior from the rest of the REE with its extraction yield not exceeding 45%. Furthermore, no dissolution occurs for Ti and Si whereas 30% maximum extraction of Al was obtained, followed by almost total dissolution of Ca and Na content. This work shows that most REE and a fraction of Sc are associated with Calcium- and Aluminium-bearing phases in the bauxite residue, while the majority of Sc is associated probably with the remaining Fe and Ti-bearing phases. The metals dissolved into hydrophobic ionic liquid can be extracted with an acidic medium while the IL leaching agent is regenerated and after separation can be reused to a new portion of bauxite residue. Enabling consecutive scrubbing-stripping on the ionic liquid pregnant solution an enhanced acidic Sc solution with reduced level of impurities is obtained.Bauxite residue (BR), also known as red mud, is the major solid waste generated in the process of alumina extraction from bauxite ores. It is estimated that 1 to 2 To achieve selectivity and high metal loading upon leaching, a new treatment is proposed by leaching BR with new versatile solvents called ionic liquids (IL's). IL's are solvents consisting solely of ions. Several IL's have been studied as alternatives in metallurgical processes, providing great potential in mineral processing ( In this study the objective is to apply HbetTf2N for achieving selective dissolution of REE against iron which is the most abundant element in BR. REE and base metals recoveries at several conditions are studied and a conceptual flowsheet of BR treatment with this innovative ionic liquid is proposed. Regeneration of the IL with an acidic medium producing an enhanced REE solution for further purification is also addressed through stripping studies as well as further processing of the leaching residue as an iron source. Betainium bis(trifluoromethylsulfonyl)imide was supplied by Iolitec with > HbetTf2N molecular structure can be seen in Chemical analysis of BR sample is shown in The total concentration of rare earth elements (as oxides) in red mud found to be 0.14 Scandium oxide found to be 0.02 HbetTf2N is a weak Brønsted acidic ionic liquid due to the carboxyl group attached to its cation. The cation offers after its dissociation in aqueous solution the necessary acidity for the metals' dissolution as well as the ligands (the zwitterionic deprotonated betaine, Me3N On the contrary, from a chemical point of view, the Tf2N Dissolution of a REE with HbetTf2N ( Stripping the metal loaded IL phase with an aqueous acidic solution i.e. HCl (ambient temperature): The dissolution process is performed in the presence of an aqueous HbetTf2N solution and therefore is carried out at temperatures higher than 55 Leaching experiments were conducted at 90 The addition of water into IL plays a crucial role in the dissolution of bauxite residue with HbetTf2N. As the water/IL ratio increases, the acidity of the leaching solution as well as the pulp pH increases ( The temperature effect studied in the range from 60 It can be concluded that as temperature rises to 180 Experiments with different % w/v pulp densities ranging from 2.5% up to 20% were conducted at 90 As pulp density reduces there is an increase in the REE extraction. In addition, it is noteworthy that relative high extraction yields of REE (> Kinetic experiments conducted at 40% v/v water/IL ratio for 4, 24 and 48 Additionally experiments of 4–24 From leaching experiments at atmospheric conditions it was found that at low pulp densities and increasing retention time of about 48 The solid residue obtained after leaching at conditions of 150 It can be concluded that through the selective leaching process the residue generated is concentrated in iron and depleted from sodium and calcium, thus making it more suitable for use as iron ore substitute in blast furnace or iron and alumina source in cement kilns ( XRD comparisons of the residues generated after leaching with HbetTf2N at 90 Peaks attributed to hematite and diaspore remain intact of the leaching process. Calcium phases like katoite, cancrinite and calcite dissolve almost completely already from 90 Stripping process can be performed with any acidic solution, therefore this process can be easily adapted to any technology that is currently available for REE purification. The metal concentration of the pregnant ionic liquid solution (PLS), obtained after leaching bauxite residue can be seen in During stripping with different HCl concentration almost all metals are stripped similarly in one step whereas Fe seems to be more efficiently extracted at lower acid concentration ( Despite the high IL losses during stripping, it was found that stripping at lower volume ratios can reduce IL losses below 5% keeping at the same time appreciable metal extraction yields. At acid/PLS volume ratio 1/8 As the acid/PLS volume ratio reduces to 1/10, Sc and Fe extraction reduce following similar trend that is different of the other REE and base metals present, signifying that there is higher affinity between HbetTf2N and Sc, Fe ions than the other REE and base metal ions. This affinity has been confirmed also in other studies ( The PLS obtained after bauxite residue leaching is highly concentrated in Ca, Na and Al ( The resulted IL solution after the PLS pretreatment for metal impurities removal (either water or H2SO4 scrubbing) is stripped in order to remove the remaining elements and regenerate the IL. Consecutive scrubbing-stripping steps of the PLS with different solutions can provide an acid solution concentrated in Sc and Fe by a factor of 8, which is twice the concentration factor of the other impurity metals (e.g. Al, Na and Ca). As an example, the metal concentrations in the final aqueous solution generated after scrubbing the PLS with H During scrubbing with small amount of H The following conceptual flowsheet ( Selective dissolution of REE against Fe is achieved by leaching bauxite residue with the ionic liquid HbetTf2N. Water addition into IL enhances the dissolution of REE whereas increased temperatures and increased retention time provide higher REE extraction up to 70–85%. Sc dissolution does not exceed 45%wt of initial amount whereas Fe dissolution remains below 3%. Increasing pulp density provides slightly lower extraction yields in autoclave conditions, whereas significant decrease is obtained at atmospheric leaching conditions. Also almost total dissolution of Ca and Na occurs and moderate Al dissolution up to 30% whereas Si and Ti dissolution is found to be negligible. It can be concluded that this IL provides a selective REE dissolution against Fe, Si, Ti whereas no selectivity occurs against Ca, Na and Al. Furthermore the dissolution behavior of the REE is different of that of Sc. Indications from mineralogical analysis of the produced leaching residue showed that the majority of the REE and a part of Sc can be associated with mineral phases generated during the Bayer process. The residue produced is enhanced in Fe, Al, Ti, and Si with main minerals of hematite and diaspore and can be further utilized for pig iron production or in cement industry. Metals dissolved into IL can be stripped with an acidic solution regenerating the IL for reuse on leaching a new batch of bauxite residue. This stripping step provides several benefits such as multiplying the metals concentration by low volume acid addition and also flexibility in the acid to be used. The whole treatment can be adjusted and cohere to any acidic technology that is currently available for metal extraction/purification. In order to minimize IL losses small volumes of stripping solution must be applied and the use of salting out agents like NaCl or Na “The research leading to these results has received funding from the