Mass transport algorithms using particle size distribution equations are common where molecular mass flux across a hydrodynamic layer is present. In this paper, we suggest a unique model and prove its effectiveness in modelling particle size distributions that vary dramatically in character and propose that the model may be useful for distributions of narrow and intermediate size ranges, more specifically, for ion exchange resin and fluidised bed catalyst, both of which are manufactured particulates. The model has a single fitting parameter and can be used in the frequency form for finite-element transport phenomena calculations.Debate over different types of particle size distribution models and their effective portrayal of frequency and accumulative particle size distributions (PSD) is topical. Transport phenomena involving ion exchange between a particulate phase and an encompassing continuous phase can be found in typical physicochemical processes such as comminution, leaching, fluidised catalytic conversion, flotation and those using ion exchange resins or natural adsorbents. In all cases, transfer occurs across the particles' hydrodynamic boundary that will be closely associated with the particles' external surface area. If this area is to be incorporated into a discrete element transport model and a moderate range PSD is present, it can only be determined from the frequency distribution form of a PSD function. Manufactured particles tend to be of narrow to intermediate size range and tend to lack extended tails at the peripheries of the distribution. However, their involvement in mass transport systems dictates a comprehensive measurement of their PSD. Traditionally, PSDs are exhibited in the accumulative form, which is a far more exacting manner of presentation than that of a frequency histogram. If a frequency function is discerned from a histogram of the raw data, it will have an inherent element of averaging within the range of any particular class size interval. Experience shows that the frequency distribution form of presentation can be clumsy and almost always requires normalisation especially if it is based on uneven class intervals from which a particle frequency against particle size function is required. Transport phenomena, between a continuous fluid phase and a discontinuous solid phase, can be severely affected by shifts in the mode of the frequency, of the PSD, as rates of transport tend to be a strong function of particle Reynolds number. This is especially true where the Reynolds numbers are low, which is indicative of a surface-controlled mechanism of transfer, as is the case with most particulate systems under normal gravity. Often, use of an average particle size for the generalisation of transport phenomena calculations may not be sufficiently accurate if the PSD has a characteristic skewness that may alter, rendering any generalised model inaccurate. The classic manner of overcoming this difficulty is to use a calculation-intensive piecewise algorithm, such as a spline, piecewise polynomial or nodal network, so as to develop a continuous functional relationship describing the particle frequency distribution A versatile, parameterised, PSD equation should be able to accommodate shifts in either mode or mean within the size range if fitted to PSD data in the accumulative form. In addition, it should be usable in the frequency distribution form for transport phenomena calculations. Particulate solids that are the result of a manufacturing process, e.g., ion exchange resin, which normally has a distribution within the 300- and 1200-μm boundaries, or fluidised bed catalyst with an equally narrow/intermediate range, traditionally have designated particle size ranges within which the mode or mean size can alter. This paper seeks to investigate the application of a suggested parameterised model to portray PSDs of these particulate solids and compare its performance to that of other popular PSD equations/models currently in use. If a particulate substance consists of particles of singular size and shape, the process of modelling transport phenomena becomes greatly simplified and the surface area normal to the direction of transport can be assumed to be a single specific value, dependent on particle population per unit volume. As this homogeneity is hardly ever present in reality, the simplest approach is to assume an average particle size. For batch or inline mixed-tank reactors, this approach may be sufficiently accurate, providing the characteristic PSD and shape do not alter significantly. However, if the system has very little longitudinal mix, which we define as being in the direction of continuous phase flow, making it more akin to a plug flow reactor, only a minor shift in mode of the frequency size distribution is likely to have an effect on transport rates. Such a set-up is common where the reactor constitutes a fluidised bed in which stratification of particle sizes may be present The model should be able to accommodate a bulk particle frequency Eq. The model should be clearly defined in both the frequency, as well as the accumulative form, as model-fitting difficulties are less likely to be experienced in the accumulative form. However, its usefulness for transport phenomena will ultimately be as a frequency distribution. The frequency form of the function should always meet with normalisation no matter what the value of the adjusted parameter (Eq. For the purposes of insuring simplicity, there should only be a single characterising parameter (Eq. Traditionally, accumulative particle size distribution models have been combinations of functions, either in the form of a product or a function of a function. In this study, we break with tradition and propose the sum of two functions (Eq. The combination of two functions proposed in Eq.   Finally, adherence to Eq. A more functional form of the differential equation and the simplest that will meet with the listed criteria is Eq. In this form of Eq. To meet with criteria 5 and 6 normalisation is required and presupposes that the characteristic length of the smallest and largest particle present will be known or can be estimated. In this study, a simple linear normalisation was used (Eq. Eq. The performance of the proposed model/equation was compared to the performance of a selection of published equations, shown in A program was written in Turbo Pascal Version 7.0 that effectively fitted the model/equations to the raw data using the Hook Jeeves  Despite major differences in the nature of PSD of the ion exchange resin, the proposed model/equation effectively fitted the curves supplying suitably high With respect to the resin distribution, it is clear that the performance of the model presented in this paper is superior to most of the listed models. Only the Gompertz and Weibull equations are statistically significantly better, but have four fitting parameters. Although the Gaudin–Meloy, which is also a single parameter model/equation, appears to achieve a similar Two difficulties can be observed with the proposed model/equation. Firstly, the value of the second function becomes infinite at Secondly it is essential to estimate the highest and lowest value of the distribution when applying the proposed model/equation, as is the case with the Jaky, Gaudin–Meloy and Weibull model/equations. This is a common practice and does not detract from the proposed model. It is also notable that the technique used to acquire the relationship between The growth in popularity of mass and heat transfer studies involving particulate solids has necessitated the development of a simple and versatile, equation-based empirical model that efficiently models a narrow/intermediate PSD as accurately as possible. An advantage of using a single equation is its potential for algebraic incorporation into a discrete transport model. Arguably, the researcher could incorporate the model/equation into his algorithm and, hence, improve on any particles size averaging approach. A further advantage of our simple two-term model/equation is in the ease with which it can be integrated/differentiated. Consider that the calculation of total flux through particle surfaces in a particulate mass could be calculated by integrating the product of the frequency PSD function and the flux equation Eq. is the PSD function is the flux function for each particle size characteristic length of particle (L) characteristic length of largest particle in range (L) characteristic length of smallest particle in range (L) characteristic length of the characteristic length of the mass transport flux (M L single fitting parameter for proposed model (dimensionless) proposed model constants for manipulation (dimensionless) number of data points (dimensionless) number of parameters (dimensionless) heat transport flux (M L normalised characteristic length of particle 0 sum of squared error (dimensionless) constant numbers observed data points predicted data points accumulative function of particle size range (dimensionless)