Low impact angle erosion resistance is a critical requirement of materials used in pumps, piping, valves, nozzles, cyclones and other components which transport and process most mineral slurries.
                  The Coriolis method offers a suitable technique for assessing behavior under such scouring attack conditions. It is being used increasingly in support of the mining/mineral processing industry, to compare and discriminate between candidate materials and also assist in the development of new products and protection systems. The specific method used in the current study involves high velocity erosion with aqueous slurry containing 10wt.% of AFS 50-70 silica test sand. This compares reasonably with the main, extremely abrasive solids constituent encountered in mining and processing oil sands deposits in northern Alberta, Canada. These are becoming a rapidly growing and critically important source of oil in North America.
                  Abrasion resistant chrome white iron castings typically covered by the ASTM A532 standard, are used widely in slurry pump components particularly in oil sand operations. However, the development of proprietary cast hypereutectic chromium white irons with microstructures containing primary M7C3-type carbides, is providing the capability to significantly improve the wear performance of such parts. In certain applications where corrosion contributes significantly to overall attack, lower carbon and higher chromium-bearing variants are employed.
                  A comparison of the Coriolis erosion behavior of a wide range of commercially available cast wear and corrosion resistant and high toughness alloys used in pump manufacture, has confirmed anticipated performance ranking and the superiority of the latest generation of hypereutectic chrome white irons. The ameliorative influence on scouring erosion behavior of high carbon content, hardness and carbide volume fraction and particularly of fine carbide size has been demonstrated. A correlation is drawn between test data and service performance.A wide range of cast ferrous alloys is used extensively in slurry pumps to withstand the diverse conditions in which they are expected to operate. In addition to an almost universal requirement for high erosion resistance to mitigate mechanical attack, corrosion resistance and high toughness properties are necessary for applications involving aggressive chemical conditions or where large solids have to be pumped, for example, in dredging. This study focuses on the use of the Coriolis method The work is part of a collaborative research program between NRCC, the Canadian mining industry and the supply/manufacturing sector, to help reduce high wear costs in the industry A particular focus for this research is the oil sands operations in northern Alberta, which are growing rapidly in size and global significance. Equipment suffer extremely high wear of all types as exemplified in In the case of pump impellers, various white irons covered by the ASTM A532 specification and in particular the well-established Class 111 Type A alloy typified by Warman’s A05 material, have been used traditionally for transporting very erosive slurries. As shown in the FeCrC ternary alloy system diagram ( Lower carbon high Cr alloys with increased corrosion resistance and decreased wear resistance, have structures containing ferrite, austenite and carbides. ASTM A532 Class 1 irons (NiHards 1-4) are also used in erosive slurry service, but this study concentrates on chrome white irons and particularly on the influence of composition and microstructure, specifically carbide size and volume, on scouring erosion attack. The designation, description and some general composition data for the Warman steels and irons evaluated are contained in The compositions of the chrome white irons included in this work are depicted in the austenite liquidus surface diagram ( Test coupons were cut with a water-cooled saw, from sand-cast standard blocks or castings of comparable size, with approximate dimensions of Heat treatment of chrome white irons throughout this work, consisted of holding the ingots for 4–6 To make a direct comparison with production castings, an additional sample of A05 was sectioned from the sidewall of a worn impeller ( The influence of rapid solidification and cooling on the Coriolis erosion resistance of hypereutectic Cr white irons was also investigated. To achieve this aim, small ingots of alloys A61 and A218 (as-cast version of A217) were produced in an arc melting furnace under a partial pressure of argon and then chill cast into a water-cooled copper hearth. Round ingots nominally 35 This technique simulates the motion of fine particle slurries and their low angle interaction with surfaces of material handling equipment like pumps, nozzles, centrifuges, cyclones and valves. A pre-mixed slurry is fed into a diametrically grooved rotating rotor and expelled radially along the grooves by centrifugal force. Entrained solids come into contact and are pressed against the exposed specimen surfaces by the Coriolis force thereby incurring wear. Schematics of the rotor, a worn specimen and the forces acting on an erosive particle are presented in The procedure provides a rapid assessment of material performance under low impact angle, erosion conditions. Previous work The erosion resistance of the test material can be estimated by calculating the specific energies (energy required to remove unit volume of material) from the wear scar cross-sectional areas along the direction of the slurry flow However, refinement of the apparatus and test methodology has allowed more accurate direct measurement of the total volume of the wear scar. This provides another means of evaluating erosion resistance in terms of the more conventional erosion rate (volume removed per unit mass of abrasive) and will be the method used in the current work. Test specimens are 29 Test sand (2.2 An AISI 1020 steel standard was also included for comparison and to obtain comparative relative erosion rate data. Measurements on wear scars are carried out with a non-contacting optical 3D surface imaging system. The results are presented as relative erosion resistance (RER) comparisons. These are ratios of the erosion rate of AISI 1020 steel standard divided by the erosion rate of the test material. The RER ratio for each material is presented along with its average test surface hardness, in Predictably the tough NiCrMo steel (A25) and the corrosion resistant stainless steels (C26 and C55) exhibited erosion resistance that was only slightly superior to the AISI 1020 mild steel standard. The erosion resistance of the other alloys increased generally with carbon content although there was one anomalous result for A05 (2) iron which was much more resistant than expected. In contrast, Hyperchrome A12 and A61 alloys were somewhat less resistant than anticipated. The latest generation Hyperchrome A217 iron displayed the lowest Coriolis erosion test volume loss and the highest hardness. The Coriolis erosion resistance of chill cast surfaces (chill) and those at a distance 5 Similar behavior was observed in both cases with chill surfaces exhibiting some variability but with mean RER values that were 3–4× greater than those for the slower cooled “top” surface of the small castings. Microstructural details for the higher C chrome white irons that were the focal point of the work, are given in Varying small amounts of microporosity observed in all microstructures, is likely to have had some deleterious effect on erosion test performance. The carbide volume fractions (CVF) of the hypo- and hypereutectic alloys ranged from a low of 18–22% for A05 and A07 irons, to a maximum of 44% for the A217 material. Microstructural features are described in Acidic ferric chloride and Glyceregia were again used selectively as etchants. The Coriolis erosion performance of the diverse cast pump alloys generally followed the anticipated ranking with one notable exception. An hypoeutectic 27% Cr A05 (2) alloy, performed far better than expected. It was even superior to A61 a heat-treated hypereutectic alloy with a higher CVF and hardness. However, results for the A05 (1) sample of the same alloy grade and hardness, that had been cut from a worn impeller casting (and also for a section of an ASTM A532 111A cyclone casting from another source) were more in line with expectations and service experience. One favored explanation for this behavior was revealed by metallographic comparison ( Results for the latest generation A217 hypereutectic alloy confirmed the expected benefits on scouring erosion resistance, of a high (44%) CVF and a fine primary carbide form ( Metallographic evidence has also provided plausible explanations for other somewhat anomalous erosion behavior that had been observed. Particularly deleterious influences on Coriolis test performance, typified by the results for the A12 ( The benefits of heat treatment for converting austenite to secondary carbides and martensite were masked in the as-cast A12 and heat-treated A61 materials ( Fast cooling and solidification had a very pronounced effect on carbide structure and erosion resistance. Hardness was unaffected. The extensive distributions of very fine carbides nucleated at the chill surface, increased the RER factor by as much as 4.5 times compared to material located only 5 This fast solidification rate had also resulted in the formation of more rounded primary carbides that were dissimilar to the blocky and elongated hexagonal form normally observed. This characteristic structure reappeared within a short distance from the chill surface as shown in The benefits accruing from a nominally higher carbon content (for A218; The development of proprietary casting techniques has enabled significant advantage to be taken of the increased wear resistance of hypereutectic chrome white irons. It has resulted in considerable gains in service life of erosive slurry pump parts, as shown in These data were obtained in various trials with different process conditions and pump designs and sizes. With the exception of the anomalous behavior of one A05 alloy and to a lesser extent, the A12 material that had been influenced by carbide spalling, Coriolis erosion test performance generally correlated with service trial experience. The study showed clearly how the scouring erosion performance of chrome white iron is related to the fineness of the microstructure. It is suggested that any differences observed between the relative performances of the alloys in Coriolis testing and in service, could probably be ascribed to this effect and also to variations in operating conditions across the wide range of applications reported.  Data from Coriolis erosion testing using AFS 50-70 silica sand, on a range of cast slurry pump materials generally displayed expected behavior. With one exception, erosion resistance increased with hardness, with higher nominal carbon content and CVF and with decreasing carbide size. Hypereutectic chrome white irons exhibited high Coriolis erosion resistance. This has been reflected in increased lives in service trials, particularly for alloys with refined carbide structures. Coarse primary carbides in some hypereutectic chrome white irons, had a spalling propensity. This is believed to have impaired their erosion test performances. Unexpectedly high erosion resistance in an hypoeutectic A05 material was related to a very fine, transformed hypereutectic structure. Chill casting of hypereutectic chrome white irons produced structures with a high concentration of very fine primary carbides. These displayed exceptionally high Coriolis erosion resistance. The test is considered to be a suitable method for evaluating the scouring erosion resistance of metallic, ceramic and cermet materials for various slurry transport components. The authors would like to record their appreciation to the management of both Warman International Ltd. (Weir Slurry Group) and NRC Canada, for permission to publish this paper. In addition, the assistance of their colleagues and the support of industrial members of the NRC Mining Wear Materials Research Program are gratefully recognized.