Flue dusts generated in Chilean copper smelters are partly recycled to smelting units, such as flash smelters and Teniente Converters, and partly processed separately by hydrometallurgical methods, in order to recover copper and stabilize arsenic in the waste. Flue dust generation is increasing due to increasing copper production and arsenic content in the copper concentrates, thus creating environmental problems. Additionally, the flue dusts contain associated metals, such as zinc and lead, which can be potentially recovered. Tests on concentrate smelting and matte converting, with various additions of flue dust, allowed the determination of the distribution coefficients of arsenic, zinc and lead among the products, and, as a result of flue dust addition, oxygen enrichment and temperature. The distribution coefficients permit determination of impurities in blister copper, which affect the quality of cathodic copper produced.The removal of impurities is critical in copper metallurgy for the production of high quality copper, but it is also of great importance from an environmental aspect. Due to the constant increase in impurities in copper ore over the years, an even more critical situation can be reasonably expected in the future. It is essential to keep impurities below the levels accepted by national and international standards for the copper industry, and to decrease the total emission of harmful components. Currently, the majority of smelters around the world face this problem. Impurity removal in copper smelting process is carried out through oxidation, followed by slagging and volatilization during smelting, conversion and refining ( Copper processes generate gaseous emissions that contain SO The flue dust generated by the Chilean copper smelters is partly recycled to the smelting units, such as the Flash smelter and the Teniente Converter, and partly processed separately by hydrometallurgical methods, in order to recover copper and stabilize the impurities ( Industrial matte, slag, copper concentrates and flue dust from a Chilean smelter were used as the test materials. Simulated tests of dust addition were conducted in an electric furnace, as shown in Two types of experiments were conducted, in order to simulate the smelting and converting processes, respectively. In the smelting test, 13 For the converting experiments, a synthetic fayalite was used in order to assess the influence of the slag on the impurities with dust addition (slag forming stage). A total mass of 37 When the gas injection for both processes was finished, the sample was kept at the same temperature for 30 The dust addition ratio represents the amount of dust charged to the process, which is defined by the following equation: The distributions of As, Pb and Zn were evaluated by alternating the amount of dust added to the smelting process, which used 21 The results are shown in The results show that the concentrations of Zn and Pb increase strongly in the matte and the amounts of 〈%Pb〉 and 〈%Zn〉 slightly decrease with higher dust addition ratio. When the volatilization of Pb and Zn decreases, the elimination of these impurities by slagging is higher, which is attributed to the fact that Pb and Zn are originally in the form of oxides in the dust (see The matte grade is one of the most important operation parameters in the copper smelting process. The distribution of As, Pb and Zn among the phases was examined by varying the matte grades, at 1523   During the slag forming stage in the copper converting process, blister, white metal and slag phases can coexist in the reactor. White metal is a fine grade of copper sulfide (70–78% The distribution of As, Pb and Zn among the phases was examined by varying the dust addition ratio, at 1473 The results show that As was mainly distributed into the blister and gas phases, due to the high affinity of As with metallic copper. Previous work ( At the beginning of the copper making stage, some of the blister, white metal and gas phases are in contact, while at the end of the converting stage, blister and gas phases coexist. The distributions of As, Pb and Zn among the phases were examined using a system with two and three phases during the copper making stage, varying the dust addition ratio. The results presented in In the refining stage ( The decrease of Zn was limited during copper blowing. This suggests that Zn reacts principally during the slag making stage. The concentration of Pb in the blister increased slightly during the first and second stages of converting, with a slight decrease at the end of the copper blowing. In the case of As, the presence of multiple phases suppressed its volatilization from the blister, suggesting that the contact between gas and blister is absolutely important for the elimination of As by volatilization. The results of smelting and converting processes with dust addition, allowed the determination of the distribution coefficients of arsenic, zinc and lead. Impurities such as Pb and Zn are mainly eliminated through the slag phase by increasing the matte grade. However, As remains in the copper rich phase, because of its high affinity with copper.  During the converting process ( As the results demonstrate, during the smelting process most impurities were at least partly transferred to the slag or the dust. Base metals with a high enthalpy of oxide formation, such as Zn and Pb, have to be transferred to the slag in several steps. During the converting process, the elements are either volatilized or transferred to the slag by selective oxidation. After the oxidation of Zn, the oxygen content increased. This allowed the oxidation of Pb, as the oxidation rate of Pb is lower than that of Zn. The evidence indicates that the activity coefficient of PbO ( The present results show that the addition of recycling materials (slag, scrap, dust, reverts, etc.) to the process is possible, and the increase of the content of impurities in the matte and the blister copper is not linear with the initial charge. This means that some of the impurities are transferred to the slag phase, where it stabilizes. At the same time, the amount of material recycled depends on the quality of the products in every stage, a quality that is essential in order to reach the required levels for electro-refining. The present results show that the addition of recycling materials (slag, scrap, dust, reverts, etc.) to the process is possible, and the increase in the content of impurities in the matte and the blister copper is not linear with respect to the initial charge. Materials with high arsenic content may be recycled to the smelting process, where the concentration of Pb and Zn limit the amount of material recycled in the smelting process. However, metallurgical streams with zinc, lead and low concentrations of arsenic can be recycled to the converting stage. The concentration of As in the blister copper defines the level of recirculation of streams with high concentration of impurities, during the converting and refining stages.