The recovery of gold from iodine–iodide solutions using strong base anion exchange resin has been investigated. The gold iodide complex can be effectively loaded on the resin provided the resin is not heavily loaded with triiodide. The loading of triiodide is found to be extremely strong due to the dissociation of the loaded triiodide to iodide and iodine, the latter being deposited on the resin by physiosorption thereby fouling the surface. This may be potentially detrimental to the gold recovery process but can be overcome by pre-reduction to remove most of the triiodide before loading. To strip the iodine from the resin it requires a reductive elution process. A sodium chloride based eluant solution containing sulfite is found to be highly effective for the elution of both gold and iodine.The use of a solution containing iodine–iodide as a lixiviant for gold was initially reported in various patents for recovering gold from scrap materials ( The rate of gold dissolution in iodine–iodide solutions was found to be unaffected by pH over a wide range of pH; 2–7 ( A complete in situ leaching process requires an effective method to recover the leached gold from pregnant solutions. Despite considerable research effort in the leaching, less work has been done for the recovery of gold from iodine–iodide solutions. The chloride form of Purolite A500/2788, a strong base anion exchange resin, was used throughout this work. All solutions were prepared with analytical grade chemicals and de-ionised water. Solutions containing iodide and iodine were prepared from potassium iodide salt and sublimed iodine. A gold stock solution was prepared by dissolving 1 Batch loading and elution experiments were conducted in 250 Samples of gold in iodide solutions were stabilised by addition of sodium cyanide and then analysed by inductively coupled plasma optical emission spectrometry (ICP-OES). Iodide was determined using high performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) with a UV detector. The HPLC setup and general procedures have been described earlier ( However, it was found that triiodide interfered with the UV detection of iodide. It was not possible to separate iodide and triiodide because the two species have exactly the same UV spectrum and chromatogram as shown in The thiosulfate was added dropwise until the yellow colour of triiodide just disappeared to minimise excess addition and the treated sample after dilution was immediately analysed by HPLC for total iodine, defined as [I The effect of some anions involved in this work on the HPLC analysis was investigated. Thiosulfate showed strong UV absorption at 226 The adsorption of iodide alone was investigated to provide some background information on the behaviour of the loading solution. Considering the replacement of chloride ion from the resin, the ion exchange reaction can be expressed as: By plotting [I Extremely strong adsorption of triiodide on the resin was observed, which had a great impact on the adsorption of iodide. An interesting feature in The iodine (I To further investigate the decomposition of I The experiments for the adsorption of gold were always performed in the presence of free I The loading curves for iodide and gold at different levels of I The gold loading, on the other hand, is very competitive even at reasonably high levels of I  While triiodide seems to be detrimental for the loading of gold, its adsorption on the resin may be utilised as an effective method for the ultimate recovery of iodine and iodide, which is important because of the high costs of these reagents. However, in the case of in situ operation in remote locations, the loaded resin may need to be transported offsite for elution. Therefore it will be more economical to load as much gold and as little iodine as possible on the resin to minimise the shipping cost. One possible way is to pre-reduce most of the I Column loading was investigated with a solution containing 5.35 Similar to The I Based on these considerations, the following solutions were designed for the elution experiments using sodium chloride as a base eluant for ion exchange: Eluant A: 2 Eluant B: 2 Eluant C: 2 In Eluant A, the addition of thiosulfate was to stabilise the eluted gold. The loaded resin generated from the column loading experiment (2.08 The elution was initially performed at 70 It was surprising that the stripped gold was stable in Eluant B in the presence of sulfite without thiosulfate. To confirm this, another experiment with Eluant B was conducted at 22 The resin was pre-loaded in a batch process and then packed into a column for the elution experiments with Eluant B. Two different levels of loading were used to investigate the elution efficiency and the effect of iodine on gold elution. In one experiment high levels of gold and triiodide loading, i.e. 20.2 In another experiment a more realistic level of loading was used, i.e. 1.13 The recovery of gold from iodine–iodide solutions using a strong base anion exchange resin has been studied in this work and the following conclusions can be drawn: Iodide loading on the resin is much weaker than the gold iodide complex and triiodide, but stronger than chloride. The loading of triiodide is extremely strong and significantly affects the loading of gold and iodide. The loaded triiodide is dissociated to iodine which deposits on the resin by physical adsorption, releasing iodide ions back into the solution. The iodine film on the surface can foul the resin, blocking the loading or elution of other species. The loading of gold is competitive and effective provided the triiodide level on the resin is kept to be much lower than saturation. To promote gold loading it may be necessary to pre-remove most of the triiodide from the solution. A reductive elution process is required to elute the iodine from the resin. A solution containing 2 The authors acknowledge the financial support provided by the