Gold is commonly liberated from sulfide minerals via oxidative destruction techniques. To circumvent the formation of sulfuric acid and to reduce the amount of energy required for these processes two alternative anaerobic processes based on sulfate reducing bacteria are investigated for arsenopyrite in this study. The first alternative, “bio-reduction” is expected to alter the structure of arsenopyrite via reduction of the mineral-sulfur to hydrogen sulfide, yielding a sulfur depleted residue that probably contains the gold. The second alternative “anaerobic oxidation” focuses on the mineral-arsenic which under anaerobic conditions can be oxidized to arsenite and subsequently precipitates as orpiment, which may contain the gold.
                  Both alternatives were investigated with gas lift loop reactor experiments performed at pH 5 and 35°C. These experiments showed that sulfate reducers were able to reduce sulfate from the reactor fluid, but that they were not able to use arsenopyrite as an electron acceptor (bio-reduction) or donor (anaerobic oxidation) under the selected conditions. As a result the gold leachability of the ore concentrate was not improved. To make the mineral more accessible for the leach solution the solubilization of lattice constituents from arsenopyrite that can be biologically reduced/anaerobically oxidized, should be stimulated. In addition, the concentration of arsenite needs to be limited to preserve the activity of sulfate reducing bacteria.Gold is a precious metal commonly associated with sulfide minerals like arsenian pyrite (FeAs Costs of roasting arsenopyrite (AsPy) are increased by the As In this paper two alternative processes, bio-reduction of mineral-sulfur and anaerobic oxidation of mineral-arsenic are theoretically and experimentally investigated for the treatment of refractory ores containing AsPy. These alternatives may have a lower energy and chemicals demand and produce lower volumes of valueless waste products than with the oxidative processes. Both bio-reduction and anaerobic oxidation are processes based on sulfate (sulfur) reducing bacteria. Process conditions selected, pH 5 and 35 Bio-reduction is expected to alter the mineral via reduction of the AsPy–sulfur, which may act as an electron acceptor when not present in its most reduced (S In contrast to bio-reduction, anaerobic oxidation will result in complete dissolution of the mineral via oxidation of the arsenic. The proposed theory is that sulfate reducing bacteria might be able to use arsenic, next to hydrogen, as electron donor since arsenic is present as As The standard reaction Gibbs free energy ( The environmental impact of the anaerobic processes is reduced, since no acidic waste streams are produced. Energy is also saved in the anaerobic processes by the lower gas demands needed to complete the reactions compared to bio-oxidation. Furthermore, the generated H In order to investigate the amount of gold that can be liberated from AsPy via bio-reduction or anaerobic oxidation, gas lift loop reactor experiments were performed. A refractory concentrate was obtained from Red Lake District, NW. Ontario (Goldcorp). Ore from this location is cyanide leached in the mill and then floated into a totally refractory (to cyanide leaching) concentrate. The dried concentrate was additionally homogenized using a Retsch SM2000 cutting mill. Particle size distribution was analyzed, in triple, by a Beckman Coulter laser LS 230 and found to have a P80 of 34 For the bio-reduction experiment (Eq. (1)) a defined medium as described by Sludges from different sources proven to contain bacteria that were able to reduce sulfate (sulfur) were used. One sample, sand-filter backwash water (BWW), was taken from the wastewater treatment plant of a Dutch oil refinery. Other sludges were obtained from a lab-scale sulfate reducing reactor operated at pH 5 ( Gas lift loop reactor experiments were performed in the same reactor setup as described by Both bio-reduction and anaerobic oxidation were operated at pH 5 and a temperature of 35 Samples of solutions were filtered over a 0.2 To make bio-reduction of AsPy proceed to the product side, the H In spite of the fact that prior to addition to the reactor, the concentrate was washed with acid and thoroughly rinsed with demineralized water, sulfate was present and increased from 4.2 to 5.4 To check if sulfate reducing bacteria were still active, 5 As the redox potential of the solution was around −180 At the experimental pH and the amount of sulfide produced over time, one could expect all aqueous arsenic to be removed as orpiment ( In order to let anaerobic oxidation of AsPy proceed, the gas phase was maintained at 95%H The concentration of sulfate in the reactor liquid and influent is 15 In the first week, a drop in the redox potential to −200 At pH 5 and a redox potential of −270 SEM-EDX analysis of the final coating showed that the yellow precipitate, with a nodule like shape, consisted of amorphous orpiment. The black precipitate was found to be a mixture of two different iron containing minerals: crystalline baricite ((Mg, Results of CIL (Carbon In Leach) gold extraction tests are summarized in Though the gold is more concentrated in the residues, its gold recovery is not improved, since ∼95% of the gold is still not leachable. Red Lake concentrate retains its refractory character despite a bio-reduction or anaerobic oxidation treatment. A calculation for the anaerobic oxidation experiment was done to investigate if the initiated reactions were a result of incomplete removal by the 2  A similar balance as in Thermodynamic calculations showed ( The lack of liberation of AsPy. The sulfur and arsenic in AsPy are not readily bio-available. The lack of removal of toxic dissolved arsenic as orpiment. Liberation refers to the surfaces of AsPy grains that are available to take part in a bio-reduction or anaerobic oxidation reaction. As shown by microprobe analysis, performed on polished slide sections of Red Lake concentrate, most of the AsPy occurs as free grains but a part is also enclosed by other minerals. Only the surfaces of the free AsPy grains are in principle accessible for bacteria. In case the AsPy is enclosed by quartz or pyrite this part will not become accessible during bio-reduction or anaerobic oxidation of this concentrate. Quartz is inert and bio-reduction of pyrite does not occur under the chosen conditions as shown in previous research ( Another factor that may influence the process is the phase in which the energy source is provided to the bacteria. Ideally, to be bio-available an element should be within the physical proximity of the bacteria and be dissolved in the aqueous phase. Elements fixed in the crystal matrix of a mineral are thus generally considered to be unavailable. Since sulfur and arsenic are both fixed in the crystal lattice of AsPy, a reaction that induces dissolution of these elements should occur. In the reactor experiments, dissolution of arsenic and sulfur from the concentrate is observed, but calculations can ascribe this to the inefficient removal of oxidized species during the acid wash. In the bio-oxidation of AsPy, dissolution is indirectly induced by the combined attack of Fe As shown by the bio-reduction of AsPy, sulfate reducers were not able to maintain themselves during the period sulfate was absent. As the rate of gas recycling through a ZnCl Different from the bio-reduction of pyrite ( Under the chosen conditions, bio-reduction and anaerobic oxidation were found to be limited by the bio-availability of arsenic and sulfur. Bio-reduction was also inhibited by the presence of dissolved arsenic. Selection of conditions that promote dissolution of AsPy and that could maintain a low dissolved arsenic concentration are therefore still worth investigating. Changing the pH to more alkaline conditions could be interesting, since the redox potential of a solution decreases with pH. However, at higher pH values the solubility of orpiment increases ( The anaerobic processes, bio-reduction and anaerobic oxidation, investigated at pH 5 and 35 The WUR authors like to thank Barrick Gold Corporation for supporting this project through their funding. Furthermore, we would like to thank the companies that supplied their sludges for scientific research. Special thanks goes to Dr. Ton van Sandwijk who reviewed the thermodynamic part of this paper.