Utilising logging residues (termed brash in the UK) for energy production has become a focus for energy providers since the development of specialist baling machinery to improve the logistical and financial potential of this material. To explore a farm-scale operations scenario, brash from a mixed conifer, temperate zone forest was baled and chipped with commercial machinery to produce fuel-grade woodchip. Clear-fell logging procedures presented a range of brash configurations to facilitate baling machinery to produce compacted, tied, regular sized bales. Average hourly bale production and fresh weight tonnage output was 28 ± 2 bales/h and 12.4 t/h respectively. Extraction of bales and stacking along access road verges achieved an average 24 ± 2 bales/h. Woodchipping output averaged 11.8, 13.7 and 13.0 green t/h respectively for whole bale, log only and bale-log composite woodchip. Chipping production efficiency was affected by bale condition, handling and machinery performance but chiefly by site transport accessibility and logistical planning. The average total cost of in-farm delivered fuel quality woodchip product from brash bales was £25.22 (€29.67) per green tonne. Brash bale chips contained more than double the percentage of fines <6.3 mm compared to round log woodchips and also had significantly higher gross energy and nutrients content. Brash bale moisture content was observed to fluctuate widely and nutrients and energy content reduced during the 3-yr monitoring period. In conclusion, the combination of equipment and the confined production scenario was a viable process that provided fuel-grade woodchip at relatively low cost.The pressure on European governments to reduce dependence on the use of imported fossil fuels and to reduce emissions of greenhouse gases (GHG) has increased greatly in recent years. The European Directive ‘Energy Policy for Europe (2007)’ Forestry logging residues (LR) referred to as At Hillsborough, in Northern Ireland, the Agri-Food and Biosciences Institute [AFBI] have developed an Environmental and Renewable Energy Centre (EREC) on its 300 ha research farm. This generates both thermal and electrical output from biomass and other renewable resources, supplying space heating and hot water via a district heating loop to offices, laboratories and farm buildings. Two biomass fired boilers; The lack of homogeneity of chipped wood fuels, whether derived from round wood or brash, presents a range of important but not insurmountable problems for combustion equipment Fuel quality is affected by chip size, particle distribution, storage and drying In view of this background an experiment was conducted at AFBI Hillsborough to monitor, record, analyse and assess the feasibility of harvesting and utilisation of LR as brash bales and the production of woodchip from brash bales, by using a combination of farm machinery and heavy duty forestry equipment, to provide biomass energy in an on-farm energy unit. The clear-fell area (Global grid reference: 54.451691, −6.072543) contained mature mono-stands of 4.2 ha Sitka spruce ( Harvesting with a Valmet 901 single grip harvester, began during January 2007, continuing for 6 weeks, with log extraction to roadside by a Valmet 860 forwarder. The trials were conducted in Sitka spruce (Ss) and Lodgepole pine (Lp) stands, both species planted in 1978. The Ss was relatively uniform in growth (yield class 16) within stands, whereas a high proportion of Lp stems were windblown or malformed, therefore were unclassed and not merchantable. These stems were left in rows for baling with brash. Conventional and adapted harvesting techniques to leave brash ready for baling, were used in drifts (defined forest segments) working along racks (openings) where every eighth row had been thinned previously. The conventional method, similar to that described by Nurmi Drifts, variable in size as defined by forest edges, ditch transects or access roads, were measured and outputs were calculated on an hectare (ha) area basis. Brash used as a brash mat was driven over by both the harvester and baling machine and clean brash formed into windrows was aligned parallel with log rows ( Brash baling began immediately post-harvesting with a John Deere 1490D slash bundler, producing bales for each distinct tree species and also mixed specie material (composite bales). Working day length was determined by operator availability. This 182 horse power (HP) machine had a 10 m crane and could produce standard bales (76 cm ø × 3 m) or specified size bales compressing brash to ∼20% of original volume during processing. Nominal output was listed as 15 to 30 bales per h in unprepared sites and in prepared sites up to 40 bales per h. Bales were produced to the same dimensions, 3.0 m long × 0.6 m ø except where brash baled without Tops tended to become unstable at 3.0 m lengths and were therefore reduced to 2.5 m lengths. The brash bales (BB) were secured with 5/6 loops of polypropylene string On-board bale weighing and bale production recording equipment collated production data that was verified by manual observation and recording. Twenty-eight days after production and stacking, 5 randomly selected contaminated and uncontaminated bales of each species and composites ( Randomly selected fresh bales of each type were chipped through a manual-feed tractor powered chipper (Sasmo 115) with a 25 mm chip screen onto bare earth in piles to 1 m depth. Samples were taken immediately and oven dried for 24 h at 100 °C for MC determinations. The selected tree species bales were chipped for MC sampling again in April 2008 with the remainder chipped in April 2009 using a self-propelled 140 hp manually fed cone-head 15 inch capacity chipper (Dynamique 460). BB string loops were manually removed and collected, oven dried (80 °C × 12 h) weighed and recorded. Thereafter fresh chips produced during chipping exercises were grab sampled 5 × 1.0 kg per trailer load for MC analysis. During 2008/9 on three separate periods, each of two day duration, comminution of sitka and lodgepole pine whole BB (with string) and round log (RL) and also a final RL only day, was undertaken to produce biomass fuel grade woodchip. The machine used on each occasion was a 320 hp mobile chipper (Starchl Mk74-600) with a 2.5 m long flat bed chain conveyer feeding through a 74 cm × 62 cm intake aperture with automated but manually adjustable roller jaws, to a chipper head fitted with a mesh screen with 25 × 25 mm perforations. The unit was fitted with a driver operated 8 m reach crane capable of 180° rotation and fitted with a 600 mm × 300 mm grapple. Capable of processing whole bales in one pass, the machine had a nominal average output of 17 t/h (Personal Communication, Mr Malachy McCann, Ecowood Energy Ltd). All process times and actions (grappling, chipping, loading and stoppages) and observations were recorded manually using calibrated stopwatches and datasheets. Data were transferred to a spreadsheet interface for collation and preparation for statistical analysis. Chips were blown into pre-tared farm silage trailers (18 m Woodchip samples of all species of parent logwood and brash were dried for 48 h at 80 °C then sieved for woodchip particle size and % mass distribution. This was determined for all woodchip types in an extended range of laboratory sieve screens (Impact ISO3310-1:2000); Hand sorted – 100 mm to 50 mm and then using an oscillating shaker for sieves; 25 mm, 12.5 mm, 6.30 mm, 3.15 mm, 1.6 mm, 1.00 mm and solid pan. Bale string remnants were manually removed, dried for 24 h at 100 °C and weighed (dry weight (g)) individually per bale. Brash production costs were based on original Forest Service (NI) planting, thinning costs and land charges. Clearfell and extraction operations were tendered and contractors costs were in line with NI market rates. Baling and woodchipping costs were based on aggregated daily hire and transport charges. Tractor transports costs were based on standard local agricultural daily rates with driver/operator costs drawn from AFBI standard overhead staff cost tables (daily rates). Currency conversion was calculated on the average exchange rate (1 Euro = £0.85) calculated from the current rates pertaining on each day. All woodchip types milled down to 800 μ particle size underwent standard laboratory concentration analysis for N (g/kg Dumas method), P (Flow injection analysis) and K (Atomic emission spectroscopy) mg/kg. Gross energy (GE) content (MJ/kg) was determined by the bomb calorimetry method. Ash content (g/kg) was derived from the dry combustion method. Results were statistically analysed using analysis of variance (ANOVA). To test for linear relationships between Fwt and DM t/h with %DM, regression analyses were used. Analysis of parallelism was used to test for significance of moisture content on chipper productivity (t/h). Correlations were performed using Microsoft Excel Data Analysis Pack. Production of bales was completed over 14 days of different working hours duration (8–12 h/day). Output of bales manufactured to a standard size (3.0 m long × 0.6 m Ø) averaged 30.4 ± 2 BB/h in the Ss and 25.6 ± 2 in Lp sectors but across the whole site production averaged 28 ± 2 BB/h overall. Production rate varied slightly with small but no statistically significant difference ( During extraction to roadside, with exception of some 3.0 m bales from the non-tops treatment which lacked rigidity, BB integrity was very high, presenting no problems with forwarder collection and stacking rate of 24 ± 2 bales/h and no significant differences ( Randomly selected bales of each type were removed from stacks and weighed and re-stacked as a distinct group for bale mass change monitoring and moisture determination. Mean bale weight of individual sample bales 28 days after stacking was 390 ± 19.2 kg indicating a 9.4% decrease in bale mass from the initial 414 kg Fwt average recorded during bale production. Upon re-weighing 55 weeks later loss of mass was generally higher in the contaminated (Con) bales though weight differences compared with clean bales remained ( Deterioration in timber strength and bale integrity due to handling during previous sampling episodes prevented re-weighing of these selected bales during later trial work. Average moisture content of bale chip samples taken during chipping from the general stack fluctuated widely during this period from an initial 61% in 2007 to 55.47% by September 2008 but decreased by May 2009 to 28.96% though re-moistening was observed in later samples. Regression analysis of precipitation and bale MC during the monitoring period revealed only a moderate correlation ( Production of biomass fuel quality woodchip began on normal working days of different duration ( BB condition was observed to be generally very good and had little effect on handling and chipping efficiency of the machine but actual bale chipping time per bale minus grappling and loading, varied from 23 to 77 s/bale, influenced largely by the amount of stem wood present in the bales formed by the brash presentation methods ( Bales were craned to the chipper platform complete with string intact and no stoppages were observed or recorded. During manual chipping episodes individual BB multiple string loops (average 5 per bale) removed and collected were found to average 22.5 ± 5.1 g, (dry weight) equivalent to an average total 112.5 g string per BB and 0.27 kg/t BB. BB position was also noted as producing clear differences, with ground contact bales having consistently higher % MC and by autumn 2009 these bales showed visible evidence of decay. In February 2010 chipping of a remaining stack of bales, each ∼60% MC, was attempted. Upon grappling most bales disintegrated and only four bales survived intact to the chipper platform. Each bale was visibly decayed and the chipper delivery chute blocked repeatedly, requiring stops to unblock, resulting in a chipping time per bale of 33 min. After 2 h the task was abandoned and chipping of original RL (64.4 ± 5.8% DM) began, which over two days, achieved average Fwt output of 16.82 ± 1.77 t/h. The average BB production cost, including machinery and factored forest overheads, was £3.25 per bale (£7.98 (€ 9.50)/t). Chipping and haulage costs varied on each day, due mostly to logistical problems with vehicle access. Variations in costs per tonne for BB and woodchip are shown in Particle analysis revealed that RL, BB and composite (bale + log) chips all contained differing size fractions. RL chip had significantly higher content of particles >3.15 mm whereas the BB chips had the highest content of fine particles. The combined fractions of BB particles <6.30 mm was significantly ( Observable string fragments recovered from the BB woodchip samples were small and loosely curled with an average weight of 0.2 ± 0.17 g/kg (0.2 kg/t BB chip) indicating that 22% of original string had been reduced to non-visible sizes or blown off during chipping. There were significant differences between fresh BB and RL woodchip for most of the parameters analysed ( The brash baling machine was consistently efficient, producing well made, tightly compacted and very uniform bales throughout the operation. The BB average production rate of 28 ± 2 bales/h overall was higher than those reported in other studies. Johansson et al. (2006) Chipping of BB using manual and machine fed standard intake aperture (300 × 450 mm) chippers was totally unfeasible. BB had to be de-stringed whereupon bales fell apart resulting in an average manual feed chipping time of 6 min 14 s per bale. Production from the large capacity mobile chipper of whole bale and RL chip output (averaging 14.87 t/h and 15.06 t/h respectively) showed a strong correlation ( Particle size analysis revealed that BB fine particles content for all sizes <6.30 mm was very significantly higher (×2) than that of RL chip. Particle size distribution in woodchip is an important factor that can affect drying processes in woodchip piles, with airflow being reduced in woodpiles with high levels of small particles The loss in energy content (GE) of the stacked BB and RL over the 2- year period was less than those reported in other studies The brash baling machine proved very efficient, producing well formed regular size bales to the given specification and brash presentation method did not influence output significantly. Gross brash yield recovered varied across the site but previous studies indicate this is a common factor in clear-fell forestry. The bales and string maintained a high degree of integrity even after 2 yr of open-air storage, remaining strong enough for grappling and pulling from the stacks and placing onto the chipper bed. Practicality of brash recovery and utilisation was greatly enhanced by the availability of a mobile chipper capable of processing the bale from the stack. However, preparations for easy access and operating were seen to be essential for efficient chip production. The higher fine particle content of brash chip could affect fuel quality standards though the relative reduction in nutrient contents in long term stored BB indicates substantial leaching, but returned and uniformly spread ash from combustion could still be an important source of replenishment for clear-fell sites. The low cost of provision of fuel quality woodchip from brash bales in this experiment suggests financial feasibility for brash utilisation, in this type of short haulage scenario, especially using similar a combination of conventional forestry and low cost farm machinery. This study was supported by the