Objective
                  The less invasive surgical stabilisation (LISS) plate fixation method is an orthopaedic procedure for the fixation of distal femoral fractures. Early physiotherapy treatments of motion and mobilisation have been advocated following this procedure. This article critically appraises the evidence base assessing the early rehabilitation of patients following LISS fixation for distal femoral fractures.
               
                  Data sources
                  A review of EMBASE, Medline, CINAHL and AMED, and a hand search were undertaken.
               
                  Review methods
                  Two independent reviewers identified all eligible articles. Two reviewers extracted the data, which were verified by a third reviewer. All included articles were critically appraised by two independent reviewers using the Critical Appraisal Skills Programme tool.
               
                  Results
                  Seventeen case series assessing 508 patients with 535 fractures were reviewed. No clinical trials comparing physiotherapy programmes were identified. The review identified that following LISS fixation for distal femoral fractures, patients begin range-of-motion exercises immediately and are initially required to restrict weight-bearing following surgery. It remains unclear whether casts, braces or immobilisation aids are applied during the initial postoperative period.
               
                  Conclusion
                  The efficacy of different physiotherapy protocols following LISS fixation for distal femoral fractures remains unclear. Further well-designed randomised controlled trials are required to compare different postoperative physiotherapy rehabilitation programmes for patients following LISS fixation of distal femoral fractures in order to determine the optimal postoperative management for this complex patient group.Distal femoral fractures have been categorised as either high- or low-energy trauma The less invasive stabilisation system (LISS Synthes USA, Paoli, PA, USA) was developed in the late 1990s During the early rehabilitation phase, protective weight-bearing has traditionally been instructed to patients after well-fixated distal femoral fractures. Patients have also been permitted to perform early range of motion exercises, and has used secondary forms of fracture fixation such as casts or braces This systematic review will examine the evidence to answer the research question: what is the optimal postoperative physiotherapy rehabilitation programme for patients following LISS plate fixation for distal femoral fractures? Using the evidence, the authors aim to determine: the initial weight-bearing status that should be undertaken by patients following LISS plate fixation; whether these patients should be immobilised postoperatively using knee braces or casts; and when these patients should commence range-of-motion or strengthening exercises following surgery. All clinical trials investigating the clinical and/or radiological outcomes following LISS fixation of distal femoral fractures (AO/ASIF classification AO 32 and AO 33) were included. The review was non-specific for subjects’ age or gender, and included those with isolated injuries or polytrauma cases. Cases of periprosthetic and non-periprosthetic fractures, as well as pathological fractures, were accepted for review. Unpublished material, including university theses/dissertations and conference proceedings, were included. All language publications, except Chinese language articles, were included. Articles which did not document postoperative weight-bearing status, whether or not the patients wore a knee brace/immobiliser, or whether or not the patients received motion exercises following surgery were excluded. Case reports, comments, letters, editorials, protocols, guidelines, reviews, and cadaver and animal studies were excluded. Studies which assessed the outcomes of locking plates which were not LISS fixated were also excluded. The reference lists of review papers were evaluated to identify any additional relevant articles. The primary search employed the electronic databases Medline (1950 to October 2008), CINAHL (1982 to October 2008), AMED (1985 to October 2008) and EMBASE (1974 October 2008), searched via Ovid using the following terms: ‘femoral fractures’ AND ‘less invasive surgical stabilisation’ OR ‘LISS’. The secondary search assessed unpublished literature using the databases SIGLE (System for Information on Grey Literature in Europe), the National Technical Information Service, the National Research Register (UK), the British Library's Integrated Catalogue, and Current Controlled Trials database for recently completed trials. A hand search was undertaken to identify any additional publications adhering to the selection criteria, using the following journals: Two investigators (TS, CH) evaluated all identified titles and abstracts independently. The full manuscripts of all citations that met the criteria were ordered. Where it was unclear if an article was eligible, the full manuscript was ordered and assessed. The reference lists of all full manuscripts were evaluated to identify any further publications. Full manuscripts were screened against the eligibility criteria by the same two reviewers. In the event of differing points of view on paper eligibility, a consensus was met through discussion. Data were extracted from all included articles. This was undertaken initially by a single investigator (TS), and verified by two other investigators (CH, RM). The exception to this was data from German publications, which were extracted by KS. Data extracted included: study design; sample size; population characteristics, including diagnosis and fracture pattern as described, age, gender and co-morbidities; presence and type of joint replacement; implant method of diagnosis; method of fracture fixation; clinical and radiological outcome measures; follow-up period; postoperative management including postoperative weight-bearing status, the use of knee immobilisers, braces or casts, and when knee exercises such as strengthening or range-of-motion activities were commenced; statistical analysis; and results. On assessing the results of this search strategy, there were insufficient data on subject characteristics, such as mechanism of injury, proportion of osteoporosis subjects or patients with diabetes, or frequency of concomitant injuries, to determine whether there was substantial heterogeneity between the studies. It was therefore considered inappropriate to perform a meta-analysis All papers meeting the eligibility criteria were evaluated against an appraisal tool based on the Critical Appraisal Skills Programme (CASP) In total, 215 citations were identified ( The literature presented the findings of 508 patients with 535 fractures. The mean patient age was 59.5 years, ranging from 16 Postoperative weight-bearing status was documented in 13 papers. Two articles did not document postoperative weight-bearing status The most common initial weight-bearing status presented was toe-touch weight-bearing, which was prescribed in five articles Weight-bearing progression from the initial status to partial or full was dependent on radiological evidence of callus formation in seven articles The use of knee immobilisation, braces or casts during the initial postoperative period was acknowledged in two articles The majority of articles reviewed permitted early knee mobilisation and exercises. Three articles did not state whether exercises or motion activities were prescribed Eleven articles reported that their patients received continuous passive motion machine (CPM) treatments during early rehabilitation. Five articles stated that CPM began immediately following surgery for all patients In addition to CPM, passive physiotherapy exercises were prescribed to patients in the case reports by Fankhauser Clinical, radiological and outcome measures were assessed ( The results of the CASP appraisal are presented in The goals of orthopaedic trauma fixation are: to reduce intra-articular elements anatomically for rapid fracture union with minimal complications, and, of importance to orthopaedic physiotherapists, to permit early mobilisation In addition to this significant limitation in study design, this systematic review also identified that the present evidence base exhibits a number of substantial methodological weaknesses. These include recruitment of small samples, which is not justified using a power calculation. The reviewed articles did not acknowledge the demographic details of their cohorts clearly, making it considerably more difficult to generalise these findings into clinical practice. The source or methods for cohort recruitment were not reported adequately in the reviewed articles. Such limited description of recruitment creates the potential for selection bias to impact on study findings The evidence base has been presented by orthopaedic surgeons. No physiotherapy-related publications were identified on this topic. The literature largely reported functional outcomes or complications relating to this relatively new orthopaedic procedure, under-reporting rehabilitation protocols rather than assessing the impact of different physiotherapy programmes on outcome. For example, although CPM was widely used, no articles assessed the effect of this modality from a non-CPM control group, or whether differences in CPM duration, frequency or settings impacted on clinical or radiological outcomes. In addition to this, the treatment strategies adopted in these case series were poorly reported. Therefore, it was not possible to distinguish between the types of exercise that were prescribed in the observational studies. This factor limited the ability to either replicate or justify the actions of physiotherapists rehabilitating patients following LISS plate fixation for distal femoral fractures. On reflection, further well-designed randomised controlled trials are warranted to inform physiotherapists of the optimal rehabilitation for this complex population in terms of the exercises used, their frequency and intensity, and the period of time for which they should be prescribed. Little information was available to support or refute the use of postoperative bracing or immobilisation for patients following LISS fixation for distal femoral fractures. The principles of operative fracture management are to stabilise a fracture to permit early motion Although early motion exercises have been prescribed for this patient group, differences remain between whether patients were prescribed passive, active assisted or active exercises. Whilst passive physiotherapy exercises may promote range of motion and thereby assist to maintain soft tissue length and joint integrity, this type of exercise will not prevent muscle atrophy. Theoretically, it may be argued that contraction of the hamstring or quadriceps muscle groups may cause a loss of fracture reduction following surgery. However, if fractures are so unstable, it could be expected that the frequency seen in this literature review for range-of-motion exercises would have been lower. Acknowledging the variation in use of exercise types, comparison studies are now required to assess whether different exercise protocols influence short- and longer-term outcomes in this patient group. The evidence base appeared to be consistent in the restriction of weight-bearing during physiotherapy activities following LISS plate fixation. The literature has suggested that commencing weight-bearing too early may permit implant failure and malunion The optimal physiotherapy management for patients following LISS plate fixation of distal femoral fractures remains unclear due to the paucity of empirical, prospective comparative studies. However, the literature does indicate that, at present, these patients begin immediate range-of-motion exercises and commence mobilisation through restricted weight-bearing following surgery. It is unclear whether braces, casts or immobilisation aids are provided during the early rehabilitation phases. As a consequence of the limited evidence base pertaining to physiotherapy treatments, further study adopting well-designed randomised controlled trial methods is required to compare the clinical outcomes between different postoperative factors in order to determine the optimal rehabilitation following LISS fixation of distal femoral fractures. The authors wish to thank the library staff at the Norfolk and Norwich University Hospital's Sir Thomas Browne Library for their assistance in gathering the papers required for this study.