The traditional treatment of severely impacted fractures of the distal radius involves bridging external fixation and maintaining reduction by applying continuous traction. The recent technique using fixed-angle screws within volar plates is reported restore the radial length and the articular profile whilst avoiding joint distraction. It is also believed to produce better and quicker clinical results. To test these claims, we carried out a randomised controlled comparison of the efficiency of external fixation (EF) ‘versus’ open reduction and internal fixation (ORIF) in treating severely impacted fractures of the distal radius. A total of 39 patients were treated with EF, eventually associated with percutaneous pinning, whereas 36 underwent ORIF with a locked volar plate. There was no significant difference in the two groups with regard to changes in the ulnar variance. Articular reduction was poor in two patients in the EF group with residual step-offs exceeding 2mm; another patient of the EF group suffered a secondary loss of reduction, healing with a severe articular malunion (>2mm). By contrast, articular reduction was satisfactory in all the patients of the ORIF group. The clinical results on the Green and O’Brien rating were significantly better in the ORIF group than in the EF group (p
                     <0.01 at 6 weeks, p
                     <0.05 at 6 months). Nevertheless, open reduction and volar plating did not yield better subjective results than EF. However, although not statistically significant, patients treated by ORIF seemed to resume their usual activities quicker than those treated with EF, suggesting that this technique may be adapted to a greater extent in the case of active, young individuals.Apart from simple fractures of the distal radius, which can be treated with minimally invasive percutaneous techniques, there are several types of complex fractures for which no method of fixation has yet proved completely satisfactory. Traditionally, the treatment of complex fractures of the distal radius involved bridging external fixation (EF) and maintaining reduction by applying continuous traction. Good to excellent results were reported with this technique, In elderly patients, internal fixation using a volar plate may carry major drawbacks, such as precarious screw purchase in the osteoporotic fragments of the distal radius. However, the recent use of fixed-angle screws within volar plates now provides satisfactory stability, Several randomised studies were designed to compare the results of invasive techniques (open reduction and internal fixation, ORIF) versus minimally invasive techniques (closed reduction and EF). Patients were randomised using a random generator, the results being transmitted to the treating physicians in sealed envelopes (ClinicalTrials.gov Identifier The inclusion criteria were: recent (<48 Within the inclusion period (2006–2009), 91 consecutive patients, who were admitted to one of our two institutions, were eligible for the study. Six patients were lost; four were discarded due to modifications of the surgical technique; and six were excluded for missing data. The remaining 75 patients were followed up during 6 months with complete clinical and radiological observations. A total of 39 patients were randomly assigned to the EF group (Hoffmann II, Stryker Patients were operated on either by fellows (JJ, VS and PBo) or by senior surgeons (PC, PBi and PM). Trans-articular radio-metacarpal distraction was performed under fluoroscopic control and maintained by 2-mm diameter sticks. In the EF group, it was prolonged over 6 weeks and associated with intra-focal percutaneous pinning in 17 cases to control posterior tilt, when EF alone failed to restore the dorsal or frontal angulations of the articular surface. The external fixator and the pins were removed at 6 weeks after operation. In the ORIF group, reduction was eventually improved through an anterior approach by direct manipulation of the fragments, and a locked volar plate was secured in place before removing the fixator. Although all metaphyseal screws were locked in the distal fragment, at least one or more screws were locked in the proximal fragment. A volar splint maintained the wrist postoperatively during 6 weeks, after which re-education was prescribed. Radiographic follow-up included centred posteroanterior (PA) and lateral wrist X-rays of the fracture, which were repeated immediately after operation to assess reduction, then at 3, 6, 12 and 24 weeks to assess the stability of the reduction. The calibration of PA views was based on a 28-mm diameter radiopaque sphere placed within the first commissure. X-rays were digitised and analysed by the first author (JJ) using semi-automated software (Imagika, Clinical Measurement Corp., Ridgewood, NJ, USA) that allowed measurements of the ulnar variance as well as palmar and frontal radial angulations. This software, tested elsewhere, offered reproducibility and accuracy of the order of 1 Clinical assessment was based on Green and O’Brien's rating, modified by Cooney, Fracture reduction was assessed by the difference between the preoperative and immediately postoperative ulnar variances. The quality of articular reduction was assessed according to Knirck and Jupiter's classification. Ulnar variance after reduction was not significantly better restored in the ORIF group than in the EF group ( There was no significant difference in the restoration of the articular profile ( After surgery, there was no significant difference between the changes of the ulnar variance in the EF and ORIF groups ( There were 12 malunions in the EF group (31%) and 11 in the ORIF group (30%). In the EF group, there were 12 ulnar variance inversions >2 The clinical results according to Green and O’Brien's rating, modified by Cooney, were significantly better in the ORIF group than in the EF group over the 6-month follow-up period ( After removal of the splint, the grip strength of the injured wrist compared with the healthy wrist was significantly higher in the ORIF group than in the EF group. This difference persisted over the whole follow-up period, at the end of which the grip strength in the EF group was evaluated at 76% of that of ipsilateral side whilst it was 84% in the ORIF group ( In the ORIF group, 10 patients (28%) returned to their normal activities without restriction within 3 months, ‘versus’ only five (14%) in the EF group. This difference, which was not significant ( Twenty-one patients (53.8%) in the EF group and 11 (30.5%) in the ORIF group had a 6-week positive predictive score for CRPS ( Volar plating of the distal radius was originally developed for its buttressing effect in anteriorly displaced fractures; by contrast, posterior plating appeared to offer better control of the instability in the case of dorsally displaced fractures. The present randomised comparison of locked volar plating ‘versus’ external bridging fixation failed to show a significant difference either in terms of maintaining the radial length or in terms of restoration of the articular profile. However, fractures included in the ORIF group had initially a greater radial shortening on average than those of the EF group, suggesting that fixation using locked volar plate had a better potential for the reduction and the maintenance of the radial length. We noted malunions in both the EF and ORIF groups but the causes differed. In the EF group, malunion was associated with suboptimal initial reduction, whereas, in the ORIF group, it was related to secondary displacement following satisfactory initial reduction. Displacements were due to technical causes, such as inadequate fixation of the palmar medial epiphyseal fragment or the insufficient length of the distal screws. This may explain why posterior displacements were more frequent with volar plating. However, displacements of the articular fragments were less frequent in the ORIF group, with no step-offs exceeding 2 Despite a 6-week period of immobilisation, we observed significantly better clinical results in the ORIF group than in the EF group, with a better recovery of grip strength, which we attributed to the absence of articular bridging. However, this is not a common opinion in the current literature. Finally, the subjective results in the present study were similar in both the EF and ORIF groups, which is in agreement with other studies. This study has some weaknesses. Functional results are considered to be stabilised 6 months after operation, A number of patients were not included in the study groups, although they were randomised. Six patients (8%) were lost to the study; the missing results possibly leading to a bias in the final conclusions. Six other patients had no complications and finally achieved a satisfactory radiographic and functional result, but they were excluded from the final analysis because of incorrect radiographic incidences. Finally, four patients, initially randomly assigned to the ORIF group, were excluded from the study due to modifications in the operative protocol. For these four patients, the operator decided to maintain the external fixator at the end of the operation because the fracture was highly comminuted and the poor screw purchase in the metaphyseal bone failed to maintain reduction. These cases illustrate the limitations of ORIF in severely comminuted fractures with major radial shortening, as evoked by Arora et al. In conclusion, although EF remains a good option for restoring and maintaining radial length following fractures of the distal radius, this technique has led to some cases of severe articular malunion that did not occur in the ORIF group, indicating that direct manipulation and fixation of bone fragments may be better for restoring the articular profile without provoking further complications. Moreover, by avoiding articular bridging, ORIF may provide better results in terms of grip strength, affording active, young patients earlier resumption of regular activity, with less risk of late posttraumatic osteoarthritis. Patrick Cronier and Philippe Massin are scientific consultants with Synthes and received payment for teaching missions unrelated to the present work. We thank the