Bologna-type sausages were made with 25, 50, 75 and 100% replacement of pork back fat by oleogel made with pork skin, water, and high oleic sunflower oil (HOSO) (1.5, 1.5: 1). The technological, nutritional, oxidative, and sensory properties were evaluated. Emulsion stability increased and cooking loss decreased with increasing the pork back fat replacement by oleogel. The reformulation increased the proportion of oleic acid within the lipid fraction by up to 20% and decreased the proportion of linoleic acid by up to 10%, with no changes in the oxidative stability. The acceptance and the sensory profile of the samples were not affected by the substitution of up to 50% of pork back fat by oleogel. Thus, the results showed that it is possible to produce Bologna-type sausages with reduced fat (~16% fat, ~29% reduction), cholesterol (40 mg, ~10% reduction), and energy value (~210 kcal/100 g, ~21% reduction) and with healthier lipid profile using oleogel from HOSO.Bologna-type sausages are one of the most consumed emulsified meat products in industrialized countries. Due to its high animal fat content (up to 35%) and a nutritionally unfavorable fatty acid profile, the frequent consumption of this product may lead to an increase in the risk factors related to the onset of cardiovascular diseases ( The partial substitution of animal fat by vegetable oils may reduce the level of saturated fatty acids (SFA) and increase the level of polyunsaturated fatty acids (PUFAs), which can help preventing cardiovascular diseases ( High oleic sunflower oil (HOSO) has gained popularity among consumers due to its fatty acids composition similar to olive oil. The frequent and moderate intake of HOSO may bring benefits to human health for its high content of oleic acid (up to 65%), such as reducing the risk of cardiovascular diseases and gallstones ( HOSO is mainly used in the manufacture of margarine, because it has a mild flavor and an affordable price. However, recent research has shown promising results on the effect of the use of oleogel from HOSO on bakery products. To date, the use of oleogel from HOSO in meat product formulations has not been evaluated. Thus, in this study, HOSO was gelled with pork skin and used as a fat substitute in Bologna-type sausages. Pork skin was selected as a gelling agent because of its high availability and high collagen content ( Lean pork meat ( Three samples in each of the three replications of the experiment were analyzed in triplicate and the average of each sample was used in the statistical analysis. The moisture, protein, fat, and ash contents of oleogel and Bologna sausages were determined according to the methodology described by the Association of Official Analytical Chemists ( The cholesterol level of the Bologna sausages was determined by the optimized enzymatic method and validated by The Bologna sausages were weighed before cooking. After the cooking and cooling, the samples were again weighed and the cooking loss was calculated according to the methodology proposed by Beakers were previously weighed (105 °C/30 min) for later use. Then, about 5 g of sample was weighed into Falcons tubes and centrifuged for 5 min at 3000 rpm. The tubes were placed in a boiling water bath for 40 min and cooled to 4 °C in an ice bath. The liquid released from the tubes was added to the pre-weighed beaker and subjected to oven drying at 105 °C for 24 h, cooled in desiccators and weighed to determine the fat and water exudation ( The analysis of oleogel and Bologna sausages were performed in three samples in each of the three replications of the experiment. Each sample was cut into three cubes with dimensions 2 cm high and 2 cm wide. The average of each sample was used in the statistical analysis. The texture profile was performed using a TA-TX2 texture meter (Stable Micro Systems Ltd., Surrey, England) and the TPA curves were constructed by the Texture Expert software, version 1.11 (Stable Micro Systems Ltda.). The samples at 20 °C were compressed at 50% of the original height with a cylindrical aluminum probe 45 mm in diameter, moving at a constant speed of 1 mm / s. The following parameters were determined: Hardness (N/cm The International Commission on Illumination (CIE) system was used, and the readings were performed in a colorimeter (Spectrophotometer CM-700D) calibrated using a white plate ( The pH was measured using a potentiometer (DM-23DC-169, São Paulo, Brazil) according to The lipid oxidation of Bologna sausages was determined by the Thiobarbituric Acid Reactive Substances (TBARS) assay, according to Lipid extraction was carried out shortly after manufacture (day 1) by the The research was approved by the Research Ethics Committee of the Federal University of Santa Maria (RS, Brazil) under CAAE: 47441915.3.0000.5346. The sensory evaluation of the Bologna sausages was performed on the 7th day of storage at 4 °C. One hundred consumers (59 female and 41 male, aged 18 to 65 years) who reported having a habit of consuming Bologna-type sausages at least once per month participated in the sensory evaluation. The demographics of the consumers that participated were: 59 female and 41 male, 45% between 18 and 25 years old, 20% 26–35, 18% 36–45, 12% 46–55 and 5% over 56–65 years old. The Bologna sausages were cut into slices approximately 0.5 cm thick. The samples were served to consumers in white ceramic dishes, coded with three-digit numbers, in monadic and random order, accompanied with water and cracker biscuits for cleansing the palate. All participants were instructed to sign the Informed Consent Form. The consumers' acceptance of the samples was determined through the affective acceptance test using a structured hedonic scale of 9 points (9-liked very much and 1-disliked very much). The samples were evaluated for five attributes: color, aroma, flavor, texture, and overall acceptance. Consumers were also asked to complete a check-all-that-apply (CATA) questionnaire with 23 terms related to the sensory characteristics of Bologna sausages. These terms were generated by a group of 10 Bologna sausage consumers and included the descriptors related to appearance (pale color, ideal color, oily and strange aspect), aroma (soft, rancid, fatty, pleasant), taste (pork, rancid, soft, strong, bitter, pleasant, unpleasant and seasoning in the right amount) and texture (sandy, ideal, rubbery, hard, dry, difficult to chew and juicy). The experiment was repeated three times ( The physicochemical and nutritional characteristics of oleogel are shown in The results of proximate composition, cholesterol, cooking loss, emulsion stability, and texture parameters of Bologna-type sausages are presented in Lipid reformulation significantly influenced the cooking loss and the emulsion stability ( During the oleogel manufacturing process, the pork skin was cooked to transform the collagen into gelatin. After cooling, gelatin solidified and formed a hard gel ( The L*, a*, and b* values of the Bologna sausages were affected by the lipid reformulation ( After manufacture process (day 0), the pH values of the Bologna sausages ranged from 6.17 to 6.38 ( One of the great problems of the addition of vegetable oils to meat products is the increase in lipid oxidation ( The lipid reformulation did not affect the Aw values of the Bologna sausages ( The fatty acid profile of the lipid fraction of Bologna sausages is summarized in Oleic acid (C18: 1n-9c) was the major MUFA found in the lipid fraction of Bologna sausages. A significant increase in this fatty acid content with the increase in the substitution level was observed. The replacement of 25, 50, 75, and 100% of pork back fat by oleogel increased 3.35, 8.78, 14.99, and 21.15% oleic acid levels in the lipid fraction of the Bologna sausages, probably due to the high amount of oleic acid presented in the oleogel (70.8 ± 0.32 g 100 g Linoleic acid (C18: 2n6c) was the major PUFA found in the lipid fraction of the Bologna sausages. The R50, R75, and R100 treatments presented a lower (  The representation of the samples and the terms in the first and second dimensions of correspondence analysis (CA) performed on data questions check-all-that-apply (CATA) is shown in The control and R25 and R50 treatments were characterized by the positive descriptors ideal texture, juicy, seasoning in the right amount, pleasant taste, pleasant aroma, ideal color, soft aroma, and soft flavor. These descriptors are in agreement with the great sensory acceptance of these treatments ( The results showed that the substitution of pork back fat by oleogel from HOSO may be a viable alternative for the manufacture of Bologna-type sausages since it was possible to reduce the fat and cholesterol levels and improve the fatty acid profile. In addition to these nutritional benefits, the lipid reformulation enhanced the technological quality and did not increase the lipid oxidation of Bologna sausages. However, a replacement up to 50% of pork back fat by oleogel from HOSO is recommended, as the sensory quality of the Bologna sausages was impaired above this percentage. This study was financed in part by the