A key response variable to describe the metallurgical performance in a flotation cell is the concentrate grade. The mineral feed characteristics and conditioning determine the grade of the particles attached directly to the surfaces of the bubbles by true flotation, while the operating conditions, such as gas rate, bubble size, froth depth and others, determine the amount of gangue recovered by entrainment, which finally decreases the concentrate grade.
                  In this paper, the recovery of liquid and solids by entrainment was evaluated by direct measurement of the fraction of liquid and solids reported to the concentrate in a 130 m3 mechanical flotation cell.
                  The liquid and solids entrainment, per size classes (+150; −150+45; −45 µm), was measured by the radioactive tracer technique. The procedure consisted of introducing a tracer impulse at the cell feed entrance. The tracer time response was monitored on-line at the concentrate overflow and at the tailings discharge. Also, in order to obtain the quantitative distribution of the feed, samples were taken periodically from the concentrate and tailings streams, for a period of 4 residence times, during the tracer tests. This allowed the quantification of the mass of tracer reporting to both streams.
                  Experimental results confirmed that solids entrainment with the froth was strongly dependent on particle size, and that the entrainment factor (EF=solid/water recovery ratio) was similar to that reported for smaller size cells under similar operations conditions.In the last decade, flotation equipment has shown a dramatic increase in size, reaching 250–300 m From a conceptual point of view, the froth flotation can be considered as a sequence of two operations, “reaction” and “separation”  In a flotation cell a froth zone occurs with usually a distinct pulp/froth interface. Thus the rates of transfer of particles attached directly to bubbles, of the liquid (water) entrained out of the pulp with the rising bubbles, and the particles entrained with the liquid, must be identified as a means of gaining insight into flotation sub-processes. According to the literature [ Feed solids percentage Froth characteristics (residence time, froth stability, froth transport) Density of the solid particles Particle size Liquid recovery. From experimental testing, it has been observed that water recovery is the main responsible for the non-selective fine particles transport by entrainment, from the pulp-froth interface up to the concentrate launder. Previous works [ In this paper a methodology for direct measurement of the fraction of liquid and solids reported to the concentrate by entrainment is presented. The procedure was evaluated in a 130 m Most previous research has shown that gangue recovery by entrainment can be estimated as a function of the water recovery. Kirjavainen Neethling and Cilliers Also, industrial operations do not have on-line information on pulp characteristics of the different streams, typically. Thus, in order to estimate the water recovery in an industrial cell a steady state mass balance is required, including information of the main streams around the system, i.e. for most cases the feed, tailings and concentrate mass flowrate, solid percentages and mineral grades. According to the above discussion, in order to develop a useful tool for modeling and/or operating purposes, a parameter called “Entrainment Factor” EF This work describes a method for estimating the entrainment factor EF The split ratio SR Once the split ratio factors for water and gangue particles (per size class) have been obtained, the gangue recoveries  In order to estimate gangue recovery,  The CF In order to determine the SR The SR The radioactive tracer technique consists of the injection of an impulse signal (water or gangue) at the feed pulp entrance of the cell. The presence of tracer leaving the cell at the concentrate and tailings streams was then on-line recorded, by non-invasive sensors, provided with scintillating crystal sensors of NaI(Tl) of 1 On-line radioactive tracer detection at the concentrate and tailings streams was used to obtain a smooth and almost continuous (minimum period of 50 ms) signal to estimate the residence time distribution of the gangue leaving the cell in each stream. However, even though both signals are proportional to the corresponding mass flowrates, they are not directly comparable. The reasons are mainly related with the differences in cell design (geometry), piping and pulp characteristics of both streams, for which sensors cannot be previously calibrated because the stream characteristics are not well known beforehand. Consequently, a second measurement was required to provide a quantitative estimate of the tracer concentration during the impulse tracer test. For this purpose, discrete sampling of the concentrate and tailing streams was performed, in order to measure (off-line) the tracer concentration during the impulse time response. These samples are discrete, and must be taken initially at a higher frequency, while the rate of change in the tracer concentration is higher, and then the sampling frequency can be decreased for larger times, i.e. after around one residence time. For this purpose, the sampling frequency was set at 10 s, for the first 200 s, and then set to 30 s for the remaining time. Samples from the concentrate stream were taken directly from the overall concentrate discharge using a standard manual cutter, while samples of tailing stream were obtained by pumping the sample from the cell bottom discharge, see Thus, the sampled signals allowed obtaining a quantitative description of the tracer signals, but they have fewer data points and are more noisy. Residence time distribution data obtained by on-line tracer detection were firstly filtered, to reduce the signal noise, and then a model was fitted to describe the general trend and shape of the time response curve, employing the large and small tanks in series model LSTS For example, Discrete samples were obtained periodically and simultaneously from the concentrate and tailings streams. In order to measure the mineral tracer content, each sample of 250 [mL] was introduced in a lead vessel (to avoid external radiation) which contains a 3 in. The LSTS model was adjusted to each RTD data measured on-line for different tracers, in the concentrate and tailings streams of the industrial cell. Then, the resulting model was scaled in order to fit the same smooth pattern, considering that this curve corresponds to the best representation of the data obtained from the discrete sampling (quantitative off-line measurement). The procedure considered a linear scale factor   After calculating the scale factors   Thus, the split ratio SR  To compare this result with data from other industrial flotation operations, presented by Zheng et al.  Using Eq.  The recovery of liquid and solids by entrainment was evaluated by direct measurement, of the fraction of liquid and solids reported to the concentrate in a 130 m The liquid and solids entrainment, per size classes (+ An entrainment factor EF Thus, the strong dependence of entrainment on fine particle sizes of less than 45 µm, in a large cell, was confirmed. While, recovery of coarse particles (larger than 150 µm) by entrainment was 0.05%.These results were in good agreement with that reported in literature for smaller cells The authors are grateful to El Teniente Division Codelco-Chile for providing access to their plant and for valuable assistance in the experimental work. Funding for process modelling and control research is provided by CONICYT, project Fondecyt 1070106, and Santa María University, project 270522.