The extraction of nickel from a leach liquor containing cobalt, manganese and lithium of Li-ion batteries cathode material using a mixture of Versatic 10 acid and LIX84-I was investigated. The leach liquor of LiB cathode material obtained with H2SO4/H2O2 as the lixiviant was purified by precipitating the leached aluminum, iron and copper as hydroxides by adjusting the pH to ~5. To extract nickel, the effect of Versatic 10 acid concentration was the experimental variable in the mixture of extractants. The pH-isotherms revealed the synergistic effect on nickel caused by the increasing concentration of Versatic 10 acid which decreased the pH50 for nickel extraction and pH5 was chosen as the most suitable pH for solvent extraction. A loading isotherm at pH5 was constructed by changing the O/A ratio. The McCabe Thiele diagram predicted the possibility of using three stages to extract over 98% nickel, which was confirmed experimentally. The stripping test was carried out from loaded organic of Versatic 10 acid alone, LIX 84-I alone and the combination of Versatic 10 acid and LIX 84-I. Slow stripping of nickel from LIX 84-I indicated that LIX 84-I and Versatic 10 acid acted as the extractant and synergist, respectively.Co-extraction of Cu and Ni by LIX 84-I. Ni was selectively stripped by spent electrolyte at pH Recovery of nickel by LIX 84-I from ammonium sulfate solution containing only nickel. The order of extraction: Cu (pH The solution did not contain cobalt and manganese. Extraction of copper from pregnant solution by LIX 984N. Extraction of nickel from copper raffinate solution by LIX 984N. Extraction of Co from mixed sulfate/chloride leach liquor, by NaPC-88A. Extraction of nickel from cobalt raffinate solution, by NaPC-88A. Co- extraction over 99% Co and Ni from Ca and Mg using Versatic 10 acid at pH Extraction of Co from co-extracted Co and Ni, mixture using Cyanex 272. Recovery of Cd from Co and Ni solutions by Cyanex 923. Extraction of Co from Cd raffinate by Cyanex 272. Extraction of Ni from cobalt raffinate, using TOPS 99. Simultaneous extraction of Ni and Cu from ammonia/ammonium carbonate solution by ACORGA M5640. Removal of ammonia by scrubbing solution of pH Selective stripping of Ni. But low stripping efficiency of Ni. No cobalt and manganese in the solution. Extraction of Fe/Cu/Al from pregnant liquor by Ionquest 801 and Acorga M5640. Extraction of cobalt by Cyanex 272. Recovery of nickel from the cobalt raffinate solution by Dowex M4195. Preferential extraction of cobalt from nickel by mixture of Cyanex 302 and D2EHPA. The pH From magnesium and calcium, recovery of nickel by mixture of Versatic 10 acid-LIX However, no cobalt and manganese in the solution and no effect of Versatic 10 acid. The order of extraction (pH The order of extraction (pH By the mixture of Versatic 10 acid and n-octyl 3-pyridinecarboxylate, the ΔpH By the mixture of Versatic 10 acid and Acorga DS5443A, the ΔpH The order of extraction (pH ΔpH The order of extraction by mixture of neodecanoic acid and Mintek (pH Cu(3.42) The ΔpH The ΔpH ΔpH By the 0.2 Resource quality and economic treatment of low grade ores can be challenging for producers in mining and metallurgical industry. Global nickel and cobalt reserves are distributed in nickel–iron–copper (Ni–Fe–Cu) sulfide ores and nickel laterites (30% and 70%, respectively). The nickel content in Ni–Fe–Cu sulfide ores and laterites is 1–3% and 1–2%, respectively. However, the mining cost of Ni–Fe–Cu sulfide is considerably high due to the deep underground locations. The cost of the laterite processing is also high due to the difficulty in upgrading ( The separation of metal ions from cobalt rich leach liquors of spent LiBs has been largely based on solvent extraction and precipitation ( A review of the general recovery methods of nickel by solvent extraction using LIX, Versatic 10 acid, TOPS, ACORGA M5640, and PC 88A as extractants is presented in  A plot of the increase of extraction efficiency as a function of pH, based on the results from a set of experiments conducted at a given value of [RH] and temperature represents an extraction curve, in which the equilibrium pH value of the aqueous phase which gives a 50% extraction (or D Preferential extraction of nickel from cobalt and manganese can be achieved when the value of ΔpH In general the synergistic enhancement of extraction of one metal ion compared to the antagonistic depression of extraction of another metal ion, is due to opposing effects on the two metal ions in question, caused by the presence of the second extractant. This has been demonstrated by In contrast, the addition of 4-(5-nonyl)pyridine shifted the extraction curve for calcium to the right ( The LIX 84-I extractant (Molar mass 277 The leaching experiments were conducted using 500 Impurities including Al, Fe and Cu were removed by precipitation at pH To determine the valuable metals extracted, the pH isotherm test was carried out under conditions of a different concentration of mixtures of extractants (0  At 25  Thus, Thus, it is clear that the adjustment of pH of the leach liquor to a value of ~   The extraction curves of Co were collapsed due to the addition of concentration of Versatic 10 acid in the all mixture systems except for the addition of 1.41 The extraction efficiency of Mn was lower than 50%. However, adding 1.41 The ΔpH The extraction of 100% Ni was not achieved by LIX 84-I alone (   The synergistic D value ( From In A series of shake out tests were carried out using the mixed extractant of 0.23 The loaded organic obtained from counter current simulated three-stage extraction test was stripped under conditions of 0.5, 1, 2, 3, and 4 The extraction of nickel from cobalt, manganese and lithium was investigated following the addition of Versatic 10 acid to LIX 84-I. The remaining nickel in the aqueous phase that was not extracted by LIX 84-I was extracted by the combination of Versatic 10 acid and LIX 84-I, which acted synergistically. The pH Slope analysis predicted an extraction stoichiometry of Ni·2L·2(LH)·2(R The McCabe–Thiele diagram showed that a three-stage system was needed for extraction of Ni. However, in the stripping test, stripping efficiency of Ni was 90% because the Ni stripping from loaded organic with LIX 84-I was less or slower than with Versatic 10 acid. Therefore, LIX 84-I acts as the extractant and Versatic 10 acid acts synergistically which supports an extraction stoichiometry of Ni·2L·2(LH)·2(R To apply this system at a concentration higher than 7 This study was supported by the R&D Center for Valuable Recycling (Global-Top Environmental Technology Development Program) funded by the