The ferrite–austenite transformation, that takes place in stainless steel manufacture, is studied as a numerical experiment. The diffusion process of Cr, Ni and Fe between ferrite and austenite is modeled as a mass transfer problem with a moving boundary. Equilibrium is assumed at the interface between the two phases. The resulting system of governing equations is solved simultaneously with the Galerkin finite element method. The model is validated against analytical solutions and extensive experimental data for ferrite and austenite size and composition versus time. It is believed that the present approach may be applied in the modeling of other phase transformations that exhibit similar diffusion and equilibrium phenomena.Diffusion controlled phase transformations are important in all engineering processes where material science is the main issue, such as alloys manufacture in metallurgical engineering or ceramics, polymeric membrane fabrication and separations in chemical engineering etc. The main characteristic of diffusion controlled phase transformation is mass exchange between two phases leading to spatial extension of one phase while the other phase shrinks. This results in a moving interface between two phases. Equilibrium is usually assumed at the moving interface. In binary systems, this moving interface has constant composition at isothermal conditions while in multicomponent systems interface composition varies with time. Modeling diffusion controlled phase transformations is not a trivial task. A realistic treatment of diffusion process in multicomponent systems phase transformations, requires the solution of a system of partial nonlinear differential equations describing constituents diffusion in the two transformed phases. The main complexity in solving the problem is the presence of a moving interface between two phases and the appearance of local equilibrium at this point. So far, the implicit Crank–Nicolson In the industrial manufacture of stainless steels, such as type 304 and 316, body-centered-cubic (bcc) δ-ferrite forms as a primary crystal during solidification. It remains in face-centered-cubic (fcc) γ-austenite matrix at room temperature and only after sufficient long annealing at high temperature (austenizing temperature) ferrite dissolves in austenite. The dissolution of ferrite is an essential step in manufacture of these types of stainless steels. Ferrite–austenite phase transformation in Cr–Ni austenitic stainless steels was studied experimentally and theoretically by Kikuchi and coworkers So far, in modeling ferrite–austenite phase transformation the generalized mathematical framework of Randich and Goldstein was applied. Besides improvements (i) Assume an initial interface composition. (ii) The displacement of the interface position is calculated by solving the proper mass balances for Cr and Ni at the interface. (iii) Calculation of two-phase equilibrium if displacements of interface position calculated by solving the respective mass balances for Cr and Ni at the interface do not agree within a tolerance. (iv) Process (i)–(iii) are repeated until the algorithm converges. (v) Solution of diffusion governing equations for each phase. This iterative procedure results in tedious calculations. The large progress that appeared in 1990s with the implementation of powerful numerical methods such as the Galerkin finite element method in the field of computational transport phenomena, leads to a reexamination of diffusion controlled phase transformation modeling methods. Previous work in the modeling area by applying finite elements or finite volumes in solid phase transformations has appeared in the literature. The work of Jacot and coworkers Recently, Chen and Morral The aim of the present work is to apply Galerkin finite elements to ferrite–austenite phase transformation without any assumption regarding the calculation of the moving interface. The main advantage of this numerical method in modeling diffusion controlled phase transformations is the simultaneous solution of governing equations along with appropriate initial and boundary conditions as well as thermodynamic equilibrium equations. This enables a direct calculation of interface composition without any additional iterative procedure such as try-and-error process and provides a general method for solving similar problems in this area. In the following section, ferrite–austenite transformation is described, governing equations are given along with appropriate initial and boundary conditions and values of model parameters are discussed. Finally, the finite element formulation is given, results are presented and conclusions are drawn. The system considered was comprised of an α phase of initial length Assuming Fickian diffusion the governing equations are: The appropriate initial and boundary for the above equations are:  To facilitate comparison of numerical solution with laboratory experiments (see   The model parameters of the system are diffusion coefficients in Coefficients The computational domain is descretized in 150 finite elements. Due to unequal proportion of ferrite and austenite, the ferrite was descretized in 60 elements, as shown in In both parts of the computational domain, the governing equations are evaluated ( The Neumann boundary condition in Eq. (16) is applied only at the elements adjacent to the interface and the two ends of the domain. Since the boundary condition at the end of the domain is zero flux [Eq. (9)], the term At the interface, Eq. (10), is an essential (Dirichlet) boundary condition, in this case, Eq. (16b–d) are replaced by Residuals are evaluated numerically using three point Gaussian integration and time integration follows the Euler backward method. The resulting system of nonlinear algebraic equations is solved with Newton–Raphson iteration according to scheme A detailed presentation of the finite element technique that enables simultaneous solution of the primary unknowns of the problem (weight fractions) with the moving boundary can be found in To validate our model, numerical results are compared with analytical solutions and laboratory experiments of Kikuchi and coworkers Analytical solutions, for the limited case of semi-infinite slab (i) Austenite chromium and nickel (ii) Ferrite chromium and nickel  At temperature 1100 °C and for three different stages of transformation ( Agreement of both solutions validates the finite element analysis of this work and enables the solution of practical problems of this type, using a general framework and avoiding tedious calculations. Additionally, each analytical iteration is 4 times slower than the corresponding iteration of the numerical solution, which results in a decrease of almost two orders of magnitude of CPU time if the numerical solution is chosen. In order to demonstrate the ability of the model to solve real problems, with variable constituents concentration at interface, model predictions were compared with experimental work of Kikuchi and coworkers In By inspecting results of From a numerical point of view, a change in initial austenite or ferrite concentration affects directly Eq. (8), which defines the thickness of ferrite. This results in different variation of ferrite size during the process, which lead to more or less pronounced peaks, as shown in These experimental results have been predicted numerically by Kikuchi and coworkers In this work, we have applied the finite element method to study ferrite–austenite multicomponent diffusion controlled phase transformation. This transformation was studied as a numerical experiment. The mass transfer equations were solved in each phase separately. At the interface, equilibrium conditions are used to couple the governing equations, while a condition of mass conservation enables simultaneous solution of primary unknowns (concentrations of Cr and Ni) with position of interface, along with appropriate boundary conditions at both ends of the domain. Thus, a general framework is provided for modeling diffusion controlled phase transformations regardless of coupling conditions at interface and functional dependence of diffusion coefficients on concentration and temperature. The rigorous formulation of this problem with finite elements enables the approach of similar material processes in a straightforward way and provides computational efficiency. The method proposed is compared with available analytical solutions and laboratory experimental data. In both cases, the agreement is excellent and suggests effectiveness of the method. The dimension of the residual vector Interface residuals are: The additional terms in Eq. (8b) defining the moving boundary position The Jacobian matrix