In this study, we demonstrate that the direction of a photoinduced magnetic field in semiconductor nano-scale quantum dots (nanocages) can be changed by tuning the frequency and the light parameters. In the case of the spin angular momentum (SAM) transfer to ring-shaped Ga
                     
                        n
                     
                     As
                     
                        n
                      molecule, some electrons of occupied states are excited into the unoccupied states for a special laser frequency. As a result of the transition due to the circular polarized light, the excited electron which has a nonzero magnetic quantum number start to circulate around the molecular GaAs ring. The transfer of orbital angular momentum (OAM) due to the twisted light can induce similar effect on the molecular ring. In the case of twisted light, the electron can be excited different unoccupied states with higher magnetic quantum numbers. In the study, the optimization and electronic structure calculation have been performed by using density functional theory (DFT). The induced current and corresponding induced magnetic field can be controlled by the change in the frequency. Also, the type of the angular momentum of the light (SAM or OAM) can be used as a tool to manipulate the magnitude and direction of the magnetic moment.Growth techniques allow us to produce low dimensional semiconductor structures The electronic structure and geometrical properties, optical behavior and binding process of Ga Recently, the investigation of quantum Although photoinduced ring current on mesoscopic semiconductor rings has been investigated previously In this study, for the first time we demonstrate that SAM carrying light is able to change the direction and magnitude of the induced magnetic field in the center of molecular semiconductor cluster by varying the laser frequency. In the case that the light carries angular orbital momentum additional to the spin angular momentum, it is possible to obtain different values of induced magnetic field in the center of the molecule. Therefore, we show the possibility of tuning the induced magnetic field by changing the frequency, topological charge (orbital angular momentum) and spin angular momentum. We did not discuss the effect of radial mode which is another geometrical parameter of twisted light. And we showed that the induced magnetic field of Ga Optimized geometry and the electronic structure of Ga The current density can be described by The main contribution to the current is obtained by performing time-dependent perturbation theory The current density due to the contribution of all possible transitions is By the using Biot-Savart law the induced magnetic field in the center of the ring can be calculated as GaAs and GaAs-based magnetic materials are well known semiconductors in the application of microelectronics, magneto-optical and magnetoelectrical devices. For the manufacturing the technological devices, a huge number of theoretical and experimental researches on bulk and low-dimensional GaAs semiconductors have been made recently The induced current density and induced magnetic field are dependent on the frequency of light and interaction term  In order to obtain a photoinduced current, one can use also OAM carrying light called as optical vortex or in another name twisted light. Twisted light has the vector potential with a radial dependence which is As can be seen form  In Ga As an additional study, we show the size dependent induced magnetic field by performing similar calculations for Ga As it is well known from quantum chemistry, physical properties are strongly dependent on the size of quantum particles. In the case of Ga In order to reveal the importance of our study, it is required to give some quantitative outcome. The magnetic field in the center of GaAs-based quantum ring of radius In order to control the strength and direction of the magnetic field, six important light parameters are spin angular momentum, In conclusion, we tried to demonstrate the modulation of the free electron circulation in a semiconductor quantum nanoring by the change in frequency with the contribution of SAM and OAM parameters of light. In previous studies, the effect of circularly polarized light and photoinduced ring current in mesoscopic semiconductor ring structures have been revealed. In the center of the ring, induced magnetic moment is in mainly We thank A. Bingül for the fruitful discussions. This work is supported by the