Copper sulphate is used as an activator in the flotation of base metal sulphides as it promotes the interaction of collector molecules with mineral surfaces. It has been used as an activator in certain platinum group mineral (PGM) flotation operations in South Africa although the mechanisms by which improvements in flotation performance are achieved are not well understood. Some investigations have suggested these changes in flotation performance are due to changes in the froth phase rather than activation of minerals by true flotation in the pulp zone. In the present study, the effect of copper sulphate on froth stability was investigated on two PGM containing ores, namely Merensky and UG2 (Upper Group 2) ores from the Bushveld Complex of South Africa. Froth stability tests were conducted using a non-overflowing froth stability column. Zeta potential tests and ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid (EDTA) tests were used to confirm the adsorption of reagents onto pure minerals commonly found in the two ores. The results of full-scale UG2 concentrator on/off copper sulphate tests are also presented. The UG2 ore showed a substantial decrease in froth stability in the order of reagent addition: no reagents>copper>xanthate>copper+xanthate, while Merensky ore showed a slight decrease. It was shown through zeta potential measurements that copper species were to be found on plagioclase, chromite, talc and pyrrhotite surfaces and through EDTA extraction that this copper was in the form of almost equal amounts of Cu(OH)2 and chemically reacted copper ions on the Merensky and UG2 ore surfaces. In certain cases, the presence of copper sulphate and xanthate substantially increased the recovery, and therefore the implied hydrophobicity, of pure minerals in a frothless microflotation device. It was, therefore, proposed that increases in hydrophobicity beyond an optimum contact angle for froth stability, were the cause of instabilities in the froth phase and these were found to impact grade and recovery in a full-scale concentrator. Differences in the extent of froth phase effects between the different ores can be attributed to differences in mineralogy.In the flotation of sulphide minerals, collectors belonging to the xanthate class are most commonly used. Activators are chemical compounds usually added to promote the interaction of collector molecules with the mineral surfaces (  Most flotation processes occur at alkaline conditions due to the mineralisation of the ores and it is important to understand the reactions occurring at these conditions. The pH of the system will affect the type of chemical species present and influences the adsorption mechanism as well as the flotation efficiency ( The ores of interest to this study are platinum group mineral (PGM)-bearing ores hosted within the Bushveld Complex in South Africa The three main PGM containing ores in the Bushveld Complex are Merensky, Upper Group 2 (UG2) and Platreef ( With regards to copper sulphate activation, the majority of the studies have focussed on pulp phase effects ( A Merensky ore and a UG2 ore from the western limb of the Bushveld Complex were used for the laboratory studies. 2 Copper sulphate pentahydrate (CuSO The pure minerals used in this study were pyrrhotite, plagioclase, chromite and talc. The minerals were carefully selected to ensure a representative range of hydrophilic and hydrophobic minerals for the UG2 and Merensky ores. Pyrrhotite is the most abundant BMS in Merensky ore and chromite is an abundant gangue mineral in UG2 ore. Plagioclase and talc are hydrophilic and hydrophobic gangue minerals respectively which are present in both ores. Activation of these minerals by copper could reduce the grade of the concentrate and affect the froth characteristics. The surface areas for the pure minerals were determined using the BET (Brunauer Emmett Teller) method and these were used to calculate the surface coverages (in monolayers) of reagents by assuming the surface area of the reactive thiol group of a xanthate molecule to be 37 The froth stability column was used to analyse the effect of copper sulphate on the froth phase of the flotation system based on a method of measuring froth stability developed by A microflotation cell was used to determine the flotation response of pure minerals in the absence of the froth phase and under low solids densities. The microflotation cell developed by Zeta potential tests were carried out on dilute dispersions of pure minerals of particle size less than 25 EDTA (Ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid) is a strong complexant used to determine the amount of Cu(II) on the mineral surface present as Cu(OH) Flotation surveys were performed on the rougher bank of a South African UG2 ore concentrator. The rougher bank consisted of 6 flotation cells, but the fifth cell was not operational and was bypassed. The survey was conducted over 3 The dynamic froth stability factor, Generally, Merensky ore resulted in a more stable froth than UG2 ore for all of the conditions investigated except for when no reagents were added. The largest difference in froth stability of the two ores was obtained when both copper sulphate and xanthate were present. The addition of copper sulphate had no effect on the dynamic froth stability factor for Merensky ore. The addition of xanthate as well as both copper sulphate and xanthate resulted in a slight destabilisation for Merensky ore. The UG2 ore showed a more substantial decrease in froth stability with the addition of reagents. The microflotation data was fitted to the Klimpel flotation model in order to assess the flotation kinetics by predicting the flotation rate constant, It is evident from The effect of addition of reagents on the floatability of pyrrhotite in synthetic plant water at pH 9 is shown in The addition of copper sulphate alone slightly increased the overall recovery of pyrrhotite. The addition of xanthate increased the flotation kinetics and the overall pyrrhotite recovery slightly as shown in Zeta potential measurements were used to show the presence of copper species on the surfaces of pure minerals since the presence of copper alters the surface charge of the mineral. The isoelectric point pH (pH It is evident that the presence of copper caused the zeta potential of the minerals to shift to more positive potentials at pH 9, which is the pH of interest. Before copper sulphate activation, the zeta potentials of the minerals were between −48 The effect of copper sulphate on the four minerals investigated in the presence of xanthate is shown in The zeta potentials of the minerals with copper activation in the presence of xanthate lie in the range between −48 The microflotation test work showed that the nature of the activation species influences the floatability of the minerals. The zeta potential tests gave an indication of the extent to which the surface charge was altered as a result of copper activation and xanthate adsorption. In order to determine the nature of the activating species on the mineral surfaces, analyses were done using EDTA, a complexing agent. For the froth stability tests, the dosage of 90 Cu(OH)  The highest amount of Cu(OH)   In this section of the paper, the zeta potential results are analysed first to show the effect of reagents on the surface charge of the pure minerals investigated. This is followed by a discussion of the microflotation results to investigate copper sulphate activation in the absence of the froth phase. The EDTA extraction results are then discussed which investigate the form of activation products on the mineral surfaces. Lastly, all of the pulp phase activation results are linked to the froth stability tests and the full-scale plant surveys. For all of the minerals investigated, there was no substantial change in the zeta potential with addition of copper sulphate below pH 5–6 as shown in From the speciation diagram of Cu(II) (  It can be seen from Adsorption of copper species at pH 9 was confirmed by the zeta potential measurements. In the presence of collector, a more hydrophobic copper xanthate species is expected to form on the mineral surface increasing the contact angle and hence the recovery of the particles through increased particle hydrophobicity. Talc is a naturally hydrophobic mineral and the reagents (copper and xanthate) were added to investigate their effect on the mineral’s floatability. The microflotation results showed that the floatability of talc did not substantially change with the addition of reagents ( It may have been expected for the floatability of the talc to decrease in the presence of copper due to non-selective precipitation of copper hydroxide at pH 9. The fact that this did not occur may mean that the copper did not react with the talc hydrophobic basal planes but with the already hydrophilic edges ( The addition of copper sulphate alone did not enhance pyrrhotite recovery as seen in For both Merensky and UG2 ores, the amount of EDTA extractable copper decreased when xanthate was present as shown in The Merensky ore had a relatively large percentage of copper hydroxide on the mineral surface (in the absence of xanthate) compared to the chemically reacted copper as shown in  The chemically reacted copper on the UG2 ore surface is expected to promote the adsorption of xanthate which may increase the particle hydrophobicity. This may then reduce the froth stability due to an increase in contact angle beyond the optimum angle to confer stability.  Two parameters with respect to particle properties namely particle hydrophobicity and the amount of particles reporting to the froth phase were found to be applicable to explain the changes in froth stability. The same trend of decreasing froth stability with addition of copper, xanthate and both copper and xanthate was observed for the two ores investigated. It is assumed this is due to the increase in hydrophobicity of the complexes formed as a result of pulp phase interactions. Based on the microflotation results discussed earlier, the increase in hydrophobicity of the complexes formed is proposed below: It is assumed that the decrease in the froth stability as a result of the addition of reagents is due to an increase in contact angle and increasing hydrophobicity which promotes coalescence of bubbles. The destabilisation effects of the froth observed could be due to increase in the contact angle beyond an optimum maximum ( The addition of copper sulphate had little effect on the froth stability of the Merensky ore, but had a destabilising effect on the UG2 ore. For the Merensky ore, it was expected that the formation of hydrophobic Cu(I) sulphide species on the mineral surfaces would increase the contact angle and result in an increase in bubble coalescence. There was a slight increase in floatability of pyrrhotite upon addition of copper sulphate in the microflotation tests, which suggests that the hydrophobicity increased slightly. However, in the context of the full mineralogical composition of the Merensky ore, this seems to have been insufficient to cause any changes in froth stability. The zeta potential tests showed adsorption of copper onto all the mineral surfaces and there was Cu(OH) The UG2 ore, on the other hand, was destabilised upon the addition of copper ( The addition of xanthate resulted in more destabilised froth than the condition with only copper addition for both the Merensky and UG2 ores, although destabilisation was minimal for the Merensky ore. The decrease in froth stability was attributed to the increase in hydrophobicity of the complex formed on the mineral surfaces. The zeta potentials of the pure minerals (talc and plagioclase) were slightly altered with the addition of xanthate possibly indicating some adsorption. The floatability of talc was not changed with the addition of xanthate as shown by the microflotation tests although the zeta potential tests suggested adsorption of xanthate onto the talc surfaces. The ions in the synthetic plant water could have increased sites for collector adsorption on the pyrrhotite surfaces. An increase in hydrophobicity increases the contact angle which in turn results in an increase in bubble coalescence which was observed with the addition of xanthate as a collector to the two ores. The most destabilised froth was observed for the condition with both copper sulphate and xanthate present for both ores. The froth stability of the Merensky ore was slightly decreased whereas the UG2 ore was substantially decreased. The zeta potential tests showed the addition of xanthate after copper activation of the minerals made the zeta potential more negative, which is indicative of xanthate adsorption after copper activation. The floatability of talc was not changed significantly with the addition of both copper sulphate and xanthate. However, talc is very naturally hydrophobic and it is possible that reagent addition has no further effect on hydrophobicity. Pyrrhotite floatability was highest in the presence of these two reagents. It is presumed that the addition of xanthate to copper activated sulphides in the Merensky ore increased the hydrophobicity and contact angle of particles. The higher contact angles promote bubble coalescence, resulting in the observed decrease in froth stability. The analysis of the mineral surface products using the EDTA extraction method revealed there was less Cu(OH) The flotation survey results shown in In general, the effect of copper sulphate addition on metallurgical recovery and grade may be complex. There may be opposing effects of copper sulphate addition. An increase in pulp phase valuable mineral recovery with copper sulphate addition, may be offset by a decrease in froth stability resulting in drop-back of valuable minerals. The overall recovery would be the net effect of these two sub-processes. In the case of grade, inadvertent copper activation may result in the flotation of gangue minerals that dilute the grade. On the other hand, a less stable froth may result in a reduction in entrainment and drop-back of minerals to the pulp. In the case under investigation, the grade was increased upon the addition of copper sulphate suggesting that inadvertent gangue activation was not a major problem and that changes in grade were due to the less stable froth. There was a relatively minor loss in platinum recovery, upon addition of copper sulphate, which confirmed that froth instability was the overriding process, rather than activation and increased recovery of valuable minerals. From the preceding findings it is evident that froth stability is dependent on the particle properties such as particle concentration and particle hydrophobicity. These factors were found to be directly linked to activation by copper sulphate. The results showed the Merensky ore froth was not destabilised to a large extent with the addition of copper sulphate although chemically reacted copper species were found on the surface of Merensky ore. The base metal sulphides were rendered more hydrophobic as shown by the microflotation tests for pyrrhotite. The increased hydrophobicity was either at or below the optimum range for good froth stability (∼65°), or the heavily mineralised Merensky ore froth was not that susceptible to the destabilising effects of increased contact angle. For the UG2 ore, froth stability decreased with addition of copper sulphate which was not entirely due to non-selective hydrophilic copper hydroxide coating as initially proposed. The formation of chemically reacted copper was unexpected and it is the first time that this has been shown for UG2 ore. It was postulated that the copper also chemically reacted with the oxide minerals in the UG2 ore. The decrease in froth stability in the presence of xanthate was attributed to the formation of hydrophobic copper–xanthate species, which have a destabilising effect in the sparsely mineralised UG2 froth. The results of the surveys on a UG2 concentrator conducted with the addition and without the addition of copper sulphate augmented the results of the laboratory tests. Entrainability was reduced upon addition of copper sulphate and this resulted in an improvement in grade and a slight decrease in recovery presumably due to a less stable froth. The extent of these changes in grade and recovery will vary according to which of the pulp or the froth sub-processes are dominant. Pulp phase sub-processes include valuable mineral and/or gangue mineral activation resulting in increased recovery of either mineral to the concentrate. Froth phase effects include changes in amount or hydrophobicity of solids reporting to the froth that will alter the froth stability. The authors would like to thank the members of the