Despite good progress in developing pedotransfer functions (PTFs), the input variables that are more preferable in a PTF have not been yet determined clearly. Among the modeling techniques to characterize soil structure, those using fractal theory are in majority. For the first time, fractal parameters were used as predictors to estimate the water content at different matric suctions using artificial neural networks (ANNs). PTFs were developed to estimate soil water retention curve (SWRC) from a dataset of 148 soil samples from North West of Iran. Including geometric mean (dg
                     ), geometric standard deviation (sg
                     ), and median diameter (Md
                     ) of particle size distribution as input parameters significantly enhanced the PTFs’ accuracy and increased the coefficient of determination (R
                     2) by up to 5.5%. Fractal parameters of particle size distribution (PSDFPs) were used as predictors and it improved the accuracy and reliability by decreasing root mean square error (RMSE) by up to 30% for water content at h value of 5kPa (θ
                     5 kPa) and by up to 12.5% for water content at h value of 50kPa (θ
                     50 kPa). Entering the fractal parameters of aggregate size distribution (ASDFPs) in the models raised the accuracy at most soil matric suctions (h) and caused up to 6.7% reduction in the RMSE. Their impacts were significant at θ
                     25
                     
                     kPa and θ
                     50
                     
                     kPa. The network architectures were unique and problem specific with respect to the output layer transfer functions and number of hidden neurons. Adding PSDFPs and ASDFPs to the input parameters of the proper ANN models could improve the estimation of SWRC, significantly.Akaike information criterion intercept of Rieu and Sposito’s model bulk density clay intercept of Bird’s model intercept of first domain of Millan’s model intercept of second domain of Millan’s model mass fractal dimension of Bird’s model critical particle size, separating the two domains in Millan’s model geometric mean of particle diameter mass fractal dimension of Bartoli’s model mass fractal dimension of Tyler and Wheatcraft’s model mass fractal dimension of Yang’s model fragmentation fractal dimension of Rieu and Sposito’s model fractal dimension of first domain in Millan’s model fractal dimension of second domain in Millan’s model geometric mean error ratio geometric standard deviation of the error ratio intercept of Bartoli’s model median diameter Morgan–Granger–Newbold multilayer perceptron number of hidden neurons output layer transfer function root mean square error coefficient of determination sand variance of mass of aggregates for Bartoli’s model variance of cumulative mass of particles for Bird’s model variance of cumulative mass of particles for Millan’s model variance of cumulative number of aggregates for Rieu and Sposito’s model variance of the ratio of cumulative mass of particles to total mass for Tyler and Wheatcraft’s model variance of the ratio of cumulative mass to total mass of particles for Yang’s model geometric standard deviation of particle diameter silt total porosity gravimetric water content Knowing the soil hydraulic properties is needed for many applications in hydrology, agronomy, meteorology, ecology, environmental protection ( Therefore, attempts have been made to develop pedotransfer functions (PTFs) to estimate soil hydraulic properties from more easily-available soil data, such as texture, organic matter, bulk density (  Despite the diverse parameters which have been employed in developing PTFs, one basic question still remained unanswered: which input variables are preferable or necessary to be included in a PTF ( Among all of the available modeling techniques to characterize the soil structure, those utilizing fractal theory are in the majority. An appropriate use of fractals can lead to rigorous quantification of the heterogeneity, tortuosity, and connectivity of the soil pore/solid space, or the power-law distribution of number sizes produced from fragmentation process ( Artificial neural network (ANN) is a powerful technique that has received great attentions to predict the SWRC ( Other types of ANNs, such as general regression neural networks, have also been used by In this work, despite the previous studies, various ANN structures including different hidden neurons and different transfer functions in both hidden and output layers were tested. In addition, for the first time, ANN and fractal theory were combined and fractal parameters were used to predict SWRC. The hypothesis of this research was that using fractal parameters of particle size and aggregate size distributions as predictors together with ANNs to estimate the SWRC may substantially improve the accuracy of PTFs. The objectives of the study were: (i) to derive point PTFs to evaluate the performance of different transfer functions in both hidden and output layers, and to find the optimum number of hidden neurons for each PTF; (ii) to assess the impact of PSDFPs as inputs in improving the accuracy and reliability of the derived PTFs; and (iii) to investigate the improvement of PTFs when using ASDFPs as inputs. The 124 data sets were collected in Hamadan and 24 sets in Guilan, the two provinces of Iran. The disturbed samples were collected using auger while the undisturbed samples were taken by core sampling method using steel cylinders of 5.1 Soil particle size distribution (PSD) of the <2 Soil water retention was determined using both undisturbed soil cores and disturbed samples. Sandbox apparatus or Büchner funnels were employed for creating matric suctions (  where The symmetry between distribution of pores and solids has been presented by pore–solid fractal (PSF) as described by Based on the natural distribution of PSD, According to The number of aggregates within each size fraction was computed using following equation On the base of mathematical concept of fractals, fractal dimension of aggregates could be estimated from power-law relationship between either number-diameter or mass–diameter or bulk density–diameter of the aggregates ( Mass fractal dimension according to According to This model was fitted to 148 soil data sets and For the fractal models, the square of the standard deviation of measurements ( The most effective fractal model parameters for both PSD and ASD were specified by sensitivity analysis and then entered as predictors into the ANN models. The whole process and different methods applied to predict gravimetric soil water content at different According to In this study sensitivity analysis was performed to determine the most influential fractal model parameters for both PSD and ASD. The sensitivity coefficient of the output variable (water content at a specific At first, for a given output variable (water content at different An example of sensitivity analysis of input variables for the prediction of In order to identify which ASD fractal model is the most effective to predict the SWRC, the same procedure as for PSD was applied and Bartoli’s model parameters ( As ANNs are explained in detail in the already existing literature (e.g. Log-transformation was used to normalize the The PTFs for the prediction of gravimetric soil water content at different PTFs were developed using three types of ANNs, namely MLP, general regression neural networks (GRNNs) and general feedforward (GFF) networks, to estimate the soil water content at Several transfer functions including tanh, linear tanh, sigmoid, linear sigmoid, bias, linear, and axon in hidden and output layers were tested to achieve the highest accuracy and reliability. In order to examine the stability of the results, for each The model inputs were arranged in a hierarchy. PTF1 category was based on the basic soil properties (i.e. %sand, %silt, %clay, bulk density (BD), and TP). PTF2 group used Training and testing data ( The Pearson correlation coefficient ( In this study, PTF1 of Introducing As the three fractal models of PSD simulate the same PSD curve, a sensitivity analysis was done to detect the most effective fractal model for the SWRC. The sensitivity analysis indicated that the parameters of the PSD fractal model of The SWRC can be predicted using the soil texture data ( In order to identify the most effective ASD fractal model, the same procedure developed for the PSD fractal model selection was applied. Sensitivity analysis showed that the parameters of the fractal model of Introducing ASD fractal parameters of Using PSDFPs as predictors along with the basic soil properties (in PTF3) significantly decreased RMSE and AIC and increased Introducing ASDFPs to the ANNs did not improve the reliability of PTF4 but significantly decreased the model accuracy when compared with PTF3 ( Third, also it was expected the influence of ASDFPs to be increased with decreasing As the results for the estimation of In general, the RMSE of PTF1 in prediction of Introducing The high reliability of PTFs developed from large databases was observed by The reason for the minor contribution of ASDFPs is that they are soil structural parameters. With increasing matric suction, soil structure loses its influence on water retention, while the effect of soil texture becomes more important ( Using sand, silt, clay, BD, and TP in the PTF1 to predict Including In this study, MLP structures had better performance than those of GRNN and GFF ( Seven different transfer functions were tested in all of the models, and for most cases tanh performed better than the others did. Therefore, this transfer function was selected for all of the models. Different types of transfer functions in the output layer neurons yielded better outputs of the PTFs. Out of the seven transfer functions that were evaluated in the output layer of 20 networks, the axon, bias axon, linear, and linear-tanh resulted in better outputs for 8, 8, 2, and 2 cases, respectively ( Each transfer function takes different formulas and gives different weights to the input variables, therefore, one may perform better than the others. The optimum number of hidden neurons varied for the different networks. Most of them yielded better outputs with 4, 5, or 10 hidden neurons, but it increased up to 30 for some networks ( In general, these results indicate that MLP-type networks with one hidden layer resulted in better outputs for estimation of the SWRC. But the networks that are required for every problem or system seem to be unique regarding the output layer transfer functions and number of hidden neurons. It means that the relationship between soil properties and water retention at a particular But this finding does not mean that these PTFs cannot be used for other data sets. Similar to the other authors ( The results of this research showed that ANN models can predict the SWRC based on fractal parameters with satisfactory accuracy. Using PSDFPs significantly improved the accuracy and reliability of the majority of PTFs. This reflects the ability of fractal models to simulate PSD and the similarity of PSD curve and SWRC. We suggest using PSDFPs as predictors to estimate the SWRC. Introducing ASDFPs to the model improved the accuracy of the results in some cases, but did not improve the reliability of the PTFs. A reason might be the correlation between ASDFPs and other variables such as PSDFPs. It is recommended to use ASDFPs for prediction of the SWRC if PSDFPs are not available. The ASDFPs were shown to improve reliability in those cases. In addition, calculating the fractal parameters for micro-aggregates and then using them to predict the SWRC would be useful. Therefore, the results of this study might be an answer to find the new input variables (ASDFPs and PSDFPs) that could improve the estimation of SWRC. PSD data can be found in most of the soil databases. Therefore, calculating fractal parameters using the recommended models in this study and using these parameters as predictors could certainly improve the estimation of the SWRC. The architecture of each ANN model is unique regarding the output layer transfer functions and the number of hidden neurons; thus each problem should be matched to the proper output layer transfer functions and number of hidden neurons. Therefore, this would be yet another step to improve the estimation of the SWRC. The authors are deeply grateful to Dr. Mosaddeghi from Isfahan University of Technology, Isfahan, Iran for his kind cooperation in providing some parts of the data. The authors are deeply grateful to the two anonymous reviewers for their helpful comments on the manuscript.