Objectives
                  Various percent canal occlusion measurement methods have been used to assess the spinal canal stenosis following a thoracolumbar burst fracture. However, there are no studies performed comparing these techniques. The objective of this study was to determine the reliability of three techniques used to measure the spinal canal stenosis in thoracolumbar burst fractures on lateral radiograph and CT scans, and to identify the most reliable and practical method of assessment.
               
                  Methods
                  Fifty preoperative lateral radiographs and axial computed tomography (CT) scans of thoracolumbar burst fractures were analyzed by five observers in two sessions. The three measurement techniques were tested: the ratio of sagittal diameter of spinal canal at the injury level to that at the adjacent level on lateral plain radiographs (Ratio 1) and on axial CT scans (Ratio 2); and the ratio of cross-sectional area of spinal canal at the injury level to that at the adjacent level on axial CT scans (Ratio 3). Interobserver and intraobserver reliability for each measure was assessed.
               
                  Results
                  Greater coefficient of variation (CV) of measurement was founded for the Ratio 1 obtained from lateral plain radiographs than the other two ratios (Ratio 2 and 3) from CT scans (P
                     <0.05), while no differences of CV were noted between the Ratio 2 and Ratio 3 with CT scans (P
                     >0.05). There was no significant improvement (P
                     >0.05) of the interobserver agreement after a 3-month interval for all three methods. A high significant positive correlation was observed between Ratio 1 and Ratio 2, Ratio 1 and Ratio 3, and Ratio 2 and Ratio 3 (P
                     <0.05 for all).
               
                  Conclusions
                  CT scans are more reliable than plain radiographs in the evaluation of spinal canal occlusion in thoracolumbar burst fractures although the agreement might be acceptable for the latter. Measurement of sagittal diameter of spinal canal using CT scan might be a more reasonable choice than of cross-sectional area of spinal canal because of its simplicity and comparable measurement reliability.Burst fractures are common among thoracolumbar injuries, characterized by height loss of the anterior portion of the vertebral body and disruption of the posterior cortex There have been many attempts to determine whether neurologic deficits are related to traumatic spinal canal stenosis in thoracolumbar burst fractures, but studies have yielded even more conflicting results Radiographic measurements play a critical role in the diagnosis and treatment of thoracolumbar burst fractures, and different measurement parameters have been recommended to assess the severity of traumatic spinal canal stenosis in different clinical settings In the current study, we compared different percent canal occlusion measurement methods in patients who have sustained posttraumatic spinal canal stenosis from a thoracolumbar burst fracture and to determine interobserver and intraobserver reliability of these techniques. The correlation between these measurement parameters was also evaluated. The aim of this study was to identify the simplest and most reliable and practical method of assessment. Following approval by the institutional review board, preoperative lateral radiographs and axial computed tomography (CT) scans of the spine were randomly selected retrospectively from the files of 50 patients who had been treated for a thoracolumbar burst fracture in our institution. The radiographs and the CT scans were obtained following a standard protocol in all cases. The CT scans were made on the GE scanner with slice thickness of 3 The three measurement techniques included: (1) the ratio of sagittal diameter of spinal canal at the injury level to that at the adjacent level on lateral plain radiographs (Ratio 1, The coefficient of variation (CV), calculated as standard deviation (S.D.)/average The results of the three ratios from five observers in two sessions were presented in  There was not any significant improvement ( Diagnosis of thoracolumbar burst fractures and evaluation of the degree of spinal canal stenosis depends partly upon the measurement techniques with high repeatability. For any measurement technique, interobserver and intraobserver reliability are a prerequisite for clinical application. However, we know of no study that has investigated the reliability of any measurement techniques for evaluating percent canal occlusion in thoracolumbar burst fractures with either plain radiographs or CT scans. Since first described by Nykamp et al. When we planned this study we hypothesized that the techniques with CT scans would significantly improve the inter- or intraobserver agreement for the measurement with plain radiographs. The findings of our study have approved this hypothesis; but we also found that there were considerable inter- or intraobserver repeatability when the percent canal occlusion was measured on the plain radiographs. In contrast with the study of Ballock et al. Another factor that could improve reliability of measurement may be the observers’ experience. Brorson et al. Obviously, it was not possible to obtain the actual extent of occlusion which was measured only in autopsy spines; it is generally believed that CT canal measurement could provide accurate anatomical quantitative data. Therefore, the use of CT imaging has appeared as the gold standard in measurement for the degree of canal occlusion. This study showed that there was statistically significant correlation between the percent canal occlusion obtained with plain radiographs and with CT scan images, indicating that plain radiographs remains a simple and practicable method for evaluating the degree of traumatic spinal canal stenosis although they may be less accurate. As addition of CT scans increases agreement on measurement, we suggest that, if possible, measurement of canal occlusion on axial CT scans be made. Furthermore, measurement of sagittal diameter of spinal canal would be a more reasonable choice than of cross-sectional area of spinal canal because of its simplicity. Whether addition of CT scans to plain radiographs for evaluating the degree of traumatic spinal canal stenosis would exert an impact on the surgeon's choice of treatment needs to be further clarified. In conclusion, with regard to the reliability and reproducibility of percent canal occlusion measurement methods in patients who have sustained posttraumatic spinal canal stenosis from a thoracolumbar burst fracture, all three methods based on either plain radiographs or CT scans have an acceptable inter- or intraobserver agreement. However, measurement with CT is more reliable than that with plain radiographs. Both measurement techniques on CT scans have the similar inter- or intraobserver agreement. Therefore, measurement of sagittal diameter of spinal canal on CT scan might be more reasonable, because of its simplicity, for evaluating the spinal stenosis than of cross-sectional area of spinal canal.