The present research study is oriented with the fabrication of tubular furnace for laboratory uses. The furnace is developed for the sintering/heat treatment of metals/alloys. It is 3 kg capacity with a power rating of 2500 W. The case of the furnace is made by a mild steel sheet and tube by silica in the center of the case horizontally. The tube is pasted with plaster of Paris to make grooves to fix the heating element and the internal volume is filled with glass wool to provide refractoriness between the heating element and mild steel case. It is designed for 1200 °C on an automatic PID control panel and achieved 1121 °C. This project is carried out to enhance the laboratory facility for sintering and heat treatment purposes at very low prices.The heating furnace plays an important role in the industrial production cycle as the most important heating equipment. As China's second-largest energy-intensive machinery, it is similar to thermal power generation, but its average combustion efficiency is about 30%, much lower than that of 50% in other developed countries It's a very difficult task to produce a compact furnace that achieves a high temperature. Furnace costs also play an important role in manufacture. The present work aims to make a compact and low-cost furnace in the required size but attain a high temperature in a low time cycle. As we know, Furnace is a material heating device that changes the shapes and characteristics of the material. There are now numerous types of furnaces that have good temperatures, but their size and cost constraints. Most types of furnaces are used similarly in the industries. The industrial furnace is intended to achieve a higher processing temperature compared to an open-air system and to achieve a more efficient closed system. Normally, industrial furnaces are more than 400 °C at temperature. Heat is produced from an industrial furnace by mixing the combustible with air or oxygen or electricity. A tube furnace is a type of heating furnace that used to synthesize and purify inorganic compounds and sometimes organically. These furnaces consist of a ceramic tube (cylinder cavity), which is enveloped in a thermal isolation matrix by the heating coils (Kanthal cable). Tube furnace is used primarily for heat-treating processes like cured, brazed, sintered, soldered, sublimated, synthesized and tempered, to increase the mechanical properties of the material. The key parts of the furnace can be found in the In high-temperature applications that require erosion and electronic or thermal insulation, ceramic tube and ceramic rod materials are utilized. The ceramic tubes and rods are made of oxides and carbides like other ceramic products and they have high-strength, high-purity, refractory, good insulation. A new type of Fire-resistant fire insulation material is used in white or tidy size which is a ceramic fiber blanket and also known aluminum silicate blanket, with integrated fire resistance, thermally insulating and heat separating functions. It has properties for no bonding formation, good resistance to tensile strength and a fibrous structure when used in a neutral, oxidizing atmosphere. The Ceramic Fiber blankets can recover original thermal and physical properties following drying without the effect of oil oxidation. The temperature ranges from 1260 °C to 2300 °C. The classic series, the pure wool series, and the research series come in three numbers of the series. A thermocouple is an electrical device composed of two different electrical conductive that form electrical joints at different temperatures. As the product of the thermoelectric effect, a thermocouple generates a temperature-dependent voltage and this voltage is interpreted for temperature measurement. Kanthal is the trademark used for the iron-chromium-aluminum (FeCrAl) family of alloys for a variety of high temperature and resistance applications to generate heat. FeCrAl alloys are composed principally of iron, chromium (20–30%) and aluminum (4–5%). It is one of the most applicatbe heating elements for furnace fabrication. The Kanthal FeCrAl alloy forms an aluminum oxide protective layer. The normal melting point of Kanthal FeCrAl alloy is 1500 °C. An integrated proportional–derivative controller is a control loop feedback mechanism that is widely used in an industrial control system and many other applications that need continuously modulated power. The error value is determined continually by a PID controller as a difference between the desired setpoint (SP) and a measured process variable (PV), and a correction is applied based on a proportional, integral and derivative term (P, I and D, respectively) and therefore on the name. An electronic switching system is used and it is called a solid-state relay (SSR). It activates or turns off when a small voltage is applied across its control terminals. SSR consists of a sensor that responds to the appropriate input (controlling signal). This includes the solid-state electronic switching equipment that switches power to the loading circuitry. The relay can be switched to either AC or DC. It does not have moving parts but it does function the same thing as an electromechanical relay. LED lights are used to indicate power on/off. By providing the input supply of the machine, the selector switch is on/off. The engine that connects or disconnects the device is provided with a switch. Gypsum plaster of Paris is sued to making grooves to hold heating element on the tube. It has properties to quick setting and consisting of the fine white powder, which hardens if moisturized and is allowed to dry. Plaster of Paris (calcium sulfate hemihydrate) is known since ancient times because it is made from abundant gypsum found near Paris. Plaster of paris usually does not shrink or crack, so it is an optimum casting medium to obtain desire exterior of the tube. It is typically used for prefabricating and retaining ornamental plasterwork on the ceilings and cornices. In medicine, plaster is also used to immobilize broken bones during the healing phase, although many contemporary orthopedic casts are made of fiberglass or heat plastics. Many sculptors work carried with plaster of Paris, because the pace at which the plaster sets offer the work a sense of immediacy and the sculptor can easily accomplish the original idea. Gesso (usually made of plaster from Paris mixed with glue) was then used in medieval and Renaissance times to create the soil for temperament and oil painting on wood panels, plaster, piercing or canvas. Plaster of paris is prepared to 120–180 °C (248–356°F), by the heating of calcium sulfate dihydrate or gypsum. The wall or hard wall is called a plaster additive that can protect interior surfaces by passive fire. Square shape box has been made with GI sheet for the length of the frame and it is prepared it perfectly. Hole is created with a diamètre of 60 mm throughout the longitudinal tube shape on both side of the frame of the box in that a ceramic tube is fixed. For the construction of the furnaces, there are many types of methods, including many steps used to make the tubular furnace successful. The tubular furnace is made to assist in sintering as well as the heat treatment operation of the specimen. This operation may enhance the mechanical/chemical properties of the materials. Initially, the tube dimension is fixed and prepared GI sheet to fabricate the box. The structure of the case of the furnace is made by using the galvanized iron sheet. The furnace case is designed in the box shape and this box contains a longitudinal hole to hold a ceramic tube. The box of the furnace is shown in The grooves on the ceramic tube are made by using POP for the arrangement of the heating element. In this combination, the ceramic tube has to be arranged in such a way that it can affect the furnace wall. POP is pasted by 20 mm thickness on the ceramic tube so that rolls can be easily made on the tube of spring with a 12 mm dia of kanthal wire. The ceramic tube is wrapped with a heating element. Glass wool is fixed in the inner side of the box to protect the iron sheets case as shown in Wrapping wools on the tube after the arrangement with the heating element as shown in Arrangement of the ceramic tube wrapped with wool in the casing (box) wrapped with glass wool. It is inserted into the cassetto and packed and bound after these two wires of kanthal wire that are formed by the electronic system from the furnace cassetto. The ceramic tube wrapped with the heating element and glass wool is inserted into the furnace box. In the assembling system PID controller, SSR, selector button and lights for furnace operation are arranged. The PID controller is used for the temperature control and calculation and SSR is used for the control unit to be activated and disabled if a small voltage is applied across its control terminals. And the selector switch is used to turn the machine on/off, providing the machine with inputs, where LED lights indicated power on/off. Furnace electrical resistance uses indirect heating principle. Wool is passed through a wire closely wounded in the ceramic tube arranged in the two-phase pipe chamber with metallic alloy wire (Kanthal). Internal resistance is contrary to the current flow, which results in heat. Energy moves through the refractory material and this energy is transferred to the charge by radiation and convection. The furnace was tested by the sintering of aluminum alloys. The characteristics curves i.e., heating time vs. Furnace temperature. Initially, the furnace is loaded with aluminum of 0.5 kg and as the temperature was rising, time and temperature were recorded continuously and a characteristics curve is shown in The change in temperature is measured/tested with a thermocouple on aluminum alloy for the thermal treatment of the sample. The specimen has been held many times in the tubular space and has a temperature profile. The various parameters and temperatures have created many products and all the tests passed successively by the furnace have been established. Some of the specific test results are obtained as maximum working temperature 1121 °C in 150 mins as shown in The present study concludes the fabrication of furnace working temperature (up to 1121 °C) after the testing of the furnace at which it can easily perform a different kind of heat treatment processes like hardening, annealing, normalizing, and sintering for different kind of materials like hardened cast iron parts, Stainless steel parts, Copper alloy parts, Aluminium alloy parts. Thus gained immense knowledge and valuable experience through working on this study. The hands-on experience with these systems gave us an insight into the actual working of an industry on a project. It could be got knowledge that how the process takes place in the construction of any new furnace. The constructed furnace cost achieved 1/8th of the market price of commercially available furnace. The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper.