Volume 2 of the ‘Flotation Reagents Handbook’ is a continuation of Volume 1, and presents fundamental and practical knowledge on flotation of gold, platinum group minerals and the major oxide minerals, as well as rare earths. Rather than reiterating what is well known about flotation of gold, PGMs and oxide minerals, emphasis has been placed on the separation methods which are not so effective when using conventional treatment processes. These difficult separation methods are largely attributed to problems with selectivity between valuable minerals and gangue minerals, especially in the flotation of oxide ores and base metal oxides, such as copper, lead and zinc oxide ores. Literature on flotation of gold, PGMs, rare earths and various oxides is rather limited, compared to literature on treatment of sulphide-bearing ores. As mentioned earlier, the main problem arises from the presence of gangue minerals in the ore, which have flotation properties similar to those of valuable minerals. These minerals have a greater floatability than that of pyrochlore or columbite. In the beneficiation of oxide minerals, finding a selectivity solution is a major task. This volume of the Handbook is devoted to the beneficiation of gold, platinum group minerals and, most important, oxide minerals. The book contains details on flotation properties of the major minerals. The fundamental research carried out by a number of research organizations over the past several decades is also contained in this book. Commercial plant practices for most oxide minerals are also presented. The major objective of this volume of the Handbook is to provide practical mineral processors that are faced with the problem of beneficiation of difficult-to-treat ores, with a comprehensive digest of information available, thus enabling them to carry out their development testwork in a more systematic manner and to assist in the control of operating plants. This book will also provide valuable background information for researchers, university students and professors. The book contains comprehensive references of worldwide literature on the subject. New technologies for most of the oxide minerals included in this volume were developed by the author.