Rock media may be exposed to dynamic forces and time-dependent stresses. Dynamic phenomena in rock such as blasting and earthquakes need to propagate waves and dynamic stresses through the body. Therefore, stresses, strains, and displacements in rocks should be defined as time-dependent due to the dynamic phenomena. In this study, a general Green's function solution of an elastic wave propagation due to rock blasting has been analytically derived. The Navier's equations of motion have been assumed as governing equations and a general two-dimensional elastodynamic Green's function has been obtained in terms of displacement. The strain and stress fields related to the displacement Green's function have also been obtained using the theory of elasticity. Then, a generic two-dimensional problem containing an explosion in a blast hole has been solved using the resulting analytical solution. Moreover, a similar numerical modeling has been conducted using Finite Difference Method (FDM). Eventually, results from the analytical scheme have been compared with the finite difference numerical modeling and the valuable results from a previous experimental and numerical study.Generally, dynamic phenomena in rocks, such as blasting and earthquakes, need to propagate waves and dynamic stresses through the body. Explosions mainly occur in a very short time (milliseconds). Propagation of explosion waves in rock media can have significant effects. Therefore, dynamic analysis of rock media and identification of dynamic behavior of rocks are important issues in engineering problems. Rock blasting as a dynamic phenomenon contained two main steps, shock wave propagation and gas expansion. Based on gas pressurization theory of blasting some quasi-static solution of the radial crack propagation due to blasting have been carried out by some researchers. Elastic wave propagation in rocks is commonly studied based on elastodynamics theories. Elastodynamic problems can often be solved using formulations or expressions referred to as Green's functions. The elastodynamic Green's function is useful for specifying displacement, strain and stress fields in solid materials. Previously, finding out the Green's function for elastodynamic As mentioned, each study in the literature was focused on a particular problem and its resulted Green's function is specific to its own problem. However, in this study, a two-dimensional analytical modeling of the rock blasting operations has been accomplished considering the elastodynamics principles and fundamental solutions using the Green's functions. Therefore, a Green's function has been derived in terms of displacements. Then, the strain and stress fields related to this displacement Green's function have been obtained using the dynamic theory of elasticity. A similar two-dimensional problem is numerically modeled and solved by a sophisticated finite difference code. These analytical and numerical results are compared with each other. Also, these results are compared with the previous experimental and numerical results cited in the literature. These comparisons illustrate the validity and applicability of the analytical and numerical results presented in this research work. Rock blasting and blast-induced effects on the rock media is a significant issue in rock mechanics and rock engineering. Some numerical and experimental studies have been performed about the blast-induced wave propagation in rock media and its effects. Rock blasting as a dynamic phenomenon contains two main steps, shock wave propagation and gas expansion. In this study, shock wave propagation stage is considered in order to study the propagation of the explosion-induced stress waves in rock media due to the explosion. Simple typical problem with some assumptions is defined and will be solved in the next sections using analytical and numerical methods. The problem contained a blast hole in the infinite rock mass. The problem is assumed two-dimensional in an elastic, isotropic, homogenous and continuum medium. In this study, the elastic properties of the rock medium and the other features of the explosion have been considered similar to. In addition to above considerations and assumptions of the problem, it is supposed that both P- and S- wave could propagate in the rock medium and attenuate. It should be noted that there are not any wave reflection and interference in the problem and assumed that all induced waves pass through the rock medium and some parts of them attenuate. Subsequently, the proposed problem will be solved using analytical and numerical methods in the next sections. The Navier's equations of motion have been assumed as governing equations. In order to calculate the Green's function, the presented governing equations were solved for time-dependent explosion loading as a point load. The resulting wave equations were solved using Poisson's equation. Then a general elastodynamic Green's function was obtained in terms of displacements. The strain and stress fields related to the displacement field (derived from Green's function) were also obtained using the theory of elasticity. Rock blasting is a dynamic phenomenon that mainly occurs in a very short time (milliseconds). The pressure of detonation (PD) is an important factor in rock blasting with several equations to calculate it. Additionally, the variations of borehole wall pressure with time lapse ( In addition to the explosion pressure equations, equations of motion are mainly significant in the analysis of dynamic phenomena like that rock blasting. The general form of elastodynamic equations of motion are, Based on Helmholtz theory, any vector field such as Thus, the Navier's equation (Eq. 11b) can be re-written as: Then, the Helmholtz decomposition of the displacement So, Navier's equation, Eq. ( A point force is used as the body force in this study. Accordingly, the Poisson's equation and its general solution are used in the form of a Dirac-delta function. Based on Helmholtz theory, the Poisson's equation ( Thus, the proposed dynamic body force (in Eq. 11a) which applies to point Eqs. For spherically symmetric solutions, in form of Substituting Eq. These two governing differential equations have a general solution as, The first term in Eq. Accordingly, the solution for Eq. By substitution Eq. The first term of Eq. Eq. In this study, two-dimensional formulations for the two displacement components, Under the application of external loading, elastic solids deform. The deformation is specified by displacement and strain. After calculation of displacement using presented approach, the related strain field can be computed using the theory of elasticity and the following relations between displacement and strain, Based on the theory of elasticity, the stress fields of the particles can be determined using the general form of stress-strain relations (Hooke's law), One of the most important parameters of motion is velocity. In case of wave propagation in the rock media, the velocity of particles is a determinative factor to identify its motion. Therefore, the velocity of the media particles should be calculated from displacement Green's function (Eq. Eq.  If the displacement of Eq.  The formulations in sub- Peak Particle Velocity (PPV) has been accepted as an important indicator of structural damage and ground vibration. So, this parameter is calculated at this stage using the presented analytical solution. The maximum displacement of the particles and the average of the stress field around the blast hole are also obtained during the explosion. In order to present these results, each of the mentioned parameters is found at different distances from the blast hole (r). In here, a simple numerical modeling has been conducted. Propagation of the explosion-induced stress wave in rock media due to explosion has been numerically modeled using finite difference method and FLAC software. The model contained a typical blast hole in the granitic rock is set. The modeling plan and the input properties are set to solve the problem stated in During the numerical modeling of the explosion, dynamic parameters are recorded in the specified distances from the explosion source ( The problem stated in In the previous sections, some dynamic parameters of the infinite problem medium have been achieved using the Green's function solution and a sophisticated finite difference code. In this section, results from the analytical scheme are compared with the valuable results from a previous experimental and numerical study Trivino and Mohanty Consequently, results from all of the mentioned methods and approaches are compared in terms of PPV. As can be seen in In order to analytical solution, a general Green's functions solution of elastic wave propagation due to rock blasting has been analytically derived. The procedure has been presented in a fully dynamic manner and the concluding Green's function is also time dependent. The displacements, strains, stresses and velocities have been obtained using the presented Green's function solution and theory of elasticity. Then, a proposed problem in an elastic isotropic homogeneous infinite medium has been solved using the analytical Green's function solution. Moreover, the problem has been numerically modeled using a sophisticated finite difference code. The numerical models have been surrounded by the quiet boundaries using the viscous dashpots. The resulting Green's function consists of two main parts, near-field and far-field terms. For small distances ( Results from both analytical and numerical solutions have been compared in terms of maximum displacement, PPV and average of the stress tensor components. The results exhibited very good agreements between two proposed methods. Furthermore, results from the analytical scheme have also been compared with the previous experimental and numerical results cited in the literature in terms of Peak Particle Velocity (PPV). Consequently, a satisfying agreement is found between the Green's function, field data and numerical models. These comparisons illustrate the validity and applicability of the analytical and numerical results presented in this research work. Generally, the represented derivation of the Green's function can be confidently used to express the elastic wave propagation in rock blasting and other rock-based dynamic phenomena. It can be used in the numerical methods for dynamic investigations as fundamental solutions. In the other words, the resulting Green's function can be a useful tool for the application of numerical methods such as Boundary Element Method (BEM). Partial derivatives of the displacement Eq.