To prevent recombination at the interface of TiO2/polysulfide-electrolyte, a ZnO layer was deposited on a TiO2 electrode. The optimized ZnO-coated solar cell exhibited a ∼32% increase in the power-conversion efficiency compared to the bare cell. The coating layer acts as an energy barrier, which plays an important role in reducing the charge recombination from the TiO2 electrode to the electrolyte. Moreover, CdS quantum-dot adsorption was enhanced by employing the ZnO-coated layer. The thicker ZnO layer (more than 8-cycle deposition), however, led to a less porous electrode, as confirmed by electrolyte diffusivity, and also deteriorated the cell efficiency by introducing defect states verified by electron lifetime and chronoamperometric reduction current.Quantum-dot-sensitized solar cells (QDSCs) have been investigated as one of the most promising approaches for third-generation photovoltaic devices Despite these advantages, the efficiency of QDSCs is much lower than that of dye-sensitized solar cells (DSSCs) As shown in Therefore, more systematic approach is necessary to analyze reactions at the TiO Nanoporous TiO The CdS quantum dots were deposited on the nanoporous TiO The photocurrent–voltage ( The ZnO-coated layer between CdS and TiO The change in the amount of CdS quantum dots, most likely due to the prior ZnO coating, is demonstrated by absorption spectra. The absorption edge is shifted to a longer wavelength, and the overall absorption is enhanced in the ZnO-coated electrodes, as shown in A quantitative analysis by ICP-AES also demonstrates that the amount of CdS quantum dots is increased. The Cd/Ti atomic ratios stood at 0.20, 0.26, 0.29, and 0.17, respectively, for the bare, 4-cycle, 8-cycle, and 16-cycle ZnO-coated electrodes. In particular, Cd atoms loaded on 8-cycle-deposited electrode increased by ∼69% compared to the bare electrode. It can be estimated that the amount of adsorbed CdS increases by ∼47% with the consideration of increased sensitizer size. A possible demonstration for increases in both the amount and size of CdS can be justified by the grown morphology of ZnO-coating layer. It was observed by Mane In order to see whether the diffusion behavior of polysulfide electrolyte can be affected by the porosity of TiO Certainly, the reduced diffusivity is associated with less porosity, and this can be also observed in The ZnO-coated cell exhibits both higher short-circuit current density ( The increase in photocurrent arises from both an increase in the absorption from the CdS quantum dots and a decrease in the carrier recombination. The reduced charge recombination increases the electron-carrier concentration, resulting in an upward shift of the electron Fermi level, and accordingly, The recombination rate at the TiO At all voltages, the electron-carrier lifetime of the 8-cycle-deposited cell is improved by approximately one order of magnitude compared with the bare cell ( Since the recombination of carrier electrons is significantly diminished by the ZnO layer, the overall charge-collection efficiency is enhanced, as shown in The chronoamperometric reduction current is a measure of showing the recombination rate of electrons near the TiO However, the reduction current is generated more severely from the 8-cycle-deposited ZnO layer than from that of the 8-cycle-deposited ZnO. When an epitaxial growth occurs, the early stage well follows defect-free epitaxial growth (below the critical thickness) Possible effects of the ZnO-coated layer in CdS-QDSCs are summarized in The effects of ZnO-coating thicknesses on the photovoltaic properties were systematically investigated. The enhanced efficiency by the nanoscale coating was attributed to the increased adsorption of CdS quantum dots, and reduced charge recombination at the TiO This research was supported by the