Mixing rules for multiple electrolyte systems for the new semi-empirical hydration model (SEHM) are proposed. The SEHM model is tested in several ternary strong electrolyte systems and proves to provide accurate estimations of the solutions’ osmotic coefficients.In part I of this series In the second part of this series the SEHM will be applied in ternary strong electrolytes systems (solutions composed of three parts: water and two strong electrolytes). The ternary systems that will be examined compose of both common ion systems and non-common ion ternary systems. The SEHM model's ability to predict the osmotic coefficient of these systems, without the use of any mixing regression parameter, will not only strengthen the basis of the model, but will establish it as a useful tool in chemical engineering. The SEHM model for a single electrolyte system is presented in detail in The non-ideality of the solution is attributed to two factors: the long range electrostatic factor, which is described through the Pitzer–Debye–Hückel theory: It is useful to notice that both Eqs. Finally the solution's osmotic coefficient is given by The first case to be considered is that of a system of two strong electrolytes with a common ion, e.g. the system of The second step to describing the system would be to express the Eqs. These ionic strength factors can be used to provide the property In a system of two strong electrolytes To overcome this problem, another set of mixing rules developed by Patwardhan and Kumar The mixing rules developed in the previous section were tested in several ternary strong electrolyte systems. Osmotic coefficient data from thirteen systems with common ions and five without common ions were compared with the SEHM model. The SEHM's The standard deviation of experimental osmotic coefficients from SEHM model results are tabulated in The mixing rules of the SEHM model tested well in all the system examined. Exceptions are the systems that contained the MgSO As far as the mixing rules are concerned, for an ion In the ternary systems without common ions the average difference between The Semi-Empirical Hydration Model (SEHM) is thus true to its name, since it describes the non-ideality of an electrolyte solution in a semi empirical way, using fitting parameters to describe multi step hydration equilibria, but at the same time producing physical significant properties of the system, like the mole fraction of the solvent or the osmotic coefficient of the solution. It is thus a model best suited for modeling and studying the behavior of electrolyte systems rather then simply predicting the activity coefficients of the ions in the system. The next step for the development of the SEHM model is its application at higher temperatures as well as in systems with weak electrolytes.  summation of the system's ionic molar concentration  hydration number of specie solution's ionic strength molal concentration of specie molar mass of the solvent (kg/moles water) Avogadro's constant radius of specie molar volume of specie mole fraction of specie ionic strength factor of electrolyte fractional contribution factor of electrolyte valance of the distance of closest approach activity coefficient of specie Pitzer–Debye–Hückel reciprocal length Grions of solution's omotic coefficient quantity referring to an anion quantity referring to a cation quantity in molal concentration scale quantity referring to the solvent (water) mean ionic quantity ionic quantity (non-hydrated) hydrated quantity This work was carried out under the “HERAKLITUS” project which is co-funded by the European Social Fund (75%) and National Resources (25%).