The effects of microwave treatment on the liberation spectrum of a rod-milled South African carbonatite ore are presented based on quantitative mineralogical analysis. The treated ore was processed for 0.5 s at 10.5 kW in a single mode microwave cavity in batches of 1 kg. The ore selected for microwave treatment was a sample from a tertiary crusher product stream feed to a rod mill. The treated and untreated ore were subsequently grinded to 80%–800 μm. The microwave treated ore showed a significant increase in the amount of liberated copper minerals in the relatively coarse particle size range (106 to 300 μm). Similar significant shifts in the liberation spectra were noted for all the minerals in the ore. It is inferred that microwave treatment induces changes in the fracture pattern, favouring liberation of microwave susceptible minerals at larger particle sizes.The depletion of higher grade ore reserves is leading to an increasing need to process lower grade ores, and the associated requirement of finer grinding to liberate valuable minerals from such ores means that the high energy requirements and low energy efficiencies of comminution processes have become a major concern. Of equal concern is the increased loss of valuable minerals to slimes due to the inefficiencies of mineral recovery in these fine size ranges. Since the early 20th century, the use of thermal pretreatment has occasionally been suggested as a way to decrease the cost of size reduction, and improve the liberation of valuable minerals in ores to aid later beneficiation technologies. Later discoveries have shown that the use of microwave treatment has many advantages over more conventional heat treatments. Most notable is the quick and volumetric heating of only microwave susceptible mineral grains at much higher heating rates than are possible from conventional treatments, which then leads to greater internal stresses and more effective particle fracturing. It was discovered that this stress fracturing tended to occur at grain boundaries as a result of microwave induced differential heating (  Results in the literature from the application of microwave heating have varied. This paper investigates the change in fracture pattern and liberation due to microwave pretreatment of a copper carbonatite ore from South Africa. For the purposes of this work, a low-grade copper carbonatite ore mined in South Africa was used. The sample was obtained from the tertiary crusher which is the feed to the rod mill in the processing plant. It is known that microwave pretreatment is more effective on larger particles, therefore the rod mill feed was truncated at 3350 μm and only material larger than this was used in microwave testing. The ore consists of approximately 50% microwave absorbing material, which occurs predominantly as magnetite. The small amount of copper sulfides present (chalcopyrite, cubanite, bornite, valeriite, chalcocite and covellite) are also microwave susceptible, though the total grade of copper in the ore is less than 0.5%. The non-absorbing gangue material which makes up the balance of the ore consists mainly of carbonates (i.e. calcite and dolomite), orthopyroxene, apatite, serpentine, talc, mica, feldspar, amphibole and clinopyroxene. Previous work by From work performed by The test work was performed in a laboratory rod mill with an inner diameter of 19.8 cm, operating at 75% of the critical speed and charged to approximately 45% of the total mill volume. The milling tests included 14 batches of treated ore, and 10 batches of untreated ore, each of approximately 1 kg. After grinding all the material, each batch was classed according to size. This size classification took place by mechanical sieving for 20 min in a sieve shaker. The mass in each size fraction was then recorded and the corresponding size fractions from each of the batches were combined for later analysis of the microwave pretreated and untreated ores. Representative samples of the microwave pretreated and untreated ores were taken from the rod mill product, and sent to Mintek in South Africa for quantitative mineralogical analysis. The instrument used was a QEMSCAN™ ( The QEMSCAN™ instrument provides modal analysis (mineral quantities), liberation analysis and mineral association analysis. The liberation of the minerals is presented according to particle classes, where the particle is classified as “liberated” (where there is > During processing, the magnetite, which is the most abundant microwave susceptible mineral present in the ore, is recovered by magnetic drum separation. According to  Considering the whole rod mill product (− The liberation analysis for magnetite appears in  The liberation of magnetite treated and untreated material for the whole rod mill product is similar. However, the liberation of magnetite at each size class shows that there is a general trend with a displacement of more liberated magnetite to the higher size classes. Most of these changes are quite subtle, with the exception being particularly the − These results, however, still indicate a change in fracture pattern after microwave pretreatment, where the magnetite mineral grains have most likely been shielded from fracture by the cracking induced around the microwave susceptible magnetite during pretreatment, resulting in a larger product and a greater amount of liberated magnetite in the larger size classes. The increase in liberation and shift of mass to higher size classes will benefit the recovery of magnetite during magnetic separation and, since the magnetite does not in general associate with the copper sulfides which are also recovered from the ore, this should not adversely affect the other processes occurring on the plant. The major gangue minerals present in the ore are carbonates (i.e. calcite and dolomite) and these contribute 17.9% of the total mass of the untreated material, and 18.4% of the pretreated material. Of this, 88.1% of the carbonates in the untreated ore, and 88.6% of that in the treated material, is liberated. Similar to that presented for the magnetite, It is seen that for both the treated and untreated ores, the mass distribution for the carbonates shows a peak in the −  Similar results were observed for most of the other major minerals in the ore, with a notable exception being orthopyroxene, where the liberation is negatively impacted by the application of microwave pretreatment. In this case, while a shift in fully liberated material to an intermediate size range (− The results obtained for the major gangue mineral in the ore suggests a greater degree of intergranular fracture is occurring during microwave treatment between microwave absorbers (predominantly magnetite) and non-absorbers (predominantly carbonate gangue), resulting in a cleaner gangue product. The smaller amount of gangue material ending up in the finer size classes also indicates a change in the fracture pattern of the gangue in the ore. These results suggest that it may be possible to introduce partial removal of gangue from the process stream in an early stage of grinding while the material is still at a relatively large particle size, leading to savings in grinding energy. The copper sulfides in the ore are recovered through flotation. According to The copper grade of the rod mill product is 0.16% for the untreated material and 0.21% for the treated material. The various copper minerals in the ore (i.e. chalcopyrite, cubanite, bornite, valeriite, chalcocite and covellite) are valuable, should be recovered and thus can be grouped and would simply be referred as “copper minerals”. The liberated particles in this case would contain >  Furthermore, from Independent batch flotation work performed by There is some indication that it is likely that the pretreated material was overground during the investigations performed in this work. Previous work by This then has to some extent hidden the true improvements in liberation affected by microwave pretreatment of the ore during this work, though even so, the results clearly indicate that significant changes in the fracture pattern of the ore, and in the liberation of minerals at larger particle sizes, is still occurring. It was noted that the fracture pattern and mineral liberation of the carbonatite ore changed as a result of the microwave pretreatment, and more importantly did so in a manner which will benefit the recovery of valuable copper minerals from the ore. With microwave pretreatment, there was a shift of 9% of the total mass of magnetite in to the largest size class investigated (i.e. − Similar results were noted for the second most abundant mineral in the ore (i.e. the carbonates), with more liberated material appearing in the larger size classes. While these results were consistent for most of the minerals investigated, an exception was noted for orthopyroxene, in which the liberation was negatively influenced. Investigations into the effect of microwave pretreatment showed that almost full liberation of copper sulphides was achieved in particles smaller than 53 μm, where analysis of the untreated ore showed that this same size class still contained almost 40% middlings. Of particular note was the increase and shift of 53% of the liberated copper sulphides to the optimum recovery size range for flotation. This would yield an increase in copper recovery from 81% for untreated material to between 85% and 89.5% after microwave pretreatment. The presence of a change in the fracture pattern of the ore after microwave pretreatment is evident from the larger particle size of the most abundant microwave absorber (magnetite) in the rod mill product, as well as the greater degree of liberation which occurs in the larger size classes. The larger product size and increased liberation of the major gangue minerals (carbonates) in the ore, coupled with the results observed for magnetite, suggest that intergranular fracture is occurring between microwave susceptible and non-susceptible minerals, and also that a fracture pattern is being induced which alters the size distribution of the gangue material, favouring the production of larger particles. Financial support for this work was provided jointly through AMIRA International (P879) and the Department of Process Engineering at the University of Stellenbosch. The authors would like to thank Dr. Keith Jackson and Dr. Aled Jones for performing the microwave treatment at the University of Nottingham's School of Chemical, Environmental and Mining Engineering. The collaborative contributions of Professor Sam Kingman from the same school are much appreciated.