The outcome of THA following acetabular fracture was analyzed on 654 patients with a systematic review approach. An uncemented acetabular and femoral component was used in 80.1% and 59.8% of the cases respectively. The median Harris hip score was 88 points. In the early THA group, Kaplan–Meier survivorship analysis with any loosening, osteolysis or revision as the end point revealed that the 10-year cup survival was 81% whereas in the late THA group was 76% (P
                     =0.287). The 10-year survival was 95% for the early stems and 85% for the late ones (P
                     =0.001). Due to their complexity these fractures should be managed in highly specializing units where the expertise of arthroplasty and trauma reconstruction is available.Acetabular fractures are severe injuries which commonly present in young adults after high-energy trauma, usually secondary to road-traffic collisions. During such incidents, the femoral head may be driven into the acetabulum leading to both bony and neurovascular injuries Contrary to young adults, in the elderly population, low-energy trauma is responsible for a high percentage of acetabular fractures, due to the frequency of falls and increased prevalence of osteopenia and osteoporosis. Several authors have reported that open reduction and internal fixation in the elderly patients is associated with poor prognosis and higher rate of long-term complications A systematic review of the literature therefore was undertaken in order to (a) determine the existing evidence concerning the classification, indications and surgical management of acetabular fractures that were treated with total hip arthroplasty (THA); (b) to analyze the clinical outcomes and the incidence of complications; and (c) to evaluate the impact of the timing of intervention (early versus delayed hip arthroplasty) as well as the type of prosthesis used (uncemented versus cemented) on the long-term treatment outcome. We searched the Medline databases using PubMed, Scopus, and Cochrane library search engines, from January 1990 to January 2014, in order to retrieve all relevant articles reporting on the management of post-traumatic arthritis of the hip following acetabular fractures with the use of late total hip arthroplasty and articles where acetabular fractures were treated with early total hip arthroplasty. The keywords used in the subject headings search included: “total hip replacement” and “acetabular fracture”. Full texts of the articles were retrieved and assessed for their suitability for inclusion in this study. The reference list of the articles was also screened manually to ensure that no appropriate studies for inclusion were omitted as well as the “related articles” options in Medline databases. The studies selected were original articles fulfilling the following criteria: (1) studies on adult subjects; (2) studies with a minimum median of 12-month follow-up; (3) publications with inclusion of more than 10 patients; (4) articles in English. All articles that did not meet the above criteria were excluded, including case reports and editorial comments. Articles were evaluated regarding the type of study, whether prospective or retrospective clinical review or a case series. Data were extracted, examined and analyzed to attain information such as, patient demographics, mechanism of injury, type of fracture, time interval from the acetabular fracture to total hip arthroplasty, type of implant used, operative approach, and early and late complications and functional outcome. For each of the analyzed factors, the number of available studies and the number of relevant patients were recorded ( Comparison of data between the groups was performed on a personal computer using SPSS (17.0.1 for Windows, SPSS Inc., Chicago, Illinois). Qualitative data were compared using the chi-squared test. Kaplan–Meier survival analysis was used to calculate the survival probabilities of implants at 10 Our original electronic search yielded 55 manuscripts, which were reviewed after obtaining the full text. However, 19 articles met the inclusion criteria The median age of patients at the time of total hip arthroplasty was 60.45 Three types of classification were commonly used to classify the initial acetabular fractures and these were the Letournel, Judet and Letournel and Tile classifications One study did not report on the initial treatment of acetabular fractures Both acute and delayed total hip arthroplasties were performed in only one manuscript that involved 121 patients Harris hip score was used to describe the functional outcome in 15 of the reviewed studies Available data comparing acute with delayed total hip arthroplasty were found in Sermon's et al study, where 53% of patients were treated with primary and 47% of them with delayed total hip arthroplasty Complications following acute or delayed total hip arthroplasty were mentioned in all 19 studies In the early THA group, 13 cups (7.5%) and 8 stems (4.6%) out of 173 implants were revised. Four cups were revised for aseptic loosening (1 had also osteolysis), 1 for traumatic loosening, 6 for dislocation and 2 for infection. Two stems were revised for aseptic loosening (1 had also osteolysis), 1 for traumatic loosening, 3 for dislocation and 2 for infection. It was not possible to clarify how many of them were uncemented or cemented because 2 studies did not report such details In the early THA group, Kaplan–Meier survivorship analysis with any loosening, osteolysis or revision as the end point revealed that the 10-year cup survival was 81%. In the late THA group, this percentage was 76%. The log-rank test showed that this difference was not significant ( In the early THA group, Kaplan–Meier survivorship analysis with any loosening, osteolysis or revision as the end point revealed that the 10-year stem survival was 95%. In the late THA group, this percentage was 85%. The log-rank test showed that this difference was significant ( In the late THA group where the proportion of uncemented and cemented implants were available, Kaplan–Meier survivorship analysis with any loosening, osteolysis or revision as the end point revealed that the 10-year survival was 86.7% for the uncemented cups and 81% for the cemented. The log-rank test showed that this difference was not significant ( Further analysis was made to compare revision rates between THAs performed 20 Thirty-three patients died and the overall mortality rate was 5%. No patient died in the acute peri-operative phase. The minimum time of postoperative mortality was 4 Acetabular fractures represent complex injuries of the hip joint associated with high morbidity. Restoration of joint congruency plays an important role in treatment outcome. However, development of post-traumatic osteoarthritis can occur even after anatomical reconstruction. Development of post-traumatic arthritis leads to painful stimuli and impairment of function. In such cases further surgery in the form of THA is recommended. Several authors have proposed that in cases where long-term longevity of the hip joint could not be guaranteed after reconstruction, primary hip arthroplasty should be considered as an alternative option allowing early patient ambulation and sparing the need for secondary surgery in the form of THA Limitations of this systematic review are the lack of high quality randomized prospective control studies and the absence of homogenous validated outcome assessment tools in order to extract robust conclusions regarding the long-term efficacy of early versus delayed arthroplasty. However, an extensive research of the literature was performed including a large population of patients to be analyzed. Moreover, different parameters that could critically affect the treatment outcome were recorded, while survival analysis was separately performed for acetabular and femoral implants as well as for the early and late THA groups. Another additional strength of this review is the comparison of the complication and revision rates with those of primary hip arthroplasty and the survival analysis in correlation with the rates reported in the most validated hip registries. Finally, a comparison of revision rates between THA performed 20 Most of the studies in this review used the classification of Letournel and Judet for the initial acetabular injuries giving important information regarding the fracture patterns In this study, the main indications for acute THA included severe intra-articular comminution, impaction/fracture of the femoral head, impaction of the acetabulum involving significant portion of the weight-bearing area, and pre-existing symptomatic hip arthritis The indications for delayed total hip arthroplasty are post-traumatic arthritis of the hip, avascular necrosis of the femoral head and its use as a salvage procedure in response to failed open reduction and internal fixation One of the main conclusions of the herein study is that better clinical outcomes are observed in younger patients compared to elderly patients over 70 Matta reported that anatomic reduction was achieved in 74% of patients under the age of 60, whereas this was feasible in 44% of patients older than 60 Mears et al performed acute joint arthroplasties in 57 patients and after 8-years of follow-up reported that the functional outcomes for the elderly patients deteriorated with age. The mean Harris hip score was 87 points for patients in their eighth decade of life and 75 points for those in their ninth decade Romness et al reported a revision rate of 17.2% in patients less than 60 Other investigators have also highlighted that in patients less than 60 One study also reported that patients with > The risk of infection in THA following acetabular fractures is higher than conventional hip arthroplasty, especially in patients with multiple prior surgeries and retained hardware from previous acetabular reconstruction. In this review, the overall infection rate was 5.6% with 2.1% involving deep infections. Only 1 study was found in which preoperative screening for infection was made and the infection rate remained high THA secondary to acetabular fractures is often more difficult than routine THA due to extensive scarring, retained internal fixation devices, and residual deformity of the acetabular bone Other common postoperative complications noted were heterotopic ossification Bellabarba et al concluded that THA is a more severe intervention in patients with posttraumatic arthritis, especially if an internal fixation of the acetabulum was previously performed. The authors reported that the operating time is longer, there is a higher transfusion need, more patients need bone grafting and there is a higher incidence of intra-operative hip instability, but no statistical significance was found in the final outcome In all 19 studies reviewed, bone graft was used to fill acetabular bone stock deficiencies Another objective of this study was to analyze the long-term treatment outcome in early and late THA and survival rates of the implants used. Acetabular shells were proved to perform in a similar way in both groups, but femoral stems showed significant better results in the early THA. Further investigation revealed that the majority of the stems (56%) with revision or loosening in the late THA were cemented and included procedures that have been performed more than 20 Despite the promising results and satisfactory functional and radiological outcomes that have been reported, there are no prospective studies to compare directly the outcomes following acute or delayed total hip arthroplasty secondary to acetabular fractures. The few data available in the literature indicate that the clinical outcomes, revision rates and implant survivorship do not differ when either an early or a late THA is performed in patients with prior acetabular fractures. The only study with large series of patients, which compared these two different treatment modalities, showed that 58% of patients who were treated with acute hip arthroplasty had an excellent or good Harris hip score in contrast to 76% of patients who had delayed hip arthroplasty. Nevertheless, the revision rate in this study was higher in the delayed arthroplasty group: 18% versus 4% in the acute arthroplasty group. According to the authors, this could be secondary to the previous open reduction and internal fixation procedure of the acetabular fracture which could lead to instability of the involved hip joint Conflict of Interest Statements