A new and complete methodology allowing the determination of the anisotropic axis orientation and the associated elastic parameters for transverse isotropic rocks from a single standard cylindrical specimen is presented. The methodology based on standard laboratory tests, allows an evaluation of the anisotropy system presented by the rock specimen, and has the advantage of minimizing the influence of heterogeneity that is common to rocks in the determination of the deformability parameters. Results from laboratory triaxial tests on St-Marc limestone following two different stress paths are presented in order to validate the applicability and accuracy of the proposed methodology, by comparing measured and predicted strains.The advent of high performance personal computers has enabled the fast development of numerical codes dedicated to geoengineering, which allow engineers to model geomaterials showing complex constitutive laws. Nowadays, most if not all numerical codes used in rock engineering allow the introduction of elastic anisotropy, such as transverse isotropy or orthotropy. Although deformational anisotropy can be easily considered in numerical models, the determination of representative deformability parameters to input in these models is still a major difficulty, since there are no standard or simple laboratory procedures available to obtain these parameters. The objective of this paper is to propose a simple and practical methodology for the determination of elastic parameters for linear elastic transverse isotropic rocks by submitting a single standard cylindrical rock specimen to a hydrostatic compression test and a uniaxial compression test. A diametrical loading test will be required only in specific situations which will be outlined later. The proposed methodology allows estimating the validity of the hypothesis regarding transverse isotropy. The major advantage of the method is that the influence of heterogeneity is minimized when compared to the other approaches found in the literature, some of which are presented in what follows. Laboratory procedures available for the determination of anisotropic static elastic parameters usually require several rock specimens specifically oriented in space. These procedures are in general costly, time consuming and, in most cases, induce errors due to the natural heterogeneity inherent to rocks. When dealing with laboratory tests for the determination of static elastic parameters of anisotropic rocks, two distinct procedures are normally adopted. The first procedure concerns class A rocks which are rocks that present a deformational anisotropic behaviour despite an isotropic appearance (absence of aligned structures) For class A rocks, the usual approach consists in determining the anisotropy axes orientations and their associated elastic parameters by means of laboratory testing using several differently oriented rock specimens, since no Peres Rodrigues This methodology has a major drawback in that the errors associated with the natural heterogeneity of rocks introduced by sampling the rock mass at different locations, will eventually blur the true anisotropic behaviour of the rock. Nunes The methodology proposed by Nunes The second drawback concerns the fact that the methodology proposed by Nunes For class B rocks, visible structures which may be linked to anisotropy, enable to assume Talesnick et al. In the case of transverse isotropy, three uniaxial compression tests performed on three rock cylinders drilled at different angles with respect to the plane of transverse isotropy are required in order to determine the five elastic parameters For the orthotropic case, the uniaxial compression test can also be used to determine the nine elastic constants of an orthotropic rock by testing three samples inclined at different angles with respect to the planes of symmetry as discussed in The relationship between stress and strain components depends on the properties of the particular body under consideration. For linear elasticity, the relationship between stress and strain is expressed by linear equations and is known as Hooke's law. Hooke's law assumes that the stress–strain relationship is reversible and the strains infinitesimal. The superposition principle follows the assumption of infinitesimal strains. This principle states that two strain fields can be combined by direct superposition and the order of application of the two has no effect on the final strain state of the solid in question Using the theory of linear elasticity for isotropic solids and the superposition principle, the final state of deformation of a solid may be defined as the sum of volume and shape changes generated, respectively, by mean and deviatoric stresses. The order of application of the stresses has no influence on the final result. The mean and deviatoric stresses are, respectively: Second-order fundamental components of deformability may be related to anisotropic solids and are characterized by volume change associated to deviatoric stresses and shape changes associated to the mean stress. Second-order phenomena may also be linked to non-linear behaviour Corthésy A solid is transverse isotropic if each point within the solid is traversed by a plane where the elastic properties are the same regardless of the direction considered. From Lekhnitskii The parameters Imposing a hydrostatic stress field to a transverse isotropic solid and assuming the For an anisotropic solid submitted to a hydrostatic stress field, the deviatoric stresses are zero since Given that for the hydrostatic load case, the deviatoric stresses are null, the second-order volume change and first-order shape change are also zero since they are, by definition, functions of the deviatoric stresses. Consequently, Eq. Assuming the same transverse isotropic solid is submitted to a triaxial stress state where the mean stress is null and the normal stress components In the triaxial stress state previously considered, the first-order volume variation and second-order shape variation are null since the mean stress is zero (Eqs. In order to determine the five elastic constants of a transverse isotropic rock and determine the orientation of the anisotropy axes with a single cylindrical standard core specimen, a hydrostatic test and a non-hydrostatic compressive test (whether uniaxial or triaxial) must be performed, and the resulting 3D strain tensors must be measured. The description of the suggested experimental procedure follows. Consider the The rosettes perpendicular to the If the specimen is subjected to a hydrostatic stress state, the resulting strain tensor obtained from the three rosettes allows finding the principal strains and their orientation. For the hydrostatic load case, the orientation of the principal strain tensor coincides with the orientation of the anisotropy axes For all the equations that follow, it is assumed that the stress state in the rock specimen is equal to the applied stresses on the sample boundaries. As the orientation of the anisotropy axes are known from the hydrostatic test, the stress components in the Therefore, the five constants of a transverse isotropic body can be determined from a single rock specimen subjected to a hydrostatic and a non-hydrostatic compressive stress state using Eqs. The use of Eq. It can be seen from Eq. For the sake of simplicity, if a uniaxial compressive stress state is considered such that So, when The application of a linear load In order to measure the strains Since case I corresponds to a stress state where one of the principal stresses is oriented perpendicular to the isotropy plane, no shear stresses develop on this plane and constant In a survey of elastic constants, Worotnicki It should be noted that case I may not be resolved by changing the location of the strain gauges on the specimen. Case II corresponds to a stress state where two of the major principal stresses are parallel to the isotropy plane and where one of them makes a 45° angle relative to the Case III is a generalization for which cases I and II represent the limiting conditions. That is, a series of inclinations of the plane of isotropy, between 0° and 90°, for which Uniaxial and a hydrostatic tests were performed in order to determine the orientation and value of the deformability parameters following the procedure presented in the previous section. Furthermore, a series of triaxial tests following different stress paths were performed in order to generate data which would allow a back calculation of the measured strains using the proposed model. A series of uniaxial, triaxial and hydrostatic tests were performed on a fine-grained St-Marc (St-Marc, Québec) limestone specimen ( The laboratory test results presented here were conducted at École Polytechnique's rock mechanics laboratory in Montréal. A single rock specimen was tested in a 1780 The strains were measured using 350 The axial load, strains and confining pressure were monitored at a 2 The rock sample was obtained from an NX core and it was machined according to ASTM standard D-4543-01. The three strain gauges rosettes were bonded at mid-height on the circumference of the cylindrical rock specimen according to the procedure presented in The specimen was submitted to an initial hydrostatic compression test followed by a uniaxial compression test used to determine the deformability parameters and two series of triaxial compressive tests to evaluate how well these deformability parameters can predict strains for various loading conditions. The difference between the two series of triaxial compressive tests resides in the sequence of application of the confinement and axial stresses (stress path). In the first series, named stress path T The triaxial tests unloading stress paths were identical for series T Two important observations can be made from the hydrostatic compression test results shown in The non-linear behaviour is characteristic of hard rocks with an internal network of open microcracks as described by various authors The directions of the principal axes of deformation were determined by the hydrostatic compression test and the In order to test the validity of the proposed methodology, the strains measured from two triaxial tests following different stress paths ( In order to see the gain in accuracy using an anisotropic model, the predicted strains were compared with those predicted supposing an isotropic model where the isotropic deformability parameters are derived from a linear regression best fit performed on uniaxial test results, as would normally be done using ASTM standard D 3148-02. Assuming an isotropic behaviour, a Young modulus of 59.5 To be able to quantify with a scalar the fit of the predicted strains compared to the measured strains, the residues standard deviation ( Although the results presented in It must also be noted that the St-Marc limestone anisotropy may be influenced by the presence of a network of open microcracks which causes the rock to behave slightly non-linearly ( Finally, when applying the oil pressure for the hydrostatic compression test, there is little doubt that the assumed stresses in the sample correspond to the applied stresses. In the case where the axial load is applied via a stiff loading platen, the boundary conditions at the end of the sample are constant displacements across the bearing surfaces assuming a perfect parallelism between the platens and bearing surfaces if one assumes the stiffness of the loading platens to be much greater than that of the rock. Such constant displacements will induce non-uniform stresses when loading a transverse isotropic body if the axis of anisotropy A simple and practical methodology for the determination of elastic parameters for transverse isotropic rocks from a single standard cylindrical specimen was presented. The methodology allows the determination of the orientation of the axes of anisotropy and the elastic parameters only by assuming the rock behaves as a linear transverse isotropic body. It requires simple laboratory tests, permits a check for the anisotropy symmetry system presented by the rock sample and has the major advantage of minimizing the effects of mechanical property variability so common in rocks. Experimental verifications on a limestone specimen show the suggested approach gives a reasonably good fit between the measured and predicted strains for stress combinations and stress paths which differ from the ones used to obtain the deformability parameters. Moreover, a comparison of the predicted strains using the suggested methodology and the usual assumption of isotropy shows a much better match with the measured strains Had the degree of anisotropy been greater, the superiority of the suggested approach would have been even more evident. The authors would like to thank the National Sciences and Engineering Research Council of Canada (NSERC), Grants # OGP0089752 and # RGPIN194316 for supporting this research.