The regrinding stage is necessary to achieve the particle size (liberation) for the final upgrade in the cleaning flotation process. At present, vertical stirred mills are increasingly employed at industrial scale. The regrinding process characterization requires mixing regime knowledge along with the mean residence time of the liquid and solid phases. In this work, residence time distribution (RTD) measurements were performed in two different industrial flotation plants. Both plants operate with Vertimills of 1000–1500HP in the regrinding process with different circuit arrangements according to the plant treatment capacity. The RTD was measured using the radioactive tracer technique, which allows for non-invasive tracer detection in real time. It was found that mixing was not perfect in agitated Vertimills and consequently the RTD was better modeled by the more flexible Large and Small Tanks in Series (LSTS) model which allowed the characterization of the different mixing regimes for both liquid and solids in the regrinding mills. Effective mean residence times in the range of 1.7–12.5min were obtained with RTD shapes similar to those obtained in tumbling ball mills. It was found that residence times of liquid and solid particles were similar. RTD estimations are useful for better understanding the Vertimill behavior and to identify the actual breakage rates, as well as for improving Vertimill modeling and simulation.The use of regrinding in flotation circuits allows the overall energy consumption to be reduced by operating the primary grinding stage at relatively coarse particle size (flotation feed) while regrinding the rougher concentrate ( Different types of mills have been employed in flotation circuits, highlighting the tumbling ball mills and the stirred mills. In tumbling ball mills, the media (pulp and balls) motion is imparted by the mill shell in which the rotation speed is limited by the media weight. The disadvantage of the tumbling ball mills is the low energy efficiency with regard to stirred mills in fine grinding operations ( A class of vertical stirred mills is the Vertimill, which was designed for fine and ultrafine grinding operations ( Industrial regrinding processes operate continuously, therefore, the output particle size strongly depends on the mill residence time, i.e. particle size reduction is related to the slurry flowrate and the mill mixing behavior ( The residence time distribution (RTD) and the actual mean residence time estimations from theoretical relationships are complex due to the presence of three components (solid mineral, balls and water), mass transport characteristics and segregation affecting solid holdup. Therefore, the experimental RTD determination is suitable for industrial mills. The RTD was measured using the radioactive tracer technique. This technique allows for non-invasive tracer detection in order to characterize the solid and liquid mixing regimes without disturbances. The procedure consists of selecting a liquid (Br In terms of process modeling and simulation the mixing regime in agitated Vertimills have been typically assumed as perfect mixed. In this sense, the present paper is focused on evaluating the actual liquid and solid mixing conditions in agitated Vertimills, as well as selecting the mixing model for process characterization and simulation. The perfect mixer model has been extensively used to characterize and simulate grinding processes due to its simple conceptual representation and suitable mathematical treatment ( Axial mixing models have also been used for interpretation of mill performance based on the molecular diffusion ( A different approach consists of representing the mill mixing regime as several perfectly mixed reactors in series either with equal or different sizes ( In the present work, two parsimonious model structures were evaluated to characterize the RTD in Vertimills: (i) the perfect mixer and (ii) the Large and Small Tanks in Series (LSTS), Eq. In Eq. RTD measurements were performed in two different industrial flotation plants. Both plants operated with Vertimills of 1000–1500  In order to study the hydrodynamic behavior of the Vertimills, the radioactive tracer technique was used to measure the residence time distribution of the solid and liquid inside the mills. The procedure consists of selecting a liquid or solid tracer that allows on-line RTD data acquisition. The samples were irradiated in a thermal 5 The way the tracer is injected into the feed is critical to generate a pulse signal (closer to impulse). For this purpose, a pneumatic system of high reliability has been developed to introduce a small amount of radioactive tracer (around 100 An advantage of using the radioactive tracer technique is the direct testing of the actual solid particles (similar physical and chemical properties, size distribution, shape, etc.). Tracer injection is almost instantaneous, because only a small amount of radioactive tracer is required. Another advantage is its capability for on-line measurements without disturbances related to sampling process. Considering the tracer injection in the feed stream entering a reactor, the output concentration, Eq. Thus, the RTD estimation can be obtained by solving the inverse problem (deconvolution) of the following equation: Assuming that the linear operator In system identification, ill-posed problems are generally avoided using an input signal which approaches to Dirac impulse function or random binary sequence. These signals allow the The use of radioactive tracer technique to determine the RTD makes the PRBS approach unfeasible because of environmental considerations, sensor sensitivity, and tracer injection constraints, among others. Therefore, a close to Dirac impulse function was selected as an inlet signal for the RTD estimation. However, the tracer recirculation in the regrinding circuit must be considered to avoid the aforementioned ill-posed problems.    In In this Section, RTD results in Plants A and B are presented. The plant samplings were performed in stable plant conditions coordinated with the control room personnel who were monitoring the operation during the measurements. All the tracer (liquid and solid) tests were carried out over a period of about 2–4       Based on the results in Plants A and B, there were no significant differences between the liquid and solid (fine and coarse) mean residence times in Vertimills. The energy dissipation provided by the two mixing mechanisms, rotor circulation plus the motion of the grinding media (recirculation of steel balls), was effective enough for keeping almost all solids in a homogeneous suspension while they were transported upwards inside the mill. Thus, it was found that the above mechanisms were effective in avoiding particles segregation. RTD measurements were performed for 1000–1500 Mixing conditions (RTD) for liquid and solid, provided by the helical rotor plus the grinding media (steel balls), were different from a perfect mixer, which has been usually assumed for stirred grinding modeling. The Large and Small Tanks in Series (LSTS) model was found to provide a good fitting to describe the actual mixing conditions (RTD) of liquid and solids in stirred Vertimills. This model, together with a first order kinetic model, can then be used to improve the particle size reduction prediction in Vertimill simulation. Funding for process modeling and control research is provided by