Primary arthroplasty or internal fixation are the most common ways of treating intracapsular femoral neck fractures, while arthroplasty is the preferred salvage treatment after failed internal fixation. A prospective registration of hip hemiarthroplasties between January 1998 and March 2002 identified 282 procedures for an acute femoral neck fracture and 149 procedures after failed internal fixation with two parallel screws. Chart review was performed after 19–74 months. The groups were comparable in co-morbidities and perioperative conditions. In the primary hemiarthroplasty group 15 of 282 (5%) arthroplasties were re-operated for complications compared to 16 of 149 (11%) in the secondary group (p
                     =0.04). The most common re-operation was soft tissue debridement because of infection. There were more patients with an excision arthroplasty as end result in the secondary hemiarthroplasty group (6 (4%) versus 1 (0.4%); p
                     =0.004). The higher risk of a re-operation after a salvage hemiarthroplasty should be considered when deciding between internal fixation and hemiarthroplasty as treatment for femoral neck fractures.Hemiarthroplasty and internal fixation with parallel screws are the two most common treatments for intracapsular proximal femoral fractures. Hemiarthroplasty is also a common salvage operation for failed internal fixation. In our department both methods have been used in the treatment of acute fractures, and hemiarthroplasty has been the preferred salvage procedure for failed internal fixations. The high rate of treatment failures after internal fixation in displaced femoral neck fractures is well documented. In the most recent studies comparing internal fixation and hemiarthroplasty the weighted mean of procedure related complications was 41%, ranging from 38% to 53% in the internal fixation groups, compared to 7% (range 6–23%) after hemiarthroplasty. All hemiarthroplasties performed between January 1998 and March 2002 in our department were prospectively recorded. In the period 480 hemiarthroplasties after intracapsular femoral neck fractures were registered, but in 12 cases we failed to obtain the medical charts and 5 hips were excluded because the patients were living outside the hospital area. Fractures due to metastatic disease ( In deciding the initial treatment for a femoral neck fracture we applied the criteria of Alho, emphasising small head fragment, comminution of the calcar femorale, and varus angulation of the head as factors favouring a primary hemiarthroplasty. The primary endpoint was the number of re-operations. Statistical analysis was performed using SPSS for Windows 11.0 (Chicago, Illinois). The differences between the groups were calculated with the Chi-square test for ordinal data and There was a larger proportion of women in the primary arthroplasty group, but the two groups were otherwise similar in pre-operative characteristics ( For the fractures initially treated with internal fixation, the median time from fracture to initial surgery was 1 day (range 0–7). The time from internal fixation to a re-operation with hemiarthroplasty was median 99 days (range 10–2644 days), for the 16 cases later re-operated the time was median 156 days (range 14–535). The reason for the secondary procedure in all cases was pain and reduced function combined with a radiograph showing non-union or mechanical failure (122 hips, 82%) or segmental collapse (27 hips, 18%). In the primary hemiarthroplasties there was median 2 days (range 0–44) from injury to surgery. There were no differences between the group later requiring re-operations and the others, neither when evaluating the time from fracture to primary surgery, nor the time from internal fixation to hemiarthroplasty for the internal fixation group. The mean stay in hospital when the hemiarthroplasty was performed was 12 days in the internal fixation group (S.D. 15.6) and 13 days in the primary hemiarthroplasty group (S.D. 13.8, This study showed that the risk of a re-operation was higher when a hemiarthroplasty operation was performed as a secondary procedure after failure of internal fixation compared to a primary procedure for a femoral neck fracture. Furthermore, the risk of one especially poor outcome, an excision arthroplasty, was higher in the secondary arthroplasty group. The literature related to this topic is sparse and few have reported complications or re-operations after secondary arthroplasties separately. Roberts and Parker In our study surgical site infections was the main reason for a re-operation in both groups, and the number of excision arthroplasties (4%) in the secondary arthroplasty group was high compared to previous reports of less than 1%. Re-operations as end point were chosen for this study because they represent the most serious complications. We have excluded patients not in our hospital's patient registry, either at the time of their hemiarthroplasty surgery, or at the time of data collection. Our health system was, until recently, organised with patients belonging strictly to a certain hospital by place of residence; hence there is a low risk of any re-operations having eluded us. The two groups were comparable in demographics, co-morbidities, registered cognitive function and residential status ( Both internal fixation and replacement arthroplasty are valid alternatives in the treatment of displaced fractures of the femoral neck.