Anodized and annealed titanium oxide nanotubes show enhanced photo activity and can be used as photo anodes for water electrolysis in hydrogen generation. Application of an external potential to the photo anode is required for enhancement of the photocurrent. This additional electrical energy input complicates the photo conversion efficiency calculation. In this investigation, the photo-electrochemical behavior of anodized titanium oxide nanotubular arrays have been characterized in various electrolytes. Increase in the applied potential increased the photocurrent under illumination with visible light. A simple experimental method for calculating the photo conversion efficiency has been proposed. According to this method, the potential difference between the photo anode and cathode is measured with and without light illumination. The product of the photocurrent and the increase in potential due to light irradiation is considered as the net power output. The photocurrent and the conversion efficiency increased with increase in the pH of the electrolyte. TiO2 nanotubular arrays annealed at 350°C for 6h in nitrogen atmosphere showed a maximum photo conversion efficiency of ∼4% in 1M KOH electrolyte and ∼3% in 3.5wt.% sodium chloride solution. The results indicate that nanotubular TiO2 can be potentially used for the photo electrolysis of seawater to generate hydrogen.Fujishima and Honda Use of nano-structured semiconductor materials has been considered to enhance the photogeneration of hydrogen owing to high surface area and improved charge separation kinetics The photo conversion efficiency of water electrolysis is calculated based on the following relation When the Khan and Akikusha In most of the reports sixteen millimetre discs were punched out from a stock of Ti foil (0.2 A two-electrode configuration was used for anodization. A flag shaped Pt electrode served as the cathode. The anodization was carried out at 20 The anodized specimens were annealed in nitrogen atmosphere at 350–500 Experiments on hydrogen generation by photo-electrolysis of water were carried out in a glass cell with photo-anode (nanotubular TiO Anodization in acidified fluoride solution results in formation of a nanotubular structure. In the absence of fluoride ions, only a thin uniform surface oxide film could be observed. Phosphate and nitrate species present in the electrolyte resulted in adsorption of these ions on the walls of the nanotubes. Annealing of the nanotubes in a low oxygen partial pressure resulted in oxygen vacancy states and possible doping of N and P species in TiO     Based on the Δ Based on the Eq. The difficulty in calculating the photo conversion efficiency using the expression A new and simple method is suggested to determine the photo conversion efficiency of arrays of nanotubular TiO This work was sponsored by U.S. Department of Energy through DOE Grant no: DE-FC52-98NV13492. The authors gratefully acknowledge the financial support of DOE. The authors thank Mr. Gautam Priyadharshan and Dr. Mo. Ahmedian for their assistance in the experimental work.