This work attempts to understand the effect of initial conditions, i.e., as-milled powder and phase stabilized nearly single phase powder (through annealing), on sintering kinetics of CoCrFeNi high entropy alloy powders. Dilatometric study indicates, axial shrinkage reduced from about 5% to 3% when powder was annealed. Analysis of shrinkage through non-isothermal method shows activation energies of sintering increased significantly for a given model, in annealed powder compared to as-milled powder. Calculated activation energies indicate, in as-milled powder grain boundary diffusion seems to be the dominating mechanism, attributed to the presence of ultrafine grains and a large fraction of grain boundaries. On the other hand, annealing helped to form almost single phase HEA, decrease in defect concentration and reduced grain boundary fraction with increased crystallites; which led to increase in activation energies. Coefficients of thermal expansion have also been studied and it was found to vary with temperature range.The concept of alloying with more than three or four elements changed thinking of metallurgists Diffusion is one of the areas, where too little is known in high entropy alloys There have been several reports of producing this alloy through mechanical alloying followed by sintering routes, where high-density materials can be produced by spark plasma sintering or other hot pressing methods. However, due to lack of adequate diffusion data, fundamental understanding about sintering mechanisms of high entropy alloy powders, are still in the preliminary stage; which has been the prime motivation behind the current investigation. Moreover, when any milled powder is sintered, the process is affected by several factors, such as diffusional processes, dislocations or defect concentrations and chemical inhomogeneity, etc. In such condition, quantifying contribution from any particular mechanism is nearly impossible. Therefore, in the present work, efforts have been made to isolate the diffusional process, through minimizing other effects by first annealing the milled powder at high temperature and to obtained stable phase and nearly strain-free recrystallized grains. Attempts have been made to understand the sintering behaviors of CoCrFeNi alloy powders, at two different conditions, as-milled powder and annealed powder. Densification data has been analyzed to determine the possible dominating mechanism during initial heating period. About 99.5% purity and −325 mesh powders of Fe, Cr, and Co powders were procured from M/S Alfa Aesar and Ni powder was procured from M/S Sigma-Aldrich. Co, Cr, Fe, and Ni powders were taken in equiatomic ratio and milled using high energy planetary ball mill (Fritsch P-5). Tungsten carbide balls and vials were used with ball to powder weight ratio of about 15:1 while using toluene as a process control agent. The milling was done at speed of 300 rpm for about 15 h. In order to study two different conditions, some of the powders were annealed at 1100  C while heated at a rate of 10  C/min. The green compacts were prepared using steel die of 7 mm diameter at low pressure of about 70 MPa. Sample was placed on a vertical dilatometer system (Theta Industries Inc., USA) and the thin push rod was adjusted through the counter weights in such way, that it should be in contact with the sample without causing additional load. Sample was heated at a rate of 10  C/min up to 1150  C under high purity argon and cooled. The characterizations of powders and sintered samples were done through x-ray diffraction (XRD PANalytical, Model: X'Pert PRO with Cu kα radiation). Morphology of the powder and the fractured surface of sintered samples were studied using scanning electron microscope (FESEM: SUPRA 40, Carl Zeiss, Germany). As-milled and annealed powders were characterized through Differential scanning calorimetry (Netzsch DSC 404 F  XRD patterns of as-milled powder ( SEM micrographs of as-milled powder ( Dilatometer plots obtained during continuous heating have been shown in Measured linear shrinkage data through usual method Currently very few diffusion properties are available on HEAs, therefore, the activation energies of diffusion reported for different constituting elements (Co, Cr, Fe and Ni) and diffusivity data on some HEA systems were compared, as best possible approach to identify the possible controlling mechanism. While comparing it was found that currently estimated activation energies for both the powders, are significantly smaller than the reported activation energies for volume diffusion ( To obtain the CTE values, compacts of powders (as-milled and annealed) were first sintered at 1150 °C for an isothermal period of 60 min. Surfaces of sintered samples were cleaned using fine abrasive paper to remove the possible oxide layers, if any, and both ends were flattened to make sure the samples sit vertically on flat surface. These samples were placed on the dilatometer and reheated to 1000 °C at 10 °C/min. Both samples show almost similar expansion behavior ( The sintering behavior of CoCrFeNi HEA powders in as-milled and annealed conditions have studied and effect of initial powder treatment on sintering kinetics was noticed. For a given mechanism activation energy of sintering was found to be increased after annealing. Grain boundary diffusion mechanism seems to be dominating during start of sintering in these powders. Measurement coefficient of thermal expansion exhibits non-linear behavior, i.e., CTE varies at different temperature ranges. This research did not receive any specific grant from funding agencies in the public, commercial, or not-for-profit sectors.