With the aim to maximise phytic acid removal and minimise losses of dry matter and minerals (Ca, Fe, Zn) in rice, three products (whole kernels and flour milled from white and brown rice; and bran, all from the same batch of variety Kenjian 90-31) were soaked in demineralized water at 10°C (SDW), NaAc buffer of pH 3.5 at 10°C (SAB), and 500UL−1 phytase of pH 5.5 at 50°C (SPS). In whole kernels and flour of white rice, phytic acid removal was 100% by all treatments; losses of dry matter, Ca, Fe, and Zn were 2–5%, 12–63%, 9–10%, and apparent gain of 63–72%, respectively. In whole brown rice, SAB removed 75% phytic acid, and SPS 100% from flour; dry matter, Ca, Fe, and Zn losses were 1–16%, 26–56%, 39–45%, and 23–24%. In rice bran, SPS removed 92% phytic acid, and SAB 50%; dry matter, Ca, Zn, and Fe losses were 20%, 48%, 63%, and apparent gain of 5%, respectively.In China, rice plays an important role in human nutrition. In 2002 and 2003, the intake of rice and rice products represented 35% of the total energy intake ( In order to increase the bioavailability of minerals in rice and rice products, rice varieties with higher mineral contents and lower levels of antinutritional factors (phytic acid, PA) could be selected for cultivation ( Soaking is widely applied at both household and industrial scale. It is the most important operation in the process of rice noodle making ( Despite the importance of rice for human nutrition, the opportunities and limitations of wet processing for the improvement of mineral bioavailability in rice have not yet been clarified. Therefore the objectives of the present study were: (1) to explore the potential of soaking, endogenous phytase, exogenous phytase and combined treatments for the removal of PA from whole and ground rice products; and (2) to quantify the negative effects of nutritional relevance, particularly losses of dry matter and minerals. Brown rice kernels, white rice kernels and rice bran (all of the same batch of variety Kenjian 90-31, harvested in 2005) were collected from Beijing Huateng Model Rice Mill Company, Beijing, China. Brown rice was obtained by de-husking rough rice; white rice was obtained by removing germs, testa and aleurone layers from brown rice; bran consisted of germs, testa and aleurone. Rice flours were prepared in a hammer-mill type grinder (HY-04B, Beijing Xinhuanya, China) and sieved through a 1 Phytase was obtained from DSM (Delft, The Netherlands), with activity of 6000 Raw materials were preheated, and soaked in various soaking media as outlined in Contents of PA of all materials were analysed by spectrophotometric detection with ferric chloride (FeCl The colorimetric method AOAC 995.11 ( Minerals in solid residues were analysed using an inductively coupled plasma optical emission spectrometer (ICP-AES) (Optima 2000, Perkin–Elmer) after wet acid digestion with concentrated nitric acid (HNO Data were analysed using the SPSS package (Sony DADC, version 12.0.1). Significance was tested at a 5% level using an unrelated The effects of rice products processing on phosphorus and phytic acid levels are presented in For white rice kernels, phytic acid (PA) started at relatively low levels and disappeared from the solids with a concomitant release of soluble phosphorus in the soaking medium ( Acid soaking caused higher dry matter losses than other soaking media ( Levels of PA in rice bran were considerably higher than in white rice. No difference ( The dry matter losses ( The results obtained with brown rice to a large extent paralleled those of rice bran. An interesting contrast was observed between the kernels and flour ( The dry matter losses ( Preheating and soaking conditions had diverse effects on PA and minerals in the tested rice products. In order to distinguish influences of endogenous and added phytase on PA degradation, endogenous phytase was inactivated by preheating. The effect of dry preheating was however, negligible, indicating that under the experimental conditions, rice endogenous phytase does not have a significant effect ( Soaking in water and acidic buffer also resulted in lower PA levels. In principle, two factors could be responsible for the impact of soaking, i.e. endogenous phytase activity and diffusion of PA into the soaking medium. Whilst endogenous phytase was functional in rice-based products ( We previously reported ( The results suggested that acid soaking of white rice was adequate to dephytinize intact kernels. For bran, dephytinizing with phytase caused a majority of minerals to be dissolved in liquid medium, which could be applied profitably as a natural mineral enrichment for food or feed use. The data on whole brown rice vs. milled rice give a very clear illustration of the function of the testa and aleurone layers as a barrier to influx of e.g., phytase, and diffusive loss of matter. It has been reported that the presence of bran, which retards water penetration and therefore the leaching of solids ( White rice, rice bran and brown rice underwent different patterns of losses of dry mass, minerals and phytic acid, when soaked with demineralized water, acidic buffer and phytase solutions after preheating. White rice contained 4 Phytase application is an effective method to rapidly remove phytic acid whilst preserving relatively more dry matter and minerals than other soaking approaches in rice products. Financial support was provided by Wageningen University through the North–South Interdisciplinary Research and Education Fund (INREF). We gratefully acknowledge Dr. Cheng Suhong of Beijing Huateng Model Rice Mill Company (Beijing, China) who provided brown rice, white rice and rice bran. We also gratefully acknowledge the assistance of Lin Li and Jin Ying for mineral analysis.