The average iron content of iron ore is <30%; therefore, crushing, grinding, milling and other processing techniques must be executed before smelting. Currently, it is expensive to break iron ores using mechanical grinding. Experiments have been carried out to develop a novel approach of producing iron ore powder. First, the iron ore is placed in a high-pressure chamber, and then liquid CO2 is injected into the chamber. Second, considering energy recycling, after the iron ore pores are filled with liquid CO2, dissociative liquid CO2 is substituted and collected for cyclic utilization. Third, an initial high pressure is applied inside the chamber using a water pump in order to increase the energy input. Fourth, the pressure is rapidly unloaded. After penetration and gasification expansion, the iron ore will immediately be converted into micron-sized particles. Laser grain size analysis indicated that the grain size of the iron ore particles ranges between 30 and 50μm, which will satisfy the requirements of gravity separation, magnetic separation and the flotation process. This is a highly efficient and low-cost method that has excellent industrial promotion value.Iron powder is in great demand, especially for the auto industry, manufacturing, and the production of permanent magnets Besides being a greenhouse gas and a major component of the carbon cycle in nature, carbon dioxide (CO It is worth mentioning that CO Liquid CO Conventional techniques used for the production of micron-sized particles of iron ore are mostly based on mechanical methods such as crushing, grinding, milling and other processes. Powder characteristics are mainly determined by the average grain size, size distribution and particle shape Aluminum was not “discovered” until 1808 (about 200 Interest in synthesizing copper powder has increased considerably during the past few years because of its high electrical conductivity, relatively higher melting point, low electrochemical migration behavior and low material cost Cement is a fine powder that is the principal strength-giving and property-controlling component of concrete The production of iron powders, aluminum alloy powders, copper powders and cement utilizes mechanical and chemical methods such as crushing, grinding, milling and heating. The first observation related to the possibility of obtaining ultrafine powders through supercritical fluid (SF) processing was made in 1876 In this paper, we developed a new alternative method for the production of micron-sized particles of iron ore by rapid unloading of liquid CO The rapid unloading of liquid CO Currently, the overall process includes CO First, iron ores are placed in the high-pressure chamber, and after sealing, liquid CO After approximately 20–30 The liquefaction process of CO For the purpose of recycling the liquid CO First, the outlet of the high-pressure chamber is equipped with a needle valve to control the amount of CO Second, the initial filling pressure of the liquid CO Third, after saturated penetration, the water pump starts to run. When the water pressure is slightly higher than 3 The total energy input is related to the grain size of the iron ore powder. The higher the energy input, the greater the pressure of the liquid CO When the pressure increases, the rupture disks will burst. The time of rupture disk bursting is approximately 5–8 In addition to the above procedures (CO The iron ore is weighed before being placed in the high-pressure chamber. The equivalent diameter of the iron ore is < Grain size is a key factor that determines the performance of different organic and inorganic materials. Data analysis indicates that both the average grain size and the grain size distribution (GSD) are related to the initial water pressure and the liquid CO The grain size distribution of the iron ore powder under different initial water pressure is illustrated in In order to verify the reliability and the reusability of the powdering method, a series of experiments on iron ore powdering were carried out, including hematite, refractory iron ore, low-grade iron ore, and magnetite powdering, as illustrated in The current cost of iron ore powder produced by ball milling in China is approximately 5.7 US dollars per ton of iron ore. The estimated cost of the rapid unloading procedure is approximately 1.0 US dollars per ton. The cost of the rapid unloading procedure has two components: power consumption and wear. Power consumption is a linear function of liquid CO The wear cost is also affected by the scale of the production. Because the rapid unloading procedure does not have a liner cost in the current production procedure, the main wear cost is the rupture of disks. By using a variable-diameter outlet design, the size and thickness of the rupture disks could be reduced. The estimated wear cost is 0.52 US dollars per ton of iron ore. Rapid unloading of liquid CO Based on the comparison of direct powder production and powder production after CO The results of the laboratory-scale experiments indicate that it is possible to produce micron-sized particles of iron ore using controllable methods of CO The production of iron ore particles by rapid unloading of liquid CO The authors would like to sincerely thank Guo WX and Liu HQ for their help with the laboratory equipment. The work presented in this paper was supported by the