The Biofuels Directive sets reference values for the quantity of biofuels and other renewable fuels to be placed on the transport market. Biogas from agricultural crops can be used to meet this directive. This paper investigates biogas production for three crop rotations: wheat, barley and sugar beet; wheat, wheat and sugar beet; wheat only. A technical and economic analysis for each crop rotation was carried out. It was found that wheat produces significantly more biogas than either barley or sugar beet, when examined on a weight basis. However sugar beet produces more biogas and subsequently more energy when examined on an area basis. When producing biofuels, land is the limiting factor to the quantity of energy that may be produced. Thus if optimising land then a crop rotation of wheat, wheat and sugar beet should be utilised, as this scenario produced the greatest quantity of energy. This scenario has a production cost of €0.90/mN
                     3, therefore, this scenario is competitive with petrol when the price of petrol is at least €1.09/l (VAT is charged at 21%). If optimising the production costs then a crop rotation of wheat only should be utilised when the cost of grain is less than €132/ton. This scenario has the least production cost at €0.83/mN
                     3, therefore, this scenario is competitive with petrol when the price of petrol is at least €1.00/l. But as this scenario produces the least quantity of biogas, it also produces the least quantity of energy. In comparing with other works by the authors it is shown that a biomethane system produces more energy from the same crops at a cheaper cost than an ethanol system.The Biofuels Directive (2003/30/EEC) Agricultural land is mainly used for food production, however with an impending oil crisis the use of agricultural land for energy production is coming to the fore In 2003, 48 The limiting factor when producing energy from agricultural land is the area of land available for energy production The cost of biofuels is also an important consideration; biofuels must be competitive with each other and with mineral fuels such as petrol and diesel The authors have published similar work on the potential for ethanol production from the same quantity of land, and the same crops in the same rotation The area of biogas production from crops for energy production, as opposed to biogas production from residues, is relatively new. At the time of writing the literature available in peer reviewed published press is relatively limited. Work is under way on an EU funded “Crop Gen” project To give a feel for the data in Amon and co-workers To compare the two sources Amon and co-workers found specific CH In particular, this paper is concerned with the production of biogas from sugar beet, wheat and barley; these are the principle crops grown in Ireland Facilities visited in Austria which digest grass and maize/silage, based storage of raw feedstock in silage pits. The reactor however had a 70 day retention time and the digestate was sent to a second reactor with another 70 day retention time. This facilitated storage of digestate until the ground thawed and digestate could be spread. Thus the reactor vessels comprised 38% of the year’s feedstock. Storage of cereals at or below 15% solids content is not problematic; however storage of sugar beet is problematic. The sugar beet campaign typically extends from September to January (approximately a 4 month period). In winter sugar beets are stored under bails of straw to protect them from frost. In summer the temperature must be maintained below 10 The cradle of this analysis is the gate to the production facility; the grave is the energy produced in the form of transport fuel dispensed from the facility. This is not a whole life cycle analysis but the paper has an ambition to compare biogas production and ethanol production from the same quantity of land and the same energy crop rotation. The ethanol paper is already published Biogas technology is considered a mature technology for the treatment of slurries and feedstocks with less than 12% dry matter Biogas is most frequently associated with electricity and heat generation, however clean-up, compression and upgrading for vehicle fuel or direct use in the gas grid is mature technology, although this is an area still under active research. Up graded biogas is termed CH The parasitic demand associated with the DRANCO process is of the order of 80 Biogas losses are experienced at digesters, particularly in gas storage devices. CH 6% losses in the digester/biogas storage system. 1.5% losses of CH Based on the data received during a review of the industry, a generic model of biogas produced from wheat, barley and sugar beet in various crop rotations is carried out. The model is based on a dry process (high solids) that is carried out under thermophilic conditions. This analysis does not take land prices or planning costs into consideration. The analysis is carried out for three different crop rotations on 48,000 Wheat, barley and sugar beet. Wheat, wheat and sugar beet. Wheat alone.  Scenario 1 is a crop rotation of wheat, barley and sugar beet in a three year rotation on 48,000 Scenario 1 produces 219,157,931 Digestate is a by-product of the anaerobic digestion process. After the digestion process the solids not destroyed remain as digestate. The anaerobic digestion process requires moisture, when wheat, barley and sugar beet are co-digested the moisture content is within the optimum range, however wheat and barley are moisture deficient, whereas, sugar beet has more than the required moisture content. For scenario 1,229,427  A typical Irish petrol car travels on average 16,000  Volvo V70 biofuel has an efficiency of ≈9.4 ≈10.64 ≈14.2 Biomethane energy value 36.64 Biomethane efficiency 0.388 Petrol energy value 32 Petrol efficiency 0.44  Car travels 16,000 ≈1130  Bus travels 1.60 Bus travels 56,000 ≈35,000  Scenario 2 is a crop rotation of wheat, wheat and sugar beet in a three year rotation on 48,000 Scenario 2 has the highest parasitic demands requiring 92,619,612 Scenario 3 is a crop rotation of wheat alone, in which wheat is grown on all available land. As wheat has a moisture content of 20% it is not suitable for anaerobic digestion as a sole feedstock, it may be co-digested with other feedstocks or water must be added to ensure the moisture content is in the optimum range. The maximum solids content allowable for dry digestion is 45%DS, thus a substantial quantity of water must be added. This scenario treats 403,200t This crop rotation yields on average 8.4 Scenario 3 has the lowest parasitic requirement with just 67,369,800 Scenario 2 produces the largest quantity of biogas. It produces 11% more biogas than scenario 1 and 23.4% more than scenario 3. This is not surprising as scenario 1 has a rotation of barley, and barley produces less biogas per hectare than either sugar beet or wheat. A similar situation is found for scenario 3; this scenario has no sugar beet in rotation and as sugar beet produces the highest quantity of biogas per hectare when it is removed from the rotation as in scenario 3, less biogas is produced. From If the objective is to obtain the highest quantity of energy per unit of land then a rotation of wheat, wheat, sugar beet in a three year rotation is optimum. Scenario 2 produces the highest quantity of biogas but as a result it has the highest parasitic energy demand. Capital costs have a significant effect on the overall production cost. In general the larger the facility the lower the capital cost per unit. Anaerobic digestion of agricultural crops is a dry process. The DRANCO process is a dry anaerobic fermentation at solids content of between 25% and 40% that is patented by Organic Waste Systems (OWS) The capital cost of the upgrading facility can be calculated based on the quantity of gas sent to the facility. Murphy and McCarthy Operating costs have a significant effect on biogas production costs. Similar to the capital cost, the operating cost is based on the DRANCO process, but again the operating cost of the CHP system must be removed but the operating cost of the upgrading and compression facility must be added. Persson From It is worth noting at this stage that scenario 3 is wheat only, as wheat is moisture deficient water is added to the process, thus the capacity for scenario three is the amount of wheat and the amount of water added to ensure the moisture content of the water is in the optimum range. The feedstock is digested at 45% solids content. From a review of the industry it was found that feedstock with a solids content 45%DS may be digested without any operational problems The cost of electricity is a high annual expenditure;   Standing charge  Average standing charge Summer rate (Mar–Oct) Winter rate (Nov–Feb) Night rate  Summer hours (245 days Winter hours (120 days  Total number of hours  ((9.85 Average rate  The cost of feedstock is the highest annual liability accounting for 58% of the total liabilities. It is assumed the cost of wheat and barley is €100/ton and sugar beet is €55/ton. As wheat and barley account for 24% of the feedstock and sugar beet accounts for 76% the average cost of feedstock is €66/ton. The cost of capital is 15% of total annual liabilities. The operating cost for the facilities is also substantial at 18%, operating costs includes the cost of labour, overheads and maintenance. The cost of both thermal and electrical energy is small at 8.6% of the total annual liabilities. The unit cost of thermal energy is high at €0.073/kWh but this is due to higher kerosene prices and the limited availability of natural gas In An economic summary of scenario 2 may be viewed in An economic summary of scenario 3 may be viewed in From  A sensitivity analysis was carried out for a change in the sale price of digestate. At present €40/ton is attainable for compost/digestate, however, in the short term if significant quantities of digestate were produced the price of digestate may drop due to over supply, in the long term the price may rise due to expensive fossil fuel. Scenario 1 and 3 are the most sensitive to change (slope 0.0009). Scenario 2 is the least sensitive to change (slope 0.0005). This is not surprising as scenario 2 produces 1.4 If no market for digestate is located, the production cost for the scenarios range from €0.92 to 1.01/m A sensitivity analysis for the sale price of biomethane was carried out. If biomethane were placed on the market for €1/m If excise duty is applied, it is not feasible to produce biomethane from crops at present revenues from the fuel produced. However, if excise exemption remains on biomethane, biomethane is economically viable if the price of petrol is at least €1.00–1.13/l for the scenarios investigated. From  Scenario 1 is the most sensitive to change (slope 0.5913). Scenario 3 is the least sensitive (0.4456) to change. If for example grain reaches €190/ton then: Scenario 1 (16 Scenario 2 (32 Scenario 1 (48 From  Scenario 3 is the most sensitive to change (slope 0.002). Scenario 1 is the least sensitive to change (slope 0.0018).  Scenario 3 is again the most sensitive to change (slope 0.002). Scenario 1 is the least sensitive to change (slope 0.0015). A sensitivity analysis was carried out to determine the economic parameters most critical to economic feasibility. The most critical parameters are discussed below. All scenarios were equally sensitive to a change in the sale price of biomethane. The price of biomethane is the main factor in economic feasibility of a biogas facility. With excise relief biomethane is economically viable if the price of petrol is at least €1.00–1.13/l for all the scenarios investigated (VAT at 21% is applied). The cost of feedstock is the next most important economic factor, a change in cereal feedstock prices results in a change in production cost of between €0.0045 and 0.0059/m When cereal costs are less than €132/ton, scenario 3 has a lower production cost than scenario 2. If the cost of grain increases beyond €140/ton then the scenario 1 and 2 which contain sugar beet have a lower production cost than scenario 3. Scenario 3 is more sensitive to a change in the price of digestate in comparison to either scenario 1 or 2. This is not surprising as scenario 3 produces substantially more digestate than the other scenarios investigated, thus a change in the sale price would have a significant effect. Overall capital costs and operating costs are not as significant as other factors. A 1% change results in a change of €0.0018–0.002/m A crop rotation of wheat, wheat and sugar beet produces the largest quantity of biogas, thus scenario 2 optimises energy production. As anaerobic digestion facilities are limited in size approximately five facilities each with a capacity of 200,000 However if optimising the production costs then scenario 3 (a crop rotation of wheat only) should be utilised, this scenario produces the least quantity of biogas, thus it produces the least quantity of energy. This scenario has only one crop type and seven facilities each with a capacity of 100,000 As stated in the “Introduction: Focus of paper” this paper seeks to examine the potential of renewable gaseous transport fuels to generate more energy per hectare from crops than liquid biofuels such as ethanol. This is set out in Gross energy output of the biomethane system is 17% higher than the ethanol system. Cost of energy output from the biomethane system is 76% of that from the ethanol system. Furthermore the parasitic demand for scenario 1 was: 54% for the ethanol system 22% for the biomethane system. It is suggested that the process of making biomethane from energy crops is superior in terms of gross and net energy production and cost, to the process of making ethanol from the same energy crops.  For biogas production in Ireland from traditional crops to be feasible, excise relief is required. If optimising the quantity of energy produced then the optimum approach is a crop rotation of wheat, wheat and sugar beet. Parasitic energy demands of the biomethane system are in the range of 21–22%. Biogas production from crop rotations that include for sugar beet produce more expensive biomethane (sugar beet charged at €55/ton) that from crop rotations that exclude sugar beet if the cost of wheat is less than €132/ton. Conversely rotations that include for sugar beet are cheaper if the cost of grain is greater than €132/ton. When wheat grain sells at €100/ton (as in Summer 2006) then a crop rotation of wheat only (Scenario 3) should be utilised if optimising the production cost. The production cost of biomethane is €0.83/m Biomethane production from a rotation of 48,000 This research was part financed by the Irish Research Council for Science, Engineering and Technology under the Embark Initiative.