A dentine protein extraction protocol was modified in order to identify matrix metalloproteinase gelatinolytic activities in the non-mineralized and mineralized phases of human dentine. Dentine proteins from 24 individual permanent molars from patients aged 15–73 years were sequentially extracted, first with guanidinium chloride (G1 extract), then EDTA (E extract), and after this demineralization step, again by guanidinium chloride (G2 extract) to dissociate collagen-associated proteins. Extracts were analysed by sodium dodecyl sulphate–polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis and the gels were processed by Western blotting and zymography to detect gelatinolytic activities. Active and latent forms of gelatinase A were identified in the non-mineralized dentine fraction (G1 extract) of 58% of the teeth. Other gelatinolytic species were also detected by zymography with apparent M
                     r of 92, 54 and 30 kDa. Although gelatinase A was detected in the G1 extracts of teeth from all ages, indicating more recent synthesis and remodelling of the predentine, gelatinase A was never detected in any E extract or in the G2 extracts of patients older than 41 years. The presence of the active form of gelatinase A in mineralized human dentine implicates this enzyme in dentine mineralization.The synthesis and organization of complex, specialized extracellular matrices precedes mineralization in dental hard tissues and in bone. In the formation of a mineralization-competent matrix and during the mineralization process, remodelling and controlled degradation of some of these matrix components occurs. Although bone remains metabolically dynamic and is remodelled throughout life, the dental hard tissues, dentine and enamel, are unique and are not resorbed under normal physiological circumstances. However, the non-mineralized predentine located superficial to the mineralized dentine on the pulpal aspect and lining the dentinal tubules is likely to be remodelled in response to functional demands and the maintenance of odontoblast attachment. As such, remodelling of cell-attachment proteins and their predentine-binding partners would be expected to occur throughout life in response to dental caries, tooth attrition and other injury. However, the proteinases involved in these processes and their cellular origin are not well understood. Matrix metalloproteinases have been implicated in the breakdown and physiologic remodelling of the extracellular matrix in a variety of tissues including dental (reviewed by: In contrast to the considerable body of evidence implicating matrix metalloproteinases in pathological tissue destruction, their role in the normal remodelling of periodontal tissues is less clear ( Although matrix metalloproteinases may be involved in enamel and dentine formation, their fate after mineralization is not known. Upon mineralization, they could be trapped in the mineralized phase bound to matrix components or to hydroxyapatite crystals. Interesting questions are thus posed: does immobilization in a mineralized matrix stabilize the protein to preserve enzyme activity over the long term or does this inactivate the enzyme? If stabilized, then upon demineralization either experimentally or pathologically, as in dental caries, can a functional enzyme be recovered? Are sufficient amounts of enzyme present to contribute significantly to degradation of the organic phase of these tissues during pathological exposure? Although gelatinase A ( Healthy erupted permanent human molars, extracted for valid clinical reasons, were obtained from the Department of Oral Surgery at the Hospital Virgen de las Nieves of Granada (Spain) and from private dental clinics. The protocol to collect samples from human donors was approved by the Ethics Committee of the Virgen de las Nieves Hospital. Informed consent was obtained from all patients before their enrolment in the investigation. Molars were taken from 24 patients (15 female and 9 male) with ages ranging from 15 to 73 years. Teeth were classified into four groups according to patient age (group 1: ≤20 years of age; group 2: 21–40 years; group 3: 41–60 years; and group 4: 61–73 years). Each group consisted of six individual teeth from different patients. Enamel, cementum, pulp and other soft connective tissues adhering to the teeth were first carefully removed. Immediately after extraction, the teeth were cleaned of blood with distilled water and any attached soft tissue was carefully scraped off with a scalpel. Enamel and cementum were removed from the dentine with diamond burs under a continuous water spray. The contents of the pulp chamber were scraped off with a dental excavator and the pulp canal cleaned with Gates files (on a dental air-turbine handpiece under a continuous water spray) and endodontic files. All the dentine samples were approx. 1.2 g wet wt. Unless otherwise stated, all steps were carried out at 4°C. Dentine was crushed by pounding with a steel hammer on a cold metallic surface. To remove any tissue remnants, the pulverized dentine was washed overnight by constant stirring in 2.5 M NaCl containing proteinase inhibitors (2.5 mM benzamidine HCl, 50 mM ε-amino- Dentine proteins were extracted by an adaptation and modification of similar techniques applied to porcine bone ( Proteolytic activities in the three dentinal extracts were assayed by a highly sensitive zymographic technique on 10% SDS–PAGE gels ( Data from different age groups were compared by the χ Protein yields in the three sequential extracts (G1, E, and G2), representing different pools of human dentine protein, are shown in Preliminary experiments using different protein concentrations of the dentine extract samples had established the optimal quantity of protein to be loaded in each well for analysis. When dentine protein extracts were analysed by zymography, multiple forms of gelatinolytic enzymes were detected, with latent and active gelatinase A ( Western blotting ( Extracts obtained by EDTA demineralization of human dentine (E extracts) were also analysed for gelatinolytic activity, but proteolytic activity was not present in any of the 24 individual samples assayed. As EDTA could have removed essential divalent cations from the matrix metalloproteinases, the assays were repeated by incubation in the calcium ion-containing assay buffer (50 mM Tris–HCl, pH 7.4, 200 mM NaCl, 5 mM CaCl Major bands of gelatinolytic activity were detected from individual samples of G2 extracts prepared after the EDTA extraction. Predominant cleared bands comigrated with gelatinase A standards in 29% (7/24) of the samples of the G2 extracts. Of these, gelatinase A was present in its fully active form (one single band at 59 kDa) in 57% (4/7) of the samples. The occurrence of gelatinase A in G1 and G2 extracts in the different age groups is shown in These studies have established, we believe for the first time, the presence of gelatinolytic proteinases in human mineralized dentine matrix. Gelatinase A was identified by zymography in guanadinium extracts, both before (G1 extract) and after (G2 extract) demineralization by EDTA. Although comigration alone does not confer identity, the apparent As revealed by zymography, activated gelatinase A ( Interestingly, no gelatinolytic activity was present in the hydroxyapatite-associated protein fraction prepared by mineral dissolution with EDTA. That the EDTA treatment did not result in enzyme instability and subsequent breakdown by chelation of structural Zn The presence of gelatinase A in the G2 fraction is interesting for two reasons. First, the presence of active enzyme provides indirect evidence for in vivo activity of gelatinase A during dentine matrix remodelling before and during mineralization. As many samples also contained latent enzyme, this indicates that the presence of activated forms was not a consequence of the extraction procedure. The gelatinase A substrates in the mineralization process are at present unknown. However, one potential target is the basement membrane beneath presecretory ameloblasts. Degradation of this layer separating the enamel-forming cells from the predentine is a requirement for enamel formation ( Although there are reports of gelatinase activity in bovine enamel ( This research was supported by a personal grant to SMDH, Researching Staff Training, from the Ministry of Education and Science of the Government of Spain. CMO was supported by a Medical Research Council Clinician Scientist award and operating grants. Some of the work described in this paper derives from a thesis, submitted in partial fulfillment of the requirements for a PhD degree (to SMDH). A preliminary report was presented at the 49th annual meeting (New York, February, 1997) of the American Academy of Forensic Sciences.