This brief article review discusses the available pyrometallurgical methods for recycling of rechargeable batteries including Li-ion, Ni–Cd and Ni–MH batteries. Owing to the exponentially growing interest for using portable electronic devices and vehicles, rechargeable batteries have attracted significant attention in recent years, resulting in an increasing demand for critical metals such as Li, Co, Ni, rare earth elements. Because most of the published review articles have been investigated the hydrometallurgical methods, in this minireview, the current status of battery recycling, pretreatment, and especially pyrometallurgical methods of recycling of the rechargeable batteries are summarized. For complete overview of the section, please refer the article collection - Recycling of batteries is challenging owing to the composition complexity and elemental diversity used in their manufacturing process. However, the rapid growth of used rechargeable batteries in portable electronic devices and vehicles has attracted the attention of researchers and companies to propose more efficient recycling procedures. Rechargeable batteries offer high energy density with prominent performance, straightforward operation and environmental advantages [ Generally, the recycling process for rechargeable batteries can be divided into two main hydrometallurgical and pyrometallurgical processes. In battery recycling, hydrometallurgical methods have been widely investigated by several authors owing to their milder processing, higher selectivity, and sensitivity, especially about Li. On the other hand, pyrometallurgical or thermal processing approaches bring several advantages to a recycling system such as easier scalability and using fewer chemicals. Battery recycling using thermal treatment is mainly the addition of reducing agents to spent battery materials to directly produce alloy and metal oxides [ Recycling of rechargeable batteries typically starts with a mechanical process that can significantly enhance recovery extraction in pyro- or hydrometallurgical methods. Mechanical pretreatments include sorting which usually is a manual job, crushing, milling, and sieving that can be operated automatically. Through the mechanical process, gravity, magnetic and pneumatic separations can disassociate scrap plastic labels and iron containers from cathodic materials [ LIBs with the highest energy and power per unit of battery weight have to be considered as the best type of battery for various kinds of portable electrical devices such as electric cars, digital cameras, watches, laptops, calculators, communication equipment, and so on. A LIB mainly is composed of cathode, anode, organic electrolyte, and separator which all have been covered by a metal case and plastic cover. The cathode is commonly made of lithium metal oxides such as LiCoO In accordance with the literature, a few numbers of the researchers have been used pyrometallurgy for recycling of the LIBs. The process starts with heating in the low-temperature furnace (150–500 °C) to remove electrolytes and organic solvent, followed by the high-temperature treatment (1400–1700 °C) to form alloy (as Co alloy) and slag (as Li Nickel as a strategic metal has a wide range of applications in stainless steel and nonferrous alloys manufacturing, chemical or petrochemical catalysts, military industries, and battery productions. Recently, nickel–cadmium batteries have been used widely as a rechargeable power source for many portable devices such as notebooks, cameras, or music players. Spent Ni–Cd battery contains valuable components including approximately 43% cathode and anode materials made of Ni and Cd, plastic separators (5%), steel container (27%), and Ni mesh plate (25%) as support for anodic powder. Owing to its high value of metallic Ni content, harmful and carcinogenic nature of Cd, its recycling has attracted much attention in terms of academic and industrial applications [ In 2006, a typical carbothermal reduction process for recovering of the Cd from Ni–Cd batteries was proposed. Coal (anthracite) was used as a carbonaceous material to extract 99.92% of Cd at 900 °C and produce a Ni–Co alloy as a by-product [ Ni–MH batteries are currently one of the widely used rechargeable batteries which were developed and commercialized in Japan in 1989–1990 [ Generally, Ni–MH batteries are composed of 36–42 wt.% Ni, 25 wt.% Fe, 4 wt.% Co, and 8–10 wt.% rare earth elements (REEs) such as La, Ce, Pr, Nd [ In Ni–MH batteries, different elements are present in forms of complex intermetallic phases. REEs and transition metals such as Fe, Co, and Ni exhibit different behaviors in terms of oxygen affinities, and this property can be used to isolate REEs (i.e., La, Ce, Nd, Dy, and Pr) in the form of transition metal oxides at high temperature. For instance, this technique was developed for the recovery of the anode compounds. The anode material of Ni–MH battery was first oxidized in air at 1000 °C for 1 h and then reduced in Ar at 1550 °C for 1.5 h by adding a waste developer kit (>99 wt.% Fe) as the reducing agent. The reduced Ni and Co contents diffuse into the Fe phase and a ferronickel alloy was obtained. The REEs contents were into the slag phase resulting in hetero-oxide material [ Scrap rechargeable batteries such as Li-ion, Ni–Cd, and Ni–MH batteries contain a significant amount of valuable metals such as Li, Co, Ni, and REEs. Recycling of these waste streams not only provide economic benefits but also reduce environmental impacts. Some companies have been settled in the industrial process for the hydro- and pyrometallurgical recycling of rechargeable batteries such as Sony, Umicore, Accurec, Onto, and Inmetco. However, owing to huge generation of new batteries with more complex metallic contents, proposing more efficient methods for the sustainable recovery of batteries is still an industrial need. Through the pyrometallurgical method, the recycling of LIBs has been investigated by thermal reduction using various reducing materials such as Al, graphite, activated carbon, and NH Nothing declared.