This paper presents the results of an experimental study investigating the effect of stand-off distance, inlet pressure, exposure time and feed particle size on grinding of magnetite using waterjet technology. A unique experimental set-up consisting of a conventional abrasive cutting head coupled with a cavitation chamber was employed for this purpose. The results of grinding tests were evaluated based on Rosin-Rammler parameters of the products and specific energy consumption (SEC) values for generation of particles below 25μm. A three-level experimental design for two independent variables with three center points was used to examine the effects of inlet pressure (69MPa, 138MPa and 207MPa) and anvil stand-off distance (3mm, 50mm, 97mm) using a feed material below 600μm particle size. The results showed that the anvil stand-off distance and pressure intensity are important factors for size reduction of magnetite particles. However, the effect of inlet pressure on size parameter was found higher than the stand-off distance. SEC values were found very similar for all pressure intensities tested at 3 and 50mm anvil stand-off distance. The largest size parameter and highest SEC value were obtained using 69MPa inlet pressure and 97mm anvil stand-off distance. Stepwise closed circuit grinding tests were also performed operating the experimental set-up at 3mm anvil stand-off distance and 138MPa pressure. The size parameter of the ground products and the SEC values were found very similar after 50s of waterjet exposure time. The feed material used in aforementioned tests was wet screened to produce mono-size fractions using a √2 sieve series. The fractions were subjected to waterjet grinding at 3mm anvil stand-off distance and 138MPa inlet pressure. The largest size parameter and SEC value was obtained when the coarsest fraction (600–425μm) was used as feed material in these tests. The 600–425μm mono-size fraction has also been subjected to waterjet grinding to determine the prevailing size reduction mechanism using 3mm stand-off distance at different pressure values. Most of the particles detected in the SEM image of the lowest inlet pressure product (69MPa) were identified as coarse and blocky particles with sharp edges. It was found that the number of blocky particles diminished by increasing inlet pressure indicating the impact breakage conditions. It was found that the destructive breakage conditions have become prominent by increasing pressure.Waterjet technology is the one of the relatively new but widely used technologies in practice to machine materials. It involves production of a high pressure waterjet using an intensifier pump and concentration of water stream in a small application area. Basically, there are two types of waterjets utilized in these machines according to the material used for eroding which are namely pure and abrasive waterjets In conventional waterjet equipment, abrasive particles enter the waterjet by pneumatic transport process with a negligible velocity. These particles are accelerated to near the speed of the waterjet stream. Particle acceleration process, in some cases, is capable of producing enough force for fragmentation of abrasive particles. According to the previous researchers, up to 80% of the abrasive particles are broken into smaller sizes during acceleration process Although abrasive fragmentation inside the focusing tube is a highly undesirable effect in conventional use, as Galecki and Mazurkiewicz Guo and Dong Galecki et al, conducted coal comminution studies using a specially designed waterjet mill consisting of a conventional abrasive cutting head coupled with a cavitation chamber High grade magnetite with 70.7 Fe % supplied from Minelco Inc. was used in the experiments ( The experimental set up consists of a conventional abrasive cutting head coupled with a cavitation chamber ( A Metrel PowerQ energy analyzer was used to determine the energy consumption during the tests. A Hitachi S4700 scanning electron microscope was used for the determination of morphological properties of the grinding products. A three-level experimental design for two independent variables with three center points was used to examine the effects of inlet pressure and anvil stand-off distance on the size parameter and specific energy consumption for generating particles below 25 The set up was run using a feed material below 600 The test design matrix for 2 variables and the corresponding size parameter and specific energy consumption values are shown in  F values of 148.78 and 162.70 indicate that the models are both “significant”. The values of 1.44 and 0.5382 imply “not significant lack of fit” for both models. A, B, AB, A Response surface plots were generated for further evaluation of the developed models. In waterjet grinding, particle fragmentation takes place as a result of different mechanisms occurring in different regions of the experimental setup. For this reason, each operational parameter affect the size reduction performance at different levels in different regions. The first stage of fragmentation occurs in the mixing tube and during the acceleration of particles through the focusing tube (mixing-acceleration zone). Highly turbulent flow conditions cause particle-particle and particle-wall interactions leading to size reduction. At this stage, an efficient destructive breakage due to rapid pressurization may occur for the materials having fractures and cleavage on their body, but it is unlikely to take place for massive magnetite particles. Pressure is the dominant operational parameter at this stage, abrasion breakage mechanism occurs at low pressures. A certain level of applied pressure is required to create impact breakage conditions, depending on the size and density of the particles. The second and last stage of particle fragmentation process through the experimental setup occurs in the cavitation cell (cavitation-impact zone). The magnetite particles are injected into the water-filled cell and directed to the tungsten carbide anvil by the nozzle at the end of the focusing tube. Submerging the waterjet produces cavitation bubbles in the low pressure regions due to shearing of the relatively stationary water inside the cavitation cell. The subsequent growth and collapse of the cavitation bubbles lead to improved particle size reduction efficiency. Particles move horizontally inside the water and hit to the anvil located at the end of the cell. The impact breakage mechanism is the dominant mechanism at this stage. The velocity of the particles, which is dependent on the applied pressure, particle size and density of the particles, plays an important role for creating the cavitation conditions and determining the intensity of the impact. The results indicated that the farther the anvil to the nozzle exit inside the cavitation cell, the harder it becomes to create necessary impact force for particle fragmentation. Although the anvil stand-off distance has an influence on size parameter, it is involved in particle fragmentation only in the second stage of the size reduction process through the experimental setup. For this reason, the effect of the intensity of applied pressure on size parameter has been found higher than anvil stand-off distance as indicated by As can be seen from A significant rise in the SEC values was observed when the setup was run with the operational parameters of 97 Stepwise closed circuit grinding tests were conducted using the feed material below 600 As seen in The tests were performed to determine the effect of feed size on the waterjet grinding of magnetite. The feed material containing particles below 600 In waterjet grinding, it is harder to accelerate high density and large size particles through the mixing-acceleration zone To further investigate the behavior of particles during waterjet grinding, additional tests were performed using the coarsest (600–425 The results of the experimental study showed that the location of the anvil inside the cavitation cell and inlet pressure are important factors determining the intensity of the particle impact for size reduction of magnetite particles. However, anvil stand-off distance is involved in particle fragmentation only in the second stage of waterjet grinding while inlet pressure determines the velocity of particles in both mixing-acceleration and cavitation-impact zones. For this reason, the effect of the intensity of inlet pressure on size parameter was found higher. Specific energy consumption values for the generation of particles below 25 In stepwise closed circuit grinding tests, size parameter of the products were found very close and about the same amount of below 25 The study has also shown that feed size has significant effect on the final product particle size and specific energy consumption. The largest size parameter and the highest specific energy consumption values were obtained for the coarsest mono-size fraction. According to the SEM images, small fragments were generated by chipping off the sharp corners of the particles at the lowest pressure intensity (69 The overall results suggested that the experimental setup is capable of grinding magnetite to fine size. Impact breakage mechanism was found as the dominant mechanism for size reduction through the experimental setup. Although the specific energy consumption values were found high compared to conventional methods due to very low capacity of the laboratory scale device, pilot scale studies should be conducted to find out the real values at large scale systems. The author would like to thank Dr. Greg Galecki from Department of Mining and Nuclear Engineering, Missouri University of Science and Technology for his helpful suggestions and encouragements. The author also wishes to acknowledge funding from Council of Higher Education of Turkey (