QEMSCAN analysis of the feed and products to a gravity concentrator can provide a detailed understanding of the effect of mineralogy, particle size and liberation on separator performance. The use of particle categorisers in Intellection’s iExplorer software allows particles to be classed by calculated density and size. Mineral, or elemental, recovery data by size can then be determined for a given set of operating conditions much more easily than by using conventional heavy liquid analysis. The procedure has been demonstrated successfully for the Mozley laboratory mineral separator using a chromite ore.
                  QEMSCAN analysis has been shown to readily provide separator performance as a function of particle size and density. This information was used to model the performance of the separator. The model was tested against a second independent ore giving encouraging results when used for prediction of the recovery/grade relationship. The potential for using this technique to predict industrial separator performance from feed mineralogy is discussed.It is well known that gravity separator performance depends on both particle size and density. Each gravity separator, under specific operating conditions, has an optimum size range at which it delivers the highest separation efficiency for a given mineral. In the past, production of accurate data on recovery by size required samples to be split into size classes by screening and classification (for particles typically below 45 To further divide the size classes into density classes requires the use of heavy liquid separation ( Following division of samples into size and density classes, elemental analysis of the samples is then required to produce a metallurgical balance which is used to calculate recovery data by size and density. Given the amount of work involved, this type of analysis is not routinely performed. Reliable data for many separators are therefore commonly not available which makes equipment selection a difficult process. Even where data are available, it may be difficult to interpret. For example, the lowering of recovery above a specific size is often attributed to reduced liberation rather than an equipment effect without sufficient evidence to support this hypothesis. Automated scanning electron microscopy systems, such as QEMSCAN, are already important tools for the minerals engineer for determining the ease of treatment of specific ores and to help with troubleshooting on the plant. The technique may also be used to more easily produce recovery data by size and density than with conventional techniques. This has great potential benefit for those involved in both equipment selection and for equipment producers who may gain further understanding of how equipment and operating variables affect performance. Despite the lack of detailed information on separator performance on the basis of size and density, there is a general agreement on the optimum size range for most separators for material of a specific density range. At present, it is possible to make a sensible selection of gravity separation equipment from information on particle size and the mineralogy of the ore. Prediction of the actual performance relies on laboratory/pilot scale testing to produce the required metallurgical results, such as concentrate grades and recoveries. The work reported here investigates the feasibility of using quantitative data from QEMSCAN allied with a suitable gravity separator model to predict separator performance from the mineralogy alone. If feasible, this would allow ore evaluation to be performed more cheaply or would allow a more detailed investigation of an ore-body to be carried out for the same cost. In addition, the technique could be used to assist in optimising the design of separators by explaining how specific variables affect the size/recovery relationship. The QEMSCAN is an extremely versatile SEM-based automated mineralogical analysis system. The system works by locating particles that are then scanned with the electron beam at a pre-determined resolution (from 0.2 According to  Particle size cannot be accurately predicted from the two-dimensional images such as those produced from QEMSCAN analysis. This results from the random sectioning process applied to the sample block producing “section sizes” that on average will be less than the maximum section size of the three-dimensional particle. When examining a size class produced from a QEMSCAN analysis, a proportion of the particles will be produced from small fragments of particles in a larger size class. One method of minimising the errors due to this stereological effect is to subdivide each sample into specific size classes (for example, by sieving) prior to analysis of each size fraction. The drawbacks of this procedure are both increased sample preparation time and costs. The question we have considered is: can we use the size classification produced by QEMSCAN of an unsized feed as a semi-quantitative measure, suitable for modelling of gravity separation equipment? In order to investigate this question we have considered one of our chromite feed samples (see following section) that was sized using an independent three-dimensional area projection method (Malvern laser sizer). Assuming the particles are spherical and a fixed density (3000 In addition to the number of particles in each size class it was necessary to calculate the percentage of particles that would report to all of the smaller size classes. To allow this calculation, it was assumed that each size class was represented by a spherical particle of median diameter (225, 180, 142.5 Information on number of particles measured in each size class ( The results show that even for a very narrow size class, such as the −105 From this analysis we have concluded that for the material tested, the QEMSCAN analysis can be used as a semi-quantitative guide to the composition of the actual size fractions. Determination of the size at which maximum efficiency is achieved would only be slightly underestimated. Provided that the method used to produce the model is the same as that used to analyse an independent sample, the model predictions should be valid. Two chromite ores (Donskoi and Asseminon) were tested in the experimental programme. The main recoverable mineral in the Donskoi ore was an Mg–Al-chromite (43.0 The Donskoi sample was used for development of the Mozley table model and the Asseminon sample was used to test whether the model would accurately predict separator performance. The Mozley laboratory mineral separator is widely used for the evaluation of gravity concentration for small samples (<100 Each test was performed with a sample size of approximately 75 For QEMSCAN analysis, one complete set of feed and products from Donskoi together with the Asseminon feed sample were prepared by mixing the samples with high purity sized graphite (−53 The spinel group of minerals (of which chromite A set of Mozley laboratory mineral separator products produced from the Donskoi feed material was analysed using QEMSCAN in order to first identify the minerals and then, using the particle categorisers in the iExplorer software, produce a classification of each product into size range and density classes. The software programme allocates each particle measured into a size fraction and further classifies the particle into a density class based on the percentage mineral composition and mineral densities. The categorisation of the particles into size ranges allows particle size distribution data (i.e. particle size category vs. mass) to be determined. When compared with data obtained from the Malvern laser sizer ( The general strategy for utilisation of this data is shown in Although the form of the models is simple the high correlation coefficient calculated ( The results produced with the Donskoi chromite ore are shown in The results produced with the Asseminon chromite ore are shown in The results presented show that QEMSCAN can generate data suitable both to evaluate separator performance on a size and density basis and to make predictions of separator performance once model parameters have been calculated. Errors may be introduced if there are significant differences in the elemental analysis between the methods of analysis (i.e. XRF and QEMSCAN calculated chemistry). The analysis of chromite concentrates quantitatively by XRF is difficult as the analysis requires the sample to be fused into a glass bead. As chromite is extremely refractory and is not readily dissolved in conventional fluxes, analysis was carried out on a pressed powder pellet. Chromite standards prepared as pressed powder pellets were also analysed and indicate that the Cr Due to the extensive substitution of Mg for Fe The testwork demonstrates that it is possible to predict the performance of a gravity separator following a QEMSCAN analysis of the feed material. Additional work is currently planned or underway with commercial equipment including the shaking table and a spiral concentrator. Further work is needed to refine the models, including additional data on the performance of higher density mineral fractions. In addition we are looking at how best to utilise the instrument to deliver the best possible data to improve the reliability of our predictive models.  The use of QEMSCAN and data analysis with iExplorer software allows particles to be classified into density and size classes. Particle size will tend to be underestimated by the technique, although the errors produced are not particularly large if sufficient grains are analysed. When separator products are analysed using QEMSCAN it is possible to determine how particle size and density affect recovery. The Mozley laboratory mineral separator was shown to produce the highest recovery in the 30–80 A model of the performance of the Mozley laboratory mineral separator for recovery by size and density has been produced. The model was shown to give a reasonable prediction of recovery for higher concentrate grades from an independent sample. The testing of further independent samples is required to validate the model. Further modification will be required to predict the recovery by size of high density minerals such as cassiterite and wolframite. Models for other gravity concentrators can be produced in a similar fashion. Ultimately this would allow the prediction the performance of a range of separators once the mineralogy, size and density classification of the feed had been determined.