The current study is an attempt to address the stochastic nature of the rock excavation process by suggesting a stochastic performance prediction model implemented into a deterministic model developed for hard rock TBMs. Full-scale linear cutting experiments using constant cross-section and V-type of disc cutters are performed on two different limestone samples to provide the basic input required for the deterministic model used for estimation of instantaneous penetration rate, daily advance rate, thrust and torque requirements of TBMs. Stochastic estimation is performed by using a Monte Carlo simulation program by applying iterations to implement the probabilistic distribution of each model parameter and provide knowledge of a confidence level. Results of the suggested model are verified by measuring the field performance of two earth pressure balance (EPB) TBMs excavating competent rocks in semi-closed mode. The results indicate that the suggested model works well for prediction of instantaneous cutting/penetration rate for both TBMs and both types of disc cutters. However, an improvement on the model is required for estimation of cutterhead torque and thrust of EPB TBMs. The stochastic model implemented into the deterministic model results in almost similar predictions with the deterministic model in 50% (best guess) probability. However, the stochastic modeling provides a tool for exploring the full implications of linear cutting experiments and allows assessing the probability of occurrence and predicting variations of the TBM performance parameters, covering the uncertainties/risks.Performance prediction for mechanical excavation projects is of big importance since the excavation rate defines schedule/completion time and unit cost/profitability of the whole project. A decision is made based on predicted excavation/production rate. This is more important especially in large section tunneling projects using tunnel boring machine (TBM), since the initial capital and operational costs are relatively higher compared to conventional excavation method and other applications of mechanical miners such as roadheaders and impact hammers. It is also very important, since these types of projects are usually realized as a result of high social demands. Performance prediction includes generally prediction of instantaneous penetration (cutting) rate, cutterhead torque requirement, machine thrust requirement, cutting tool consumption rate, machine utilization time, and daily advance rate. Deterministic performance prediction based on full-scale linear rock cutting tests is the most commonly used, cheaper, and more reliable method among the many other prediction methods such as empirical, theoretical, computer simulation, testing a prototype machine in laboratory, and in situ testing of a real machine ( Many studies were performed for developing empirical and deterministic models on predicting performance of especially hard rock TBMs. There is quite limited number of scientific studies on predicting performance of EPB TBMs. There are also quite limited studies on use of stochastic/probabilistic approaches for performance prediction purposes. Increasing number of infrastructure projects and demand of prosperity, in parallel to the technological developments, necessitate to foresight the risks to be encountered during all stages of a construction project such as feasibility, design, construction, and operation (post-construction). The risks in terms of economical and safety points of view include all related parties such as owners, contractors, engineering-design companies, and others. Therefore, management of the risks in all stages of an underground construction project becomes very important. All the risks should be defined, analyzed, allocated, and control measures should be identified prior to the job as its basic frame is given by One of the risks affecting the project is the inaccurate performance prediction for especially large tunneling projects. One of the reasons for inaccurate performance prediction comes from the stochastic nature of the excavation and tunneling processes. In the feasibility stage, inaccurate performance predictions can affect drastically the decision making process for costing and scheduling of the entire project. The inaccuracy on predictions might result in lower advance rates, higher machine maintenance, lower machine utilization, higher cutter replacement rates and costs, sometimes changing excavation machine or method because of difficulties in excavation, and disputes between the parties involved increasing the overall cost of tunneling. There are many project examples driven by using different types of TBMs in hard rocks and soft grounds suffered from inadequate excavation performance ( This study addresses the stochastic nature of rock cutting/excavation process and aims at improving the capabilities of performance prediction models for TBMs by using Monte Carlo simulation implemented into a deterministic (semi-theoretical) model based on full-scale linear cutting experiments and providing an additional tool for decision makers. Full-scale linear rock cutting experiments using a constant cross-section (CCS) disc cutter for cutting Kartal Limestone and a V-type disc cutter for cutting Kirklareli Limestone are performed to provide the basic data required for deterministic estimation of excavation performance of TBMs. The input variables include the experimental parameters such as average normal and rolling forces acting on a disc cutter and average optimum specific energy, TBM parameters such as excavation diameter and line spacing, and operational parameter of cutterhead rotational speed. The stochastic model is based on the deterministic model parameters, some of which are redefined as probabilistically from the laboratory data and expert opinion. Stochastic spreadsheet modeling is performed by using a commercially available Monte Carlo simulation program by applying iterations to implement the probabilistic distribution of each parameter and provide knowledge of a confidence level. Results of the stochastic model are verified by measuring the performance data of the EPB TBMs working in semi-closed mode in two different tunneling fields. The results are evaluated probabilistically and compared with the deterministic output. The deterministic model was originally developed for predicting performance of hard rock TBMs ( Instantaneous penetration rate ( Total thrust ( Penetration index Daily advance rate ( It should be noted that either one of the  The value of Single point or deterministic modeling involves using a best guess concerning each variable within the model to determine the expected outcome. The main structure of a stochastic model is somewhat very similar to a point estimate except that some variables in the stochastic model are represented by a probability distribution function (pdf). The objective of the stochastic model is to calculate the combined impact of the variability and uncertainty in the model parameters in order to determine overall distribution of model output. Stochastic modeling is based on Monte Carlo simulation technique by which a mathematical model is introduced to a number of simulation runs. Simulation should be controlled so that the random selection of values from the specified distributions does not violate the existence of correlation relationships among the model variables ( Stochastic model for tunneling performance prediction can be broken down into the following stages as shown in The stochastic model in this study is built on a spreadsheet with the selected risk variables and assigned probabilities. Then, the Monte Carlo simulation is carried out with 10,000 iterations to obtain the model outputs of Two different metro tunneling sites in Istanbul are visited for obtaining block samples with minimum sizes of about 50 Physical and mechanical property tests include uniaxial compressive strength, Brazilian tensile strength, static elasticity modulus and Poisson’s ratio, acoustic wave velocities (dynamic elasticity modulus and Poisson’s ratio), Shore scleroscope hardness, Schmidt hammer rebound hardness, NCB cone indenter hardness, and Cerchar abrasivity index tests. Acoustic wave velocities tests are performed according to The procedures, equipment, and basic parameters of the full-scale linear cutting tests are described previously in Two rock types (one block of Kartal Limestone and one block of Kirklareli Limestone found in Istanbul) are used in the tests. Kartal Limestone is gray in color. Kirklareli Limestone known as fossilized limestone is beige in color. Kartal Limestone is cut by using a 330 The measured and estimated parameters are average rolling force ( Physical and mechanical properties of the rock samples are summarized in The results of full-scale linear cutting tests for Kartal Limestone at optimum cutting conditions (line spacing of 80 The results of full-scale linear cutting tests for Kirklareli Limestone at optimum cutting conditions (line spacing of 75 Results of application of the deterministic model for Kartal and Kirklareli Limestones are summarized in The selected risk variables, their assigned (assumed) probability distributions and distribution parameters are presented in The machine utilization time ( The probabilistic outcomes Two cases of EPB TBM applications in Istanbul, at where the samples for the linear cutting tests are obtained, are analyzed for validation of the suggested model of performance prediction. Kartal–Kadikoy Metro Project constructed by Anadoluray JV (excavating Kartal Limestone) and Otogar-Bagcilar Metro Project constructed by Gulermak-Dogus JV (excavating Kirklareli Limestone) are the sites, at where the field performance data are obtained. Since the rock cutting tests are performed on massive blocks of rock samples, the field performance data obtained from the sites includes the data from the massive and competent hard rock conditions. In both cases, the EPB TBMs are used in semi-closed mode (excavation chamber with around one half filled by excavated material) and both joint ventures are experienced in tunneling business. Some of the technical features of the EPB TBMs used in Kartal–Kadikoy Metro Project ( Average line spacing (  If the total consumed cutterhead power in the field is reduced for the frictional torque The net specific energy consumed by the TBM can be re-estimated based on the These results are similar to the findings of Average Average Average value of It can be summarized for Kartal Limestone cut by a CCS type disc cutter that the deterministic model works very well for predicting Average line spacing (  If the total consumed cutterhead power in the field is reduced for the frictional torque The net specific energy consumed by the TBM can be re-estimated based on the These results show a slight deviation from the findings of Average Average Average It can be summarized for Kirklareli Limestone cut by a V-type disc cutter that the deterministic model works very well for predicting Overall results of the stochastic estimations along with the deterministic estimations and field measurements are summarized in The stochastic modeling results exhibit quite variations around their mean values for both rocks (and cutters), which warn the decision maker. For example, the variation in There are limited probabilistic studies on tunnel excavation in the literature, the most of which were based on very large database ( The suggested model in this study requires only linear cutting test data and is based on a proven and reliable deterministic model, although it requires an improvement for EPB TBMs working in semi-closed mode for excavation of competent rocks, especially for torque and thrust estimations. However, to increase the reliability/accuracy of the suggested model, it is suggested to run linear cutting tests by using more than one block for the same formation and increasing the number of experiments for each block. The results indicate that the deterministic model, originally developed for hard rock TBMs, requiring full-scale linear cutting experiments works very well for predicting instantaneous penetration and cutting rates ( Since The results of the stochastic model are, as expected, in accordance with the results of the deterministic model at 50% (best guess, mean) probability, since it relies on (implemented into) it. However, the stochastic modeling provides a tool for exploring the full implications of full-scale linear cutting experiments and allows assessing the probability of occurrence and predicting variations of the TBM performance parameters. This information will guide the decision maker determining uncertainty and risks involved in a project during planning and feasibility stages and therefore take appropriate action for the successful completion of the project. Additional studies are required for more reliable/accurate predictions using the suggested stochastic model in this study by increasing the number of laboratory tests and field data for different types of TBMs and geological conditions. A part of this article includes a part of Can Dayanc’s MSc dissertation. The authors are grateful to the support of Anadoluray Joint Venture, Gulermak-Dogus Joint Venture, and Istanbul Metropolitan Municipality; this work could be impossible without their support.