The Carris orebody consists of two partially exploited W–Mo–Sn quartz veins formed during successive shear stages and multipulse fluid fillings. They cut the Variscan post-D3 Gerês I-type granite. The most important ore minerals are wolframite, scheelite, molybdenite and cassiterite. There are two generations of wolframite. The earlier generation of wolframite is rare and has the highest WO4Mn content (91mol%) and the most common wolframite contains 26–57mol% WO4Mn. Re–Os dating of molybdenite from the ore quartz veins and surrounding granite yields ages of 279±1.2Ma and 280.3±1.2Ma, respectively which are in very good agreement with the previous ID-TIMS U–Pb zircon age for the Carris granite (280±5Ma).
                  
                     3He/4He ratio of pyrite ranging between 0.73 and 2.71 Ra (1 Ra
                     =1.39×10−6) and high 3He/36Ar (0.8–5×10−3) indicate a mixture of a crustal radiogenic helium fluid with a mantle derived-fluid.
                  The fluid inclusion studies on quartz intergrown with wolframite and scheelite, beryl and fluorite reveal that two distinct fluid types were involved in the genesis of this deposit. The first was a low to medium salinity aqueous carbonic fluid (CO2 between 4 and 14mol%) with less than 1.95mol% N2, which was only found in quartz associated with wolframite. The other was a low salinity aqueous fluid found in all the four minerals. The homogenization temperatures indicate minimum entrapment temperatures of 226–310°C (average 280°C) for the H2O–CO2–N2–NaCl fluid and average temperatures of 266°C for scheelite and 242°C, 190°C and 160°C for the last generations of beryl, fluorite and quartz, respectively. It was estimated that wolframite was deposited ~7km depth, assuming a lithostatic pressure, probably due to strong pressure fluctuation caused by seismic events triggered by brittle tectonics during the exhumation event. Precipitation of scheelite and sulphides took place later, at the same depth, but under a hydrostatic or suprahydrostatic pressure regime, and probably caused by mixing between the magmatic–hydrothermal fluid and meteoric waters that deeply penetrated the basement during post-Variscan decompression.Tungsten, tin and molybdenum are three important metals for many applications of everyday life products. Production of tungsten and molybdenum in 2010 was the highest ever. Since 2003 prices of tungsten and tin concentrates were multiplied by five, and by three for molybdenum, which attest the present economic importance of these metals. Portugal is one of the two European tungsten producers and the country has a long tradition of W mining with hundreds of exploitations in the XX century. Between 1900 and the present, the country has produced around 190,000 Ore-forming fluids play an important role during the formation of any hydrothermal ore deposit. Therefore, the characteristics, origin and evolution of ore-forming fluids are important for metallogenic studies. Several mechanisms have been considered for the initiation of wolframite precipitation, such as boiling, fluid mixing, cooling, pressure decrease and wall-rock reactions; this will be referred later in the discussion. Helium and argon are good indicators to decipher the provenience of the hydrothermal fluids in terms of crust–mantle origin. The This paper presents the geology of the area and Carris orebody, mineralogical features and the mineral paragenesis of veins, fluid inclusion studies (microthermometric and Raman microspectrometry), Re–Os age of molybdenite and He–Ar analyses of fluids from pyrite to identify their origin. Research on the metallogeny of this W deposit is a contribution to the knowledge of W formation in the European Variscides and particularly in the metallogeny of NW Iberian Peninsula. The Carris mine is located in northern Portugal in the highest zone of the Gerês Mountain, close to the Spanish border, about 500 The Carris mine was a tungsten producer between 1943 and 1979. During this period the mine produced more than 1000 Samples were mainly collected underground, particularly in the accessible levels 1 and 2 (old mining drawings, 1953) of the Carris mine, but samples from this mine belonging to the collection of the Centro de Geologia, Universidade do Porto (CGUP) were also studied. All minerals were analyzed for major and trace elements and backscattered images were obtained using a Hyperprobe JEOL JXA-8500F electron microprobe at the National Laboratory of Energy and Geology, S. Mamede de Infesta, Portugal. Standards used include albite (Na Kα), orthoclase (Al Kα, Si Kα, K Kα), apatite (Ca Kα), MgO (Mg Kα), MnTiO Analyses of silicates and oxides (cassiterite, rutile, ilmenite and ixiolite) were conducted at an accelerating voltage of 15 Petrography, microthermometry and Raman analyses of fluid inclusions have been carried out at the laboratories of the Centro de Geologia da Universidade do Porto (CGUP), in doubly-polished wafers of about 150–200 The material analyzed for Re–Os isotopes consists of two samples containing molybdenite in the Salto do Lobo vein (PV1) and from the Gerês granite (PG1) outcropping near the mine. Molybdenite was obtained by metal-free crushing of the samples, followed by gravity and magnetic concentration methods, to obtain a pure mineral separate. Methods used for molybdenite analysis are described in detail by Pyrite samples for He–Ar isotopes were collected in W–Mo–Sn ores from level 1 (old mining drawings, 1953). After the samples were crushed, mineral chips were hand-picked under a binocular microscope. An all metal extraction line and mass spectrometer (GV 5400) at the Institute of Geochemistry, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Guiyang, was used following the procedure given by The mineralogical characteristics and relative abundance of minerals in the W–Mo–Sn quartz veins from Carris are given in In earlier paragenetic stages, potassic phyllitic, microcline, hematite or albite, chlorite and sulphide hydrothermal alteration occurs and also feldspar selvages with comb structure. The peripheric comb growing of some alkali feldspar crystals from the quartz veins is concordant with the inner stretching of some vein minerals, passing gradually to a microcline plus quartz association with a graphic pegmatitic texture at the border. The microcline selvages and feldspar borders observed in some quartz veins mark a typical and gradual transition between the generation of miarolitic pegmatites and the precipitation of hydrothermal quartz, both focused in the same structures during successive shear stages and multipulse fluid fillings. The pegmatite assemblages are typical of the early stages of mineralization and are important for the Sn enrichment, as the Sn content increases from parent granite to pegmatite by fractional crystallization (e.g. Paragenetic analysis reveals a sequential crystallization between pegmatite assemblages, quartz fillings of the dilatational porosity and hydrothermal alteration of the host granite suggesting a generalized syn-kinematic character relatively to shear. One of the best examples is given by the occurrence of blue Fe beryl crystals associated with euclase in the transition of the intermediate zone to the quartz core of pegmatites. It also occurs disseminated in the host granite affected by the hydrothermal alteration associated with the tungsten mineralization ( Under the microscope the quartz associated with wolframite is slightly milky and of millimetric to submillimetric dimension; generally has low deformation features such as undulating extinction and subgrains. Three generations of fluorite occur. The first was observed within miarolitic cavities in the pegmatite facies. In quartz veins, the earlier fluorite crystals are unzoned and the later fluorite crystals are complexly zoned in BSE images ( Wolframite crystals observed microscopically are dark brown to black in color. The earlier crystals do not contain inclusions. The most common wolframite consists mainly of crystals without inclusions and in general surrounded by scheelite. The later crystals are partially replaced by scheelite, which penetrated along cleavages (  Albite and microperthitic microcline are nearly pure ( The darker zone in BSE images of chlorite has higher Si, Al Rutile inclusions occur in muscovite of the first and second generations and cassiterite. In general, they are irregularly zoned, but some are homogeneous. Those included in cassiterite contain Nb There is no significant chemical distinction between darker and lighter zones, in a BSE image ( Very rare ixiolite is included in wolframite and scheelite. Some crystals are homogenous and others heterogeneous, and up to 104 The earliest crystals of wolframite have 91 Scheelite is homogeneous and fairly pure containing up to 0.15 The sulphide compositions are given in In general, no chemical distinction was found between the two generations of pyrite. A few grains of the earlier generation and lighter areas in BSE images of zoned crystals have higher As content and lower S content than the common pyrite grains ( In general, cosalite shows compositions of (Pb In the second generation of fluorite, the lighter zone in BSE images has a higher F content than the darker zone. The unzoned crystals of the first generation of fluorite have a composition close to the lighter zone ( Native bismuth is nearly pure containing up to 0.87 Studies of the types and petrography of fluid inclusions were carried out on wafers from representative samples of the Salto do Lobo vein. The succession of fluids and possible mineralization events has been studied by interpreting the relationships between fluid inclusions and the different host minerals. The fluid inclusion studies were performed in quartz related to wolframite, and in scheelite, the later beryl and the later fluorite ( From petrographic, microthermometric and Raman characteristics two types of fluids were recognized: (i) aqueous carbonic fluids (H These inclusions (designated Lc-w) are three-phase at room temperature and have an average degree of filling of 0.7–0.8. The melting temperature of the CO A representative set of these inclusions was selected for Raman spectroscopy analyses. The only gaseous species found were carbon dioxide (CO This type of fluid was trapped as fluid inclusions (Lw) in quartz associated with wolframite, scheelite, fluorite III and beryl III ( According to In order to constrain the age of the mineralization and crust/mantle origin of the ore-forming fluids, rhenium–osmium and helium–argon isotope analysis of ore samples were carried out. The Re–Os data of molybdenite from the Carris quartz veins and surrounding Gerês granite indicate ages of 278.5 The abundance of helium in the atmosphere is very low (1.39 Six generations of muscovite were found in the W–Mo–Sn quartz veins from Carris ( The W–Mo–Sn quartz veins from Carris present two generations of wolframite ( Scheelite partially replaces wolframite ( A complex magmatic–hydrothermal continuum during the mineralizing process (e.g. The Re content of molybdenite from the Carris W–Mo–Sn quartz veins is very low < Taking into account the age errors, the Re–Os age (279.4 Helium data represent a mixture of a magmatic mantle fluid component with a radiogenic He-rich crustal fluid ( In order to estimate the P–T depth for the ore deposition conditions, a series of isochores representative of the observed fluids were drawn ( The main mechanisms considered for the beginning of wolframite precipitation are boiling (e.g. The Carris ore deposit is associated with granites ( The authors thank the