In the present study, copper and vanadium carbonitride (VCN) were added to low alloy P/M steel and their effects on the densification behaviour and mechanical properties were studied. The effect of heat treatment was also studied. All the sinterings were carried out at 1120°C for 1 h in hydrogen. For heat treatment, the samples were austenitised at 1000°C for 10 min and then oil quenched to room temperature. The increase in carbon level in steel from 0.3 to 0.5% resulted in better densification and better mechanical properties. The results showed that, although copper addition resulted in poor densification, it improved mechanical properties of the steel. Further improvement was observed after heat treatment. The best results were observed for 10% copper–0% VCN composition. VCN addition in straight steels did not help either in densification or in improving mechanical properties. But when added simultaneously with copper, it affected the densification behaviour of the steel.Low alloy P/M steels find enormous usage as structural material in automobile and other industries. Almost all P/M low alloy steels contain copper. The amount of copper in them varies from approximately 1 to 8% depending upon desirability of end products. At low content it is added to provide strength by age hardening, while at higher concentrations the purpose is to promote liquid phase sintering causing faster densification and homogenisation. Torralba et al. Khalegi et al. Vanadium containing low alloy steels are produced by P/M too. The most significant P/M steel system is MoCrMn steels where vanadium is introduced to promote better hardenability. Production of low alloy vanadium containing steel is done by different techniques. The most common is to use elemental vanadium. Lawley et al. In the present investigation, the combined effect of copper and hard VCN refractory compound in low alloy steel (Astaloy ‘A’) has been investigated. The former is aimed for better sinterability through liquid phase formation, while the latter is mainly for particle strengthening. The characteristics of various powders used in the investigation are listed in Densification parameter was evaluated after sintering using the formula Sintered pellets were austenitised at 1000°C for 10 min followed by oil quenching to room temperature. The samples were tested in as sintered as well as in oil quenched condition for densification behaviour, microhardness and microstructural features. Metallographic samples were prepared in conventional manner followed by polishing using alumina (0.3 μm) based slurry in water. The etchent used was FeCl Vickers microhardnesses of various phases were measured using Leitz microhardness testing machine at a load of 0.1 kg. X-ray powder diffraction studies for determining lattice parameters of ferrous and copper phases were carried out in ISO-Debyeflex unit of Rich-Siefert and Company, Germany, make using CrKα and CuKα radiations. In steels of either C content, densification decreases with the addition of either copper or VCN alone. The maximum densification was observed in both the steels where neither copper nor VCN was present. However, in the presence of copper, VCN affects densification in a different manner. In 0.5% C steels, minimum densification was observed for the 5% copper content for both 0.3% and 0.6% VCN additions The microhardness of ferrite and pearlite phases observed in as sintered steels with or without VCN addition increased with increase in copper content. The same trend was observed in the oil-quenched steels, where the phases were ferrite or bainite or martensite depending upon the copper concentration ( Steels containing either 0.3% C or 0.5% C, but without any copper or VCN, when sintered showed two distinct phases ferrite and pearlite apart from pores. The pearlite volume fraction was visibly more in 0.5% C steel ( XRD plots of the steels having constant copper but varying VCN content showed similar trends i.e., almost the same 2θ lines for copper as well as for iron ( The expansion of green pellets after sintering increased with increase in copper content from 5 to 10%. It is in the line with previous works Increase in the microhardness of various phases in as sintered steels with increase in copper content suggests that copper has strengthening effect. For higher copper containing steels enhanced liquid phase sintering is another contributing factor. Copper increased hardenability of steels. CCT diagram for a copper containing steel is given in In the microstructure of 10% copper steels free copper was observed. It was expected as the solubility of copper in less than 10%. These free copper pools were mostly located at grain boundaries and were relatively more in 0.5% C steel, which was expected due to role of carbon. Carbon increases dihedral angle between the copper rich melt and austenite thus, preventing its penetration through pore channels. Carbon also decreases the diffusivity of copper into iron Since VCN is a hard refractory material, it was not expected to aid in densification during sintering. Such behaviour was confirmed in this investigation also. XRD plots of VCN containing steels show no dilation in ferrous matrix. The observation that VCN particles did not affect the microhardness of various phases observed either in as sintered or in oil quenched conditions suggested that VCN particles did not dissolve in steel either during sintering or during austenitising. This can be explained using the phase diagrams of Fe–V–C and Fe–V–N Following conclusions can be drawn on the basis of this investigation: Addition of either VCN or copper caused swelling in Astaloy ‘A’ steel during sintering. The extent of swelling was directly proportional to their contents. Dissolution of copper caused expansion in iron's lattice parameter, which finally lead to dimensional growth of compacts during sintering. Addition of copper increased hardenability of steel. It resulted in an increase in the microhardness of various phases with increasing copper content. In 10% copper steels, the increase in microhardness was substantial, due to formation of martensite after oil quenching. Addition of VCN did not affect the microhardness of phases observed in sintered steels, as it did not dissolve into steel either during sintering or during austenitising. The authors are grateful to Hoganaes Corporation, NJ, US for supplying the Astaloy ‘A’ powder.