In this work, a composite central design with five levels and four variables was employed to model and optimize the batch flotation kinetic process in a cyclonic microbubble flotation column (FCMC). 30 sets of batch flotation rate tests were executed at different conditions of pulp concentration (X
                     1), frother dosage (X
                     2), flow rate of circulation pulp (X
                     3) and froth depth (X
                     4). It was observed the maximum flotation time (t
                     max) obtained in tests fluctuated wildly under different conditions. Statistical analysis based on the model fit and stability was performed to discriminate six kinetic models. The response surface methodology was used for the identification and development of significant relationship between process variables. Statistical analysis indicated that the modified Kelsall model was the optimal kinetic model for characterizing the flotation process. Analysis of variance results revealed that the effect of X
                     1 was significant for all process responses. X
                     4 was found as a significant independent factor for the two response variables of t
                     max and the ultimate combustible recovery (ε
                     ∞) of the optimal kinetic model. X
                     3 had a significant influence on the parameter of the optimal kinetic model (the fraction of flotation components with the slow rate constant). Furthermore, the maximum flotation time and ε
                     ∞ were significantly influenced by the interaction between X
                     1 and X
                     4. Based on the result of optimization it was found that the desired ultimate combustible recovery with an appropriate flotation time was obtained from the flotation process with a given range of experimental variables (X
                     1: from the intermediate levels to the higher levels; X
                     2: the intermediate level; X
                     3: 220g/t and X
                     4: 25.00mm). There was an acceptable relationship between predicted and actual values with one of the optimal conditions (Adj. R
                     2
                     =0.9971). The response surface methodology was effective for predicting and optimizing the batch flotation process of FCMC.Froth flotation has been used industrially for years to separate valuable minerals from their associated gangue constituents ( Cyclonic microbubble flotation column technology (abbreviated as FCMC)was developed and patented by China University of Mining and Technology, in which flotation column and centrifugal force field are combined to enhance the efficiency of separation for coal fines ( FCMC has some advantages over the conventional mechanical flotation cell in fine and ultrafine coal. As shown in The availability of mathematic model is an essential requirement for the optimization and operation of automation of the flotation process ( In this study, batch flotation rate tests were carried out based on the central composite design (CCD). The availability and validity of six kinetic models listed in The coal sample was collected from a coal preparation plant (Datong, China). The sample was screened at 0.5  A self-aerating bubble generator was used to generate microbubbles in which circulating middling pulp was pumped into the nozzle and shoots out as a jet flow at high speed. Air was drawn in due to the negative pressure induced by jet-flow. The slurry exiting the bubble generator was fed into the cyclone section at the bottom of the column. The froth depth ( Batch flotation tests were executed in the experimental system. All tests were carried out at pH The experimental design techniques commonly used for process analysis and modeling are the full fractional, partial fractional and central composite design. A full fractional requires at multilevel many experiments ( This work performed the central composite design. Flotation tests were carried out in the designed experimental system. The variables considered in the study are: the feed pulp concentration According to the central composite experimental design, 24 runs are needed for non-replicated cases. For the present case involving six replications at center points, the total number of tests is 30. As shown in  To find the optimal model for the flotation process on the basis of the model fit and stability, kinetic models descripted in The values of The predicted results calculated from six flotation kinetic models for part of data sets and the experimental data were plotted on a time-recovery graph, which is shown in As previously discussed, it was proved that Model 6 was the optimal kinetic model among competing models on the basis of the model fit and stability. Furthermore, it was evident that model 6 was the best kinetic model for understanding the total flotation time. Finally, it was concluded that the batch flotation process of FCMC can be characterized with the modified Kelsall model. The modified Kelsall model was applied to 30 data sets, the unknown parameters of which were evaluated by statistical techniques. These values can be computed by the least squares method using non-linear regression in MatLab software. The calculated values of parameters of the modified Kelsall model are given in As shown in The factors in this study were the feed pulp concentration ( The results of responses inserted to Design Expert software and a model among several models were chosen and fitted to the results. The final equation of Significance of each factor and interaction were determined by student's The model adequacy check is an important part of the data analysis procedure, as the approximating model would give poor or misleading results if it were an adequate fit. This is done by looking at the residual plots, which are examined for the selected model ( The model The model Lack of Fit The plot of normal probability and the internally studentized residuals for The The result of the combined effect of feed pulp concentration and froth depth (coded factors) on As discussed previously, the modified Kelsall model was the most effective model to portray the batch flotation process in the flotation column. In this study, the combination of the four flotation variables investigated under batch flotation tests, that is, feed pulp concentration ( The results of kinetic model parameters obtained ( The regression models were found to be adequate according to statistical testing of coefficients and the overall regression equation. Typical results of ANOVA for As shown in The model Lack of Fit The The normal probability and the internally studentized residuals plots for parameters of The relationship between the responses and the experimental variables can be illustrated by plotting both the response values versus the experimental factor values simultaneously. The response is represented graphically, either in the three-dimensional space or as contour plots that help visualize the shape of response surface. Such plots are helpful in studying the effects of the variation of the factors in the domain studied and, consequently, in determining the optimal experiment conditions. The three-dimensional response surface and the contour curves with constant response on a two-variable plain (coded factors) for the four response variables (  The effect of feed pulp concentration (  The effect of interaction between feed pulp concentration ( Based on the above findings, an optimization study was performed to evaluate the optimal maximum flotation time and ultimate combustible recovery. The desired value for ultimate combustible recovery was calculated by allowing twenty percent variation in the maximum value obtained from the fit of experimental result. The maximum flotation time for a batch flotation test was controlled in a proper range (from 10 to 50 The yellow area shown in   The maximum flotation time varied with different conditions in the batch flotation rate test of cyclonic microbubble flotation column. The modified Kelsall had the best fit to the test data based on the analysis of the model fit and stability. Meanwhile, the validity of the model is best under different conditions. The statistical analysis (ANOVA) indicated that feed pulp concentration had a significant effect on both the maximum flotation time and parameters of modified Kelsall model. Froth depth was found as the significant independent factor for the maximum flotation time and the ultimate combustible recovery. The effect of flow rate of circulation was significant for the parameter of modified Kelsall model (the fraction of flotation components with the slow rate constant). Furthermore, there was significant interaction between feed pulp concentration and froth depth for the maximum flotation time and the ultimate combustible recovery. The response surface methodology (CCD) was effective for the optimization of flotation process variables. There was an optimal range of experimental variables that produced the desired ultimate combustible recovery with an appropriate flotation time. The correlation between predicted and actual values was excellent with one of the optimal conditions ( This work was supported by