Deformability of rock mass significantly influences its behavior and is, therefore, an important consideration for the design of underground structures. The deformation modulus of rock mass (Em) is directly measured from the time-consuming and expensive uniaxial jacking tests, whose results often have a large scatter. Hence, in this study, an attempt has been made to evaluate Em in different conditions using the Monte Carlo simulation (MCS). To achieve this aim, the most important parameters influencing Em were investigated. The parameters of rock mass rating (RMR), depth, uniaxial compressive strength of intact rock (UCS), and elastic modulus of intact rock (Ei) were selected as the model inputs. First, an equation was developed by the multiple non-linear regression (MNLR), and it was then used for evaluation and prediction of Em by the MCS technique. The results indicated that this approach is capable of simulating Em ranges with a good level of accuracy. The mean of the MCS-simulated values of Em was obtained as 15.13 GPa, while the measured values of Em had a mean equal to 14.54 GPa. Moreover, the results of a sensitivity analysis demonstrated that the deformation modulus of the intact rock (Ei), among the other parameters, is of the most influence on Em.The modulus of deformation of rock mass (E  Since rocks are inherently heterogeneous and variable, their nature of random characteristics needs to be appropriately described in preliminary design investigations ( In the deterministic estimation of E The empirical methods require just a single value for each input characteristic and give a single output value. They do not provide the probability distributions of the investigated rock mass parameters; this is primarily due to the difficulty of handling the inherent uncertainties of the component variables in the empirical model. The aim of this study is to demonstrate the application of the Monte Carlo simulation (MCS) in estimation of E This study concerns with the estimation of E The database used in this study, comprising a total of 60 data sets, was extracted from previously published work ( Estimation of E The determination coefficient (R MCS methods have gained the status of a full-fledged numerical method capable of addressing complex problems. MCS can be loosely described as a simulation method where the simulation results are based on an arithmetic equation or developed model where the input values are selected at random from representative statistical distribution functions that describe those inputs. The simulation is repeated n-times and the results themselves now described a statistical distribution. MCS methods are primarily used in situations where there is uncertainty in our inputs and where the calculated uncertainty of results accurately reflects the uncertainty of the input data ( In MCS, two important goals will be pursued. The primary goal of MCS is to determine quantitatively the uncertainty and variability in the output. The second goal of MCS is to investigate the major agents of the variability and uncertainties with relative contribution of them to the overall variance as well as the range of model results ( In MCS models, two variables are independent if the taken value by a variable does not have any influence on the value assumed by another variable. The existence of this feature (i.e., independence of random variables), makes it easier to represent and analyze the uncertainty. In order to have a comprehensive attitude related to dependent random variables, there is a need to describe joint probability distributions which for two variables may be depicted as a surface. Sometimes when the descriptors for covariance and correlation coefficient show the degree of dependence between the parameters, a simple descriptor will be sufficed instead of a full-probability description ( In this study, @RISK software ( In the stochastic model, based on the available data, a continuous probability distribution (CPD) was considered to each of the model inputs (i.e., RMR, depth, UCS and E In MCS, there are generally two sampling schemes, including Latin Hypercube sampling (LHS) and simple random sampling. In LHS method, it is expected that a stratified sampling scheme is able to ensure a good representation of lower and upper ends of the distributions used for the analysis. According to some references (e.g., ( To ensure that all the possible combinations were selected randomly, a value of 6000 iterations was performed using the LHS method. This means that each simulation run yields 6000 different possible combinations of the input variables. It should be noted that these possible contributions are randomly selected from the defined distributions. The relationships between the input variables have a significant impact on the modeling of MCS. Hence, to achieve an improved MCS model for simulating E To estimate E The distribution functions (using Easy Fit software) were determined and employed by @Risk software. By using the continuous probability distributions, the stochastic assessment of E Correlations between the input variables (for all dataset and using STATISTICA software) were added into the MCS model. To reduce transformation uncertainty associated with Eq. The distribution model for E As shown in Also, as shown in Since the E The E The performance measures of the developed MNLR model proved its capability to estimates E As shown in All the estimator parameters (i.e., E It is important to note that due to the nature of the problem, the proposed equation/model in this study is site specific and cannot be directly applied in the other sites/conditions. For estimation and simulation aims in the other sites, the presented process in the present study should be reconsidered.