We are interested in the reliable simulation of the sedimentation of monodisperse suspensions under the influence of body forces. At the macroscopic level, the complex interaction between the immiscible fluid and the sedimentation of a compressible phase may be governed by the Navier–Stokes equations coupled to a nonlinear advection–diffusion–reaction equation for the local solids concentration. A versatile and effective finite volume element (FVE) scheme is proposed, whose formulation relies on a stabilized finite element (FE) method with continuous piecewise linear approximation for velocity, pressure and concentration. Some numerical simulations in two and three spatial dimensions illustrate the features of the present FVE method, suggesting their applicability in a wide range of problems.Gravitational sedimentation of small particles dispersed in a viscous fluid is a phenomenon widely observed in many engineering applications and natural systems. Such a process, where gravity drives the separation of the suspension into a clear supernatant liquid and a consolidated sediment, is typically employed in e.g. the solid–liquid separation of suspensions in mineral processing and wastewater treatment. Historically, many sedimentation models were based on the one-dimensional sedimentation theory by Kynch Besides experimental and theoretical investigations on the physics of sedimentation processes, numerical simulation is still an important tool to study the behavior of these phenomena. It provides an inexpensive way to try different configurations, nonstandard settings and special conditions for a given process. An important amount of work has been devoted to the determination of exact and numerical solution of related equations (see e.g. Continuity equations can be solved numerically by a large variety of methods, each of them featuring some desirable properties. For instance, classical finite differences and finite volumes in structured meshes are straightforward to implement and can allow for conservative approximations, whereas finite element methods are robust and permit natural derivation of error estimates provided that the solution has enough regularity. Many modifications and combinations of these classical methods have been proposed to solve flow problems. Here we focus on one of these hybrid strategies, the finite volume element (FVE) method, that goes back to the early works Works closely related to the present paper include the FVE method applied to Boussinesq equations analyzed in The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. In Section We will consider the usual notation for Sobolev spaces The governing equations for the sedimentation–consolidation process in an immiscible fluid can be written as follows (see e.g. The model is complemented by initial data for the concentration The flux vector in The term The forcing term After introduction of the functional spaces Throughout the text, A dual mesh Let us introduce the following finite dimensional spaces associated with the primal and dual partitions The discrete problem associated with the variational formulation Unless a stabilization strategy is applied, the present form of this method fails to satisfy the discrete inf–sup condition relating In what follows we study the properties of our FVE method in the framework of coupled systems modelling sedimentation problems. We present a set of numerical examples in two and three dimensions, where we first verify the spatial and temporal accuracy of the approximations. A fixed point algorithm with a tolerance of Our first example addresses the experimental spatial and temporal convergence of the FVE scheme applied to the following coupled problem, where the only nonlinearities are the convection terms: Find System We focus now on the sedimentation of particles described by A different sedimentation experiment is performed beneath a vessel with downward-facing inclined walls (we refer to The FVE method is now tested in a 3D scenario by considering a cylindrical column of height 10 m and radius 1 m. The column is inclined so that it forms an angle of We have presented a finite volume element formulation for the coupling of the incompressible Navier–Stokes equations and a parabolic equation describing the transport and consolidation of sediment in two and three spatial dimensions. The FVE formulation relies on a stabilized Ongoing extensions of this work include the implementation of a fully implicit scheme with Newton linearization, a rigorous stability and convergence analysis of the proposed FVE method, the derivation of a mixed formulation for the coupled problem in terms of concentration, Cauchy stress and velocity; the development of residual-based a posteriori error indicators and mesh adaptivity that would permit us to accurately capture, for instance, the vorticity field (see e.g. The authors wish to thank Prof. Raimund Bürger and Prof. Kai Schneider for the stimulating discussions on the subject of this paper. In addition, RRB and HT acknowledge, respectively, the support by the