In this paper, lipase-immobilized membranes were prepared by both non-covalent and covalent immobilization methods using (i) lipase adsorption on membranes, (ii) inclusion of enzyme in membrane structure by filtration and (iii) covalent attachment of lipase to membrane. The catalytic properties of these membranes have been studied in reaction of butyloleate synthesis through esterification of oleic acid with n-butanol in isooctane. Ultrafiltration membranes made of regenerated cellulose (C030F) and polyethersulphone (PM30) were used for lipase immobilization. It was found that the lipase inclusion in the wide porous supporting layer of membrane was the most efficient method in preparing highly effective biocatalytic membranes. The degree of oleic acid conversion using these membranes was about 70–72% with a reaction time of 8h. It was shown that the distribution profile of the lipase in the membrane was important for the effective enzyme utilization.
                  The profile imaging atomic force microscopy (AFM) technique was used to visualize surfaces of lipase-immobilized biocatalytic membranes. AFM has also been used to directly quantify interactions between lipase-coated tip and membrane surfaces. It was concluded that the direct measurements of the interaction force between the enzyme-coated tip and the membrane surface would be a useful and practical approach for the choice of membranes as porous polymeric support for lipase immobilization through adsorption.Currently, lipases, also known as triacylglycerol ester hydrolases EC 3.1.1.3, have generated interest in fundamental and applied research Generally, many lipase-catalyzed reactions studied were carried out in emulsion systems Immobilized lipases display a number of advantages over the use of soluble enzymes, e.g. the possibility of recovery and re-use, simplicity in operation, improved stability and activity Since lipases can be used in the wide variety of reaction systems, the preparation of immobilized lipase derivatives has to be made according to each synthetic process of interest. In this context, the combined evaluation of the complex mechanism of the biocatalytic membrane action as well as the special requirements for the membrane reactor performance should be taken into account. Thus, availability of immobilization procedure suitable for each different lipase and specific biotransformation process is of great importance in developing advanced membrane biocatalysts for organic synthesis including the esterification process i.e. immobilization of lipases on or within membranes is far from an already solved problem. In this paper the catalytic behaviour of lipase-immobilized membranes prepared by both non-covalent and covalent immobilization methods using (i) lipase adsorption on membranes, (ii) loading of membranes with enzyme by filtration of lipase solution through active or support membrane layers and (iii) covalent attachment of lipase to activated membrane, have been studied in the reaction of butyloleate synthesis through esterification of oleic acid with  Two types of ultrafiltration membranes used: (1) C030F membrane made of regenerated cellulose supplied by MICRODYN-NADIR GmbH (Wiesbaden, Germany) and (2) PM30 polyethersulphone membrane supplied by Millipore Express (Watford, UK) were used in this work. According to the manufactures’ specifications, both membranes have the same MWCO of 30 A membrane sample 50 The amount of lipase adsorbed onto the membrane surface was determined as the total protein quantity from the difference between the amount of protein in solution before and after adsorption and in washing using QuantiPro™ BCA Assay kit (Sigma-Aldrich, Dorset, UK). 0.5–0.75 The total protein concentration in the initial solution, permeate and washings was measured using a BCA test kit. The amount of lipase retained in the membrane was defined as protein quantity and calculated from the protein mass balance of the solutions. The preliminary activation of the membrane surface via periodate oxidation was used for covalent immobilization of lipase on C030F cellulose Nadir membrane. The activation procedure involved introducing aldehyde groups into cellulose chain using periodate oxidation for subsequent lipase linkage. The procedure for covalent lipase immobilization was as follows: a membrane sample of 50 For the insertion of HMD spacer, the membrane sample was activated with sodium periodate and placed in 10 The amount of lipase that bound to the membrane was calculated from the protein mass balance of the solutions. The membrane bioreactor was designed on a base of membrane element described elsewhere The degree of oleic acid conversion was determined using the following equation: Because of the possibility of oleic acid being transported into the receiving phase without transformation, samples of 1 AFM was used in this study to visualize the surface structures of both initial and lipase-immobilized membranes. It was also used to quantify adhesive interactions between the silicon tip, lipase-coated tip and the membrane surfaces. The AFM used in this study was an Explorer (TMX 2000), a commercial device made by Veeco Instruments (USA). Silicon cantilevers (Ultralevers, Park Scientific Instruments) with a high aspect ratio tip of a typical radius of curvature 5–10 To quantify adhesion interactions between the lipase-coated silicon tip and the membrane surfaces, the force of interaction between a cantilever and a membrane surface as a function of the scanner displacement was measured Immobilization through the adsorption is one of the most widely used methods of enzyme immobilization Usually, adsorbed lipases are not very useful to work in high water-activity systems because of the possible desorption, however enzymes can remain adsorbed on the membrane surface in organic media due to practical insolubility in organic solvents. It is well known that the time needed to reach the adsorption equilibrium depends on the initial adsorbate concentration in adsorbate–adsorbent system As can be seen from The adsorption results correlate with AFM measured adhesion interactions between lipase-coated AFM tip and membrane surfaces. According to Thus, PM30 membrane, which showed higher lipase adsorption, stronger interacts with lipase attached to AFM tip. It is worth nothing that adhesion interaction measured between a bare silicone tip and the active layers of PM30 and C030F membranes surface were 36.7 The coating of a silicon tip with lipase leads to its hydrophobization, which results in opposite trends in the alteration of the adhesion interactions between the lipase-coated tip and active/support layers of the studied membranes. The results obtained indicate that the direct measurements of the interaction force between enzyme-coated tip and the membrane surface would be a useful practical approach for the accurate selection of membranes as porous polymeric support for enzyme immobilization. Atomic force microscopy might be more reliable in characterization of hydrophobic/hydrophilic properties of membranes, in the determination of the value of enzyme adsorption, than contact angle measurement which are affected by membrane porosity Reaction profiles of butyl oleate synthesis in membrane reactors with lipase-adsorbed biocatalytic membranes are shown in To increase the membrane loading with lipase, the enzyme inclusion into the membrane body using the filtration technique was carried out. This procedure was based on the fact that PM30 and C030F are asymmetric composite ultrafiltration membranes and lipase molecules readily penetrate their supporting layers. The asymmetric membrane structure permits the lipase confinement by localizing it between the lipase-impermeable active layer (through which the lipase macromolecules cannot pass, for the chosen membrane cut-off) and the sponge support layer. Lipase is loaded into the porous membrane structure by ultrafiltration of an aqueous lipase solution in the direction from the support towards the active layer (reverse filtration mode). According to To study the effect of lipase loading on the degree of oleic acid conversion, membranes with various enzymes loading were prepared. Lipase immobilization on an active membrane layer using a similar procedure was also carried out for comparison. This was carried out by the ultrafiltration of a lipase solution through the membrane in the direction from the active layer towards the support layer (normal filtration mode). The lipase retention on the membranes was found to be practically independent of the membrane orientation giving similar lipase loading after filtration of equal volumes of lipase solution. Enzyme loading was in the range of 0.034–0.68   As previously mentioned, the cellulose membrane was pre-activated by periodate oxidation to introduce aldehyde groups in the cellulose chains. Created aldehyde groups react with aminogroups of enzyme, thus providing the covalent attachment of lipase to the membrane. The biocatalytic membranes with a HMD spacer introduced between the membrane surface and covalently immobilized enzyme were also prepared. The scheme of covalent lipase immobilization on cellulose C030F membrane with and without a HMD spacer is presented in Reaction profiles of butyl oleate synthesis with covalent immobilized lipases membranes are shown in  AFM images of covalent immobilized C030F membranes are presented in Moreover, surface roughness for the membranes with covalently immobilized lipase was lower than that in the case of immobilization by filtration. Probably rigid multipoint binding due to covalent immobilization results in the spreading of protein macromolecules across the surface smoothing it. Such a distortion in protein structure has a detrimental effect on the enzyme activity. Spacer introduction, as mentioned above, contributes to better preservation of the protein structure. That was confirmed by less pronounced smoothing of the membrane surface when lipase was immobilized with the spacer. Lipase immobilized by filtration preserves the globular structure even better and surface roughness in this case is the highest among the membranes with immobilized lipase. This paper has shown that effective biocatalytic membranes for synthesis of butyloleate through esterification of oleic acid with It was shown that lipase immobilization by filtration in the sponge layer of the asymmetric membranes allowed higher catalytic activity with respect to the enzyme immobilized on the active membrane layer. Thus the distribution profile of the lipase in the membrane is important for the effectiveness of immobilized enzyme. It was also found that substrate conversion degree varies slightly (63–72 and 43–48% for membranes with lipase immobilized in sponge or active PM30 membrane layers, respectively) over a wide range of enzyme loading (0.034–0.68 Covalent immobilized lipases on membrane C030F were found less active in esterification reaction compared with the adsorbed enzyme on this membrane, this is probably due to conformational changes in tertiary structure of lipase during the covalent attachment to the membrane, which results in a partial loss of the lipase activity. An introduction of a HMD spacer between the membrane surface and covalently immobilized enzyme mitigates to some extent the detrimental effect of covalent immobilization and increases the rate of esterification reaction. Data on lipase adsorption on membrane surfaces correlates with the measured adhesion interactions between lipase-coated AFM tip and membrane surfaces. Direct measurements of interaction force between AFM enzyme-coated tip and membrane surface would be a useful practical approach in search of membranes as porous polymeric support for lipase immobilization through the adsorption. We thank the Royal Society (UK) for the financial support of this work (GR 15335).