Surface roughness affects the interactions of solids with droplets and bubbles. In this study, natural magnesite lumps were polished by a series of sandpapers and diamond to produce four magnesite specimens having 2 to 240 nm root-mean-square roughness. The dynamic measurements of attachment, spreading, adhesion, and separation with a high-sensitivity microelectronic mechanical balance revealed the effect of surface nano-scaled roughness on the induction time and forces of spreading, adhesion and separation for both water droplets and air bubbles. It was found that the increasing nano-scaled roughness enhances the spreading of water on hydrophilic magnesite and strengthens the water-magnesite adhesive contact. Nano-roughness also causes delays in attachment of air bubbles to magnesite surface, inhibits displacement of water by adhering air bubbles, and reduces the adhesive strength of air bubbles to the magnesite surface, factors that might slow down the flotation separation.Flotation is a complex physicochemical process involving at least three phases (solid, liquid and gas), and was invented to selectively separate targeted particles from other particles suspended in the pulp ( The effect of surface roughness on flotation of mineral particles has been in focus among several research laboratories in the last two decades, but the published reports often lead to contradicting conclusions, as already reviewed in the previous paper ( Although the effects of particle surface roughness on flotation and bubble-particle attachment are reported in the literature quite well, understanding the factors that drive these effects appears incomplete yet. In AFM colloidal force measurements, Previously, we demonstrated the positive effect of particle nano-scaled roughness on flotation recovery of magnesite ( High quality magnesite lumps were selected from an ore mined in Dandong, Liaoning Province, China. The x-ray fluorescence analysis confirmed a high purity of specimens with more than 97 wt.% MgCO In this study, 10 × 10 µm AFM (atomic force microscopy) images of magnesite surfaces were collected with an MFP-3D Origin A high-sensitivity microelectronic mechanical balance, called Dynamic Contact Angle Meter and Tensiometer instrument by the manufacturer (DCAT 21, Dataphysics, Germany), equipped with a CCD camera was used in this study to record adhesion forces between water droplet and air bubble and magnesite samples ( The sample was lifted upward toward the droplet (or bubble) by a programmed motor movement until the microbalance detected the suspended droplet (or bubble) (point B). Because of a continuing submersion of air bubble into water (from point A to B), a small negative force caused by hydrostatic pressure was recorded before the bubble attached to the mineral surface. An attractive force was measured at point C, which reflects the force for the droplet (bubble) to spread spontaneously on the mineral surface after attachment. The attachment of water droplet to the mineral specimen was instantaneous whereas it was delayed for air bubble and delay increased with increasing mineral surface roughness. The time of delay is called The force curve section from point C to D represents the compression of droplet (bubble) against the mineral surface. The compression distance was set at 0.1 mm in this study, and was used to secure enlarged contact area between droplet (bubble) and mineral surface, useful for reproducible adhesion force measurements. At point D, the movement of stage with the mineral sample was reversed, causing the water droplet (air bubble) to be stretched and its base diameter to reduce. The maximum value at point E in the force curve represents the maximum adhesion force. The continuation of stretching beyond point F concludes with separation of droplet (bubble) from the mineral surface at critical point F, at which pull-off force is recorded. The entire process of attachment, spreading, compression, stretching, and separation was continuously recorded with the CCD camera, having a resolution of 0.133 s. From recorded images, the droplet (bubble) dimensions, shapes and contact angles were determined (  The R Both skewness (R  After rupturing, a portion of water droplet remained in the holding ring and rest remained on the magnesite surface in shape of a lens. The shape of the water lens remaining on the magnesite surface was affected by surface roughness. The lens diameter increased with increasing roughness of the magnesite surface at the expense of its height, clearly indicating on decreasing water contact angle.  There are three different sets of force and contact angle values, similar to what was reported and discussed in details in our previous contributions ( As shown in The three-phase contact line perimeter for a droplet on a smooth, homogeneous and flat solid surface becomes circular and equal to Eq. This Wenzel equation predicts a decrease in contact angle value for water droplet on any hydrophilic surface, when surface is roughened (R  Second, detachment of air bubble from magnesite was relatively easy as compare to detachment of water droplet. Entire bubble could be detached from mineral surface whereas only portion of water was removed during detachment of water droplet (see  As shown in In summary, the force and contact angle measurements provide a solid evidence that nano-scaled roughness of magnesite weakens adhesive interactions of mineral with air bubbles. Since the measurements were carried out on large specimens, it remains to be seen whether the weakening of adhesion has any consequences in flotation recovery and kinetics, and under what hydrodynamic conditions. Conceptually, weakening bubble-mineral adhesive strength might increase probability of early detachment of mineral particles from gas bubble under intense hydrodynamic conditions, typically observed in mechanical flotation cells. The direct measurements of attachment, spreading, adhesion, and separation for water droplets and air bubbles in contact with magnesite surfaces support the followings conclusions: Magnesite mineral is hydrophilic, showing a preferential affinity of this mineral to water rather than to air, with the most stable (water) contact angle of 25–32 degree as determined experimentally and calculated based on the Wenzel equation. Nano-scaled roughness of magnesite surface enhances adhesive strength with water, which becomes more resistant to replacement with the air bubble during attachment and spreading. Induction time for the air bubble to attach to magnesite surface increased from ≤ 0.133 s for a smooth surface to 5.3, 8.0 and 12.0 s for surfaces with root-mean-square roughness of 42, 69 and 240 nm, respectively. It suggests an opposite effect of nano-roughness on air bubble attachment as compared to the effect of bubble-mineral energy barrier that is reduced by nano-sized asperities. Interplay between stability of aqueous film on nano-rough surface and magnitude of energy barrier in bubble-particle interactions, most likely dictates the rate at which mineral particles are picked up by gas bubbles in flotation systems and can have an important role in flotation kinetics.  The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. The financial supports for this work from the Financial support for purchasing the atomic force microscope at Michigan Tech through NSF-CS-MRI grant (No. 1725818), used in characterization of mineral surfaces, is also acknowledged.