In 2008, the nitric acid pressure leaching (NAPL) technology was patented and developed to treat laterite ores in China. In the following year, a pilot plant with an annual processing capacity of 330,000tons of dry ores was assembled and tested. The pilot-scale tests were documented to illustrate the innovative technology. NAPL consists of six process steps: raw ore preparation, selective pressure leaching, pregnant leach liquor purification, Ni/Co intermediate product preparation, Mg precipitation, and HNO3 regeneration/recycle. The results of the treatment of limonitic laterite ores with NAPL are as follows: (i) the recoveries of both Ni and Co were over 82%, (ii) Ni/Co hydroxide with 25.4% Ni and 2.6% Co was obtained, (iii) above 85% of HNO3 could be regenerated/recycled, and (iv) several valuable by-products could be produced. The leach iron residue without sulfur in particular is marketable because of its application in iron making. Meanwhile, fibrous calcium sulfate used in papermaking was produced in the regeneration of HNO3. In the processing of high magnesium-bearing laterite ores, nickel, cobalt, and iron extractions reached over 98%, approximately 99%, and less than 1.5%, respectively. Such advantages make the NAPL technology for laterite processing profitable, as proven by preliminary economic accounting.Nickel is an important commodity that is widely used in stainless steels and super alloys, as well as in electroplating and chemical industries. Nickel-containing sulfide base reserves account for only about 30% of the total nickel reserves worldwide. Nevertheless, more than 60% of the current worldwide nickel production is derived from these reserves ( Nickel oxide ores, namely, nickel laterite ores, are widely distributed in equatorial regions and are usually formed through the prolonged tropical weathering of ultramafic rocks that are associated with various geological settings from the Precambrian to the Tertiary periods ( Limonitic laterite ores are usually treated using a high pressure acid leaching (HPAL) process, which has been developed for industrial applications, such as the Coral Bay, Ramu, Ambatovy, Ravensthorpe, Goro, Bulong, Cawse, and Murrin Murrin projects ( No technology can be used to treat all types of laterite ores. The HPAL has become a popular research topic in recent years because of its high recovery of valuable metals (nickel/cobalt) and low energy consumption. Although HPAL can treat limonitic laterite ores and precipitate most of the iron as oxide, the resulting leach solution still contains some iron, as a divalent/trivalent blend, which affects downstream processing. It also contains a relatively high level of residual sulphuric acid which must be neutralized, thus increasing acid consumption and reagent cost. If the final product is to be mixed nickel/cobalt sulfide, any trivalent iron must be treated with a reductant such as H Unlike sulfuric acid, nitric acid is not only an acidic lixiviant but also a relatively strong oxidant. Nitric acid can sufficiently dissolve valuable metal minerals and completely oxidize divalent iron ion for precipitation as hematite ( In relation to current issues, nitric acid was proposed to be used as the reaction medium for extracting laterite ores in 2008. An innovative technology called nitric acid pressure leaching (NAPL) was then developed and patented by our research team for processing laterite ores ( The general process flow of the NAPL technology for laterite ores is shown in Iron and aluminum dissolved in the leach liquor were removed by adding CaCO In the pilot tests, the leaching reactions were performed using an agitated 25 The laterite ores for the pilot test work originated from Indonesia. Although five different batches of laterite ores were used in the pilot tests, their chemical components did not greatly differ. The chemical analysis of the five batches of laterite ore samples is shown in The selective pressure leaching process is the key part. A series of laboratory tests were conducted systematically. The optimal parameters were as follows: nitric acid/ore ratio, 0.38 The first stage is the dissolution of goethite and magnetite. The second stage is the oxidization of divalent iron. The third stage is the precipitation of trivalent iron. The pressure leaching process in NAPL is then deemed to correspond to a dissolution–oxidation–precipitation mechanism. As mentioned above, 80% nickel was distributed in the iron-bearing minerals. Thus, nickel can be extracted by dissolving iron-bearing minerals. The iron-bearing minerals mainly transformed into Fe The aluminum, magnesium, calcium, and manganese extractions were approximately 62%, 78%, 70%, and 58%, respectively. The impurities silicium and chromium were barely extracted. The details are listed in The pilot test results show that nitric acid can be regenerated following the reactions NAPL was also used to treat high magnesium-bearing laterite ores. The laterite ores used in the pilot tests originated from the Philippines. Three different batches of the ore samples were treated in the tests; the chemical components are listed in The following optimal leaching conditions for processing high magnesium-bearing laterite ores were achieved: nitric acid/ore ratio, 0.80 When NAPL was employed to treat the high magnesium-bearing laterite ores, the aluminum, magnesium, calcium, and manganese extractions were approximately 58%, 95%, 70%, and 60%, respectively, with negligible silicium and chromium extractions ( The processing capacity of the pilot-scale plant is 330,000 Consequently, the innovative NAPL technology is profitable and can be used to achieve high economic value for the comprehensive utilization of all laterite ore layers. NAPL was developed and patented in 2008. Pilot-scale tests were performed systematically in the Yongtong Nickel Industry Company Ltd. With the use of NAPL to treat the limonitic laterite ores, the extractions of nickel and cobalt were as high as 84.50% and 83.92%, respectively, and the iron extraction was approximately 1%. In processing the high magnesium-bearing laterite ores, the nickel and cobalt extractions all exceeded 98% while the iron extraction was less than 1.5%. We can thus conclude that NAPL can be used to treat all types of laterite ores. The nitric acid pressure leaching process corresponds to a dissolution–oxidation–precipitation mechanism. Iron-bearing minerals can be dissolved, and divalent iron ion can be oxidized to trivalent iron ion. Simultaneously, trivalent iron precipitates in the form of hematite (Fe Several other valuable by-products can be produced, including high-grade fibrous calcium sulfate (CaSO This work was financially supported by the