In this study, the extraction of Bi(III) from synthetic solutions of 2M H2SO4/0.5M HCl by supported liquid membranes (SLM) using tri-n-octylphosphine oxide (Cyanex 921) as extractant is reported. First, the nature of the Bi(III)/Cyanex 921 solvates extracted to organic phase (in a solvent extraction system) was determined by the slope method. It was found that Bi(III) reacts with 2 molecules of Cyanex 921 to form the solvate BiCl
                     
                        3
                     ·2Cyanex 921. In the recovery of Bi(III) by the SLM system, parameters that influence extraction efficiency were evaluated, including: support, feed solution and stripping solution nature, and extractant concentration in the organic phase which impregnates the support. Results indicate that Cyanex 921 dissolved in kerosene is not able to extract Bi(III) from H2SO4 media. Moreover, transfer of H2SO4 was observed. HCl addition to the feed solution up to a maximum concentration of 0.5M increases Bi(III) extraction. Further increase in HCl concentration causes a decrease in Bi(III) transfer. Likewise, the concentration of Cyanex 921 in the SLM organic phase which produced the maximum Bi(III) extraction was found to be 0.3M. The performance of H2O and 0.2M H2SO4 as stripping solutions was evaluated, and it was found that only H2SO4 enabled Bi(III) transfer.Bismuth is present in nature in its native state as bismuthinite, Bi Although liquid–liquid extraction is a technique that can be easily implemented in industrial level processes, it has become necessary to develop separation techniques that comply with increasingly strict environmental standards. One of the most prominent is that of supported liquid membranes (SLM), which enable the separation of chemical species using a thin layer of organic solution absorbed in the pores of a polymeric support. This membrane acts as an intermediary separating the feed phase, which contains the species to be removed, and the stripping phase in which the species to be transferred is recovered. As in solvent extraction, the extractant is responsible for the extraction of the species of interest; in this case, however, the extraction and recovery processes are carried out simultaneously, with the advantage that, unlike solvent extraction, SLM uses minimum quantities of organic phase Despite high levels of interest in the application of SLM for metal ion recovery, few studies have been done on bismuth separation by means of supported liquid membranes using solvating extractants. Nishiyama et al. The mass transfer process of a metal ion from a feed solution to a stripping solution through an SLM involves several stages, which include: a complexation reaction between the solute and the extractant at the feed solution-SLM interface, diffusion of the complex formed through the SLM, release of solute in the stripping solution via a decomplexation reaction of the complex at the SLM-stripping solution interface, and diffusion of the extractant from the SLM-stripping solution interface to the feed solution-SLM interface to restart the transfer process  All reagents used were analytic grade. The extractant used to prepare the SLM was tri- The supported liquid membranes were prepared by submerging the support in an organic solution containing the extractant diluted in kerosene at the desired concentration. The support was impregnated for 2 pH determinations were carried out with a 716 DMS Tritino Metrohm device using a combinated glass electrode. The bismuth-Cyanex 921 solvate stoichiometry was determined in a solvent extraction system by the slope method. For this, organic solutions at variable concentrations of Cyanex 921 in kerosene and aqueous solutions were used, where the concentration of protons and chloride ions remained constant at 2.5 and 0.5 To avoid the influence of co-extraction of H The chloride/Bi(III) ratio was determined through titration of total chlorides (from the Bi(III)–Cl The extraction of Bi(III) in mixed 2 The apparent equilibrium constant of this reaction is: If there is only one solvate in the organic phase, the distribution coefficient of Bi(III), The total Bi(III) concentration is determined by the secondary reaction coefficient,  Substituting Eqs. Keeping the concentration of protons and chlorides in the feed solution constant, Eq. Eq. It is observed that experimental points correspond to a straight line with slope of 2.25. This slope value indicates the possible existence of more than one complex in organic phase, and it is probable that the complex with Bi(III):Cyanex 921 ratio of 1:2 prevails under conditions of this study. The variation of Bi(III) concentration in feed and stripping solutions, in the case of Bi(III) transfer from H Additionally, the two supports employed in the preparation of the SLM showed transport of H  The influence of extractant (Cyanex 921) concentration was analyzed as to the efficiency of the SLM in Bi(III) transport. Towards this end, Bi(III) solutions of 20 It can be seen that Bi(III) extraction increases upon increase of extractant concentration in the SLM (see Although Bi(III) extraction into the SLM is observed with the four concentrations of Cyanex 921 used, Bi(III) extracted into the SLM could not be recovered in the stripping phase when H Additionally, it is necessary to point out that a variation in stripping solution pH is observed ( When using 0.2 SLM extraction capacity was studied for the Bi(III) concentration range from 17 to 100 It is observed that for a transfer time of 160 The SLM, prepared according to the procedure described in this study, presents good stability and performance over 8 The liquid–liquid extraction study showed that 1 The authors wish to thank CONACYT for financial support of this study (Project 44768-Q).