The present study illustrates the effect of physical (thermal) and chemical surface treatment on the separation of the coal-quartz synthetic mixture in a tribo-electrostatic separator. The work also reports the effect of applied voltage and splitter position on the tribo-electrostatic separation of surface treated and untreated samples. Different reagents used in chemical conditioning of the synthetic mixture are kerosene, acetic acid, acetone, ethanol, phenol, toluene, and aniline. The study establishes that both chemical and heat treatment improves the tribo-electrostatic separation efficiency of coal and quartz particles. The applied voltage and splitter position affect the product grade and yield of treated and untreated samples. The ash removal and combustible separation efficiency of the synthetic mixture improved after chemical conditioning of the synthetic mixture with ethanol, acetone, acetic acid, and aniline. However, aniline treatment has produced the best separation result. It is possible to achieve 9 and 14% ash clean coal with 40% yield each from 53% ash synthetic mixture at 15 kV applied voltage after aniline and heat treatment, respectively. The ash removal and combustible separation efficiency of the tribo-electrostatic separator for the aniline and heat-treated synthetic mixture are 96, 60% and 90, 70%; respectively.Coal is the most abundant fossil fuel. It is the primary energy resource for electricity generation and steel production. It has been estimated that about 70% of the world’s steel production is coal-based. World Energy Council reported that 40% of the world’s electricity produced utilising coal as fuel Lately, tribo-electrostatic separation acquires increased attention in the area of coal preparation to enhance its energy value and sustainability Dwari and Rao have established that surface energy of a particle changes during contact electrification Several authors have claimed efficient separation of coal and mineral matter after physical and chemical pretreatment The present research work aims to enhance the tribo-electrostatic separation of quartz from coal by physical and chemical conditioning. In this study kerosene, acetic acid, acetone, ethanol, phenol, toluene, and aniline are used for chemical conditioning of both coal and quartz particle. The tribo-electrostatic separation response of coal-quartz synthetic mixture after chemical conditioning are studied and reported. The effect of thermal/heat treatment on the separation of coal and quartz also discussed in the paper. The tribo-electrostatic studies were carried out using a synthetic mixture of high-grade coal and quartz in 50:50 (w/w) ratio. The low-grade coal was received from M/s. JSW Ltd., Karnataka, India. The coal was prepared by the wet jigging process to produce high-grade coal for the preparation of the synthetic mixture. The Alljig jigging machine was used to generate the low ash coal. The feed size of the coal used for jigging operation was – 6 + 1 mm. The coal particles were stratified into different layers based on their density. The top of the stratified layer contains low ash, which was skimmed from the top and used for the present studies. The ash content of high-grade coal was 7.12%. The high purity quartz (98%) was collected from Mayurbhanj, Odisha, India. The quartz sample was cleaned with dilute hydrochloric acid, followed by a rigorous washing in distilled water to remove the contamination of iron oxides. The coal and quartz particles were ground and classified into different size fractions. The high-grade coal and quartz particles were dried in an oven for one hour at 105 °C and kept in a desiccator for various studies. The size fractions of −300 + 106 µm of both pure coal and quartz were utilised for chemical conditioning and tribo-electrostatic separation studies. The proximate and ultimate analysis of coal was carried out using the ASTM-D-3174 method using a LECO make Thermo Gravimetric Analyzer (TGA) 601 and LECO CHNS analyser (Truspec), respectively. The particle size analysis and surface area measurement of coal and quartz particles were carried out using a Malvern particle size analyser (Mastersizer 2000) and a Smart BET surface area analyser (SORB 92/93), respectively. The densities of quartz and coal were measured using a Helium-Mercury pycnometer (Smart Pycno 30). The XRD spectra were recorded using a PAN analytical X’pert pro instrument with Cobalt target. Extended characterisation studies performed by scanning electron microscope (SEM, CARL ZEISS, model no. EVO 18) attached with an Energy dispersive spectrometer (EDS). The integrated instrument provides advanced morphological information and elemental analysis of the specific target. Coal petrography was performed using a coal petrography Microscope (DMA 4500P, Leica, Germany) following IS-9127 method. The surface pretreatment of quartz and coal synthetic mixture was carried out by using different organic and inorganic reagents listed in The tribo-electrostatic separation experiments were carried out using in-house designed and fabricated free fall tribo-electrostatic separator. The details of the tribo-electrostatic separator, experimental setup and operational procedure are described in an earlier publication In the present study, the size of the coal and quartz mixture used for separation studies was −300 + 106 μm. For all the separation studies, 40 g of a dried synthetic mixture (freshly removed from desiccator) was used for tribo-charging followed by their separation in an electric field. The plate inclination angle in all the tests was maintained at 7.83°. At this plate inclination angle, the top and bottom plate gap was maintained at 0.07 m and 0.43 m, respectively. The plate arrangement had enabled the particles to fall between bin 1 and 6 after a deflection in the electric field. The ASTM-D-3174 method was followed for the ash analysis of particle collected in the bins. All the separation studies with or without chemical treatment were carried out at 20% relative humidity. The DC applied voltage maintained in the tribo-electrostatic separator was in the range of 5–25 kV and changed at an increment of 5 kV. The separation studies were also carried out to study the effect of temperature on the separation of the synthetic mixture in the tribo-electrostatic separator. In such studies, the synthetic mixture is heated at 105 °C in an oven and directly tribo-charged before feeding to the tribo-electrostatic separator. These experiments were designed to understand the effect of physical and chemical surface pretreatment on the tribo-electrostatic separation of carbonaceous matter and mineral. Random repetition of experiments was carried out, and it was observed that the separation data are reproducible. The particle size analysis of high-grade coal and quartz particles used in the separation studies are shown in The high-resolution scanning electron microscopy (SEM) image and energy dispersive spectroscopy (EDS) of quartz and coal particle (300 + 106 µm) are shown in The effect of temperature on the tribo-electrostatic separation of coal-quartz synthetic mixture is shown in  In the case of The effect of temperature on the cumulative ash versus cumulative yield curve on the tribo-electrostatic separation of the synthetic mixture at different applied voltage is shown in  The effect of chemical conditioning on the ash and yield distribution on the tribo-electrostatic separation of the synthetic mixture at different applied voltage is shown in The effect of applied voltage on the tribo-electrostatic separation of the chemically conditioned synthetic mixture with toluene is shown in The remarkable changes on tribo-electrostatic separation result were obtained when aniline adopted as a surface modification agent of the synthetic mixture. The tribo-electrostatic separation of aniline treated synthetic mixture at different applied voltage is shown in The significant changes in separation are also observed after chemical treatment with phenol and ethanol in In the case of  The separation of a synthetic mixture that occurs in tribo-electrostatic separator after chemical treatment with kerosene and acetic acid is shown in In the case of The effect of chemical conditioning on the cumulative ash versus cumulative yield on the tribo-electrostatic separation of the synthetic mixture at different applied voltage is shown in The ash removal efficiency and combustible separation efficiency are calculated considering the split of concentrate and tailing between bin no. 2 and bin no. 3, also between bin no. 3 and bin no. 4. For notation, the former is called as bin 2 split while the latter is called as bin 3 split. The plot of ash removal efficiency versus combustible separation efficiency for bin 2 split and bin 3 splits is given in The result suggests that the chemically treated samples separated efficiently than the untreated samples. The chemical treatment of the synthetic mixture changes the surface properties of the particles. Ash separation is improved using three aliphatic reagents ethanol, acetone and acetic acid as these reagents adsorbed onto the coal surfaces producing higher differential charging between coal and quartz particles Recently, we have reported that the change occurred in the work function and frictional charge after the surface functionalisation of coal and quartz with aniline Therefore, during frictional charging of synthetic mixture using copper tribo-charging medium, the quartz and coal particles are charged by contact with copper and contact between each other. The charge acquisition of the original and aniline treated coal and quartz particles on frictional contact with copper were aligned to the change in their work function. The saturation charge measured for coal and quartz particles is 0.000274 and −0.000325 µC g The effect of temperature and chemical conditioning on the tribo-electrostatic separation of coal and quartz synthetic mixture were carried out at 20% relative humidity. The coal-quartz mixture separated more efficiently after pre-heating. There is a net reduction of 12% and 40% ash of the mixture without and with pre-heating of coal from the feed ash content of 53%, respectively. The percentage of combustible recovered from the synthetic mixture without and with pre-heating is 67% and 83%, respectively. The chemical condition has a significant effect on the tribo-electrostatic separation efficiency of coal and quartz particle. Toluene and phenol conditioning resulted in low ash removal and combustible separation efficiency. The chemical conditioning with aniline, ethanol, acetone and acetic acid has improved the ash removal and separation efficiency of the tribo-electrostatic separator. The better separation is achieved after the chemical conditioning with aniline. The ash removal and combustible separation efficiency aniline conditioning are 96% and 60%, respectively. After chemical treatment with aniline, 9.17% clean coal is possible to achieve with 40% yield from 53% feed ash of coal-quartz mixture at 20% RH, and 15 kV applied voltage. At this experimental condition after heat treatment, 13.80% clean coal is obtained with 40% yield from 53% feed ash coal-quartz mixture. The study establishes that both chemical and heat treatment improves the tribo-electrostatic separation efficiency of coal and quartz particles. The applied voltage and splitter position affect the grade and yield of the product. The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. Authors gratefully acknowledge the financial support received from CSIR-SRF research grant.