Roof and rib instability is an important issue in underground mining. To optimize ground support design, enhance ground stability, and reduce the possibility of roof or rib failure with minimal use of artificial ground support, it is essential to have an accurate understanding of ground conditions. This includes the location of voids, cracks, and discontinuities, as well as information about the different strata in the immediate roof. This paper briefly introduces ongoing research on void detection by using the roof bolter feed and rotation pressure. The goal of this project is to improve the sensitivity of detection programs to locate smaller joints and reduce the number of false alarms. This paper presents a brief review of the testing procedures, data analysis, logic, and algorithms used for void detection. In addition, this paper discusses the results of preliminary laboratory tests and statistical analysis of the data from these two drilling parameters used for void detection.Roof falls are one of the most serious and frequent accidents in underground mining. Each year, personnel are injured or killed because of roof falls. Equipment can also be damaged when this occurs. According to Mine Safety and Health Administration statistics collected from 1999 to 2008, ground falls were the largest cause of fatal accidents in underground coal mining, causing around 40% of all fatalities Certain features in the ground, such as voids, cracks, and discontinuities, are significant factors that cause roof support failures and roof fall accidents. The detection of those geological features are essential for design of effective ground support in underground support. Void detection in underground space can be performed by various techniques including bore scoping, visual observation and geophysical loggings, rock mass rating of the roof and ribs. However, these techniques also offer many shortcomings. For instance, although the bore scoping is widely applied in field for the identification of the rock types, voids, cracks and formation boundaries, it is a time-consuming method for stability analysis, and it requires pre-training on operators. In addition, visual observation and geophysical loggings usually failed to provide sufficient geological features information of the ground. Rock mass rating method typically cannot be performed in advance of mining activities, because some on site observation and measures are required. Thus, it seems that these methods could not provide sufficient geological information for support strategy improvement in a timely manner Many researchers have worked on this problem using instrumented drilling machines. For instance, Itakura et al. instrumented a pneumatic drill to monitor the torque, thrust, rotational speed, and stroke; both in the laboratory and the field. A research team at West Virginia University applied the J.H. Fletcher & Co.™ HDDR Model Walk-Thru Dual Head Roof Bolter to detect the location of voids, joints, bed separation, fractures, and formation interfaces by analyzing several drilling parameters. These drilling parameters included rotational speed, thrust, torque, and penetration rate values More recently, Bahrampour et al. at the Pennsylvania State University research group installed vibration and acoustic sensors on the J.H. Fletcher drill unit to monitor vibration and acoustic signals for void detection Currently, several manufacturers provide smart roof bolters with limited capabilities for void detection. While successful in many instances, in laboratory experiments, the existing void detection systems have limited success in detecting void openings that are less than 0.318 As shown in To simulate the void, each testing sample was set up by placing one block on top of another block. This left a gap of less than 2 As discussed above, various pattern recognition systems have been studied for detecting joints using different drilling parameters. The most promising of the parameters seem to be the drilling thrust or feed pressure, and the rotation pressure, representing torque. Other parameters, including vibration and acoustic data, have also been considered and used in previous stages of this study  The CUSUM algorithm was applied in all specimen settings to detect the location of the void in each hole.  To estimate the capability of the new void detection program based on the CUSUM algorithm, many laboratory tests have been conducted by drilling into various concrete block samples. Since the concrete blocks had three different strengths, there were nine different combinations of concrete blocks ( As shown in  To improve the accuracy of the void detection program, composite indices have been developed to eliminate some of the excessive variations and noise in the input data. Another approach to increase the sensitivity of the programs is the use of various digital filtering techniques to eliminate certain reoccurring frequencies to clean up the ambient noise in the data. One of the successful indices has been the ratio of torque/thrust/penetration. The results of laboratory testing on an instrumented roof bolter drilling unit have shown that the new void detection programs based on the CUSUM algorithm could improve the capability of void detection, by showing reasonably good success when drilling across voids with aperture of around 2