Pyrite cinder is a typical hazardous waste produced in sulfuric acid industry, which, however, contains a significant level of valuable metals, such as iron, copper, cobalt, etc. About 12 million tons of pyrite cinder are generated in China annually, while the utilization rate is less than 50% due to the complex relationship of various components. In this study, a process of phosphoric acid leaching was used to selectively separate and recover Cu, Co and Fe from the pyrite cinder. The effects of different leaching parameters on the recovery rate of valuable metals in phosphoric acid leaching systems were investigated. Under the optimal conditions, the results indicated that the leaching efficiency of copper and cobalt was above 82% and 99%, respectively. More than 98% of iron was transferred into insoluble FePO4·2H2O, which could be used as precursor of battery-grade electrode material after a hydrofluoric acid purification process. Cu and Co in the leaching solutions were extracted efficiently by P204.Pyrite cinder is typical hazardous waste produced in the bottom of the furnace and dust removal equipment after pyrite is roasted at high temperature in a fluidized bed furnace in the sulfuric acid industry, which contains a significant level of valuable metals, such as iron, copper, cobalt, etc. ( At present, pyrite cinder was mainly used as iron-making raw materials, cement ingredients, iron pigment, building materials, etc. ( Iron phosphate (FePO In this study, pyrite cinder with high content of Cu, Co, and Fe was used as raw material. A novel value-added utilization process of pyrite cinder was proposed, in which iron phosphate was synthesized by co-precipitation method, while copper and cobalt were recovered from leaching solution by organic extraction. In this work, the effect of phosphoric acid leaching parameters as well as organic extraction parameters on the separation and recovery of iron, copper and cobalt were investigated systematically. Besides, synthetic iron phosphate was characterized thoroughly, which indicated that battery grade iron phosphate with uniform particle size was obtained. This work puts forward a novel idea for high-value utilization of pyrite cinder. The pyrite cinder used in this study was taken from Tongling, China. The main chemical compositions were shown in The microstructure images of the pyrite cinder were shown in The copper content in pyrite cinder was too low to be effectively detected by XRD, SEM-EDS and EPMA, hence, chemical phase analysis was applied to investigate the phase of copper in this study ( Based on the results in The phosphoric acid (H The pyrite cinder was subjected to a ball mill at first, and ground to fully pass a 0.037 mm sieve. The sifted material was filtered and baked at 100 °C for 12 h to make sure that it was dried, and then cooled down to room temperature to be stored for acid leaching. The prepared pyrite cinder was leached with phosphoric acid solution (1–5 M) in a high-temperature reaction kettle with an electric heating oil bath, and the oil was modified silicone oil with boiling point up to 290 °C. In each test, five grams of pyrite cinder and phosphoric acid were added to the reaction tank according to a certain liquid-solid ratio (8–16 mL·g The powder pattern X-ray diffraction (XRD, D/Max 2500, RIGAKU, JPN) was carried out by using a copper K Leaching efficiency of various elements was applied to evaluate the leaching process. It's calculated according to Eq. (1): In Eq. (1), ε (M) is the leaching efficiency of various elements, wt%; c is the content of the elements in leachate, g/L; V is the leachate volume, L; α represents the content of target elements of the pyrite cinder, wt%; and m stands for the mass of pyrite cinders participating in the reaction, g. The leaching process was also evaluated by the yield of leaching residue and SEM images. The leaching yield was calculated according to Eq. (2): In Eq. (2), γ represents the yield of leaching residue, %; M The extraction ratio (η) was calculated by Eq. (3): In Eq. (3), η denotes the extraction ratio, %; C To illustrate the chemistry mechanism of pyrite cinder during phosphoric acid leaching process, the initial precipitation pH (pH Similarly, for the trivalent cation, It was seen from According to previous research on the phosphoric acid leaching process, the substances containing phosphate mainly included H Firstly, metal oxides in the pyrite cinder reacted with phosphoric acid (Eqs. (6)–(13) in On the basis of thermodynamic calculation and exploratory experiments, the effects of leaching parameters (including initial phosphoric acid concentration, leaching temperature, leaching time and liquid-to-solid ratio) on the leaching behavior of pyrite cinder were examined systematically, and the results are presented in It could be observed from  As could be seen from The leaching efficiency of Cu and Co as well as the yield of iron phosphate were presented in  In summary, the optimal leaching conditions were chosen as following: 3 M phosphoric acid, leaching temperature of 110 °C, leaching time of 4 h and liquid-solid ratio of 12 mL·g In Section 3.1, FePO The SEM-EDS images of the synthetic iron phosphate precursor are shown in  However, irregularity particles were found in The results in The iron phosphate precursor synthesized under the optimal conditions was analyzed by ICP -OES, and the results of chemical compositions are shown in To determine the occurrence states of copper in the synthetic iron phosphate. EPMA analysis was conducted, and the results are shown in It was well known that, silicon was an inert substance for battery materials, but the effects of some metal elements such as Cu and Co were negative. Then subsequent purification process was necessary in the following study. In order to remove the remanent copper to further purify the iron phosphate, special solvents must be applied to dissolve silicon-bearing minerals to release the Cu in silicate. Then hydrofluoric acid solution was taken into consideration, and the effects of acid concentration and leaching time were investigated systematically at room temperature, agitation rate of 200 r/min, and liquid-solid ratio of 20 mL·g As shown in Generally, the optimal impurity removal conditions were determined as follows: hydrofluoric acid concentration of 2%, leaching time of 3 h. Under the conditions, the chemical composition of purified iron phosphate under these optimal conditions is shown in The leaching solution obtained under the optimal leaching conditions was collected, the pH value was measured to be about 0.95. The ion concentration in the leaching solution was determined by ICP-OES, and the results are shown in Based on previous researches, it was known that the pH value in solutions had an obvious effect on the organic extraction of Cu and Co, which should be adjusted to neutralize the H Di-(2-ethylhexyl) phosphoric acid (P204) is one of the most common extraction agent for valuable metals in phosphate acid system, hence, solvent extraction behaviors of copper and cobalt using P204 were investigated in this section. The effect of solution pH values on extraction behavior were investigated in the aqueous pH value range of 0.5–4.5 under the conditions of 40% P204 (the volume ratio of P204/organic phase), A/O (the volume ratio of aqueous phase/organic phase) of 1 and oscillation time of 20 min, the results are shown in In conclusion, based on the above results and discussions, a novel process for the added-value comprehensive utilization of pyrite cinder was proposed as shown in  Copper in pyrite cinder was mainly existed as CuO, CuSO The optimal phosphoric acid leaching conditions were as follows: phosphoric acid of 3 M, leaching temperature of 110 °C, leaching time of 4 h and liquid-solid ratio of 12 mL·g Iron phosphate precursor was purified using 2% of hydrofluoric acid concentration and leaching for 3 h at room temperature, agitation rate of 200 r/min, liquid-solid ratio of 20 mL·g Copper and cobalt were enriched in the leaching solutions, under the pH of 3.0 and using P204 as extraction agent, the extraction ratios of copper and cobalt reached 84.6% and 68.7% respectively. This process provided a new idea for comprehensive utilization of pyrite cinder, Cu, Co and Fe were selective recovered efficiently, and no solid waste was produced during the comprehensive utilization process. The authors would express their sincere thanks to the The authors declare no competing interests. No experiments on live vertebrates and/or higher invertebrates were performed in this manuscript.