In this paper, we study the effective thermo-elastic properties of hybrid materials containing layered auxetic microstructures. We consider three types of arrangements: (1) hybrids with randomly distributed plate-like inclusions possessing the negative Poisson’s ratio and negative thermal expansion coefficient, (2) sandwich structures with auxetic cores and (3) laminates with randomly arranged and ordered auxetic and negative thermal expansion layers. We evaluate the effective characteristics of these hybrids by analysing representative volume elements using the finite element method. We observe that the plate-like auxetic inclusions increase the effective stiffness of the hybrid. This stiffening effect was previously reported for spherical and cubic auxetic inclusions and is further investigated in this study. We demonstrate that the aspect ratio of the plate-like shapes has strong influence on this stiffening effect: the decrease in the aspect ratio reduces stiffening in the direction parallel to the layers and enhances it in the direction perpendicular to them. In the auxetic laminates, the stiffening effect strengths with the increase in the number of auxetic layers. We also show that thinner inclusions provide lower effective linear coefficient of thermal expansion (CTE) in the direction parallel to the layering and higher effective CTE in the direction perpendicular to it.Hybrid materials are combinations of two or more materials that are architectured in such a way as to provide qualities that no material alone can offer This approach allows designing hybrid materials combining components with unusual basic properties, for instance, negative Poisson’s ratio (NPR) and negative thermal expansion (NTE). The desired effective properties of the multiphase hybrid can be reached by crafting the microstructure of the hybrid or by varying the effective properties of the phases. Blending materials with contrasting properties is a promising direction to the design of materials with superior performance. It was shown that adding a phase with negative Poisson’s ratio into a conventional material with positive Poisson’s ratio leads to an increase in the effective Young’s moduli, so called the stiffening effect of auxetic inclusions In the present study, we consider plate-like auxetic inclusions with negative CTE. We investigate the effective thermomechanical properties of the hybrids with layered microstructures consisting of (1) randomly distributed plate-like auxetic inclusions, (2) a sandwich structure with an auxetic core and (3) laminates with ordered and random auxetic layers. Auxetic materials and structures exist at different scales ranging from nanoscale Recently, a number of papers on the layered arrangements that include auxetic layers have been published. These studies include investigation of the effective Young’s modulus enhancement and auxetic windows in laminates with isotropic auxetic constituents The current paper focuses on the effective characteristics of hybrids with random and prearranged orientation of NPR and NTE plate-like elements. It extends the previous works Consider a hybrid consisting of two isotropic phases: one exhibits positive Poisson’s ratio (PPR) and positive coefficient of thermal expansion (CTE) and another has NPR and positive or negative CTE. We assume that both phases are represented by blocks of a shape of a rectangular prism with dimensions In order to estimate the whole range of thermo-elastic properties, we consider three loading cases: (i) normal unidirectional and bidirectional loadings for evaluation of Young’s moduli, Poisson’s ratios and bulk moduli; (ii) shear loading test for evaluation of shear modulus and; (iii) thermal expansion test for evaluation of the effective linear CTEs. The corresponding computational models for these numerical tests are presented in the following sections.  The biaxial compression test in the The effective moduli of the hybrid are calculated based on the displacement fields obtained through the finite element analysis. For each phase configuration, we calculate the normal displacements at each face of the RVE, average them and then obtain the generalised strain at each face by diving the average displacement, Note that in this case, no shear strain is developed along the outer faces of the RVE and the normal strains are the principal strains, which can be used to calculate the effective elastic moduli of the material as follows. From the uniaxial loading in the The uniaxial loading test in the The computational model for case (ii), the shear loading test, is shown in The stress at the outer faces is specified as follows: The computational model for case (iii), the free thermal expansion test, is presented in As described The effective thermo-elastic properties of hybrids with plate-like inclusions and layers with NPR and NTE are studied numerically in this section. We implement the finite element models described in The block grid dimensions and finite element mesh properties are defined based on the mesh sensitivity and statistical validation studies presented in The properties of both phases are assumed to be linear elastic. The results will be presented using dimensionless ratios by normalising the effective property obtained through the analysis with respect to the corresponding property of the phase with positive characteristics. The results are marked using the following notation: subscripts of ‘ We are presenting only the characteristic results in the main part of the discussion, while the complete set of properties is provided in the additional information section available online. We start our investigation with randomly distributed plate-like inclusions with NPR and continue using contrasting CTEs. For each volume fraction of the NPR phase, we generate 10 random realizations using a random number generator incorporated in MATLAB. For each realization, we obtain the average strain at each face of the RVE as it is described in   The behaviour of the effective Poisson’s ratio,  Next, we study the effective CTE of the hybrids with the NPR phase and contrasting CTEs. To further study the CTE behaviour, we compare the effective CTE values for different hybrid realisations at the volume fraction In this section, we study sandwich plates with auxetic cores.    In this section, we study laminated hybrids where the positive phase layers alternate with the NPR and NTE layers. First, we consider a random mixture of NPR and PPR layers as shown in Lastly, we consider laminates with the NPR and NTE phases arranged in a finite number of negative layers as shown   In this study, we have investigated the effective thermo-mechanical characteristics of hybrid materials with plate-like auxetic elements with negative thermal expansion. We modelled the representative volume elements consisting of a large number of randomly distributed or prearranged prismatic inclusions using the finite element method. The effective elastic moduli and thermal expansion coefficients were calculated based on the strain and stress averaged over these volume elements. We have considered three types of layered microstructures: (1) randomly distributed prismatic inclusions, (2) a sandwich structure with a single core and (3) laminates with random and ordered lamination scheme. The obtained results can be summarised as follows: Thin plate-like auxetic inclusions diminish the stiffening effect of negative Poisson’s ratio (NPR) in the direction parallel to the layers and enhanced it in the direction perpendicular to the layers. The influence of the aspect ratio of prismatic auxetic inclusions on the shear and bulk moduli is insignificant. In the hybrids with plate-like auxetic inclusions with negative linear coefficients of thermal expansion (CTE), thinner inclusions provide lower effective CTEs in the direction parallel to the layering and higher effective CTE in the direction perpendicular to it. In the hybrids with a single auxetic core, the use of higher NPR increases the range of achievable material properties The laminates with auxetic layers exhibit effective properties similar to those with randomly distributed of inclusions with the same volume fraction of the NPR inclusions. In the laminates with the ordered lamination scheme, the strongest stiffening effect of the auxetic phase appears with higher numbers of auxetic layers. Conversely, the number of layers has little influence on the effective CTEs of these laminates. The results obtained in this study demonstrate that the combining materials with unusual properties, such as negative Poisson’s ratio and/or negative thermal expansion at different structural scales opens a range of possibilities for design of composites with controlled stiffness and thermal expansion. The parametric study conducted here identifies new ways to modify the properties of hybrid materials. The authors acknowledge the financial support through Supplementary data to this article can be found online at The following are the Supplementary data to this article: