A new bipolar electrocoagulation and electroflotation process was developed to treat laundry wastewater. In this new process, electrocoagulation and electroflotation were carried out simultaneously in a single reactor. The operating parameters such as initial pH, hydraulic residence time (HRT) and current density were investigated. The unique design of the reactor made it possible for the effective removal of turbidity, COD, phosphate and surfactant (MBAS) in a wide pH range (5–9) at a short HRT (5–10 min). The pilot scale tests (1.5 m3/h) were carried out successfully in three different places suggested that the bipolar electrocoagulation–electroflotation process was feasible for the treatment of laundry wastewater.Traditional methods for dealing with laundry wastewater consist of various combinations of biological, physical and chemical methods A variety of very promising techniques based on electrochemical technology, including electrocoagulation, electroflotation and electrochemical oxidation, have been developed for the treatment of wastewater. Amongst them, electrocoagulation has been used to treat urban wastewater In this study, a combinative bipolar electrocoagulation–electroflotation process was developed to treat laundry wastewater. The primary objectives of using the new reactor were to neutralize pollutant charge, generate ultra-fine bubbles and separate the coagulated flocs from water. Finally, pilot scale field tests (1.5 m In the bipolar electrocoagulation–electroflotation unit ( The main anodic reactions are as follows: The hydrolysis and polymerization of Al Since some amount of NaCl always exists in the laundry wastewater, other reactions may be also encountered in anodic compartment: While the main cathodic reaction on the Ti cathode and negative side of aluminum is as follows: Other reactions could be observed at the cathode surface and bring about the precipitation of the carbonate salt. These will increase the ohmic resistance of the electrochemical cell. However, alternating current direction (ACD) at due time can be applied to alleviate the precipitation of carbonate salt on the electrode surface. The experimental setup is schematically shown in The wastewater collected from Huaqing Laundry House in Tsinghua University was used for all the experiments except for pilot-scale field tests. The wastewater entered the electrochemical reactor from the bottom, moved upwards in a zig-zag pattern from the spacing between electrodes. It flowed out the reactor from the top. After adding desired amount of polyelectrolytes (PAM), the coagulated wastewater was introduced from the bottom of the inner tube of the separator. The treated wastewater exited from the lower part of the separator. The floated sludge could either be removed from the top of the separator (laboratory tests) or recycled back to the influent wastewater tank (pilot-scale field tests). Chemical oxygen demand (COD), surfactants (MBAS) and phosphate (P-PO First we carried out laboratory experiments of laundry wastewater to investigate the variables such as hydraulic residence time (HRT), initial pH and current density that may influence the processes of electrocoagulation–electroflotation. The electrical current direction was automatically alternated every 15 min to alleviate passivation of the electrodes. It has been established that the influent pH is of vital importance in the performance of many electrochemical process and chemical coagulation operations. To examine the effect of pH on the bipolar electrocoagulation–electroflotation process, the laundry wastewater was adjusted to the desired pH with diluted aqueous sodium hydroxide or sulfuric acid. The results illustrated in The removal of surfactant in this process may be assumed that the surfactant is first adsorbed on the particulate surface, making the surface hydrophobic, and thus forcing the particulate to the surface of the rising bubble. Finally the surfactant-particulate-bubble composite is floated to the surface. The reduction of COD may be mainly accomplished by electrocoagulation, electroflotation, direct anodic oxidation and indirect oxidation by chloride ions. Electrochemically produced aluminum has been found to be more efficient in removing phosphate than the same amount of aluminum contained in an aluminum sulfate solution It was found that after electrocoagulation–electroflotation process, the pH of the aqueous medium could be neutralized to some extent ( In acidic medium, CO The pH neutralization effect made this process effective in a much wider pH range, which made it superior to traditional chemical coagulation. The latter is highly sensitive to pH change and effective coagulation is achieved at pH 6–7 The influence of HRT on the process was studied on the COD removal at the desired HRT where other parameters were kept unchanged. Here HRT should be defined as the ratio of the total volume of the electrochemical reactor to wastewater flow rate. The conditions present in the electrocoagulation–electroflotation cell favored formation of the microbubble-pollutant aggregate composite after the collision and union of the two occurred in the subsequent separation unit. On the whole, the configuration of the reactor can be considered as plug flow. But the plug flow reactor (PFR) was comprised of many micro continuous stirred tank reactors (CSTR) present in two electrodes. Typical bubble sizes in electroflotation always fall in the range of 20–70 μm  Based on the laboratory test of laundry wastewater, 1.5 m The field test results are shown in A new bipolar electrocoagulation–electroflotation process was developed for the treatment of laundry wastewater. The process successfully removed turbidity, COD, phosphate and MBAS simultaneously in the pH range of 5–9. The laboratory results showed that the removal of COD was greater than 70%. And the removal efficiencies of MBAS, turbidity and P-phosphate could be reached above 90%. The 1.5 m The research was financially supported by National Outstanding Youth Fund (No. 50225804).