Spherical Ni57Zr20Ti16Si2Sn3 (numbers indicate at.%) amorphous powders were produced by the gas atomization process, and ductile Cu phase was coated on the Ni-based amorphous powders by the spray drying process in order to increase the ductility of the consolidated amorphous alloy. The characteristics of the as-prepared powders and the consolidation behaviors of Cu-coated Ni-based amorphous composite powders were investigated. The atomization was conducted at 1450°C under the vacuum of 10−2
                     mbar. The Ni-based amorphous powders and Cu nitrate solution were mixed and sprayed at temperature of 130°C. After spray drying and reduction treatment, the sub-micron size Cu powders were coated successfully on the surface of the atomized Ni amorphous powders. The spark plasma sintering process was applied to study the densification behavior of the Cu-coated composite powders. Thickness of the Cu layer was less than 1μm. The compacts obtained by SPS showed high relative density of over 98% and its hardness was over 800Hv.Bulk metallic glass (BMG) alloys have been intensively studied to apply for various advanced structural materials because of their unique and excellent mechanical and chemical properties such as high strength (∼2 Amorphous alloys could be produced into various kinds of forms such as thin sheets, rods, ribbons and powders from their melting stocks. The amorphous powders have been fabricated by several techniques such as mechanical alloying, melt spinning and gas atomization, etc. In this study, Ni-based (Ni In order to synthesize Ni Spray drying technique was used to fabricate the Cu-coated Ni-based amorphous composite powders. The amorphous powder and Cu nitrate were mixed together with a small amount of binder and then the mixed material was sprayed at temperature of 130 Ni-based amorphous powders and Cu-coated composite powders were consolidated into cylindrical specimens with size of 20  In order to analyze the glass forming ability of Ni The as-prepared powders were coated with Cu powders by spraying drying process. The Cu-coated Ni-based amorphous powder was consolidated by the spark plasma sintering (SPS) process. From the preliminary study, we conclude that pressure, temperature and degree of vacuum are more important processing variables for SPS process than variables such as die materials, electric current density and sintering schedule. The relative density increased from 79% to 98% when the pressure was increased up to 350 In the present study, Ni This work was financially supported by MOCIE (Ministry of Commerce, Industry and Energy) under the project named development of structural metallic materials and parts with super strength and high performance.