This chapter explores the functions of salt in meat and poultry products and the effects a reduction in salt has on these products. It includes the effects salt has on flavor, texture and processing characteristics. It also reviews the current levels of salt in meat and poultry products and discusses low- or reduced-salt products that are on the market. The chapter presents an outline of the ingredients and processes available to manufactures to produce low- and/or reduced-salt products and examines the future trends in reducing salt in meat and poultry products. The ultimate goal of ingredient suppliers and meat processors is to produce great-tasting reduced-sodium meat products that consumers can enjoy as a part of an ongoing healthier diet and lifestyle. The chapter discusses the strategies for and consequences of salt reduction and reviews some of the technological aspects of reduced-salt meat products. Apart from lowering the level of salt added to products, there are currently three major approaches to reduce the salt content in processed foods. First, and probably the most widely used, is the use of salt substitutes, in particular, potassium chloride (KCl). Masking agents are commonly used in these products. Second, the use of flavor enhancers that do not have a salty taste, but enhance the saltiness of products when used in combination with salt. This allows less salt to be added to the products. Third, optimizing the physical form of salt so that it becomes more taste bio-available and therefore, less salt is needed.The association between sodium and the development of hypertension has prompted public health and regulatory authorities to recommend reducing dietary intake of salt (NaCl). Hypertension is a major risk factor in the development of cardiovascular disease. Observational epidemiological studies and meta-analyses based on trials of varying methodological rigour in different populations and patient groups have provided grounds for controversy on the link between salt and blood pressure ( These reports state that meat and fish is one of the main sources of sodium for adults in Ireland contributing 29.8% of the mean daily sodium intake. Of this, cured and processed meats contribute 20.5% to the sodium intake. Similarly, in the UK meat and meat products contribute 20.8% to the sodium intake. The As a result of the ongoing campaign by public health authorities, the following chapter examines the functions of salt in meat and poultry products and the effects a reduction in salt has on these products. This will include the effects salt has on flavour, texture and processing characteristics. The current levels of salt in meat and poultry products will also be examined and details of low- or reduced-salt products that are on the market will be discussed. An outline of the ingredients and processes available to manufactures to produce low- and/or reduced-salt products will be addressed and finally future trends in reducing salt in meat and poultry products will be examined. Salt is one of the most commonly used ingredients in processed meat products and has being used since ancient times for the preservation of meat products due to its capacity to reduce water activity and therefore retard microbiological growth. In the modern meat industry salt is used as a flavouring or flavour enhancer and is also responsible for the desired textural properties of processed meats. Salt imparts a number of functional properties in meat products: it activates proteins to increase hydration and water-binding capacity; it decreases fluid loss in vacuum-packaged product that has been thermally processed; it increases the binding properties of proteins to improve texture; it increases the viscosity of meat batters, facilitating the incorporation of fat to form stable batters; it is essential for flavour and is a bacteriostatic at relatively high levels ( Salt has a flavour enhancing effect in meat products, with the perceived saltiness mainly due to the Na  In a study on cooked hams, hams with 1.7% NaCl were rated as salty as hams with 2.0 and 2.3% salt, but saltier than those with 1.1 and 1.4% ( As can be seen, salt has an impact on the flavour of meat products, however one of its main functions in processed meats is the solubilisation of the functional myofibrillar proteins in meat. This activates the proteins to increase hydration and water-binding capacity, ultimately increasing the binding properties of proteins to improve texture. In a comprehensive review on reducing sodium intake from meat products, The effect of NaCl on meat proteins is most likely caused by the fact that the Cl  The extraction of myosin from myofibrils when they swell is of great relevance to meat processors. In processed meats the salt-solubilised myofibrillar proteins form a sticky exudate on the surface of the meat pieces which binds the meat pieces together after cooking. This layer forms a matrix of heat-coagulated protein which entraps free water and binds the meat pieces together. In finely chopped or emulsified products such as frankfurters, bologna, etc. the solubilised protein in the continuous phase form a protein film around fat globules, thereby retaining the fat during cooking (  Both In whole muscle product, such as cooked hams, salt and phosphate contribute to the disruption of muscle fibres caused by massaging, solubilisation of the myofibrillar proteins and the production of an exudate rich in solubilised proteins. This protein-rich exudate binds meat chunks together. More recently, The beneficial effect of sodium chloride on the binding of poultry meat pieces has been demonstrated as far back as the 1970s. The preservation and shelf life of processed meats is of vital importance when reducing the salt levels. Reducing NaCl levels below those typically used without any other preservative measure has shown that product shelf life is shortened ( For the most part, the Food Standards Agency in the UK has been leading the way in trying to get both consumers and the food industry to reduce their sodium intake and usage in foods. The sodium content of processed meats in Ireland and the UK is quite variable with cured meats having higher sodium/salt contents. Burgers or patties contain 290–590 mg sodium per 100 g or 0.7–1.5 g salt per 100 g. Sausages contain 600–1180 mg sodium or 1.5–3.0 g salt per 100 g. Cured meats, such as hams and frankfurters, contain 720–1200 mg sodium per 100 g or 1.8–3.0 g salt per 100 g while bacon rashers contain 1000–1540 mg sodium per 100 g or 2.5–3.9 g salt per 100 g. Breaded chicken products contain 200–600 mg sodium per 100 g or 0.5–1.5 g salt per 100 g. In a study carried out by  Apart from lowering the level of salt added to products, there are currently three major approaches to reduce the salt content in processed foods. First, and probably the most widely used, is the use of salt substitutes, in particular, potassium chloride (KCl). Masking agents are commonly used in these products. Second, the use of flavour enhancers which do not have a salty taste, but enhance the saltiness of products when used in combination with salt. This allows less salt to be added to the products. Third, optimising the physical form of salt so that it becomes more taste bioavailable and therefore less salt is needed ( Potassium chloride is probably the most common salt substitute used in low- or reduced-salt/sodium foods. However, at blends over 50:50 sodium chloride/potassium chloride in solution, a significant increase in bitterness and loss of saltiness is observed. In Ireland, the FSAI scientific committee ( Notwithstanding the FSAl's concerns most research has focused on reducing the sodium intake with the partial replacement of salt with KCl. According to Other commercially available mixtures of NaCl and KCl include Lo It has previously been stated that it is the chloride ion that has been primarily responsible for the functional efficiency of NaCl in meat products ( In fermented sausages, Research has also demonstrated that phosphates can be very useful in lowering the NaCl content in meat products ( In terms of sodium reduction, some phosphates are sodium salts; however, the usage rate is substantially lower than NaCl. Sodium polyphosphate contains 31.24% Na compared to 39.34% in NaCl and is typically used at 0.5% compared to 2–4% usage rate for salt. The potassium salts of phosphate are also commercially available and are equally effective in terms of water binding, gelation or ionic strength as the sodium salts (   In addition to phosphate, other ingredients have been investigated in low-salt meat products. These are mainly binding agents that, in the absence of or at reduced salt levels, replace salt soluble proteins. These ingredients enhance the binding of meat pieces in restructured or reformed meat products and/or increase the water-binding capacity of the finished product. There is a wide variety of ingredients that can be used for this purpose and include non-meat proteins such as soya, milk and deheated mustard; blood proteins; hydrocolloids such as carrageenan, gums and alginates; starches such as potato, corn, wheat, waxy maize, tapioca or rice. The gel matrix formed with these alternative ingredients provides binding through a combination of protein coagulation and gel formation rather that direct interaction with muscle proteins ( There are a number of flavour-enhancing and masking agents commercially available. These include yeast extracts, lactates, monosodium glutamate and nucleotides amongst others. Dipeptides also offer the potential for replacing either NaCl or MSG. In the process of studying the structure-taste relationship of a bitter peptide (Arg-Gly-Pro-Pro-Phe-lle-Val) obtained from bacterial proteinase treatment of casein, Encapsulated ammonium salts such as chlorides, phosphates, citrates and lactate amongst others when added to foods can reduce the amount of NaCl required and will enhance or potentiate the salty taste of the food ( More recently, a US company Prime Favourites has launched NeutralFres Products derived from mycoprotein, such as Mycoscent; claim to have the ability to impart a salty taste without the addition of salt. According to the manufacturer, it has a synergistic effect with dairy and savoury notes. It is possible to have a 50% sodium reduction in biscuits and snack foods and 25% sodium reduction in savoury dishes. Mycoscent 400 has a darker, richer brothy taste and can be used to deliver a succulent, cooked taste in meat applications ( Yeast autolysates are also commonly used in low salt preparations. In particular they mask the metallic flavour of KCl. Synergy Flavours manufacture specific yeast extracts for low-salt applications, e.g. Saltmate Another yeast extract that is available is Aromild produced by Kohjin Co. Ltd in Japan. According to the company, Aromild contains an abundance of natural 5′-inosinic acid (5′-IMP) and 5′-guanylic acid (5′-GMP) and is capable of enhancing flavour of foods with the effect of reducing the salt content. It can be used as an alternative to MSG and HVP and as it is in such a concentrated form, only around a tenth of the amount is needed. Recommended usage rates in meat are 0.01–0.1%. Research from Kohjin has shown that Aromild is ten times stronger than MSG and has a longer lasting taste. At AllinAll Ingredients we have produced reduced salt cures using a range of these ingredients and have been able to produce reduced salt cooked hams similar to the flavour and texture of normal salt hams, without any increase in cooking losses. The perception of salt in the solid form is affected by crystal size and shape. Research has been carried out using various forms (flaked versus granular) as a method of reducing salt content in meat products. Flake-type salt has been shown to be more functional, in terms of binding, increasing pH, increasing protein solubilisation and improving cooking yield, in model emulsion systems ( More recently, Leatherhead Food International have been investigating optimising the physical form of salt and looking at changing the physical form of salt so that it becomes more taste bioavailable and therefore less can be added to the products. This involves increasing the efficiency of the salt, changing the structure and modifying the perception of the salt. Results of this collaborative project were published in 2006 ( Another product from the Alberger The ultimate goal of ingredient suppliers and meat processors is to produce great-tasting reduced-sodium meat products that consumers can enjoy as part of an ongoing healthier diet and lifestyle. The strategies for and consequences of salt reduction are discussed in this chapter. This was by no means an all-encompassing discussion, but an attempt to review some of the technological aspects of reduced-salt meat products. Because there is no panacea in terms of a single ingredient that can be used to replace salt in meat products, a range of functional ingredient combinations must be developed and/or optimised. Products need to be recreated that will continue to appeal to consumers. Leatherhead Food International believes that a widespread reduction of salt in processed foods by >10% requires new technological approaches ( The FSAI believes that food makers should not be looking at simply replacing salt with KCl and this method should only be used as a short-term measure. Progress is being made and meat processors have committed to reducing salt levels in their products. Ingredient firms, such as AllinAll Ingredients, are researching new methods, such as combining various ingredients, to help the industry fulfil its commitments. As an ingredient company supplying to meat processors AllinAll has been actively working with our customers in order that they can supply reduced-salt alternatives that are cost effective and that don't affect the quality of the products. Innovation demands increased technological awareness, through continued research in the field of food ingredients and additive technology companies like AllinAll offer their customers the opportunity to lower the technical barriers to manufacture reduced- or low-salt products. This includes producing various combinations of ingredients, depending on customer and product requirements, to be used in low- or reduced-salt applications. Any alteration in salt content of meat products requires ingredient reformulation or manipulation. Some companies have produced products that are successful in replacing or substituting sodium in processed products, others have been less so. Research is continuing to look at various flavours, in particular more savoury/umani taste to enhance the flavour of reduced salt products. Both through the use of these flavours and by adding more aromatics such as herbs and spices a reduction in salt can be achieved; however, salt cannot be totally eliminated due to its functionality regarding binding and texture of products, unless other ingredients such as phosphates, hydrocolloids, etc. are added. It should also be recognised that a number of companies and retailers have produced successful reduced-salt meat products and that processed meats provide variety, taste and nutritional value to consumers. There is an extensive range of literature in the area of salt reduction, in particular during the 1980s and there are particularly good reviews published in