Solubility data for the LiCl+PEG 4000+H2O system at 25°C were obtained. These data, along with other data published in the literature for the NaCl+PEG 4000+H2O, KCl+PEG 4000+H2O, LiCl+C2H5OH+H2O, NaCl+C2H5OH+H2O, and KCl+C2H5OH+H2O ternary systems at 25°C, were correlated using a modified Pitzer model. The values of the solubilities calculated using the model are in good agreement with the experimental observations. Using the model parameterization established in this study, the yield of precipitated salt was calculated as a function of kg PEG 4000 or C2H5OH/100kg of saturated solution.One of the methods employed in crystallization to produce supersaturated solutions is termed drowning out. This separation method consists of adding an additional component that is miscible with the original solution to decrease the solubility of the salt of interest. This crystallization technique has a number of advantages compared with traditional evaporation or cooling procedures, including increased yields, operation at ambient temperature, higher purity of crystals, selectivity and others The prediction or correlation of salt solubility data in mixed solvents is an important tool for the design and simulation of the drowning-out crystallization process. To carry out this type of analysis, several models have been proposed in the literature based on the thermodynamics of the electrolytes. Farelo et al. Jimenez et al. The Pitzer model of virial coefficients has been used widely in the prediction and correlation of solubilities in systems that contain one salt (or more) in a single solvent, generally water The purpose of the present work is to use the method of Wu et al. to correlate the solid–liquid equilibrium of alkali chlorides (LiCl, NaCl, and KCl) at 25 The solid–liquid equilibrium data used in the correlation were taken from the literature. Galleguillos et al. Synthesis-grade samples of polyethylene glycol with an average molar mass of 4000 (PEG 4000) and analytical reagent-grade+99% anhydrous lithium chloride were procured from Merck and used without further purification. Salt was dried to a constant weight in an oven at 100 The phase equilibrium study was carried out by mixing known masses of PEG 4000 and water with excess salt. All of the solutions were prepared by mass using an analytical balance with a precision of 0.07 Once equilibrium was reached, the mixing was interrupted, and the solutions were allowed to decant for 60 The concentration of LiCl was determined by lithium and chloride analysis using atomic absorption spectroscopy (AAS) and the argentometric method. The AAS measurements were performed using a Varian model SpectrAA 220 instrument. The solubility values of the ternary system represent the means of two independent replicates. The relative standard deviation was less than 0.43%. Based on the arguments of Barata and Serrano The values of The symbols The superscript In this work, the ionic strength The constants In Eqs. If the salt crystallizes as a hydrate with Since the experimental values of the osmotic and activity coefficients are reported in the literature on a molality scale, it is necessary to convert them to a mole fraction scale. The following equations are useful for this purpose Given that the polymer is considered a pseudo-solvent, the use of the modified Pitzer equation to calculate the electrolyte activity coefficient would be valid strictly for polymer+salt+water systems. However, we propose that it is also valid for an electrolyte in a mixed solvent such as ethanol+water. The experimental solubilities of LiCl·H The relationship between the solubility of the salt and solvent concentration is given by Eq. The binary parameters for the salt have been estimated by fitting data from the literature at 25  The solubility product, Then, the unknowns in Eqs. Once the optimal parameters were found,  The objective function used to find the cross virial coefficients between salt and polymer was efficient because it allowed the use of electrolyte activity coefficients between 0 and 10% PEG With the parameterization of the ternary systems LiCl+PEG 4000+H However, the addition of PEG or C This work reports solubility measurements of LiCl in solutions of PEG 4000+water at 25 The Pitzer model modified by Wu et al. With the parameterization of the systems studied in this work, the yield was determined based on the amount of PEG 4000 or C The authors thank Supplementary data associated with this article can be found in the online version at 