The behaviour of the rare earth elements at concentrations likely to be encountered during gypsum precipitation in a commercial process was investigated. The syntheses were done by slowly mixing pH-adjusted Li2SO4 and CaCl2 solutions such that significant variations in pH did not occur. Increasing concentrations of the light or heavy rare earth ions had no significant effect on the calcium (~24% Ca) or sulphate (~55% SO4) contents of the precipitates. However, the REE contents increased as the concentration of the rare earth ions increased from 0 to 8g/L, although most of the increase occurred in the 0.2 to 2g/L range. The maximum extent of REE incorporation occurred at praseodymium-neodymium and decreased for lighter or heavier rare earth elements. The maximum contents of the individual REEs were <1.5%. The gypsum precipitates made from mixtures of the rare earth ions had reduced contents of the heavy rare earths relative to the light rare earths. This could be advantageous as the generally more valuable heavy REEs would tend to remain dissolved for subsequent recovery. The rare earth ions are structurally incorporated in gypsum where three Ca2+ ions are replaced by two trivalent rare earth ions and a vacant Ca2+ lattice site. Although the trivalent light rare earth ions have radii similar to that of divalent calcium, the charge differences limit the extent of solid state substitution, even where the ionic radii are very similar to that of Ca2+.The rare earth elements (REEs) “are strictly the fourteen elements following lanthanum (cerium to lutetium) in which the fourteen 4 Several investigators found low levels of REE incorporation in natural gypsum formed from dilute solutions. Gypsum (or phosphogypsum) is the major solid product formed during the sulphuric acid leaching of phosphate rock in the fertilizer industry. The deportment of <  The above discussion indicates that relatively small amounts of the rare earth elements can be incorporated in gypsum precipitated under a wide range of conditions. However, most of the reported studies involved low concentrations of the rare earth ions, such as those typically encountered in geological situations or phosphate rock processing. Because of the importance of minimizing rare earth losses during gypsum precipitation in commercial rare earth processes, the present study was undertaken to elucidate the behaviour of all the trivalent rare earth elements (except promethium, but including lanthanum and yttrium) at the higher concentrations likely to be encountered during gypsum precipitation in a commercial rare earth process. The rare earth elements were generally considered individually, although some experiments were carried out using mixtures of several rare earth species. In industrial practice, a rare earth-containing sulphate processing solution would be neutralized by the addition of lime (CaO), hydrated lime (Ca(OH) The gypsum precipitates filtered rapidly using 150 All the precipitates were subjected to X-ray diffraction analysis using a Rigaku automated diffractometer with a rotating copper anode with CuKα Preliminary experiments carried out using Li The light rare earth elements are prevalent in many rare earth processing circuits, and X-ray diffraction analysis of the precipitates indicated well crystallized gypsum together with occasional trace amounts of anhydrite (CaSO There was no indication of any tetravalent cerium compound such as CeO Similar results were realized for another light rare earth element, samarium, and the data are summarized in X-ray diffraction analysis of the samarium-containing precipitates detected gypsum with occasional trace amounts of anhydrite (CaSO The heavy rare earth elements behave in a manner similar to that of the light rare earth elements, as is illustrated for dysprosium in The analogous data for the incorporation of another heavy rare earth element, ytterbium, in the precipitated gypsum are summarized in X-ray diffraction analysis of the Yb-bearing precipitates detected gypsum with occasional trace amounts of anhydrite (see A series of experiments was carried out wherein gypsum was precipitated at 75 The data presented above were obtained for single rare earth species, but the behaviour of mixtures of the rare earth elements is also of relevance. In this regard, The data presented above indicate a modest degree of REE incorporation in gypsum, and there are two possible mechanisms of incorporation. The first is adsorption of the rare earth ions on the gypsum crystals, as proposed by There are two possible mechanisms by which a trivalent rare earth ion can substitute for divalent ions. Firstly, the coupled substitution of a monovalent ion and a trivalent rare earth ion for two divalent calcium ions could occur to maintain charge neutrality, as illustrated for lithium and neodymium below: The second mechanism involves the replacement of three Ca The first mechanism does not seem to apply in the present experiments. The Li  The behaviour of the rare earth elements at concentrations likely to be encountered during gypsum precipitation in a commercial process, was investigated. The syntheses were done by slowly mixing pH-adjusted Li The maximum extent of REE incorporation in the precipitates made from solutions containing 1 The rare earth ions are structurally incorporated in gypsum, according to a mechanism involving the replacement of three Ca The author wishes to acknowledge the contributions of Co-op students Sean Lavoie of McGill University for carrying out many of the experiments and Janie Amyot of the University of Ottawa for assistance in the preparation of the paper. He is also indebted to CanmetMINING employees Derek Smith for the numerous X-ray diffraction analyses, Rolando Lastra for the SEM investigations and Yves Thibault for the electron microprobe analyses.