Mineral processing of low-grade ores requires high processing flow rates. Pre-concentration is a clever technological solution for this challenge because the rejection of barren rock, in the early stages of the processing flowsheet, leads to increasing the head grade of the concentration plant and reducing the corresponding input flow rate.
                  As pre-concentration at crushing sizes depends on the ore texture and consequently, it relies on the achieved mineral liberation degree, a straightforward methodology to assess quantitative mineralogical data of the ore macro-texture, based on image analysis, was developed.
                  For the purpose, photos of hand samples collected at the mine site were converted into a digital image representative of the ore macro-texture. Then, a random comminution algorithm simulating a coarse crushing stage, to generate particles in size range 19.3/6.7 mm was applied. The surface grade of each particle was calculated by pixel counting, allowing for the computation of the Grade Histograms (wt%) and then for the construction of ultimate upgrading descriptors, which has been proved to be a useful tool to assess pre-concentration feasibility and the separation efficiency.
                  This methodology was applied to a Li-Mica lepidolite ore from Alvarrões deposit (Portugal) by simulating several separation scenarios. The separation efficiency of an optical sorting separation was also assessed using the proposed methodology. Furthermore, the influence of mineral liberation at different size ranges on the global separation efficiency was predicted.
                  This paper intends to underline the importance of quantitative mineralogical data in the study of the pre-concentration process. Data acquisition must be improved, taking advantage of the more accurate and faster systems, such as the modern multispectral analytical devices and ore sorting technologies.About 60% of particles are pure gangue; 40% of mixed particles; rich middlings are dominant Pre-concentration would be feasible due to the high-contrast between valuable and non-valuable particles. Only of about 20% gangue particles Low-grade mixed particles are dominant Pre-concentration would be not recommended. About 60% of particles are pure gangue 40% of mixed particles; intermediate middlings are dominant Pre-concentration would be feasible, but a stronger selectivity is required. About 30% of particles are pure gangue 70% of mixed particles; intermediate and low-grade middlings Pre-concentration would be feasible, but a very stronger selectivity is required One of the main challenges of the mining industry is the processing of low-grade ores. This type of ores obliges high processing plant throughput rates, which would result in increased energy consumption and operational costs ( It has been referred that, on average, 44% of the total electricity consumption is dedicated to crushing and milling stages ( When longer grinding stages are needed to attain a suitable degree of liberation of low-grade ores, frequently below 1% mass, a high amount of energy is wasted in the comminution of gangue material ( The increase of energy efficiency and unit metal productivity would lead to lower concentration plant capacity, and consequently for lower investment and operating costs, both on mineral processing and tailings disposal ( Pre-concentration has found application in mines worldwide, being an important factor for the viability of many mining projects. Dense media separation, jigging with ragging, magnetic separation, scalping selective screening and the modern ore sorting systems are the most typical methods of pre-concentration referred to in the technical bibliography ( Being pre-concentration at coarse sizes highly dependent on the pattern of gangue liberation, which relies on the ore texture, mineralogy studies play a very important role in the optimization of this process. Modern technical developments in image acquisition and analysis and pattern recognition would allow for an accurate description of the ore texture in a macroscopic scale and valuable mineral occurrence ( Examples of this approach were reported to compare the impact of different flotation conditions in the separation performance using the Grade and Recovery curve ( In this work, a straightforward methodology is proposed to acquire quantitative mineralogical data from a macro-texture of a Li-mica ore, based on image analysis. Grade Histograms (wt%) generated by a random comminution algorithm are used to compute Henry and Mayer ultimate upgrading curves. As Henry curve is a function of cut-grade, it is well suited to select the most appropriate cut-point for the separation. Then, the Mayer Ultimate Upgrading Curve (UUC) was compared with experimental data of an optical sorting to assess its efficiency. The ore used in this work is a Li-mica lepidolite (LPD), carrying 7.7% Li A set of hand samples (200 kg) was collected at the mine site. A sub-sample of 20 kg was randomly selected and kept aside for the macro-texture assessment, and other sub-sample was crushed in a jaw crusher (single toggle 5″ × 6″, 4 kW, 325–375 rpm, Denver). A sub-sample of the crushed material was size classified and then chemically assayed by atomic absorption spectrometry (AAS) (UNICAM-M SERIES) for Li. It is possible to observe that the average Li The set of samples saved for the macro-texture assessment was sawn to produce flat surfaces and photographed using a conventional digital camera Nikon D3200, equipped with a DX AF-S Nikkor 18–55 mm lens. The camera was mounted on a tripod to guarantee the same distance to different samples, and photos were taken under stabilized illumination conditions (artificial light). Then, a MATLAB® algorithm was developed to generate a binary digital image, distinguishing LPD from non-LPD pixels (px). Firstly, the LPD colour was calibrated according to the RGB model. Each image pixel is defined by the three levels of the RGB colour scale, using a 3-D mathematical array. If the RGB values that characterize LPD were clearly defined, it would be possible to distinguish LPD px from gangue (no-LPD) px. Using a set of 25 LPD images as standards and applying machine-learning techniques ( The procedure applied to generate the digital image was calibrated by introducing a parameter (L) to adjust its grade according to the ore average grade. In the developed approach, it was assumed that the surface grade is an acceptable approximation for the volume grade, such as what is done in optical microscope procedures for the determination of modal mineral composition. After the acquisition of the ore macro-texture images, a random comminution simulator was conceived by overlapping masks of different geometry and size upon the acquired digital macro-texture (in the case square masks were used to facilitate calculations). At each iteration, a particle is generated with a specific size, and its px information is collected and stored. Then, using the formula presented in the Eq. After the generation of 5000 particles for each size, the Grade Histograms (wt%) of each size fraction was computed applying this procedure. Grade Histogram (wt%) is the most appropriate tool to characterize the liberation level of the mineral at a given size. It allows for the computation of the ultimate upgrading, in the sense that it expresses the technical limit of the separation performance (based on a 2D analysis), which can be called Ultimate Upgrading Curve (UUC). Grade Histograms (wt%) define the liberation potential of the ore because it takes into consideration the metal content of particles in each grade fraction. UUC is generated by the simulation of perfect separation of particles accordingly to their specific grade. The UUC, such as any experimental upgrading curve, can be presented by traditional graphical representations. For the present purpose, the Henry Curve was used to assess the feasibility of a theoretical pre-concentration, based on the obtained Grade Histograms (wt%). As it is well established, the Henry Curve relates cut-grade and yield of a separation at different cut-grades, from which concentrates and tailings average grades are calculated and plotted together. In a second step, experimental data of real separation are plotted in the Mayer Diagram together with the UUC obtained as above described. In order to apply the above-described approach to assess the separation efficiency of a real pre-concentration process, an experimental separation of a sample of the Alvarrões Li ore was carried out on an optical sorter using the size fraction 19/6.3 mm. The separation was performed in two steps: in the first one the separator was calibrated to produce a richer LPD concentrate; in a second scavenger step, the sorter was adjusted to accept a middling LPD content product and to reject a tailings fraction composed by particles with almost no LPD content. The objective of the first step was to assess the possibility of producing a high-grade marketable product that can be directly sent to a Li conversion plant. The second step allowed for the rejection of gangue in an early stage of the processing flowsheet, i.e., at crushing sizes. All products were weighted and chemical assayed by AAS. The application of the image analysis algorithm proposed in this work allowed for mineralogical data acquisition of the Alvarrões ore macro-texture. A tentative of reconstruc a hypothetical drill core, shown in Random comminution algorithm applied to macro-texture generated the Grade Histograms (wt%) of the size fractions between 19.3 and 6.7 mm, as can be observed in The evolution of liberation is well assessed by the generated Grade Histograms (wt%) of narrow size fractions. A joint histogram of a broader size range 19.3/6.7 mm can be computed ( As above mentioned, Grade Histograms (wt%) give important information concerning mineral liberation: at the above-referred crushing size, Alvarrões ore shows a slight amount of sterile material (around 10% of mass in the 0% grade class); approximately 58% of mass can be considered low-grade mixed particles (in the range ]0, 2] %Li In this step, a Henry Curve was used to plot the UUC calculated by simulating perfect separations applied to the Grade Histograms (wt%), as referred. The Henry Curve allows for predicting the separation for the desired cut-grade. Now, based on the Henry UUC it is possible to predict several scenarios for the pre-concentration of Alvarrões ore. Ultimate prediction of pre-concentration of Alvarrões ore at crushing size (as indicated) points out to (i) rejection of pure gangue not greater than 10%; (ii) accepting Li losses in the order of 4–5%, mass rejection would reach 28%; (iii) operating with a cut-grade at around 1% Li Nevertheless, it is fundamental to emphasize that these results were obtained simulating a perfect separator, and for this reason, the presented Henry curve is called as Ultimate Upgrading, so it should be expected that the performance of any real separation would be lower than that predicted by the UUC. At this point, the results of experimental separations carried out in an optical sorter were compared with UUC to assess its performance. Global process efficiency depends both on the degree of liberation and the technical performance of the separator. The present study aims at distinguishing between both. As already mentioned, the separation process was carried out in two stages. Results are plotted in a Mayer diagram, as seen in Then, in This methodology was carefully described in a previous work ( The non-negligible distance between the UUC and the Ideal Upgrading (zone A) indicates low liberation degree, which is likely due to the superimposition of pegmatitic and aplitic textures in the Alvarrões ore. The experimental curve is also far from the UUC (zone B), meaning that the optical sorting separation was not as efficient as expected. Furthermore, as can be seen in This methodology can also be used to optimize the sorter settings, trying to approximate the experimental curves to the UUC, which is the limit of the physical separation given by the level of liberation produced by the comminution of the ore. Pre-concentration at crushing sizes is a fundamental separation process and a promising solution for the processing of low-grade ores. According to that, it is crucial to develop proper methodologies to assess quantitative mineralogical data of macro-textures and comminuted particles at coarse sizes. Having access to that quantitative mineralogical data, Grade Histograms (wt%) can be obtained and used to build the UUC, which has been proved to be a tool to assess mineral liberation. During this work, a methodology to acquire the desired quantitative mineralogical data was developed and applied to the case of a Li-mica lepidolite ore from Alvarrões deposit, Center of Portugal. Then, the representation of UUC using the Henry curve showed to be a fast and accurate tool to assess the feasibility of pre-concentration. This methodology can be easily applied to photos of drill cores to get information about ore types and textures. For the studied case, the most promising theoretical scenario for pre-concentration would be the rejection of 40% mass with 7% Li losses. However, as this result was predicted as a perfect separation scenario, it should be considered that any real separation would lead to lower performances. When the methodology was applied to a pre-concentration by optical sorting of a Lithium-Mica ore, Mayer plots of the upgrading curves discussed in this paper point out to the following: i) UUC corresponds to a pre-concentration at the crushing sizes, in which non-valuables are more liberated than lepidolite; ii) the distance between the experimental curve and UUC indicates that a better separation performance can be achieved, acting in the technical component of the efficiency; iii) the optical sorter was more efficient when dealing with high-grade particles. The manuscript was written through the contributions of all authors. All authors have approved the final version of the manuscript.  The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. R. Sousa acknowledges the “