Intracapsular hip fractures in young adults have a significant risk of complications. Consequently, some authors advocate urgent and/or open fracture reduction. Our aim was to analyse outcomes following such fractures with reference to influence of fracture displacement, timing of surgery and method of reduction (open/closed) on the incidence of non-union (NU) and avascular necrosis (AVN). Methods: Specific search terms were used to retrieve relevant published studies from 1966 to May 2003. Results: Eighteen studies involving 564 fractures were analysed. The overall incidence of NU was 50/564 (8.9%) and AVN was 130/564 (23.0%). There was a higher incidence of NU and AVN following displaced than undisplaced fractures. NU occurred more frequently after open reduction than closed reduction (10/89 [11.2%] versus 13/275 [4.7%]). There was an increased incidence of AVN after closed than open reduction but this was no longer statistically significant when one study with a markedly higher reported incidence of AVN was excluded. The difference in the incidence of NU and AVN following early (<12h) or late (>12h) surgery was not significant for either NU or AVN. Conclusion: Early or open reduction of these fractures may not reduce the risk of NU or AVN. There is a suggestion of a higher incidence of NU following open reduction than closed reduction. Randomised studies with 2 year follow-up are required to report on a larger number of patients before definite conclusions on treatment can be made.Although intracapsular femoral neck fractures in young adults account for only about 3% of the total hip fracture population, Accurate reduction and stable internal fixation are advocated for such fractures to reduce the risk of fracture healing complications. The purpose of this study was to analyse outcomes following such fractures with particular reference to the influence of fracture displacement, timing of surgery, method of reduction (open/closed) on the incidence of non-union and avascular necrosis. Meta-analysis for this study was conducted, in principle, by adapting the QUOROM guidelines A comprehensive search of various data sources (MEDLINE, EMBASE, CINAHL, allied and complimentary medicine, British nursing index and DHSS-DATA: health administration and medical toxicology) extending from 1966 to May 2003 was conducted to identify appropriate studies using specific search terms (femoral ADJ neck ADJ fractures, femoral neck fractures AND young adults, intracapsular, cervical and subcapital fractures). We also scanned the reference lists of eligible studies for potentially relevant reports. Articles of all languages were considered. The age of 50 years was agreed upon as the demarcating line after which fractures of the femoral neck in females might be attributable to post-menopausal osteoporosis. We included studies involving patients between 15 and 50 years of age with acute intracapsular hip fractures. We included studies with a minimum follow-up of 12 months. Fractures that were treated non-operatively were excluded from the study. We excluded studies where vascularity enhancing supplementary procedures such as muscle pedicle grafts, vascularized iliac bone grafts or fibular grafts were used as these supplementary procedures appeared to be instituted to address the delay in treatment. Each eligible study was independently reviewed by authors for methodological quality. Although there are scoring systems We agreed on a 12 A number of studies had used the Garden’s classification. Data was extracted from the papers independently by two authors with differences resolved by discussion. For the analysis of the effect of fracture reduction (open versus closed) or timing of surgery (early versus late), only the results of displaced intracapsular fractures were considered. For the ‘present series’, data for 55 patients was obtained from Peterborough Hospitals’ database of hip fractures. This database records outcome of all hip fractures treated at the Peterborough Hospitals from January 1987 to February 2002. From this, the results of treatment for all patients aged between 16 and 50 years with a non-pathological intracapsular hip fractures were included in this study. We used GraphPad InStat Version 3.00 for Windows 95, GraphPad Software, San Diego, California, USA, for statistical analysis. Fisher’s exact test, two-sided Data was analysed to: Determine the incidence of non-union and avascular necrosis in general. Determine the effect of fracture displacement (undisplaced/displaced) on development of non-union and avascular necrosis. Determine the effect of the timing of surgery (early or late) on occurrence of non-union and avascular necrosis. Determine the effect of closed or open reduction on the incidence of non-union and avascular necrosis.  In all, 27 studies were retrieved. The authors reviewed titles and abstracts independently. All relevant articles were identified and read to determine their eligibility. We excluded one study We excluded studies which used fibular graft, A total of 31 fractures that were treated non-operatively were excluded from the study. The studies of Kuslich and Gustilo Thus, 18 studies involving 674 patients were identified ( 59.9% (269/449) of these fractures were in males. Age range was from 15 to 50 years with a mean age of 27.9 years. Specific data to establish the injury to surgery interval in hours was not available from five studies. Methods of meta-analysis were applied to analyse 18 studies involving 564 intracapsular hip fractures in young adults less than 50 years of age. The study of Sadat-Ali and Ahlberg The overall incidence of non-union was 50/564 (8.9%) and avascular necrosis was 130/564 (23.0%) ( There was a higher incidence of avascular necrosis in displaced fractures than undisplaced fractures (86/382 [22.5%] versus 7/118 [5.9%]; There was a higher incidence of non-union in those fractures that underwent open reduction than closed reduction (10/89 [11.2%] versus 13/275 [4.7%]; The difference in the incidence of non-union between early and late fracture reduction was not significant (13/110 [11.8%] versus 3/60 [5.0%]; Randomised, controlled trials provide the strongest evidence. We included studies that had a minimum follow-up of 12 months. Non-union is invariably apparent by 1 year. We appreciate that it may take up to 24 months, and at times, 36 months for radiological signs of avascular necrosis to become evident. It is, therefore, possible that the rate of avascular necrosis in certain studies may have been underestimated. However, few published studies presented at least 24 months follow-up and considering the rather rare incidence of such fractures, we decided to include studies with a minimum follow-up of 12 months for this report. We also noted that Jain et al. Tooke and Favero The overall incidence of avascular necrosis within the studies included in this review was 23.0% (130/564). Three studies reported a higher incidence of avascular necrosis in displaced fractures when compared to undisplaced fractures ( The evidence from literature regarding the timing of surgery on outcomes following intracapsular hip fractures is conflicting. The study of Swiontkowski et al. In our review, the difference in the incidence of non-union and avascular necrosis for early versus late surgery was not statistically significant. One of the shortcomings of our study in respect of this observation was the relatively small number of fractures which we could analyse as it was difficult to extract information from a number of studies regarding the precise timing of surgery. According to Jain et al. Another factor, which may influence the occurrence of avascular necrosis, is the restoration of normal anatomy and/or decompression of the intracapsular haematoma. In our review, there was a statistically higher incidence of non-union in those fractures that underwent open reduction as compared to the ones that were stabilized by closed reduction. Our results also suggested a higher incidence of avascular necrosis in fractures that underwent closed reduction as compared to the ones that had open reduction thus suggesting that open reduction may be better than closed reduction in reducing the incidence of avascular necrosis. However, this observation appeared to have been largely influenced by the study of Zetterberg et al. Adequate information on the quality of reduction was not available from all the studies. It was, therefore, not possible to correlate the quality of reduction to fracture healing complications. Whilst most studies in the closed reduction group failed to comment on the quality of reduction, the study of Jain et al. The studies of Dedrick et al. In conclusion, it appears that early (<12