Six new azo dyes containing of 5(4H)-oxazolone ring were prepared by diazotization of 4-aminohippuric acid and coupling with N,N-dimethylaniline, 1-naphthol and 2-naphthol and condensation with 4-fluoro benzaldehyde or 4-trifluoromethoxy benzaldehyde. The new compounds were fully characterized by spectroscopic techniques. All synthesized compounds exhibited high tyrosinase inhibitory behavior. The results of mushroom tyrosinase inhibition assays indicate that the 4-trifluoromethoxy derivatives have high degrees of inhibition and N,N-dimethylaniline derivatives are better for tyrosinase inhibition than 1-naphthol and 2-naphthol derivatives. All synthesized azo compounds (4a–4f) showed the most potent mushroom tyrosinase inhibition, comparable to that of Kojic acid and l-mimosine, as reference standard inhibitors.Tyrosinase (monophenol or Nitrogen heterocycles are of special interest because they constitute an important class of natural and nonnatural products, many of which exhibit useful biological activities. Oxazolone derivatives are in general well-known five-membered nitrogen-containing heterocyclic compounds. 4-Arylidene-2-phenyl-5(4)-oxazolones are important intermediates for the synthesis of fine chemicals and precursors of several biologically active molecules such as amino acids and peptides. On the other hand, oxazolone derivatives are highly versatile intermediates used for the synthesis of several organic molecules, including amino acids, peptides, antimicrobial or antitumor compounds, immunomodulators, heterocyclic precursors for biosensors coupling, and photosensitive composition devices for proteins. It is well known that azo compounds are the widest class of industrial synthesized organic dyes due to their versatile application in various fields, such as dyeing textile fiber, biological–pharmacological activities and advanced application in organic synthesis. In recent years, the fabrication of azo dyes has been intensively investigated, due to their unique industrial applications in hypnotic drugs, In this work, we synthesized a number of new azo compounds containing of oxazolone ring and studied chemical structures. Also we evaluated inhibitory effect on tyrosinase of new compounds. Diazonium salts could react readily with nucleophiles as an aromatic compounds containing amino or hydroxyl group, which have been extensively researched and widely used for the preparation of molecules with significance for both academic and industrial applications. 4-Amino hippuric acid is dissolved in a 2.5% sodium carbonate solution by heating and stirring. In the solution of 4-amino hippuric acid, sodium nitrite is dissolved and 4-amino hippuric acid was diazotized by slow addition of concd HCl at 0 Coupling components ( Then 4-arylidene-5(4 Generally, variation in color of these dyes results from the alternation in coupling components. Since the synthesized dyes obtained varied in color from red to brown, a convenient method of measuring the color of the compound was to study the absorption spectra of their solutions. The visible absorption maxima for the synthesized dyes were measured in Me The absorption maxima of the synthesized dyes changed from 496 to 542 The compounds ( Compounds ( Comparing the activities with the structures of compounds, it turns out that the tyrosinase activity is mainly dependent on the substituents present at C-2 and C-4 positions of oxazolone ring. When tyrosinase inhibitory activity of the most active compound ( This shows that extension of conjugation through an aliphatic double bond could be the prerequisite for activity rather than extension through an aromatic ring. A decrease in the activity of compounds ( Effect of the compound The inhibitory of the compounds ( All the chemicals were obtained from Merck, Fluka, Sigma and Aldrich Companies and used without further purification. Melting points were measured using Thermo Fisher Scientific. IR spectra were recorded Bruker tensor 27, FT-IR Spectrophotometer. All The fluorescence emission spectra were determined with a RF-5301PC Shimadzu spectrofluorometer using a cuvette with a 1 In a 125-mL Erlenmeyer flask, 4-aminohippuric acid (0.01  1-Naphthol (0.01 2-Naphthol (0.01 A mixture of anhydrous sodium acetate (0.01 Dark red powder; mp: 264–266 Brown powder; mp: 248–250 Brown powder; mp: 246–248 Red powder; mp: 214–216 Dark red powder; mp: 280–282 Red powder; mp: 206–208 The spectrophotometric assay for tyrosinase was performed according to the method Ref. Here, the B and S are the absorbances for the blank and samples. All the experiments were carried out at least in triplicate and the results represent means Melanin production inhibition was ascertained by method of Wang et al. Cytotoxicity assays were performed using a micro-culture MTT method described by Han et al. The authors thank Payame Noor University (PNU) of Kerman for the financial support.