Seawater has been reported to depress the floatability of molybdenum in copper-molybdenum (Cu-Mo) flotation circuits under alkaline conditions (pH > 9.5). However, the seawater used in the process contains various minerals and flotation reagents, which make it difficult to investigate the depression mechanism. This paper presents a fundamental study into the effect of artificial seawater as a seawater model solution on the floatability of molybdenite and chalcopyrite, which are the main minerals in the Cu-Mo flotation process. Floatability tests in the absence of flotation reagents (i.e., frothers and collectors) reveal that artificial seawater adversely affects the floatability of molybdenite and chalcopyrite at pH > 9. This phenomenon can be attributed to the adsorption of hydrophilic Mg(OH)2 precipitates formed under alkaline conditions on the mineral surfaces, which increases the surface wettability of the mineral particles, as shown by contact angle measurements and atomic force microscopy (AFM) images. The effect of kerosene as a molybdenite collector has also been investigated to assess its potential in the selective flotation of molybdenite and chalcopyrite in artificial seawater.Flotation is a water-intensive process; thus, to minimize the use of freshwater, most mining operations use recycled water, underground water, saline water, or seawater, which contain various inorganic electrolytes ( Flotation units are controlled at an alkaline pH using lime (CaO or Ca(OH) The typical electrolyte composition of seawater is listed in Speciation of CO Speciation of Mg and Ca Salt precipitation There are several benefits of using electrolyte solutions instead of freshwater in the flotation process. The presence of various inorganic electrolytes (e.g., KCl, NaCl, CaCl Frothers are required to produce fine bubbles in the flotation process. However, Furthermore, the floatability of minerals improved in the presence of inorganic electrolytes and at high electrolyte concentrations. The effect of various electrolytes on mineral floatability has been reported by The floatability of molybdenite in saline solutions has been investigated by On the other hand, there is no consensus on the effect of calcium ions on molybdenite floatability, as listed in Seawater has been reported to depress the floatability of molybdenum ore (molybdenite) at pH values higher than 9.5, as shown in Meanwhile, Mg(OH) Various studies have been conducted to overcome the depression of molybdenum floatability in seawater and achieve the selective flotation of molybdenum and copper ores in saline water. Kerosene, or fuel oil, is usually added during the grinding stage to enhance the molybdenite recovery ( The salinity of seawater varies with location. Moreover, seawater can be contaminated with organic matter, which might affect the flotation behavior. Thus, artificial seawater was used as a seawater model solution in the present study to investigate the effect of seawater on the natural floatability of pure molybdenite and chalcopyrite in the absence of flotation reagents at various pH values. Moreover, the effect of seawater on the surface hydrophobicity and mineral zeta potentials of molybdenite and chalcopyrite is reported. Further, a kerosene emulsion was employed in this work to improve the separation selectivity of molybdenite and chalcopyrite in seawater flotation. Chalcopyrite from Miyatamata Mine, Akita Prefecture, Japan and molybdenite from Wolfram Camp, Queensland, Australia were used in this study. Artificial seawater (Marine Art SF-1) was employed as a model solution in this experiment. The chemical composition of the artificial seawater is shown in The mineral sample was cut into a flat section and cast in an epoxy resin (SpeciFix-20 Kit, Struers, Germany) for surface characterization by atomic force microscopy (AFM) and contact angle measurements. Afterwards, the chalcopyrite surface was polished following the procedure described by The chalcopyrite was ground using an agate mortar and pestle and was dry screened (− 38 μm). The molybdenite fine powder (<30 μm) was supplied by Sumitomo Metal Mining, Co., Ltd. The mineral sample powders were cleaned using a 1 M HNO The effect of kerosene on the floatability of molybdenite and chalcopyrite was investigated using emulsified kerosene in artificial seawater. Kerosene (25 μL) was mixed with 190 mL artificial seawater in a food blender (Palcookin Tescom TM5) at 12000 rpm for 1 min. Subsequently, the emulsified kerosene was used for mineral treatment at the desired pH values (2–11). The surface topography was examined by AFM. The surface was scanned in the ambient air at an average temperature of 20.1 ± 1.5 °C and relative humidity of 43.8 ± 7.5% using a Si The flotation tests of chalcopyrite and molybdenite and their mixture (1:1) were performed using a glass column ( Contact angle measurements were carried out following the procedures described by Each mineral powder (ca. 0.1 g) was suspended in 50 mL artificial seawater (with or without kerosene) under ultrasonication for 1 min. The suspension pH was controlled at the desired pH (3–11) for 10 min by adding a KOH or HCl solution. Zeta potential measurements were carried out using a zeta potential analyzer (Zetasizer Nano ZS, Malvern Co., Ltd.). The zeta potentials of the precipitates obtained in artificial seawater in the alkaline pH range (9.5–12) were measured in the same way as those for the mineral powders. In addition, the zeta potentials of molybdenite and chalcopyrite in the supernatant of the artificial seawater in the alkaline pH range were measured. The pH of artificial seawater was adjusted to 11 to allow the precipitates to form a suspension. Subsequently, the supernatant of this suspension and the precipitates were separated by centrifugation (Tomy, SRX-201) at 12000 rpm for 10 min. Each mineral powder (ca. 0.1 Species diagrams were constructed for calcium, magnesium, sulfate, and carbonate in artificial seawater to describe the chemical species that may be present over the entire range of experimental conditions. The species distribution diagram for artificial seawater (ionic strength of 0.65) was calculated using Medusa (open source software) by inputting the concentration of the ions. The artificial seawater used in this study contained Mg The effects of the artificial seawater on the floatability of molybdenite and chalcopyrite were examined. It should be noted that the flotation was conducted in the absence of flotation reagents (i.e., collectors and frothers) to assess the effect of artificial seawater on the natural floatability of molybdenite and chalcopyrite. The recoveries of molybdenite and chalcopyrite in the absence of emulsified kerosene at pH values lower than 9 were in the range of 70–80% and 80–85%, respectively ( On the other hand, the recoveries of molybdenite and chalcopyrite in artificial seawater decreased with increasing pH, especially at pH values higher than 9, where both minerals exhibited low floatability ( On the other hand, the kerosene emulsion only slightly improved the floatability of chalcopyrite at pH 10 and had no significant effect on the floatability at pH 11 ( The difference in the affinity for kerosene may arise from the different crystal structures of the molybdenite and chalcopyrite particles. The molybdenite particles have two types of surfaces: (1) non-polar faces formed by the scission of S The flotation results presented in this work agree with those of a previous study that demonstrated the effect of Mg Nevertheless, the flotation results in artificial seawater contradict several studies that reported the detrimental effects of seawater on the floatability of molybdenum ores at pH values higher than 9, and the insensitivity of the floatability of copper ores to pH ( The contradiction in the flotation results may have emerged from the higher pulp concentrations used in the previous studies (ca. 35%) compared to that used in the present study (ca. 0.3%). Higher pulp concentrations mean more mineral particles in the flotation cell, which reduces the concentration of adsorbed hydrophilic precipitates on the particle surfaces. In contrast, the concentration of adsorbed hydrophilic precipitates was higher at lower pulp concentrations and, thus, had a more profound effect on the floatability of molybdenite and chalcopyrite. The above argument is supported by the following calculation of the adsorbed concentration per total available surface area. By assuming that the particles used in the previous studies ( Notably, the relatively simple system used in the present work might not be representative of a real complex system, as described above. However, the flotation results obtained here suggest that both minerals were depressed in collectorless seawater flotation and the presence of kerosene emulsion is crucial for improving the molybdenite floatability while maintaining a low recovery of chalcopyrite in the system. These results can be used to develop the use of seawater as a natural depressant for chalcopyrite. Surface wettability affects the floatability of minerals, which increases with decreasing surface wettability, and vice versa. The contact angle value is generally used to estimate the surface wettability of a material. The contact angles of molybdenite and chalcopyrite in artificial seawater with and without the addition of emulsified kerosene are presented in The contact angle results confirm the flotation behavior displayed in A similar correlation between the contact angle and mineral floatability was observed in the presence of emulsified kerosene in artificial seawater ( The zeta potentials of molybdenite and chalcopyrite in the absence and presence of emulsified kerosene in artificial seawater is presented in The adsorption of seawater precipitates on the mineral particles may have reduced the surface hydrophobicity, as indicated by the lower contact angles at pH 10 and 11 ( As shown in the species diagram in A similar phenomenon was observed for the zeta potentials of molybdenite and chalcopyrite in the presence of emulsified kerosene ( Furthermore, the reversal of the zeta potential in emulsified kerosene in seawater at pH values higher than 9 indicates that the kerosene emulsion may have formed aggregates with the Mg(OH)  The AFM images of chalcopyrite in artificial seawater without and with kerosene are presented in A similar phenomenon was observed on the chalcopyrite surface in the presence of emulsified kerosene in artificial seawater. The surfaces were covered with mountainous features at pH 10 and 11, which suggest that the emulsified kerosene could not prevent the adsorption of seawater precipitates on the chalcopyrite surfaces ( The AFM images of molybdenite surface in artificial seawater are shown in The surface topography of molybdenite in emulsified kerosene in artificial seawater is shown in The floatability tests shown in The flotation results of molybdenite and chalcopyrite in the single and mixed mineral systems indicate that the selective flotation of both minerals is possible with the addition of a kerosene emulsion in artificial seawater. However, the kerosene concentration used in this study is relatively high (104 mg/L kerosene per 0.63 g mineral ≈ 31.3 mg kerosene/g mineral) compared to the typical concentration of kerosene used in industry (ca. 80 × 10 The high kerosene consumption in this study is possibly due to the formation of kerosene-precipitate aggregates, as reported by In addition, the flotation results shown in A fundamental study of the effect of artificial seawater on the floatability of pure molybdenite and chalcopyrite in the absence of flotation reagents at various pH values is reported in this work. In addition, emulsified kerosene in artificial seawater was employed to improve the separation selectivity of molybdenite and chalcopyrite. Artificial seawater was found to depress the floatability of both minerals in the absence of flotation reagents at pH higher than 9. The depressing effect is mainly due to the adsorption of Mg(OH) The addition of emulsified kerosene to artificial seawater selectively improved the floatability of molybdenite at pH 10 by reducing the surface wettability of molybdenite, as indicated by contact angle measurements. However, the floatability of chalcopyrite increased only slightly in the presence of emulsified kerosene under the same conditions, which is probably because of the higher affinity of kerosene for the molybdenite surface than the chalcopyrite surface. The different effects of emulsified kerosene in artificial seawater on the floatability of molybdenite and chalcopyrite demonstrate the possibility of the selective flotation of molybdenite and chalcopyrite at pH 10. However, further investigation is required to optimize this process. This work was supported by a Grant-in-Aid for Science Research (