Calcification is a key step in the newly proposed calcification–carbonation process, which involves the recycling of alkali (Na2O). In this study, the mechanism of calcification of red mud with lime (CaO) was elucidated thermodynamically, and the factors influencing the calcification were studied experimentally. The results showed that sodium aluminosilicate hydrate (Na2O·Al2O3·xSiO2·(6−2x)H2O) can be calcified with Ca2+ in red mud slurry, though not so with Ca(OH)2 and CaO. Furthermore, calcification is mainly a solid–liquid reaction involving the transformation of sodium aluminosilicate hydrate to calcium hydrogarnet. Temperature increased the rate of CaO hydration and favored the calcification reaction. For reaction time equals 2 h, liquid–solid ratio equals 4, and the amount of lime added to dry red mud equals 30 wt%, at temperatures >160 °C, the content of Na2O in the calcified slag reached <1%. When the reaction time reaches 90 mins, the content of Na2O in calcified red mud slag became stable.In the Bayer process of alumina production, silica is found dissolved in sodium aluminate liquor, normally to the saturated state. The dissolved silica is separated from the liquor during the process of desilication, as a precipitate of sodium aluminosilicate hydrate (SAS), Na In the Bayer process, SAS is mainly in the form of sodalite and cancrinite. The amount of sodalite in SAS is higher at an elevated temperature (such as between 150 and 240 °C). In this process, the sodalite is formed first, which is then transformed slowly to cancrinite at a rate that increases with the increase in temperature. The activation energy for the formation of Linde type A zeolite from an amorphous phase lies in the range of 12–14 kJ·mol When lime is added to a Bayer solution, SAS will react with lime in the solution to form a new precipitate, such as calcium hydrogarnet (3CaO·Al It is also worthwhile to note that an attempt has been made to transform SAS to hydrogarnet in the calcification–carbonation process for Al In calcification–carbonation process, lime can be present in the form of Ca Many studies have been conducted to investigate the formation of SAS in the desilication process of Bayer liquor. Most of these studies [ Gibbs free energy of formation is a property used to describe the thermodynamic behavior of chemical reactions in metallurgical engineering. One important application of Gibbs free energy is its use in the prediction of the direction of chemical reactions of minerals. For most simple minerals, the experimental data on Gibbs free energy are generally available. However, such data are not available for SAS and hydrogaenet, which are usually found in the constituents of red mud or scales in pipe lines/heat exchangers, due to their complex compositions. In this study, a method which was proposed previously by the present authors, is used for the analysis of the calcification reaction [ The free energies and enthalpies of formation of complex minerals are represented by Eqs. The standard Gibbs free energy and enthalpy of calcification reactions are given by Eqs. The Gibbs–Helmholtz equation is given by Eq. The dependence of the isobaric molar heat capacity ( The difference between the isobaric molar heat capacities of the products and reactants is given by Eq. The temperature dependence of each of the variables, standard enthalpy, entropy and Gibbs free energy is represented by Eqs. The Van't Hoff equation is given by Eq. In the above equations, Δ The standard Gibbs free energy of calcification reaction is a function of temperature and heat capacity as shown by Eq. Substituting Eq. Using the above representations, the standard Gibbs free energy and enthalpy of formation (Δ Using the data in Using the data shown in As in the previous section, the data of Using the data in Using the data in In calcification reactions of At the beginning of the calcification, NaOH concentrations in red mud slurry are very low, and as a result, the contribution of the NaOH activity to ∆ With increasing degree of calcification, the concentration of NaOH increases. The relationship between the concentration of NaOH and the factors in the calcified red mud liquor is given by three Eqs. From Eqs. According to the experiment, in the process of calcification, the concentration of NaOH in the calcified liquor is in the range 8–23 g/L (the molality of the solute was 0.20–0.58 mol/kg). The activity coefficient was found to be in the range 0.683–0.731 as reported by Lide et al. [ As shown in In fact, the calcifying agents Ca The thermodynamics analysis reveals that SAS has larger tendency to react with Ca The factors affecting the calcification reactions were studied experimentally using red mud slurry. The red mud sample was collected from Zhengzhou alumina plant, China, which the chemical compositions of the sample are shown in  The red mud slurry was made by adding water to dry red mud, and lime was also added to it before being processed in an autoclave, for preventing the evaporation of water. The slag of calcified red mud was washed by water and dried at 90 °C for 12 h for analyzing. An X-ray diffractometer (D8 ADVACE, Bruker corporation, Germany) along with the analysis software (X'Pert HighScore Plus) was used for phase measurements and analysis.The experiment detail are as follow: Effect of CaO additive amount: The calcification temperature was set to 160 °C, reaction time to 1 h, and liquid–solid ratio to 4, and the amount of lime added to dry red mud was varied as 20, 30, and 40 wt%. Effect of Temperature: The reaction time was set to 2 h, liquid–-solid ratio to 4, and the amount of lime added to dry red mud to 30 wt%. Effect of reaction time: The calcification temperature was set to 160 °C, the liquid–solid ratio to 4, and the amount of lime added to dry red mud to 30 wt%. The phases in red mud when SAS to hydrogarnet transformation occurred are as shown in The thermodynamic analysis reveals that temperature favors the calcification process. SAS in red mud slurry can be calcified at a lower temperature ( The calcification results are shown in The effect of reaction time on calcification reaction is shown in According to a previous study, Ca Ca The hydration rate is mainly affected by the particle size of CaO, hydration temperature, and anions present as an impurity. The anions present as an impurity affects the equilibrium solubility of calcium ions in water [ In the calcification The main factors affecting the exchange of Na The solid phases of CaO and Ca(OH) In the present study, the mechanism of calcification of red mud with lime was elucidated based on thermodynamic analysis, and the factors influencing the calcification of red mud were studied experimentally. The following conclusions can be drawn based on the results of the study. The calcification reaction between sodium aluminosilicate hydrate (SAS) in red mud slurry and Ca Agitation was an important factor for the hydration of CaO and exchanges of Na + with Ca Temperature increased the rate of CaO hydration and favored the calcification reaction. For reaction time equals 2 h, liquid–solid ratio equals 4, and the amount of lime added to dry red mud equals 30 wt%, at temperature >160 °C, the content of Na When the reaction time reaches 90 mins, the content of Na The authors are grateful to      Supplementary data to this article can be found online at