With numerous developments taking place around the world, land becomes more and more precious. There is an increasing need to consider building infrastructure on the land that used to be treated as uneconomical or potentially dangerous because of abandoned underground mines. Underground mining can result in surface subsidence that manifests itself as sagging and cracking of the ground surface. Surface subsidence may occur suddenly and cause severe damages to the surface infrastructure A creep behavior is a time-dependent deformation resulted from constant stress conditions Disaggregated rocks deform in response to external loadings. Different loadings result in fragment crushing and fragment splitting Disaggregated sandstone samples with five different ranges of fragment sizes categorized using sieves were prepared for the creep experiments of the samples under different axial stresses. The ranges of the fragment sizes are shown in Under an axial compressive loading, disaggregated rocks without any confining pressure will easily “flow” horizontally and cannot take a large amount of pressures. Disaggregated rock materials in caved zones in underground mines are confined horizontally by sidewalls and internal friction between rock fragments. Considering this situation, an apparatus for creep tests of saturated disaggregated rocks was designed (see The height of saturated disaggregated sandstones is set to 128 The rock sample was placed in a glass container filled with tap water for 72 The saturated disaggregated sample was placed on a deformable plastic paper and mixed to achieve an evenly distribution of the rock fragments of the sample. The paper was wrapped into a cylindrical shape with a diameter slightly smaller than the steel cylinder and fully inserted into the horizontally located cylinder of compacting device. The cylinder was then placed vertically, and the paper was removed from the cylinder. The cylinder containing a rock sample with a height larger than 128 This procedure was performed for the disaggregated rock samples with different fragment sizes to achieve homogeneous distributions of the rock fragments in the cylinder. The experiments were conducted under three different axial stresses: 4; 8; and 12 There are 15 sets of experiments (five different ranges of fragment sizes×three different axial stresses). Each set of experiments was performed three to five times, and the average value of axial displacement is used in analyses. When a large discrepancy was observed in one set of the experiments, more experiments were carried out until credible results were obtained in at least three tests. The changes in the axial displacements of the samples under different axial stresses were recorded in the tests. The axial displacement records are shown in Based on the test results in Porosity of disaggregated rock materials is a measure of the fraction of void space in the materials and is defined by In the tests, the relationship between the porosity and time of the saturated disaggregated samples can be described by Based on the axial displacement results, the variations in porosity for the saturated disaggregated sandstones are calculated using Eq. The creep process of the saturated disaggregated rock samples includes fragment crushing, fragment splitting, fragment rearrangement and possibly stress corrosion cracking due to the existence of water. Fragment crushing is pervasive in the creep tests of the saturated disaggregated rocks and is resulted from the stress concentration in the vicinity of contact points (e.g., corner–corner or corner–surface contacts) between the rock fragments where crushed zones form. Crushing of a rock fragment can slightly reduce the fragment size and result in many small fragments. Fragment splitting is caused by the formation of tensile fractures or shear fractures in the rock fragments, which separate a rock fragment into two main parts accompanied by smaller fragments formed along the fracture zone. Fragment rearrangement occurs because the existence of the voids between the rock fragments and the small fragments that pre-existed in the saturated disaggregated samples or formed by fragment crushing and fragment splitting. Stress corrosion cracking may contribute to the creep of the saturated disaggregated sandstones. However, such cracking behaviors cannot be proved based on the available test results. These processes are schematically shown in Fragment size analysis was carried out by sieving the remaining rock fragments in each test into different ranges of sizes (i.e., 20–25, 15–20, 10–15, 5–10 and 0–5  As presented in An important observation in these experiments is the abrupt changes in axial displacement of the samples in their steady state creeps. The most obvious changes are marked in Based on the results of creep experiments of the saturated disaggregated sandstones, the following conclusions can be drawn. The relationship between axial displacement and time can be described by In transient creep stage, the axial displacement and porosity of the samples are quite large. After the transient creep stage, the change in axial displacement and porosity become less signifying steady state creeps. The final axial displacement of the samples with the same fragment size increases as the axial stress increases. Under the same axial stress, the final axial displacement of samples increases with increased fragment size. As the axial stress increases, the final porosity of the samples with the same fragment size decreases. The mechanisms of the creep of saturated disaggregated sandstones include fragment crushing, fragment splitting, fragment rearrangement and possibly stress corrosion cracking due to the existence of water. The abrupt changes in the axial displacement are observed in some tests, particularly, the samples of small fragments under high axial stresses. Such abrupt changes are possibly caused by the formation of shear zones in the samples in the creep process. Further study needs to be carried out to obtain comprehensive and detailed information about the abrupt variation of displacement of saturated disaggregated rocks. This paper was supported by the