The author of this spine fracture classification has reorganized his thinking with regard to the anatomical relationships of the motion segments in the spinal column. The classification is in three parts, each of which is subdivided into three additional categories. His approach is novel and interesting and may have some application in describing the morphology of spinal injuries. Type I injuries are related to the bony ring. This is not a new concept and had been proposed by Roy-Camille and Sagnet Type II injuries are purely discoligamentous and make up a relatively small proportion of injuries of this type. Distraction injuries (of which this is the classic category) are more commonly associated with significant bony injury anteriorly or posteriorly, depending on the location of the axis of rotation. In Dr. Malberg's classification, when these latter injuries occur, they are placed into the type III category. By doing so, these relatively more stable injuries are lumped in with much more unstable injuries, as he has described in types III A and B. With regard to type IIIC, its relevance is unclear, because it is the same morphological structure as types III A and B. Although the author indicates that magnetic resonance imaging is unnecessary (but may enhance the identification of the injury), magnetic resonance imaging is in fact very valuable in assessing soft tissue injuries, that is, ligamentous disruptions and disc disruptions when there is little if any displacement, such as may occur with a wedge-shaped vertebral body fracture associated with disruption of the ligaments of the facet joints. The author's classification does not take into account the mechanisms of injury, that is, the force vectors. This aspect of a classification is extremely important, because it allows the observer to determine the forces needed to be reversed when contemplating management, particularly surgical treatment. The comprehensive classification described by Magerl et al. To date, no classification has been entirely successful in addressing all of the variables associated with spinal trauma, particularly the marrying of the neurological condition with the structural spinal column lesions. Although the author has an interesting concept that may be refined in the future, there are still significant issues that need to be addressed.