Gypsum board containing a shape-stabilized PCM either as a sheet or as pellets is thermo-physically characterized. The main objective is to elucidate which is the most efficient way to introduce the PCM into gypsum boards by measuring the thermal transmittance, effective thermal conductivity, total heat accumulated, and the average heat capacity. At their light it can be concluded that a gypsum board containing 25% PCM is more thermally insulating than the gypsum without PCM, and the average heat capacity of the samples containing sheet-PCM and pellets-PCM are higher than the gypsum by itself due to the latent heat effect, being 41% and 33% respectively.Thermal energy consumption in buildings is still growing up because of the rise in the standards of comfort in society. It represents 34% of the total energy demand (115 EJ in 2009 Following this strategy, researchers are making a big effort to find new promising ways to reduce the energy consumption. In this scenario, thermal energy storage is presented as a key point within the on-going International Energy Agency implementing agreements The first one is the sensible heat thermal energy storage (SHTES), in which heat is stored sensibly in a solid/liquid/gas media The second method is using the latent heat due to a state change from liquid to solid, liquid to gas, solid to solid. This process is known as latent heat thermal energy storage (LHTES) method and it has been studied thoroughly during recent years Finally, the third method to store energy is using the heat generated and absorbed during a chemical reaction or sorption process. This is the best way to store energy from energy efficiency point of view but there are only few examples of real applications of this method All these technologies have been studied and applied to buildings The results of thermo-physical characterization of gypsum boards containing a shape-stabilized PCM in a sheet or in pellets form are presented. The main objective of the study is to elucidate which is the most efficient way to introduce PCM into gypsum boards. Thermal transmittance, effective thermal conductivity, total heat stored, and average heat capacity are measured in order to evaluate which method is the most appropriate. The PCM used during the experimentation is an ester which is able to store energy as latent heat but it is not from fossil fuel origin The fatty ester PCM is obtained from vegetable oil methyl ester, at an esterification plant. The raw materials of fatty esters are derived from renewable vegetable and animal sources that grow with increasing world food production The main thermophysical properties of the ester used as PCM in are shown in Gypsum (YG/L) was the material used to make the three samples under study. The first sample is composed of gypsum only, the second and third samples contain gypsum and fatty ester PCM in their formulations, introduced using different methods as shown in The fatty ester PCM is introduced in a polymeric matrix within the PCM is stable composted like sheets. This polymer sheets are known as shape stabilized PCM. Compositions of the three samples analyzed thermophysically are listed in The dimensions of the samples under study are 190 Note that the PCM is introduced in sample A as 2 In order to perform the thermal behaviour characterization of the samples, a device has been designed and constructed. A schematic diagram of this device, known as Thermal Behaviour Analyser, is shown in This equipment is composed of two cavities, which are used to simulate inner and outer conditions of a building envelope. Both cavities have a copper coil connected to two programmable water baths which provide the heating and cooling needed to simulate different thermal conditions. Room temperature is controlled by a heat pump with a set point at 20 The sample has three temperature sensors inserted in it (using thermocouples type T, with an error of ±0.75%). The thermocouples are placed on each surface of the sample while the third one is inserted in the middle centre of the sample. The temperature of each cavity is controlled with a temperature sensor (calibrated Pt-100 DIN B with a maximum error of ±0.3 This device can perform several experiments simulating real environmental conditions revealing several thermal properties of the samples under both steady and unsteady states. This equipment was used to test the three formulations performing using different experiments:   Otherwise, the amount of accumulated heat ( The thermal transmittance ( The thermal conductivity of both samples with ester PCM is very similar. The addition of ester PCM in the gypsum formulation decreases the thermal conductivity similarly by 25% because the shape stabilized PCM is composed by polymer and organic PCM (the thermal conductivity of both components is lower than the gypsum one, 0.3–0.6 The results of the second experiment performed with the Thermal Behaviour Analyser, where the The heat storage capacity of the samples is increased by 41% when the ester PCM is introduced as sheets and 33% when ester PCM is introduced using pellets. The rate of heat accumulation over time of the samples during experiment 2 is presented in The samples under study here were made with an ester PCM introduced in two different ways: as pellets or as a sheet. The total amount of PCM introduced were exactly the same percentage in weight. The samples were tested with a Thermal Behaviour Analyser device which was developed by de Gracia et al. The results show that the effective thermal conductivity decreased 25% both samples containing ester PCM in comparison with the one without PCM. This fact elucidates that the gypsum containing PCM is more thermally insulating than the gypsum without PCM. However, the ways to introduce the PCM here studied (as pellets or as sheets) affect similarly the gypsum matrix concerning thermal conductivity and thermal transmittance. On the other hand, the second experiment results show that the average heat capacity ( The work is partially funded by the Spanish government (ENE2011-28269-C03-02). The authors would like to thank the Catalan Government for the quality accreditation given to their research group GREA (2014 SGR 123) and research group DIOPMA (2014 SGR 1543). The research leading to these results has received funding from the European Union's Seventh Framework Programme (FP7/2007–2013) under grant agreement n° PIRSES-GA-2013-610692 (INNOSTORAGE).