Bauxite residue (or red mud) is a waste generated during the Bayer process of alumina production. Its storage is a spatial and environmental concern. Currently, there are no bulk applications of bauxite residue except for minor use in cements and ceramics. Nonetheless, some types of bauxite residues are rich in rare-earth elements (REEs), and the extraction of scandium in particular is of special interest. Leaching experiments on Greek bauxite residue were performed with different acids at different concentrations, liquid-to-solid ratios, leaching times and temperatures. Extraction of the REEs was high for leaching in HCl solutions compared to other acids, but the dissolution of iron was high as well (∼60%). The maximum extraction of the REEs was around 80%. Sodium and calcium were completely dissolved during leaching. Dissolution of aluminum, silicon and titanium was between 30% and 50%. The leaching data show a very close association of scandium with the iron oxide phases.Bauxite is the major ore for aluminum production. Alumina is extracted from bauxite by the Bayer process. The waste slurry generated in this process is called red mud and its solid fraction is called bauxite residue. About 1–2 Bauxite ores are classified in three different ways based on: (1) genetic principles: (1a) bauxites on igneous and metamorphic rocks; (1b) bauxites on sediments: carbonate rocks and clastic strata; (2) geological age: (2a) Palaezoic; (2b) Mesozoic; (2c) Cenozoic; and (3) mineralogical composition: (3a) gibbsite bauxites; (3b) boehmite bauxites; (3c) diasporic bauxites ( Some literature data on the leaching of REEs from bauxite residue are available ( The majority of the literature studies focus upon scandium and very little on other REEs. Neither has much work been done on leaching of major elements from bauxite residue nor leaching of REEs by organic acids. Study on the leaching of major elements is, however, useful for the development of the further purification process. Therefore, in this study we systematically investigated the extraction of REEs as well as other major elements in organic and mineral acids (HCl, HNO The bauxite residue studied in this work was provided by the Aluminium of Greece, which is located at Agios Nikolaos, Greece. It is originated from a mixture of karst and lateritic bauxites and is similar to the bauxite residue examined by The leaching of the bauxite residue was carried out in sealed polyethylene bottles by constant agitation using a laboratory shaker (Gerhardt Laboshake) at 160 The concentrations of the major elements in the form of oxides in Greek bauxite residue is given in The following major minerals and compounds were identified by X-ray powder diffraction (XRD): the iron minerals hematite and goethite; the aluminum minerals gibbsite and diaspore; the calcium mineral calcite and the sodium compound cancrinite ( The cumulative particle size distribution of the bauxite residue sample is shown in Leaching studies with water were carried out to study the change in pH of bauxite residue and the possibility of sodium hydroxide removal prior to acid leaching. Prior removal by water would be beneficial as this would reduce the amount of acid needed to merely neutralize the high pH. The experiments were conducted at two Experiments were conducted at low acid concentrations (<1 The effect of nitric acid concentration on the leaching of major elements is shown in  The percentage extraction is different for different REEs. This is due to the association of REEs with different minerals and their ionic radii ( Experiments were conducted at high concentrations (>1 Leaching results of REE’s were plotted against major elements at a given  Leaching experiments were carried out at different time intervals (between 5 The effect of leaching temperature was studied at 0.5 The bauxite residue sample was a very fine material, with 90 This research was funded by DBOF grant from KU Leuven to CRB and supported by the