The extraction of aluminium from coal fly ash (CFA) has been carried out using two extraction techniques, acid leaching with an inorganic acid and gas phase extraction with acetylacetone, a beta-diketone. The acid leaching experiments were carried out at varying factor values of temperature, time, solid to liquid ratio, and acid concentration. Factors investigated for gas phase extraction included acetylacetone flow rate, extraction temperature and time, and aluminium (III) oxide source.
                  Direct leaching of fly ash in 6M sulphuric acid at a solid to liquid ratio of 1:4 gave an extraction of 23.5% at 75°C after 8h 45min of leaching time. With gas phase extraction, 17.9% aluminium extraction was achieved at 250°C, 6mL/min acetylacetone flow rate, after 6h. This represents 85% and 64% extraction from the CFA amorphous phase respectively. It was also found that when a synthetic aluminium (III) oxide mixture with a similar content to CFA (31wt%) was subjected to gas phase extraction, 46.7% extraction could be achieved after 6h at 250°C. The difference in extraction levels could be explained by the fact that the alumina in CFA occurs in both mullite and amorphous phase compared with only the amorphous phase in synthetic fly ash, an indication that mineralogy has a significant effect on the extraction. Therefore the lower extraction from CFA by acetylacetone is possibly due to the non-amenability of the mullite phase to the acetylacetone beta-diketone. The results presented in this paper show that extractions using acetylacetone in the gas phase are comparatively lower than acid leaching but have advantages of reduced extraction times and the possibility of recycling the unreacted acetylacetone.CFA is the incombustible residue that remains after the burning of coal in coal-fired power stations. In South Africa alone there is an estimated 500 million tonnes of CFA reserves ( Commercial processing of bauxite through the Bayer process involves conversion of the hydrated aluminium oxide in the ore to smelter grade alumina (Al CFA, other than bauxite, is a potential pre-mined source of alumina for which two alternative techniques to the Bayer process have been investigated for the extraction of aluminium. In the first technique, CFA is directly leached with sulphuric acid. Direct leaching of fly ash using an inorganic (mineral) acid such as sulphuric acid is achieved by proton attack. The hydronium ion displaces the metal cation Eq. The other non-acid soluble phases of the ash plus calcium sulphate precipitate are retained as residue and the resultant aluminium sulphate leach liquor is a candidate for purification and recovery of alumina by processes such as solvent extraction, precipitation and crystallization. Leaching processes such as sulphuric acid leaching of CFA can be described in the framework of heterogeneous non-catalytic reactions in conjunction with the shrinking core model. The shrinking core model assumes that the reaction products and inert matter that remain in the solid phase form a layer of ash that encapsulates the unreacted core ( The second alternative extraction technique to the Bayer process is the gas phase extraction of aluminium from fly ash using acetylacetone, a chelating beta-diketone ligand. Acetylacetone reacts with aluminium (III) oxide in fly ash to form aluminium acetylacetonate and water products as presented by the following reaction:  This research therefore focusses on using two alternative extraction techniques to investigate the extent of aluminium extraction from CFA and parameters that promote alumina dissolution so as to propose and develop different process technologies for the production of smelter grade alumina. The two extraction techniques make use of sulphuric acid, an inorganic acid and acetylacetone, a chelating beta-diketone ligand. The extraction of aluminium using acetylacetone in the gas phase is a relatively novel approach. CFA containing 30.52 All reagents used in this study were of analytical grade. The reagents were all purchased from Merck and Sigma Aldrich and were used as received without further purification. Distilled water, analytical grade sulphuric acid (98% The sulphuric acid leaching experimental set-up consisted of a 1000 The gas-phase extraction experimental set-up ( The synthetic mixture of 31 The elemental composition of CFA by particle size within the size range of −38 The effect of temperature on aluminium extraction from CFA by sulphuric acid leaching to form Al The effect of time on aluminium extraction with sulphuric acid leaching is presented in Preliminary results support the significance of temperature and time in influencing alumina dissolution when a statistical design of experiment method (DOE) was employed to study the leachability of CFA with sulphuric acid. The DOE is a simultaneous study of several process parameters ( The effect of sulphuric acid concentration on aluminium extraction is presented in The effect of solid to liquid ratio is presented in The decreased extraction for the solid to liquid ratio greater than 1:4 was probably due to low mass transfer rates of reactants and products caused by the increased density of the CFA reaction mixture. This may have caused the particles not to be suspended efficiently in the solution as the stirring rate was kept constant.  Acetylacetone vaporizes at 140 Introduction of the nitrogen carrier gas into the system did not influence extraction to any great extent. In the absence of nitrogen, 10.0% was extracted at an acetylacetone flow rate of 2 Preliminary results from experiments (    Sulphuric acid, an inorganic (mineral) acid, extracts aluminium from CFA by Al Flow rate and temperature promote aluminium extraction in the acetylacetone gas phase technique whereas temperature and time are the key driving factors in the acid leaching method. Acetylacetone is able to extract up to 17.9% aluminium at 250 Acetylacetone is able to extract up to 46.7% aluminium from synthetic fly ash with the same reaction conditions for extracting aluminium from CFA. This indicates possibility of higher aluminium extractions from CFA if reaction conditions are probably varied in favour of better gas–solid contact. Acetylacetone gas phase extraction reduces extraction time to 6 The extraction product obtained from the acetylacetone gas phase technique is aluminium acetylacetonate (Al (acac) Sulphuric acid is stable, allows good solubilization of alumina and is easier to handle whereas acetylacetone is volatile at 140 Sulphuric acid is relatively cheaper at an FOB price of US$190–200/tonne (2011) whereas acetylacetone at an FOB price of US$2000–7000/tonne (2011) is not cheap. However, the possibility of recycling the unreacted acetylacetone and producing aluminium acetylacetonate as a finished saleable item could mitigate the acetylacetone reagent cost. The overall purpose of employing the two alternative methods of extracting aluminium from fly ash is to develop and propose different process technologies for the production of smelter grade alumina from CFA. In the first technique, an incombustible fly ash residue was optimally leached with 6 In the second technique, an extraction efficiency of 17.9% was obtained from CFA when extracted with acetylacetone in gas phase at 250 The experimental results show that flow rate and temperature promote alumina dissolution in the gas phase technique whereas temperature and time are the key driving factors in the acid leaching method. The extent of extraction with acetylacetone is comparatively lower than that of acid leaching but has advantages of reduced extraction times and the possibility of recycling the unreacted acetylacetone. Acid leaching on the other hand has longer leaching times but relatively higher extraction efficiencies at lower temperatures. The extraction of aluminium using acetylacetone in the gas phase is a relatively novel approach and therefore has great potential for further research. Kendal Power Plant, a division of Eskom, is gratefully acknowledged for the CFA used in this study. The National Research Foundation of South Africa, Carnegie and SANHARP are gratefully acknowledged for their financial contribution to the research.