The occurrence of rare earth elements on clay mineral surfaces and the metallogenic mechanism is significant for mining and the leaching of ion adsorption REE ore. Through experimental isothermal adsorption of La onto the kaolin surface, it was found that the unit adsorption capacity could be divided into three stages according to the La concentration in solution: a) when the concentration of La in solution is 0–0.69 mmol/L, the adsorption capacity of La on kaolin increases rapidly with the rising of La concentration; b) when the concentration is 0.69–1.69 mmol/L, the adsorption capacity of kaolin to La tends to be flat; and c) when the concentration is more than 9.95 mmol/L, the adsorption capacity of kaolin to La increases linearly. The occurrence of La on the kaolin surface was studied by desorption experiments. It was found that with increasing La concentration, the water-soluble phase La is initially adsorbed up to a maximum adsorption of 0.259 mg/g, followed by the ion-exchange phase La up to a maximum adsorption of 0.175 mg/g. Finally, when the concentration of La in solution is >9.95 mmol/L, the colloidal phase La appeared. The metallogenic process of ion adsorption REE ore is revealed through the adsorption experiment of La on kaolin surface and the “three-phase La desorption” experiment.Rare earth elements (REE) are a strategic resource, which are found in low grade and high tonnage deposits ( At present, mining research into ion adsorption REE ore is mainly focused on the ion-exchange phase due to the low mining and processing costs of this phase. There has been significantly less research on the other phases of REE absorbed on clay minerals even though they are important for exploring the ion adsorption rare earth metallogenic mechanism ( REE in ion adsorption REE ore are mainly concentrated on the surface of clay minerals. According to previous research, kaolin is one of the main components of clay minerals ( In this study, the adsorption of La onto the kaolin surface at different concentrations and pH conditions was explored as a proxy for investigations of the mineralization process of ion adsorption REE ore. The content of REE in each phase was determined by desorption experiments. On this basis, the leaching process of ion adsorption REE ore was discussed, the occurrence regularity of REE on clay mineral surfaces was investigated to explore the mineralization mechanism using adsorption/desorption experiments. The kaolin used in the experiment (China Pharmaceutical Group Chemical Reagent Co., Ltd., Shanghai, China) was chemically pure with the chemical formula Al La nitrate hexahydrate (Tianyi New Material Co., Ltd., Jining, China) with the chemical formula La(NO In the present isothermal adsorption experiments, La solutions at different concentrations (0.4, 0.8, 1.5, 2.5, 5, 10, 20, 40, 80, 95, and 110 mmol/L) were divided into four groups and the pH of the solution was adjusted using NaOH (0.05 mol/L) and H A convenient method to represent the adsorption data is the adsorption capacity In Eq. In the desorption experiment, the kaolin-adsorbed La from the adsorption experiment was extracted using the method applied to extract REE from ion adsorption REE ore ( The adsorption isothermal curve is shown in Freundlich equation: Langmuir equation: Henry equation: In Eqs. The adsorption isothermal curves shown in In sections I and II, the greater the slope of the curve was, the greater the affinity between kaolin and La. With increased La nitrate concentration, the affinity and the slope of the curve decreased. This is because La ions bind to the active adsorption sites located at the outermost surface of kaolin particles, so the rate of adsorption reaction will be significantly slower ( According to the experimental steps of isothermal adsorption, the supernatant after the reaction was pH-measured. As shown in The desorption experiments of kaolin adsorbed La were carried out according to the desorption experimental steps, and the total amount of La desorbed was determined. The results are shown in It can be seen from  It can be seen from Comparing the  During the adsorption process, La adsorbs onto the surface of kaolin and cations must be desorbed from the surface, the aluminum content in the supernatant after the adsorption reaction was determined (  With increasing As All in all, the desorption process of aluminum corresponded to the adsorption process of La on the kaolin surface, which provides further evidence that, at low concentration of La in solution, the water-soluble phase and then the ion-exchange phase were the first to adsorb onto the kaolin surface. With increasing   In the triple-extraction process, the pH gradually decreased with each subsequent extraction, resulting in sequential leaching of the water-soluble phase, then the ion-exchange phase, and finally the colloidal phase La, and an increasing amount of total leached La. Therefore, decreasing the leaching solution pH improved the leaching effect of REE in a cup leaching experiment ( In conclusion, pH affects the adsorption and desorption of La on kaolin surface.  Eqs. Some La ions begin to hydrolyze to form La hydroxide complexes, and then the complex adsorption occurs on the mineral surface ( There are numerous adsorptive products that may adsorb positively charged REE complexes and ions in ion adsorption REE deposits, the adsorptive materials are usually considered to be clays like kaolinite and halloysite ( In general, the mobility of REE is facilitated by low pH and the immobilization of REE results from the increase in pH due to the contact with higher pH groundwater ( In the process of La mineralization, the water-soluble phase La easily migrates with the water flow, and therefore it is not likely to be adsorbed onto the surface of clay minerals. Ion-exchange phase La will not be washed away by water but will be continuously adsorbed onto the surface of clay minerals to enrich the mineralization. The mineralization of colloidal phase La requires a high concentration of La in solution, which is difficult to achieve in nature. Therefore, colloidal phase REE occurs scarcely in the process of rare earth mineralization. In summary, the main REE in ion adsorption REE ore are in the ion-exchange phase, while REE in the water-soluble phase and colloidal phase are rare. The adsorption of La With increasing pH from 3 to 6, the unit adsorption capacity La increases, the adsorption capacity of colloidal phase La on kaolin from the solution decreases from 9.95 to 2.69 mmol/L, the unit desorption capacity of La falls, which corresponds to La adsorption on the kaolin surface. Consequently, the research data supports that pH affects the metallogenic process of ion adsorption REE ore and ion exchange occurs with clay minerals during the mineralization. In the process of rare earth mineralization, the water-soluble phase REE adsorbed on the surface of clay minerals is easily washed away by water, and the natural conditions for the formation of colloidal phase REE are difficult to achieve. Therefore, the ion exchange phase REE is the main occurring form of ion adsorption REE ore, and REE in the water-soluble phase and colloidal phase are rare. This research is supported by the Supplementary data to this article can be found online at The following are the Supplementary data to this article: