Modern gold deportment studies include physical, chemical and mineralogical assessments, combined to obtain a full understanding of the nature and variability of gold in a resource. The objective is to provide information which will allow cost effective and practical processing by informing decisions regarding resource evaluation, mining method and extraction process optimization.
                  The distribution of gold, based on speciation, grain size and mode of occurrence (liberation, exposure, and mineral association) is quantitatively determined by means of automated Scanning Electron Microscopic Techniques (QEMSCAN/MLA). Furthermore, general mineralogical characterization is undertaken in order to characterize the gangue components; with special emphasis on deleterious characteristics of the ore (e.g. cyanide consumers such as secondary Cu-species, preg-robbers/borrowers, passivation due to Sb-minerals or As-minerals and oxygen consumers such as pyrrhotite/marcasite).
                  Predictions based on the mineralogical observations are confirmed by physical and chemical testwork. These include grading analyses, gravity separation, direct cyanidation, and diagnostic (sequential) leach tests.The most efficient gold extraction processing route is directly related to the inherent mineralogical features of the gold ore being processed. The mineral assemblage determines the performance of all chemical and physical processes involved in gold extraction (e.g. The main aim of a gold deportment analysis is to locate and describe gold-containing particles in order to determine the gold speciation, grain size and mode of occurrence (gold liberation, exposure, and mineral associations) as well as to generally characterize the mineralogical composition of the ore. Two common problems affecting the results of a gold deportment study are representivity of the samples being analysed and variation in gold grade. Two main factors influence representivity namely (i) biased sample collection and (ii) the “nugget effect” caused by sparse and inconsistently distributed gold grains. Since a gold deportment study is based on a reasonable, but statistical number of observed gold grains (not always possible in very low grade material), the number of polished sections prepared for examination will depend on the grade of the sample. Variation in gold grade may result in difficulty in determining an adequate number of polished sections to prepare for examination. Thus reliable results are achieved by proper sample selection, sufficient sample mass, careful splitting, adequate number of replicate polished sections and proper data validation. The mineralogical data is validated by supporting chemical and metallurgical data (including gold mass-balances). A wide range of metallurgical techniques are used to test the extractability of gold from gold ore. The most common metallurgical tests employed are direct cyanidation, gravity separation and diagnostic leaching. Diagnostic leaching is a procedure that involves the selective destruction of minerals, followed by a cyanide leach step to recover the newly exposed gold after each destruction stage. Various examples and adaptations of the application of diagnostic cyanide leach tests are found in the literature (e.g. It is found that a combination of mineralogical and metallurgical tests provides the most cost- and time-efficient means to fully characterise gold-bearing samples. The data is used to predict the behaviour of the ore during processing and to recommend a cost-effective processing route. This paper describes the methodology employed by the MetMin Section at SGS South Africa. A case study is discussed to demonstrate the applicability of the methodology. Generic reference is made to results obtained from other gold ore projects completed at SGS South Africa, during the last few years. SGS South Africa uses QEMSCAN Mineralogical characterization and gold deportment studies must be done on representative samples of the different or variable domains or zones within the ore body. The domains within an ore body are normally defined during the earlier stages of exploration. The domains are based on grade, lithology and mineralogical composition, degree of weathering or alteration and spatial distribution. Composite samples of each of the different domains usually comprise drill core, but could also be drill chips, coarse rejects from assayed samples or even bulk rock samples. A composite sample mass of about 10–50 A full gold deportment study includes: Crushing and milling to achieve the required particle size distribution. Head chemical analysis and gold assays. Modal mineralogy. Grading analysis. Heavy liquid separation analysis. Gravity separation analysis. Gold deportment of particulate gold in the head sample and/or gravity concentrate and/or heavy liquid separation (HLS) sinks fraction. Direct cyanidation of the head sample. Diagnostic leach analysis of the head sample and/or gravity tailings. Gold deportment testwork options are illustrated in Most gold ores should be milled to at least ∼50–80% passing 75 Split aliquots of each composite sample (∼50% passing 75 A split aliquot of ∼500 Gold may be upgraded by means of heavy liquid separation (HLS). HLS analysis is conducted on a ∼500 Gold reporting to the floats fraction is usually fine-grained and associated with light gangue, such as silicates and carbon. Entrainment of liberated gold grains is not uncommon, especially for very fine-grained samples. Gold reporting to the sinks fraction is mostly liberated and larger than 25 In order to achieve a mass pull of ∼2.5–3%, two split aliquots of ∼4 X-ray Diffraction (XRD), optical microscopy and QEMSCAN Bulk Modal Analysis (BMA) are employed to obtain the detailed quantitative mineralogical composition of each sample. Concentrations of minerals detrimental to processing, such as pyrrhotite which is an oxygen consumer, are obtained. XRD analysis is done in order to identify the major minerals present. Data collection is done using an X-ray diffractometer employing Co-radiation, since most gold ores are iron-rich and this causes X-ray fluorescence (resulting in a high background) when Cu-radiation is used. XRD is a quick and inexpensive way to identify and/or quantify minerals, particularly those not easily distinguishable by other techniques, e.g. identification of clay minerals and detrimental phyllosilicates, like pyrophyllite and talc. QEMSCAN BMA is done on two 90° cut polished sections, designed to limit bias related to the settling of heavy or large particles. The detection limit of BMA analysis can be as low as 0.01%, but care should be taken to validate the BMA data against the XRD mineral identification and XRF chemical composition. Optical microscopy is employed to identify carbonaceous components (e.g. kerogen) not easily identified by XRD or BMA. For sulphide-rich ores, the sulphide characteristics may be investigated in detail since the sulphide characteristics may influence the processing route. An aliquot of ∼100 Depending on the gold grade of the sample, between 12 and 48 polished sections are prepared from the ∼80% passing 75 Gold mineral type and proportions (e.g. native gold vs. aurostibite or Au-tellurides). Gold-containing particle characteristics (e.g. particle composition, particle size distribution and particle SG). Gold exposure (% of gold grains exposed vs.% of gold grains locked in gangue particles). Gold mineral associations (especially mineral associations of locked gold grains). Gold grain size distribution. An estimate of the amount of sub-microscopic gold (solid-solution or “invisible” gold). The estimate is obtained by calculating the particulate gold grade and subtracting it from the measured head grade. A direct cyanidation test (at excess conditions) indicates the amenability of the ore to gold extraction by cyanidation. These results are compared to the gold grain exposure determined during QEMSCAN analysis. The results should be similar, unless the sample contains a significant amount of sub-microscopic or solid-solution gold or if the gold is hosted by phases which leach very slowly or not at all (like aurostibite and Au-tellurides). If gold deportment analysis is only done on a concentrate sample, then diagnostic leach tests are done on the gravity tailings (Modified Gold Deportment Study). Diagnostic leach tests may also be done on a head sample and the results must agree with the gold deportment results. The procedure involves the sequential solubilising of the least-stable minerals via various pre-treatments, and extraction of the associated gold by cyanidation/Carbon in Leach (CIL). The tests are performed on split aliquots milled to ∼80% passing 75 Cyanidation can be used to determine the following: To quantify the gold that can be extracted via direct cyanidation (i.e. free and exposed gold), a sub-sample is cyanided. To quantify the gold that is preg-robbed, but which should be recoverable via CIL processing, a second sub-sample is cyanided in the presence of activated carbon. To quantify the gold liberated by mild oxidative pre-treatment (occluded in carbonates, pyrrhotite, magnetite, etc.), the CIL residue is subjected to hot HCl followed by CIL dissolution of the acid-treated residue. To quantify the gold occluded within sulphide minerals, the residue from the previous step is subjected to a severe oxidative pre-treatment using hot HNO To quantify the gold associated with carbonaceous material such as kerogen, the subsequent residue sample is subjected to complete oxidation via roasting, followed by CIL dissolution of the calcine product. The gold remaining in the final residue is assumed to be occluded within silicate gangue. The interpretation of the diagnostic leach results is sometimes difficult, especially if mineralogical data is not taken into consideration. For example, diagnostic leach tests on a recently studied sample indicated low direct cyanidation recoveries (∼65%). An additional ∼25% gold became available to cyanidation after mild oxidative pre-treatment (hot HCl), and it was assumed that this gold was locked in pyrrhotite and carbonate. However, the gold deportment analysis indicated that <1% of the particulate gold was locked in pyrrhotite or carbonates. In fact the particulate gold was very well exposed (>90%). Further investigation showed that the sample contains significant amounts of aurostibite, arsenic- and antimony-sulphide minerals as well as oxygen consuming marcasite and pyrrhotite. These sulphides interfered with the cyanidation chemistry by consuming cyanide and oxygen and forming passivation rims around gold grains during cyanidation. Thus, the HCl pre-treatment really only acted as a washing step and some of the passivation rims may have been dissolved. As a consequence of all this, the cyanidation chemistry was subsequently changed by adding lead nitrate and kerosene and the direct cyanidation recoveries improved dramatically (∼90%). If the mineralogy was ignored, a considerable amount or money would have been wasted on a testwork program to recover the “locked” gold (flotation, ultra-fine grinding and even high pressure leaching). Cyanidation is the most commonly used technique for extracting gold from ore by converting the gold to water soluble aurocyanide metallic complex ions ( Depending on the response to cyanide leaching, gold ores can be classified as “free milling” or “refractory” ( For refractory gold ores and concentrates a suitable pre-treatment process is required to render the gold amenable to cyanidation. Pre-treatment options include roasting, pressure oxidation, bio-oxidation, ultra-fine grinding and modified cyanidation, often preceded by a concentration step such as gravity separation or flotation ( The degree of gold grain exposure is measured using an automated electron microscopic technique (QEMSCAN). Very fine (normally <10 During cyanidation, gold grains may also be encapsulated by newly formed precipitates, limiting the exposure of the gold grains to the cyanide solution. The possibility of the formation of these so-called “passivation rims” is related to the presence of antimony/arsenic-sulphide and pyrrhotite in the ore ( Gold occurring in “solid-solution” or as sub-microscopic particles within the crystal structure of sulphides, such as pyrite, arsenian-pyrite, stibnite and arsenopyrite ( The gold-bearing sulphide minerals are often recovered into a sulphide concentrate by gravity or flotation concentration, depending on the liberation characteristics of the sulphides. Gold present in solid-solution can only be effectively recovered if the mineral matrix is decomposed by some chemical or biological pre-treatment method. Roasting is one of the most common methods for the treatment of gold-bearing pyrite/arsenopyrite and pyrrhotite concentrates to produce porous calcine with an increased amenability to cyanidation. Pressure oxidation and bio-oxidation methods are more environmentally friendly than roasting. Gold predominantly occurs as native metal, often alloyed with silver. Since native gold has such a high specific gravity (16.0–19.3) it can be recovered by gravity concentration, provided the gold grains are liberated and coarse enough (>10 Native gold and electrum (gold containing 25–55% silver) are readily dissolved in cyanide solution ( The gold minerals are identified by Scanning Electron Microscope – Energy Dispersive Spectroscopic (SEM–EDS) analysis. The proportions of the different gold minerals are determined by QEMSCAN analysis. The mineralogical composition of each sample is determined by a combination of X-ray Diffraction (XRD), optical microscopy, major element chemistry and Bulk Modal Analysis (BMA) by QEMSCAN. Emphasis is placed on the identification and quantification of deleterious components such as cyanide and oxygen consumers, preg-robbers and also other minerals that would pose difficulties during processing (such as natural floaters and clay minerals). The presence of significant (often as low as <100 Oxygen is one of the reagents consumed during cyanidation, and a deficiency of dissolved oxygen in the leach solution will slow down the cyanidation reaction. Oxygen consumers, such as pyrrhotite and marcasite, can have a detrimental effect on cyanidation. The oxidation state of the leach, and a need for oxygen addition, should then be closely monitored to optimize the leach performance. Pre-oxidation is a common step, where oxygen consumers are abundant. Air or pure oxygen gas can be bubbled through the pulp to increase the dissolved oxygen concentration. The presence of preg-robbers, such as organic carbon, can also have a detrimental effect on gold recoveries. This is often overcome by the Carbon in Leach (CIL) process ( Clay minerals, some micas, sulphides and occasionally iron-oxyhydroxides may act as preg-borrowers ( If gold concentration by flotation is considered, the presence of natural floating minerals like pyrophyllite and talc becomes important ( If clay minerals, like montmorillonite, are present in significant amounts, then problems related to solid–liquid separation will be encountered. Lower sold-liquid ratios may be required, which lowers the throughput of a processing plant. Clay minerals also reduce permeability in heap-leach operations. Sulphide minerals further interfere by providing sulphide, arsenite/arsenate and antimonite/antimonate ions that form insoluble species on gold grain surfaces ( The presence of coarse gold is indicated by the following results, obtained during the testwork program: High assay variability (triplicate gold assay). Gold upgrades into the coarser fractions during the grading analysis High gold recovery by HLS and gravity (>40%). Large portion of the gold grains >25 Coarse gold results in large assay uncertainties due to the “nugget effect”, which influences the mine call and plant call factors. Furthermore, coarse gold requires longer retention times during cyanidation in order to achieve full dissolution. Incomplete dissolution of coarse gold leads to gold losses to the tailings. Investigation of various tailings samples from South African Witwatersrand ores indicated that tailings from certain reefs may contain relatively large liberated gold grains. These grains are rare and sporadic and normally unaccounted for when small tailings samples are assayed, resulting in an underestimation of the tailings grade. When coarse gold is present, it is highly recommended that gravity concentration be part of the processing circuit. Furthermore, blasting should be done in such a way as to minimize the production of fines, since coarse gold is easily liberated and lost on the mine floor and during transportation of the ore. Theft of coarse gold is also a problem since the coarse gold is easily concentrated in suitable traps. Six composite samples from an east African gold ore deposit were submitted to SGS South Africa for gold deportment analysis. The samples were composed of reverse circulation drill chips (drill core is preferable, but was not available). Very little historical data was available and the mineralogy and gold deportment completely unknown. The composites were created by the exploration geologist, based on geology and spatial distribution. The objective of the study was to understand the mode of occurrence of gold, in order to ascertain a possible cost effective and practical process route. The project was in the pre-feasibility stage and the client required a fast and inexpensive testwork program. Therefore the “Modified Gold Deportment” approach was followed. The head gold and silver assays are given in Generally, the silver to gold ratio was between ∼1.5:1 and ∼2.4:1, except for sample F, where the ratio of silver to gold was ∼0.4:1. The average silver to gold ratio for all the samples (equal weights) was ∼1.8:1, thus the silver content was on average almost double the gold content. The chemical compositions as determined by AAS, XRF, and Leco ( XRD analysis revealed that the samples were mineralogically fairly similar. All six samples were primarily composed of quartz, muscovite, albite and calcite with minor pyrite. In addition some samples contained chlorite and minor amounts of ankerite. The QEMSCAN modal analyses agreed with the XRD results. Data validation was done by comparing the calculated chemical composition to the measured chemical composition of the head samples and indicated good agreement. The mineralogical compositions of the samples are given in In order to determine the amenability of the ore to direct cyanidation, a split aliquot of each sample was milled to ∼80%–75 Grading analysis indicated that most of the samples were finer than the target grind of 50% passing 75 The results of HLS analyses are given in Due to the time and cost constraints of the project, it was decided to pre-concentrate the gold grains by gravity separation and to only analyse polished sections prepared from the gravity concentrates for their particulate gold deportment. Since a large proportion of the gold reported to the gravity tailings ( The gravity testwork results compared well with the HLS results. Gold recoveries by gravity are slightly better than HLS, at slightly higher mass pulls. The total gold recovery by gravity concentration varies between ∼17% and 44%. Gold in the gravity tails could possibly be attributed to several factors, namely: Very fine-grained liberated gold not amenable to gravity concentration, due to entrainment by the silicate/carbonate gangue. Very fine-grained, locked/attached gold associated with light gangue (silicates/carbonates). Sub-microscopic or ‘invisible gold’ associated with relatively fine-grained sulphides which were not recovered by gravity concentration (low middling or locked sulphides). Three polished sections were prepared from each gravity concentrate for QEMSCAN Trace Mineral Search (TMS) analyses. The QEMSCAN was set up to find and map particles containing areas of high backscattered electron (BSE) intensity (including gold grains). Three polished sections of the gravity concentrate of each sample were scanned. The gold grains observed in the concentrates only represent ∼17–44% of the total gold. The gold that reported to the gravity tails was characterized by diagnostic leach tests. A total of 4226 gold-containing particles were mapped and these particles contained 12,986 gold/silver grains. A selection of backscattered electron images of gold bearing grains and their corresponding QEMSCAN particle maps are presented in SEM-EDS analyses revealed that gold is present as native gold (AuAg, with low, but variable amounts of silver), as petzite (Ag The grain exposure gives an indication of the leachability of an ore at a specific grind. The exposure of the gold grains in the gravity concentrates (milled to ∼50%–75 All the gold minerals were combined for the grain size distribution analysis. Generally the grains are very fine, mostly <25 Since the gold lost to the gravity tails was not characterized, diagnostic leach tests were conducted on the gravity tailings. A split aliquot of the gravity tails of each sample was milled to ∼80%–75 Between ∼79% and ∼87% of the gold in the gravity tailings was recoverable by direct cyanidation ( The key case study outcomes are summarized below: Gold recovery by gravity concentration would not be a viable processing option, since most of the gold (56–83%) was not recoverable at a decent mass pull. The exposure of the gold grains in the gravity concentrates (milled to ∼50%–75 Most of the locked gold was locked in pyrite (∼13–53%) and very little of the gold was locked in silicates (up to 11.6%, generally <5%). A large proportion of the gold may be recoverable by sulphide flotation. The exposure analysis is only valid for the gold grains in the gravity concentrates. The exposure of the gold/silver grains in the gravity tails was inferred from diagnostic leaching to be between ∼79% and 87%. Gold recoveries of between 81% and 88% by direct cyanidation at a grind of 80%–75 The locked gold grains were very fine-grained. Further grinding, perhaps to 80%–53 The fact that gold occurs as both native gold and gold-tellurides (hessite and petzite) flag the possibility of low and variable leach kinetics. More intensive leach conditions (longer retention times, more cyanide and higher dissolved oxygen) may be required to improve gold recovery. A possible process route to recover the bulk of the gold and silver would be to mill the ore to 80%–53 A second possible processing route would be to upgrade the gold and sulphides into a sulphide concentrate followed by oxidative destruction of the sulphides by roasting or bio-oxidation followed by cyanidation. Additional metallurgical testwork was done on a bulk sample (simulated run-of-mine) and the following results were obtained, which confirm the gold deportment predictions: Gravity concentration yielded a concentrate containing 34.94% of the gold, assaying 67.73 Dissolution tests showed that finer grinding (from 80% passing 75 Gold dissolution increased from 87.5% to 89.49% with an increase in cyanide addition from 1 Gold dissolution increased from 88.42% to 88.96% by increasing the retention time from 24 to 48 Gold dissolution increased from 88.96% to 89.93% by increasing the dissolved oxygen (DO) content from natural DO to elevated levels of ∼15 Modern gold deportment studies aim to fully and quantitatively characterize representative gold ore samples using a combination of mineralogical and metallurgical techniques, in a time- and cost-effective manner. Potential metallurgical problems and ore variability are identified early on in the testwork phase so that subsequent metallurgical testwork can focus on optimising gold recovery through the most effective processing route. Application of the gold deportment methodology to a wide variety of samples demonstrates the value of modern gold deportment studies. The authors would like to express their sincere thanks to the many gold clients of SGS South Africa, especially AngloGold Ashanti and Gold Fields.