The use of microorganisms and/or their metabolic products is becoming an attractive alternative in mineral processing. In that sense, this research deals with the use of the hydrophobic gram positive Rhodococcus erythropolis bacteria as a possible substitute of synthetic reagents used in hematite flotation. Bacterial growth experiments, using culture media of tryptic soy broth (TSB) and yeast and malt extract with glucose (YMG) separately, showed a greater bacterial density for the first one. In addition, it was observed that the isoelectric point (IEP) of hematite was shifted after biomass interaction, suggesting that the bacterial cells were adhered onto the mineral surface. Moreover, bacterial adhesion was higher at acidic pH, which also suggests an electrostatic attraction between the mineral surface and the biomass at this pH range. Microflotation tests were carried out in a modified Hallimond tube achieving a maximum hematite floatability of 83.86% at pH 6. Finally, the kinetics of the process followed a second order model.The production of bioreagents capable of a selective separation in mineral processing has been the objective of several studies. The most important advantages for the use of these bioreagents can be: their selectivity for a specific mineral and environmental impact reduction caused by conventional reagent ( Most of the works dealing with mineral bioflotation focuses primarily on its fundamental aspects (  As mentioned in previous researches, the use of microorganisms as bioreagents could be a promising solution to the current problems in mineral flotation, such as, the need to achieve lower operating costs in the processing of low grade ores, mineral selectivity in the processing of fine and ultrafine mineral particles and to the constant quest of reagents that attends the rigorous specifications for production of concentrates and stricter environmental legislation ( Therefore, the review of the state-of-the-art of mineral bioflotation requires fundamental studies that show the relevant potential use of biomass as biocolletors and/or biofrothers in the flotation of minerals, focusing in the bioadhesion process as one of the most important steps in mineral bioflotation. Against this background, this paper provides a study based on the fundamental aspects of hematite bioflotation with the main objective to evaluate the behavior of the The hematite sample, purity of 94%, was provided by local supplier from Araçuaí in Minas Gerais. The samples were jaw-crushed and dry-screened to −3  Stocks of the bacteria were prepared using a solid medium in Petri plates and saving them in a refrigerator at 4 For the measurement of cell concentration in suspension, the dry weight method was adopted, which was determined by the difference between the final weight and the initial weight, expressed in g/l. There are several methods to establish the composition of the cell wall, some of them using methods such as X-ray diffraction, infrared spectroscopy and biochemical analysis. The composition of the carbohydrates presented in the bacterial concentrate was determined by the anthrone method (proposed by Zeta potential measurements for the mineral sample and the microorganism were carried out on the micro-electrophoresis apparatus “Zeta Meter System 4.0”. The concentration of the cell suspension was 50 All bioadhesion experiments were carried out in a duplicate run basis, at 25 The amount of bacterial adhered was calculated by: The analysis of scanning electron microscopy (SEM) was used to observe Infrared absorption spectra were recorded on a Nicolet 6700 Fourier transform infrared (FTIR) spectrophotometer using The microflotation tests were carried out in a modified Where m A SEM image of The growth curve of From The amount of proteins and carbohydrates associated to the bacterial concentrate obtained in TSB culture medium and YMG culture medium is shown in From The composition of the bacterial concentrate was compared with the results of Additionally, Zeta potential measurements were carried out to evaluate the possible changes of the electrokinetic properties of hematite after interaction with After interaction with the bacterial cells the IEP of hematite shifted from pH 5.3 to 2.1, adopting a zeta potential profile similar to that of the bacteria, as showed in The FTIR spectrum of the Studies of bacterial adhesion provide important information about the affinity of the microorganism towards the mineral surface. This ability depends on the functional groups of the bacterial cell wall and of the mineral surface ( The (−53 In order to evaluate the effect of From It was also observed that the higher the initial concentration of the bacteria, the higher the adhesion capacity. Thus, for bacterial concentrations of 150   The adhesion of the bacterial cells onto the hematite surface can be observed through scanning electron microscopy. Thus, from FTIR tests of  The surface tension measurements of cell suspensions of  The floatability of hematite as a function of pH and particle size, using the Zeta potential studies showed that the hematite and the bacteria have an IEP of 5.3 and 2.2, respectively. Therefore, at pH These floatability results are not in accordance with the adhesion results, where the higher adhesion was achieved at pH 2. The last can be explain due to the IEP of the bacteria was around pH 2, at this pH the cells has no charge and electrostatic repulsion is inhibited, therefore the cells can form agglomerates and flocs, which will reduce the bacterial concentration of the suspension, which in consequence affect the adhesion capacity value. The effect of the bacterial concentration on the hematite floatability can be observed in According to According to Finally, the floatability of hematite as a function of time can be observed in The results of floatability are basically consistent with findings in previous research, as mentioned above. It is also clear that the floatability of hematite depends on the pH value, bacterial concentration, particles size and flotation time. Therefore, from these studies it is evident that hematite can be recovery by this environmentally friendly strain; under specific flotation conditions. The kinetic parameters are exceptionally important for the flotation and are depending on several process variables which influence its efficiency. Thus, the kinetics models are relative and are restricted to determinant factors of the flotation process. The most important factors are the particle size, the hydrophobicity, hydrodynamic of the equipment and the bubbles distribution inside the cell. Flotation experiments were carried out to determine the effect of particle size on the microflotation rate constant using the The flotation data plotted in According to the results presented in By applying the second-order kinetic model to the floatability data, the linear fit of the experimental data is shown in From  Zeta potential evaluation of hematite particles before and after interaction with bacterial cells showed a shift of the hematite IEP towards acidic pH, which indicates adhesion of bacterial cells onto the mineral surface. Bacterial adhesion was reported higher at acidic pH, where mineral and bacteria have opposite surface charges, suggesting electrostatic attraction between both. FTIR analysis of the modified hematite identified NH, CH Surface tension measurements showed that when the bioreagent concentration was increased, the surface tension of the bacterial suspension was decreased to a mean value of 51.5 A maximum floatability of 83.9% was achieved at pH 6 fitting a second order kinetic model, which suggests a strong interaction between the mineral and bacteria. The authors acknowledge