A thin diamond-like carbon film was deposited on Ni substrate by plasma electrolytic deposition in ethanol-water solution. The thickness of the deposited carbon film was measured about 40–60nm by using glow discharge optical emission spectroscopy and optical profilometer. The characterization of film structure by Raman spectroscopy showed the superposition of Raman features on a photoluminescence background because of low thickness of the deposited film. The surface enhanced Raman scattering technique by coating the carbon film with Au nanoparticles and high power laser in Raman spectroscopy was used as Raman intensity enhancer. Amplified Raman signals by using both techniques showed formation of diamond-like carbon film and various sp2 and sp3-bonded compositions on grain boundaries of nanostructure carbon coating. The Raman spectrum of the Au coated carbon film revealed an additional band at 2150cm−1, which is related to the carbyne structure whereas carbyne band could not be detected using high power laser. Comparison of Raman spectra at two wavelengths of 632.8 and 785nm showed changes in the intensity and position of Raman bands. Likewise, the 785nm laser wavelength excitation has sufficient energy to enhance the scattering from the grain boundary structures.Deposition of diamond-like carbon (DLC) by different techniques has attracted attention due to its favorable tribological properties Raman spectroscopy, as an effective and non-destructive tool, can be utilized to identify the structure of different carbon materials Production of the DLC film by the CPE process leads to the low thickness of porous and nano sized carbon film on the substrate. Consequently, characterization of these coatings by Raman spectroscopy requires enhancement of Raman signals due to the problems explained above. Raman spectroscopy by high power laser and surface enhanced Raman scattering (SERS) techniques are two solutions for this problem. However, the structure of some materials can be damaged or altered by heating with high powered laser. The Raman spectra of some carbon nanomaterials are sensitive to the temperature changes induced by high power laser The purpose of the present study is to investigate the effect of both laser power and SERS techniques on the Raman spectra of thin DLC films produced by the plasma electrolytic deposition. Both methods namely high power laser (25 Diamond-like Carbon films were synthesized by plasma electrolytic deposition in an aqueous solution containing 50 The surface morphologies of the deposited films were characterized by employing a field emission scanning electron microscopy (FESEM) at 15 The SEM morphology of plasma electrolytic deposited carbon film on the Ni cathode is shown in The principle of the plasma electrolytic process is to apply a high DC voltage between two electrodes in an electrolyte at an atmospheric pressure. At lower voltage, the concentrated electric field near the cathode causes strong heating of electrolyte in the vicinity of cathode and creates a gas envelope around that electrode. This insulating envelope creates strong electric field within the separated bubbles. If the voltage is sufficiently high, this high electric field will induce the ionization of the gas and the electronic avalanche process leading to the electric breakdown of the gas and the initiation of a plasma discharge within the bubble. The higher increase of the voltage causes the cathode surface to be covered entirely by several plasma micro-discharges  Deposition of the gold film in two different sputtering times for enhancing Raman signal intensity (SERS) also helps suppressing the undesired photoluminescence  The visible absorption spectra can be used to understand the surface-plasmon properties. The measured UV–vis reflection spectra of bare carbon coating on Ni substrate and both of the Au coated carbon films are shown in  A Gaussian fitting of Raman spectra can help to better understand the differences at two Raman laser wavelengths. As a result of our fitting, six and seven Gaussian curves are necessary and sufficient to detect the spectral data in In addition to the D and G bands, five other bands are obvious in The 632.8 The combined effect of SERS and high laser power techniques can be seen in The diamond-like carbon coating was successfully deposited on Ni substrate by plasma electrolytic deposition in ethanol–water solution. Deposition of the gold film in two different sputtering times and high power laser (25 The authors wish to express their sincere thanks to Istanbul Technical University, Istanbul, Turkey for their technical support.