The simulation of delamination using the Finite Element Method (FEM) is a useful tool to analyse fracture mechanics. In this paper, simulations are performed by means of two different fracture mechanics models: Two Step Extension (TSEM) and Cohesive Zone (CZM) methods, using implicit and explicit solvers, respectively.
                  TSEM is an efficient method to determine the energy release rate components GIc
                     , GIIc
                      and GIIIc
                      using the experimental critical load (Pc
                     ) as input, while CZM is the most widely used method to predict crack propagation (Pc
                     ) using the critical energy release rate as input.
                  The two methods were compared in terms of convergence performance and accuracy to represent the material behaviour and in order to investigate their validity to predict mode I interlaminar fracture failure in unidirectional AS4/8552 carbon fibre composite laminates.
                  The influence of increasing the loading speed and using mass scaling was studied in order to decrease computing time in CZ models.
                  Finally, numerical simulations were compared with experimental results performed by means of Double Cantilever Beam specimens (DCB).
                  Results showed a good agreement between both FEM models and experimental results.Delamination failure (separation of two adjacent plies in composite laminates) is frequently found in composite structures. This kind of damage is considered one of the most critical in laminated fibre reinforced composites. The delamination crack may propagate undetected during inspection under the action of static or dynamic loads. It can lead to the ultimate failure of the component, inducing reduction in stiffness and compressive load-carrying capacity of a structure. Consequently, the analysis of the onset and propagation of the delamination continues to be studied by composite technology researchers. The delamination process is characterized by means of the energy release rate ( The onset of delamination takes place when Finite Element (FE) analysis is a numerical procedure commonly used to determine The CZM method presents fracture as a gradual phenomenon in which separation takes place across a cohesive zone. Some of the first works in this field can be attributed to Dugdale CZM is available in all important commercial FE packages. Nevertheless, CZM models sometimes present convergence problems with implicit solvers, so this model is usually used with explicit solvers. This is because most implicit solvers are not so efficient with discontinuous functions. It is also well known that explicit calculations with CZM show spurious oscillations of computed forces leading to undesirable results Regarding implicit solvers, the most extended method to solve delamination problems is the VCCT method In this work the Two Step Extension Method (TSEM) has been used as an alternative to the VCCT method. The TSEM is based on the calculation of the forces and displacement at the crack tip in two steps. Irwin’s formulation is applied without any simplification In this paper, mode I delamination tests have been modelled by means of TSEM (implicit solver) and CZM (explicit solver) in order to compare both procedures. Finally, an experimental program has been performed in order to obtain Five samples of Hexcel AS4/8552 laminates were tested in mode I interlaminar fracture test following the ASTM Standard D 5528-01 As it can be seen in The DCB specimen was 150 mm in total length, 50 mm in crack length, 25 mm width and 6 mm thickness (nominal dimensions). The specimens were tested on a MTS testing machine with a 5 kN load cell, applying a constant displacement velocity of 1 mm/min. The load-displacement response was obtained and a travelling optical microscope (100×) was used to measure the crack length during the test. The Modified Beam Theory (MBT) Eq. According to ASTM Standard D 5528-01 In this work, simulations of mode I interlaminar fracture toughness tests of composite material were conducted by means of two different fracture mechanics methods: Two Step Extension and Cohesive Zone methods, using ANSYS In this numerical method, the crack path is modelled using pairs of coincident nodes. The forces at the crack tip are calculated in a first step when the load reaches the critical value. The imposed displacement in the sample is then held and the coupled DOFs (degrees of freedom) of the nodes at the crack tip are released in a second step. Displacements are then calculated in this second step (see This procedure can be analytically described as follows:  Δ      The suffix The DCB specimens were modelled by means of four node 2D solid elements in plane strain with two degrees of freedom at each node (translations in the nodal Material behaviour was implemented as transversely isotropic (i.e. the mechanical properties perpendicular to the laminate plane, have been made equal to the in-plane transversal properties). These calculations were performed by means of LS-DYNA The main solution methodology is based on explicit time integration. This code is one of the most widely used to model impact and crash situations in layered composites. Cohesive elements are implemented in the code. In this method, the delamination surface is modelled between individual laminas by Compared to VCCT, CZM has the advantage of being able to predict the onset and propagation of a crack without the need to implement a pre-existing crack The combined effects of the damage processes are well defined by unique models called Cohesive Zone Models. By implementing these models, one may take the delamination into account by finite element analysis. In a cohesive element, a maximum opening normal stress is associated with an initial crack opening and a maximum crack length is associated with zero bond strength (see The fracture toughness of the bond between plies (a material input) is equal to the integral of the element traction versus crack opening. One of the most widely used constitutive equations is the bilinear law The discontinuity at maximum load shown by the bilinear law can be avoided by means of a smooth nonlinear law ( Different laws developed in the scientific literature can be reviewed in Ref. In a real structure, more than one pure load mode is usually present at the crack front, so it is necessary to define a general formulation for mixed mode delamination. For pure modes I and II, the onset of delamination can be determined by comparing However, under mixed mode loading, the onset of delamination may occur before any of the energy release rate values reach their respective critical values. There are several failure criteria developed in the scientific literature for the onset of delamination as the Power Law Nevertheless, in this work this issue is not relevant as only pure mode I is developed in DCB specimens. The DCB model was performed by two beams or sub-laminates. Every sub-laminate was modelled by means of fully integrated S/R-8 node solid elements, with two elements across the thickness. Material behaviour was simulated as orthotropic by means of the MAT_002 (*MAT_ORTHOTROPIC_ELASTIC) option. On the other hand, a cohesive interface was performed between the beams with one element across the thickness. The cohesive element thickness was 0.01 mm. This layer was implemented by means of the MAT_138 (*MAT_COHESIVE_MIXED_MODE) model, based on the bilinear law. This option requires the independent material parameters shown in  In this work, a value of The mode mixity is defined as: In this model, the mixed mode damage initiation displacement ( The cohesive element fails when the ultimate mixed mode displacement ( Two alternative formulations are implemented for MAT_138: The Power Law (for values of The Benzeggagh-Kenane Law: (for values of In this work, the power law with Several models were performed in order to obtain a successful FEM simulation. First of all, the element size in the different parts of the model had to be set. As is well known, the usage of small elements gives rise to a more accurate solution. Nevertheless, as element number increases the total CPU time to solve the problem increases. This effect is particularly important with explicit solvers where the critical time step depends on the dimensions of the smallest element. In this way, the selection of the gap thickness between both sub-laminates (cohesive element thickness) must be also carefully fixed. In this work, a previous study was developed in order to determine the optimum size of the elements in the cohesive zone ahead of the crack front in order to optimize the CPU time while maintaining the accuracy of the results. It was found out that cohesive element length about 2 mm near the crack front was small enough to obtain results with a good approximation to the experimental values and leads to a reasonable computational cost. The final mesh density used in the subsequent runs is shown in Five specimens were tested following the experimental procedure described in point Each experimental specimen tested as described in As we can see comparing As the experimental tests were performed at low velocity (1 mm/min = 0.017 mm/s), the experimental time to maximum load was about 1.5 min. This time is too long for explicit software, resulting in very high computational cost. In order to reduce the computing time, two strategies can be used. On one hand, the loading speed can be increased. On the other hand, mass scaling can be applied for the lowest velocities. In both cases a sensitivity study must be developed in order to assess the validity and accuracy of the results. In this work, the influence of the loading speed on the critical load has been studied in order to prove the validity of increasing that parameter. Mass scaling was also used to obtain faster solutions with the lowest velocities. Mass scaling refers to a technique whereby non-physical mass is added to a structure in order to achieve a larger explicit time step. Mass scaling reduces the simulation time, but it may affect the results. This procedure is justifiable when the effect on the results is negligible. This is the case of quasi-static analysis where the velocity is low and so the kinetic energy is very small relative to the peak internal energy The critical loads ( As can be seen in This means that, when simulating a quasi-static mode I test, the loading speed can be increased from quasi-static values up to about 100 mm/s in order to speed up the solution procedure, without affecting the accuracy of results. Following these results, the critical load obtained with the lowest velocity (0.25 mm/s) was taken as quasi-static and used to compare with the experimental and TSEM methods. Good agreement was found between experimental and CZM models (see As can be seen in In order to study the propagation behaviour by means of CZM, other procedures should be implemented in LS-DYNA The TSEM is a very efficient method to work with implicit solvers. It is easy to implement and useful to support experimental results. This method, as presented in this work, uses as input the critical load obtained from experimental results and furnishes the energy release rate On the other hand, CZM running on explicit solvers also furnishes very accurate results (the critical loads obtained from experimental and numerical results differs only by 1%). This method is very useful to study the onset and propagation of cracks. The material model uses the critical energy release rate obtained in pure modes I, II and III as input parameters and furnishes the critical load needed to initiate or propagate the crack. Nevertheless, in order to reduce CPU times in quasi-static tests, some issues must be taken into account, such as introducing mass scaling and increasing the loading speed. These parameters should be carefully adjusted to avoid any influence on the results. It was found that the loading speed can be increased up to 100–200 mm/min with no significant influence on the obtained results, on the other hand, mass scaling of the order of 5 × 10 If the critical load is known, the TSE method is better than CZM to analyse and solve mixed mode problems. This is because the decomposition of modes is directly obtained without the need of any criterion, via Eqs. Finally, if crack propagation needs to be studied, any action should be taken in order to avoid spurious oscillations after maximum load as implementing a smooth law or an adaptative cohesive model.