It is well-known that pyrrhotite is a slow floating mineral and there are many studies investigating its behaviour in the presence of pentlandite with which it most frequently occurs. In the treatment of massive sulphides the process often aims to depress the pyrrhotite whereas in other applications such as the treatment of platinum group elements (PGE) losses of the mineral may result in losses of PGEs as well as a reduced availability of sulphides required for smelter operation. The causes of pyrrhotite's poor floatability and reagent usage and the conditions encountered at the pHs typical of circuits treating pyrrhotite bearing ores are still a subject of considerable research. The present study was undertaken to measure the extent and rate of reaction of a relatively pure pyrrhotite sample using a standard xanthate collector at different pHs and conditioning times. The role of copper sulphate as an activator and guar as a depressant were also investigated. The effect of these treatments on the hydrophobicity of the pyrrhotite was determined by microflotation tests. This study has shown that under most conditions surface coverage of SIBX-originated species on the pyrrhotite equates to multi-layer coverage and that this is promoted by the pre-treatment with copper sulphate. Longer conditioning times increase surface coverage and recovery. Guar when added before copper sulphate using different addition regimes will depress the pyrrhotite. The findings and their significance for pyrrhotite flotation on flotation plants are discussed.Pyrrhotite is one of the most abundant sulphide minerals and in flotation processes is frequently rejected to tailings. This is often the case when massive nickel ores are being processed in a flotation plant or in the treatment of chalcopyrite–pentlandite rich ore bodies. In South Africa pyrrhotite occurs in significant quantities in the Merensky, UG2 and Platreef ore bodies of the Bushveld Complex. In the Merensky reef in particular the base metal sulphides constitute around 1% by mass of the ore. The major sulphides and their typical contents are pyrrhotite (Fe The typical reagent suites employed by concentrators in the treatment of platinum group minerals (PGMs) focus largely on recovering the sulphides using typically sodium iso-butyl xanthate as the primary collector often, in the case of PGM concentrators, in conjunction with a secondary collector such as a dithiophosphate. Many, but not all, of the flotation plants add copper sulphate as an activator. Generally these concentrators use a polysaccharide depressant, either a carboxymethyl cellulose (CMC) or a modified guar gum, to reduce the recovery of naturally floating gangue minerals such as talc, pyroxene, plagioclase, etc. The flotation is carried out at the natural pH of the milled ore which may vary between 7.5 and 9 but is typically closer to the higher value. As is well-known the chalcopyrite is fast floating and pentlandite, although not as fast floating as the former, tends to float readily. Pyrrhotite on the other hand is well-known to be "notoriously slow floating" ( A number of studies have shown that reaction between pyrrhotite and xanthates produces the oxidation product dixanthogen subject to the oxidation potential being maintained at ~ A number of studies have supported the contention that the greatest contributing factor to the poor flotation of pyrrhotite in a mixed pulp is the effect of galvanic interactions. It has been found that in pentlandite/pyrrhotite mixtures a reduction in the surface potential of pyrrhotite leads to greater reaction at the pentlandite surface ( While some studies suggest that copper activation of pyrrhotite is not effective in the alkaline range ( Pyrrhotite has been shown to strongly adsorb other metal hydroxy species, such as iron hydroxides, that are formed in the alkaline pH range and may be present in flotation systems following mild steel milling ( The present study was aimed at resolving some of these questions by measuring the rates and extent of reaction of a xanthate collector (viz. SIBX) with pyrrhotite in the absence of any other sulphides under various conditions and then using microflotation as an indicator of the resultant hydrophobicity. Samples of pyrrhotite obtained from Wards Scientific Establishment were pulverized in a Sieb apparatus and screened into [−106 Unless otherwise stated the tests were conducted at pH 9 which is close to the natural pH found in most Merensky ore flotation plants. De-ionised water was used to make up the reagent solutions and for the microflotation tests and was buffered to the required pH using either a borate (pH The collector used in the tests was sodium iso-butyl xanthate (SIBX) supplied by Senmin. It was purified by dissolution in acetone and re-precipitation with benzene. Copper sulphate was used as an activator. Two different polymeric depressants were used, viz. a guar depressant (Stypress 504) supplied by Chemquest and a CMC depressant (Depramin 267) supplied by Akzo Nobel. For comparative purposes a number of microflotation tests were performed using a sample of synthetic plant water made up by the addition of various salts to de-ionised water to produce an ionic concentration typical of that found on concentrators processing PGE ores of the Bushveld Complex ( The rate and extent of reaction of SIBX with the mineral samples were determined by monitoring the change in the xanthate concentration by measuring the absorption at its characteristic UV absorption wavelength, i.e. λ The relative hydrophobicity of the mineral surface was measured by determining the rate and extent of recovery in a microflotation system. These results are not regarded as a true indicator of floatability as this is a resultant of all the relevant interacting parameters including the froth phase which is absent in such a cell. However the results do indicate the extent to which the mineral particles successfully attach to bubbles generated in the system and essentially report to the pulp–froth interface. The apparatus has been described previously ( In a number of tests the sample was treated with a copper sulphate solution buffered to pH 9 and added either before or after reaction with SIBX. The concentration of copper sulphate was equivalent to an addition of 50 Even without collector addition the degree of natural hydrophobicity of the sulphide minerals gives a measure of floatability in the microflotation cell. Since depressants did reduce the overall floatability of the samples they were added to some of the tests described below to amplify the differences in hydrophobicity resulting from different pre-treatments. As required, 2    Experiments were carried out to determine the effect of the addition of depressant at various times after the start of the reaction between a pyrrhotite sample and SIBX. The depressant reduced the extent of the ongoing adsorption but did not inhibit it entirely. Both guar and CMC were found to give similar results. It is clear that the depressant molecules do not cause any desorption of adsorbed xanthate species but may passivate sites on which further xanthate adsorption could have occurred. This is consistent with studies done of the interactions between guar and xanthate in the presence of chalcopyrite ( The microflotation tests were performed at various conditions in order to determine the influence of factors such as pH, conditioning time, copper activation and the presence of depressant on the recovery of pyrrhotite.   With regard to the use of depressants such as CMC it is known that the effectiveness of these depressants may be significantly affected by the ions present in typical plant water. A number of tests were carried out, both with and without depressant addition, in which the synthetic plant water described above was used instead of deionised water to make up the buffer solutions. No significant differences were found. Solid precipitates of ferric hydroxide, arising from corrosion products produced in milling and processing, are likely to be present in flotation systems at alkaline pH values. In a set of tests to investigate semi-quantitatively the effect of adding such iron hydroxides to the pulp on the flotation was evaluated. A significant reduction in the flotation rate and recovery was observed with the first order rate constant measured as k The adsorption and microflotation results were aimed at developing an understanding of why, in flotation circuits, pyrrhotite is observed to be slow floating and its recovery poor. Notwithstanding the well-known fact that at alkaline pHs pyrrhotite rapidly oxidizes and may be covered with iron hydroxide species these results have shown that even in this pH range there is a fairly rapid reaction of pyrrhotite with xanthate as indicated by the reduced solution concentration of SIBX when contacted with pyrrhotite thus implying the formation of multiple pseudo-monolayers of xanthate reaction product at the surface. The precise nature of the interaction between sulphide mineral surfaces and xanthates continues to be an area of on-going research. These interactions are related to well-defined reactions leading to the formation of sparingly soluble surface chemical complexes at the mineral surface. The other mode of interaction is strongly related to electrochemical interactions ( As referred to above, the pyrrhotite/xanthate reaction product has been shown to be dixanthogen ( In a flotation system a typical addition of xanthate is 30–50  Although the question of whether pyrrhotite can be activated with copper sulphate has been questioned, these results are consistent with those observed by previous workers ( Thus the overall reaction is proposed to be: This mechanism allows for the formation of hydroxides at the surface while also accounting for the reaction with xanthate. This ½reaction is coupled with the following reduction reaction: When copper sulphate is added, the Cu Reaction (6) results in the formation of the activating monovalent copper species. Hence when xanthate is added before the Cu From the perspective of plant practice it is commonly observed that there is little residual guar in the recycled process water whereas there is certainly often a significant concentration of Cu This study has shown that adequate surface coverage of SIBX-originated species on the surface of pyrrhotite occurs over a wide range of pH values and that this surface reaction is promoted by the pre-treatment with copper sulphate especially at short conditioning times. Hence the observed slow floating nature of pyrrhotite does not appear to be a result of inadequate coverage by xanthate products. Recoveries in a microflotation cell followed the same trends as surface coverage by xanthate species at different pHs. Longer conditioning/exposure times to SIBX resulted in a greater degree of surface coverage and also greater recoveries. Guar, when added after copper sulphate, did not reduce recovery but when added in any other sequence resulted in significant reductions in recovery. A number of these findings have implications for plant practice. Maintaining an adequate concentration of collector in the system will permit an ongoing reaction and increase hydrophobicity and floatability of the pyrrhotite through the circuit. However, high dosages of xanthate will not necessarily result in increased recoveries unless there is sufficient contact time allowed for adequate surface coverage to occur. At short contact times surface coverage can be enhanced by prior addition of copper sulphate. Ultimately the slow reaction of xanthate with pyrrhotite as a result of the presence of surface iron hydroxide species will result in the pyrrhotite being slow floating rather than non-floating and hence managing flotation cell residence times and contact times with xanthate will be an important operating variable. In the presence of other sulphides pyrrhotite would experience lower xanthate coverage due to the preferential adsorption of xanthate on, for example, chalcopyrite or pentlandite. Careful management of copper sulphate can lead to increased recoveries but overdosing may result in the formation of excess copper hydroxide in solution and that is likely to have a more serious negative effect on pyrrhotite recovery than overdosing with xanthate since the copper hydroxide will react with the collector before the latter is able to react with the mineral surface. Recycled process water may often contain significant amounts of copper ions but this may, in certain circumstances, result in increased recoveries. Finally the depressants will generally reduce recovery unless added after the Cu