The low moisture content of lignite is essential to its high utilization efficiency. There has been increasing attention given to the adsorption of surfactants to decrease the hydrophilicity and moisture readsorption of lignite. This has focused on findings surfactants that are effective, convenient, and inexpensive. To understand the effect of surfactant structure on decreased lignite hydrophilicity, eighteen surfactants including conventional types of surfactants were used for lignite treatment. Wetting heat results indicated that cationic and non-ionic surfactants were superior in their performance to decrease the hydrophilicity of lignite compared to anionic surfactants with the same hydrophobic alkyl chain. Ethanediyl-1,2-bis(dimethyl dodecyl ammonium bromide) (12-2-12) and lauryl polyoxyethylene ether (C12EO9) were found to be the most effective cationic and non-ionic surfactants in these samples, respectively. Linear shapes, long alkyl chains, and gemini structures were beneficial to decreasing the hydrophilicity of lignite. Structures to be avoided included anionic types, branches, aromatic rings, and glucoside. The adsorbed surfactant layer covered the oxygen containing functional groups on the surface of the lignite, and also blocked lignite pores to reduce the storage space of water, effectively reducing the hydrophilicity of the lignite. The contribution of the coverage of oxygen-containing functional groups was found to be more significant. In addition, we demonstrated the consistency between moisture readsorption and wetting heat in terms of presenting hydrophilicity of lignite and their differences were also discussed. Our results provide a reference for selecting an appropriate strategy and further developing the application of surfactants to decrease lignite hydrophilicity.Lignite is one of the most important fossil fuels due to its huge deposits, low mining cost, and high reactivity. Excessive moisture content lowers the utilization efficiencies of lignite by lowering the combustion heat value, creating unnecessary transportation and storage costs and posing high security risks for spontaneous combustion Surfactant molecules are characterized by unique amphiphilic structures with a hydrophilic head and hydrophobic end. As such, they are endowed with an excellent ability to modify phase interface characteristics, particularly for liquid and solid surfaces Surfactants are comprised of thousands of species with different structures and include cationic, anionic, non-ionic, liner, branch, and gemini types. Their effect on the hydrophilicity of lignite varies due to different interactions and adsorption behaviors. Surfactants with a cationic hydrophilic head may easily adsorb on the negatively charged surface of the oxygen-containing group of lignite, leading to a significant decrease in hydrophilicity In this paper, eighteen different surfactants spanning various types were used to attempt to decrease the hydrophilicity of lignite. The objective laws referring to the efficiency of different surfactant structures were analyzed. The relationship between wetting heat and moisture readsorption of lignite samples was discussed. The adsorption characteristics of surfactants on critical functional groups and pore structures was investigated through x-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) and nitrogen adsorption/desorption methods. This study evaluated the different responses in the hydrophilic decrease associated with surfactant adsorption between organic components and raw lignite. This paper provides an essential reference for the application of surfactants to decrease the hydrophilicity of lignite and shed light on the adsorption mechanism of surfactants on the lignite surface. Lignite from Manglai in China was selected for this study. The lignite was milled and sieved into 48–75 μm particles and dried in a vacuum oven at 373 K for 2 h prior to use. All lignite samples used in this study were dried lignite. A fraction of lignite was demineralized using dilute HF and HCl solution Lignite samples treated with surfactants were obtained through adsorption methods. All the adsorption experiments were conducted based on methods published in a previous report Moisture readsorption was carried out in a chamber with a relative humidity ( Wetting heat measurements were carried out using a C80 micro-calorimeter (Setaram, France), and XPS experiments were conducted on an ESCALAB 250Xi instrument (Thermo Fisher). The nitrogen adsorption and desorption measurements were carried out at 77 K on a TriStar II 3020 specific surface and porosity analyzer (Micromeritics Instrument Corporation, USA). The methods used were based on a previous study The wetting process of lignite by water is a spontaneous exothermic reaction. When particles are immersed in liquid, the wetting heat of solid particles is generated from a change in surface energy. The released heat during the wetting process is an important indicator of lignite hydrophilicity. As shown in In order to understand the relationship between the moisture readsorption process and the wetting process, the wetting heat of lignite samples with different moisture readsorption amounts were measured. The effect of surfactant adsorption on wetting heat and moisture readsorption was studied by the adsorption of C The decrease in the wetting heat of lignite by surfactant adsorption depends on the coverage of hydrophilic sites. This was closely associated with the arrangement morphology of the loaded surfactant layer. Effective adsorption was successful only when the hydrophilic head of the surfactant attached onto the hydrophilic sites of lignite with the hydrophobic end of the surfactant positioned away from the direction of the adsorption. The efficiency of different surfactants mainly depend on the structural characteristics of surfactant molecules, such as the ionic type, the length of the alkyl chain, branching structure and the aromatic structure. Generally, the hydrophilic head has a greater impact on the property and performance of surfactants than the hydrophobic end in a surfactant molecule. Three different ionic surfactants with the same hydrophobic end were applied in this study; cationic dodecyltrimethylammonium bromide (DTAB), anionic dodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS), and non-ionic C Three cationic surfactants decyltrimethylammonium bromide (C Gemini surfactants contains two hydrophobic groups and two hydrophilic groups in the molecule, connected by a linkage (spacer) close to the hydrophilic groups. One benzene ring in a surfactant molecule approximately occupies 3.5 times the –CH The C Alkyl polyglycoside surfactants are nonionic and are comprised of glucose and long chain fatty alcohols.  Based on the findings from Organic components bear the skeleton structure of lignite and play a role in the wettability of lignite. In this study, organic components were obtained using acid demineralization. The surface chemistry and pore structure directly affects lignite hydrophilicity. The effective inhibition of lignite hydrophilicity by the adsorbed surfactant relies on the coverage of oxygen-containing groups with hydrophobic intermediate exposure The structural effects of surfactants on decreasing lignite hydrophilicity were evaluated to understand the general laws. Lignite hydrophilicity could be decreased significantly after adsorption of a surfactant, with different structures of surfactant molecules exhibiting varying efficiencies. The most effective cationic and non-ionic surfactants among the eighteen surfactants tested were found to be 12-2-12 and C  The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. The authors would like to acknowledge the financial support provided by the