A major operating cost in dense-medium separation is in replacement of lost medium solids. The loss of medium solids, being costly, plays a crucial role in determining the economics of any preparation operation. Coal washeries that employ dense-medium cyclones often attempt optimization of the processes by varying the vortex or the spigot diameter and the feed relative density. While these changes help in closer control of the separation process, they also result in medium losses due to changes in the medium split ratio (ratio of the medium flow rate in overflow to underflow). Since medium solids are lost by adhesion to products and as magnetic separator effluent, the effect of the change in medium split ratio on the drain-and-rinse screens and, hence, the magnetic separator circuit needs to be studied. In Tata Steel's coal washeries, at Jharkhand India, which employs primary and secondary dense-medium cyclones in series to produce clean coal, middlings and rejects, reducing the relative density of feed medium, had an insignificant effect on the medium split ratio. On the other hand, changing the cone ratio (ratio of the overflow diameter to the underflow diameter) changed the relative density and the flow rates through the cyclone outlets, thus affecting the performance of the magnetite recovery circuit.
                  A systematic study through laboratory tests and a detailed plant sampling campaign helped in identifying the causes of magnetite loss. Upon implementation of the recommendations, the magnetite losses decreased, resulting in a saving of approximately US$27,500 per annum. The study also helped in evolving some checkpoints for plant operators for identifying magnetite losses.Dense-medium (magnetite in the case of coal), a slurry/suspension having a relative density intermediate to that of valuable mineral and gangue, is generally used as the medium of separation in most coal preparation plants. The medium, being costly, plays a crucial role in determining the economics of any preparation operation. There are normally only two possible routes by which medium can be lost from the plant ( adhered to the products of separation, after draining and washing on screens; and present in the final effluent from the medium regeneration process, usually magnetic separators, settling cones or other solid–liquid separation devices. The forces of attraction between the ore and medium particles, ore porosity, and inefficient washing ( magnetic separation and classification inefficiencies ( corrosion and abrasion of the medium ( excessive circuit loadings during the addition of fresh medium; housekeeping (when the floors are being cleaned and washed off); plant downtime (associated with housekeeping); medium properties (size, shape, magnetic susceptibility) ( There has been much work done over the years, usually by operating plants, to identify and quantify the sources of medium loss and to minimize consumption. The task, however, is complicated by the difficulty of determining an unequivocal medium balance across the plant by sampling process streams. It is rare that a balance thus established, for a relatively short operating duration, reflects quantitatively the actual consumption recorded by the plant over normal reporting periods such as a month or a year.  An increase in operating relative density also led to significant increases in losses. Most of the increase in loss was attributed to the poor drainage characteristics of the higher viscosity medium ( The washing arrangement was also found to affect medium losses significantly through drain-and-rinse screens. Of the various washing arrangements, screens with weirs and a vigorous tumbling action reduced the magnetite losses considerably compared to slotted spray bars and screens with flood boxes. There is no consensus in the literature as to the contribution which magnetic separator losses make to total medium loss in dense-medium plants. Adhesion to coal and the losses in the magnetic separator are the two main routes through which magnetite gets lost in a coal washing plant. In general, magnetic separators seem to contribute 20–40% of this loss, though this proportion will fall where adhesion losses are abnormally high, for example, with porous ores. Magnetic separators are therefore an important, though, not necessarily, a dominant source of medium loss. Since their performance can deteriorate markedly if not operated correctly or properly maintained, they deserve close attention. Analysis of losses in magnetic separators collected in plant surveys by Rayner (1994) suggests that this could be due to the separator being overloaded, in terms of either its volumetric capacity or, less often, its dry solids capacity.  Based on operating experience at the Iscor iron ore mines, Tata Steel at Jamshedpur, Jharkhand, India owns captive coal washeries, which supply 60% of coking coal requirements for its integrated steelmaking operations. In the washeries, the ROM coal after being crushed and screened at 0.5 mm, the + The dense-medium and clean coal (middlings or rejects, as the case may be) is laundered to sieve bends and one set of drain-and-rinse screens. The sieve bends and the first section of each drain-and-rinse screen are used to drain medium from the coal; the medium is collected in screen under-pans and returned to the primary cyclone sump via the primary cyclone medium distribution box. The second section of the screens is used to rinse and drain the coal free of adhering medium. The spray water containing the dense-medium rinsed from the coal is collected in the second section of the screen under-pans and returned to the dilute medium sump for subsequent magnetite recovery. The level of magnetite water slurry in the dilute medium sump can be adjusted using the PID (Proportional, Integral, Derivative 3-term controller) loop provided for level control and the modulating splitter actuator. When the slurry levels in the sump rises, the splitter actuator would divert the flow away from the system to maintain balance. The indication loop also generates high and low alarm levels within the control system. The dilute medium thus collected in the dilute medium sump is pumped to magnetic separators, which produce the recovered magnetite as over-dense medium and a reject tailings circuit. The over-dense medium is returned to the over-dense medium sump and distributed to the dense-medium washing circuits as make up. Magnetic separator tailings are used as product rinsing water. Considering the overall economics of steel-making, it was thought to reduce the composite clean coal ash at the washeries from 17% to 16% starting April 2003. With a view to achieving 16% clean coal ash, the following changes were made in the coal washing plants: The relative density of medium in the primary cyclone circuit was reduced from 1.36 to 1.3–1.33 The spigot diameter of the secondary cyclones was reduced from 140 mm to 125 mm. These changes would have an effect on the medium split ratio (ratio of the medium flow rate in overflow to underflow) and hence an effect on magnetite recovery.  Reducing the spigot diameter of the cyclones would indirectly increase the cone ratio, i.e., the ratio of the diameter of vortex finder to the spigot thus affecting the medium split. The flow rate of medium through the overflow would increase and that through the underflow decrease, thus increasing the overall medium split. Changes in the cone ratio would result in either lower/higher pulp relative density and higher/lower flow rates through the cyclone outlets. Lower pulp relative density will have a negligible effect on the performance of the drain-and-rinse screens. However, lower pulp relative density in the feed to the magnetic separator will inhibit the formation of flocs, which has been identified as the main process step for magnetic separation. According to the “conceptual collection mechanism” model developed by Similarly higher pulp relative density would increase the viscosity of the medium coming out through the outlets of the dense-medium cyclone. This in turn would reduce drainage through the drain screens and increase adherence of the medium to the coal samples. This increased adherence of magnetite to coal would directly increase the magnetite loss after rinsing. Within the capacity of the screens, increase/decrease in medium flow rate would not affect the performance of the drain-and-rinse screens. However, increased medium flow rate to the magnetic separator would reduce the residence time and hence the recovery of magnetics. Decreased/increased medium flow rate to the magnetic separator would also affect its performance. The pool depth in the magnetic separator needs to be maintained at an optimum for an efficient magnetic separation. This can be done by adjusting the tailings discharge in the magnetic separator. Detailed sampling campaigns were carried out in the magnetite recovery circuit. Samples of clean coal, middlings and rejects, and overflow, underflow and feed to the primary magnetic separator and one secondary separator were collected. These samples were collected in fifteen increments over a period of about 1 min using standard samplers. Each sample was collected from all parts of each flow stream, and all material in the stream had the same probability of being collected. About 15 kg of tailings and 1 kg of concentrate were collected over a period of 1 min by this system. Both wet and dry sample weights were measured using appropriate laboratory techniques ( The major operating variables of a medium recovery screen that influence its performance are (i) the adhesion of the medium prior to washing, (ii) quantity of wash water, (iii) screen-ore conveying velocity, (iv) screen-ore bed depth, (v) screening duration, (vi) ore size, (vii) ore porosity and (viii) properties of the medium pulp. For any washing plant, the ore size remains constant, and the rank of coal treated also remains unchanged. Hence the factors that were considered for the laboratory study were the adhesion of the medium prior to washing, the time of washing, screening velocity, relative density of medium and the quantity of wash water. The levels of the variables maintained were similar to that in the plant. The tests were carried out with the clean coal (considered as coal type 1) and rejects (considered as coal type 2) obtained from the washery. The wash water and the coal type were varied at two levels and all the other variables at three levels. All together 108 tests were carried out, the results of which are shown in A simple test procedure was adopted to simulate the drain-and-rinse screen section of the medium recovery circuit in the laboratory. Media with three different relative densities were manually prepared using magnetite (size: 90%, − In this work, the experimental procedure was to initially contact the ore with the medium so as to allow the medium adhesion to occur. The ore to be contacted was placed inside a wire basket and lowered into the re-circulating medium for about 30 s and then taken out. The 30-s contact time is much more than the normal 4–5 s contact time observed in a cyclone. The contacted ore was then taken out of the wire basket and placed on a laboratory screen mounted on a sieve shaker to simulate the medium recovery step across a vibrating medium recovery screen. The sieve shaker was operated without wash water for 15 s to allow the excess medium to drain free from the ore. A sample of the drained ore was taken to determine the mass of the medium adhering to the ore prior to the washing step. The sample was then taken in an open bucket filled with water, the volume being twice that of the sample. The sample with water was then mixed using an impeller for about 2 min. The sample was then taken out, dried, and weighed. The adhered medium from the sample was thus recovered from the ore by scrubbing the ore. The rest of the ore on the screen was further shaken for about 5–15 s with wash water to wash off the adhered medium. Particles that were still adhered to the ore after the washing step were recovered from the ore by scrubbing, as mentioned above. The tests were carried out using statistical design of experiments and the results analysed using the analysis of variance (ANOVA) technique. The variables were studied at different levels, and the percentage of magnetite lost was calculated for each test. The sum of squares, the mean sum of squares, the ‘ A mass balance of the magnetite recovery circuit was also done using the simulator MODSIM. The complete dense-medium cyclone circuit with the magnetic separators, the primary and the secondary dense-medium cyclones, was created. The flow-rates to the magnetic separators and the cyclones as existing in the plant were supplied as input data, and simulations were carried out to produce 17% ash from the overflow of the dense-medium cyclones. The flow rates of the medium to the overflow and underflow of the primary and the secondary cyclones were noted. The relative density of the dense medium to the primary cyclones was then reduced from 1.36 to 1.32 and the spigot diameter of the secondary cyclones from 140 mm to 125 mm. Similarly, the medium split at conditions of 16% clean coal ash was simulated. At 17% and 16% clean coal ash, the ratio of the medium split in the primary cyclones was found to be 1.21 and 1.2, respectively, whereas in the secondary cyclones, the same was 3.32 and 4.93. Hence, while reducing the relative density of medium in the primary cyclones was found to have an insignificant effect on the medium split ratio in the primary circuit, the same had increased by 1.48 times in the secondary circuit by reducing the spigot diameter. This is in line with the discussions described in The results of ANOVA analysis of the laboratory tests to simulate the performance of the drain-and-rinse screens are shown in Statistical analysis showed that all the four variables, the wash water, the time of washing, the screening velocity, and the relative density of medium all had a significant effect on the % of magnetite lost. The interactions between wash water and screening velocity, wash water and the coal type, screening velocity and coal type, relative density of feed and coal type were all significant ( The interaction pots between various variables are shown in Because the bulk density of the clean coal is less than that of the middlings/rejects, it is clear that the porosity of the former is higher than the latter. Higher screening velocity re-settles finer magnetite in the clean coal pores, thus increasing magnetite losses. For products, generally, the middlings and the rejects, obtained at a higher relative density (> A graph was drawn relating the percentage of magnetite that remained adhered to coal after drainage versus the percentage of magnetite lost after rinsing. As can be seen from In summary, higher wash water, higher residence time, higher screening velocity and improving dilution of the underflow reduced magnetite losses in the middlings and rejects section. For clean coal, care should be taken to keep the screening velocity of the drain-and-rinse screens at a minimum.  The ratio of magnetics to non-magnetics measured in terms of the amount of magnetics per m The relative density of the concentrates from the magnetic separator can be increased by (i) adjusting the discharge gap and (ii) ensuring that the feed pulp does not overflow into the concentrate. The latter could happen due to very high flow rates to the magnetic separator in which case the drum would need to be raised/lowered to increase the pool depth of the slurry. The magnetite losses in the underflow were dependent upon the percentage of solids in the feed to the separator, percentage of magnetics in the feed, and the percentage of coal in the feed. Attempts were made to correlate the relationship through a regression equation given by The The analysis of the magnetic content in different streams showed that the magnetite slurry contained a large quantity of coal particles. The coal particles, while being rinsed in the drain-and-rinse screen had escaped into the magnetite medium underneath due to the enlargement of screen openings, thus into the dilute medium sump, and then the dilute medium head box, which fed the primary magnetic separator. The presence of coal would severely affect the efficiency of the magnetic separator. The figures in Based on the study, the following recommendations were made. For the sieve bend and the drain-and-rinse screens: Possibility of slightly increasing the screening velocity for the drain-and-rinse screens of the middlings and the rejects section; Keeping the screening velocity in the clean coal screen section to a minimum; An increased residence time of the middlings and the rejects coal in the rinse section as compared to that of the clean coal; Installing dilution water in the cyclone underflow to improve drainage; Sieve bends used for draining and the drain-and-rinse screens to be periodically checked and replaced; High pressure water spraying through nozzles. For the magnetic separators: The relative density of the concentrates from the magnetic separator can be increased by (i) adjusting the discharge gap and (ii) ensuring that the feed pulp does not overflow into the concentrate. The relative density of feed to the magnetic separator can be adjusted by adjusting the level of the magnetite water slurry in the dilute medium sump. The opening of the tailings discharge to be checked periodically and adjusted to maintain proper slurry level in the separator. Correct level would be when 50% of the feed water volume is discharged from the overflow weir. The following checkpoints could well help operating personnel to reduce magnetite losses. For the drain-and-rinse screens and sieve bends: •Periodic checking of the opening of sieves in screens and sieve bends. For the magnetic separators: •A rough method to estimate the losses through the separator would be to determine the density of the feed slurry to the magnetic separator and its concentrate/overflow. While the feed slurry is expected to have density of 1.2, its concentrate/overflow would have a density of 2.1. A lesser density is indicative of losses through the effluent and could be rectified by adjusting the discharge gap of the separator. Implementation of the above recommendations reduced the magnetite losses in the coal washing plants from about 1.64 kg/t to 1.3 kg/t. This in terms of raw coal processed in the cyclone circuit reduced the magnetite consumption by 639