Bioleaching of chalcopyrite and bornite in the presence of Acidithiobacillus ferrooxidans was carried out to investigate the influences between each other during bioleaching. Bioleaching results indicated that bornite accelerated the dissolution of chalcopyrite, and chalcopyrite also accelerated the dissolution of bornite, it could be described as a synergistic effect during bioleaching, this synergistic effect might be attributed to the galvanic effect between chalcopyrite and bornite, and to the relatively low solution potential as the addition of bornite. Significantly amount of elemental sulfur and jarosite formed on the minerals surface might be the main passivation film inhibiting the further dissolution, and the amount of elemental sulfur significantly increased with the addition of bornite. Results of electrochemical measurements indicated that the oxidation and reduction mechanisms of chalcopyrite and bornite were similar, the addition of bornite or chalcopyrite did not change the oxidative and reductive mechanisms, but increased the oxidation rate.Bioleaching has been successfully applied in the processing of secondary copper sulfide minerals, it is still not efficient and economic to process primary copper sulphide minerals like chalcopyrite (CuFeS Many authors have concluded that the low extraction rate and dissolution kinetics of chalcopyrite in bioleaching are caused by passivation film, which was considered to be jarosite, elemental copper and metal-deficient sulfides ( Some authors pointed out that higher extraction rate could be obtained by controlling the solution potential at a relatively low value, even though the specific mechanisms are still not explicit (  Therefore, bioleaching of chalcopyrite and bornite in the presence of The X-ray diffraction analysis and chemical elements analysis of ore samples showed that both chalcopyrite and bornite were of high purity. Chalcopyrite contains 37.94% of copper, 26.1% of iron, and 31.96% of sulfur. Bornite contains 61.59% of copper, 9.92% of iron, and 22.52% of sulfur. Ore samples were ground and screened to −0.074  10 The consumption of acid was represented by the amount of H The Carbon Paste Electroactive Electrodes (CPEE) were made by mixing 0.7 For the cyclic voltammograms test and tafel test, a conventional three-electrode system consisted of working electrode, graphite rod as counter electrode and Ag/AgCl (3.0 The mineralogical compositions of solid samples were examined by X-ray diffraction (XRD) (DX-2700). The bacterial concentration was measured by microscope (CX31). Copper concentration was determined by inductively coupled plasma-atomic emission spectrometer (ICP-AES) (America Baird Co. PS-6). The pH values were measured with a pH meter (PHSJ-4A) and the redox potentials of leaching solution were measured by a Pt electrode with reference to a Ag/AgCl electrode (3.0   The variations of redox potential shown as  The initial stage of chalcopyrite bioleaching was a period of acid consumption, which could be mainly described as Eqs.  X-ray diffraction (XRD) analysis indicated that a significant amount of jarosite and elemental sulfur was formed on the mineral surface after bioleaching. It could be observed that the amount of elemental sulfur increased with the addition of bornite, and jarosite kept at a significant amount with respect to any ratio of chalcopyrite and bornite.  For the pre-wave of peak d at about 300–700 In the reverse scan from 800 Results of cyclic voltammograms tests indicated that the oxidation and reduction mechanisms of chalcopyrite and bornite were similar. The addition of bornite or chalcopyrite did not change the oxidative and reductive mechanisms, but increased the current density during oxidation process at 300–700  A model of interaction between chalcopyrite and bornite during bioleaching was provided as shown in The synergistic effect between chalcopyrite and bornite existed during bioleaching in the presence of Significant amount of elemental sulfur and jarosite could be the main passivation film inhibiting the further dissolution, and the amount of elemental sulfur significantly increased with the addition of bornite. Electrochemical measurements revealed that the addition of bornite or chalcopyrite did not change the oxidative and reductive mechanisms, but increased the oxidation rate. The relationship between chalcopyrite and bornite with different crystal structures during bioleaching in the presence of different strains of bacteria will be investigated, and the detailed transformation of surface phases will be studied in the future work. This work was supported by Science Foundation of China (project No. 51374248), National High-tech Research and Development Program of China (project No. 2012AA061501), Research Fund for the Doctoral Program of Higher Education of China (project No. 20120162120010), and National Key Basic Research Program of China (project No. 2010CB630905) Natural. Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at 