Precipitation of manganese from the SO2-roast leach ammoniacal ammonium sulfate solution bearing both high and low concentrations of manganese in the presence of copper, cobalt and nickel ions was carried out in a stainless steel reactor fitted with a turbo grid. Air/O2 was used to precipitate Mn as MnO2 from the solution. There was adsorption loss of cobalt from the solution. Precipitation of manganese from the solution was 57.2–99.9%. The maximum adsorption loss of Co was 22.1%. The precipitation of Mn and adsorption loss of cobalt from the solution followed the first order kinetics. The rate constants for the precipitation of manganese and loss of cobalt were evaluated and the experimental data were fitted to Freundlich and Langmuir adsorption isotherms.Ores, concentrates and by-products containing manganese, copper, nickel and cobalt are directly subjected to ammoniacal leaching ( Mn(II) was precipitated from a chloride solution bearing 11.8 Precipitation of manganese from an acidic solution bearing Fe, Mn, Co and Ni was carried out with the mixtures of SO Due to the depletion of valuable metals like copper, cobalt and nickel from earth, it has become necessary to recover these values from other sources. Manganese nodule is an important source for these metals. It also bears quite a bit of less valued manganese and iron which are not to be recovered. In this study, most of the metal content has come into the solution during SO Powdered (− Three different high Mn (42.75 Some experiments were repeated randomly and the experimental error was found to be within ± The low Mn bearing solutions were buffered more and were more ammoniacal. During preheating of the powdered nodule at 400 During roasting of nodule with SO The roasted nodule was leached in water to solubilize the metal sulfates instantaneously in solution where ferric sulfate was hydrolyzed and precipitated as hydroxide/oxide quantitatively. After filtration through Whatman filter paper Grade 1, the filtrate was analyzed. Ammonium sulfate was added to the filtrate followed by the addition of ammonia to convert the metal ions to their corresponding ammine complexes as follows: The metal ammine solution was again analyzed to confirm the constitution of the solution. During the precipitation experiments carried out in the turbo grid, the solution came in contact with air/oxygen to precipitate manganese as MnO Copper, nickel and cobalt values present as ammine complexes did not precipitate out from the solution. The loss of metal ions from the solution can be ascribed to their adsorption on the MnO Thus, the loss of Mn from the high Mn solution can be kept in the order: air 10 The precipitation of Mn from high and low Mn solutions with air flow rate of 10 To determine the order of reaction for precipitation of manganese and adsorption loss of cobalt, the zero order, first order and second order reaction equations such as concentration of metal ion at time ‘t’ concentration of metal ion at time ‘0’ Reaction rate constant, s time, s The loss of cobalt from the solution was due to its adsorption on the MnO amount of cobalt adsorbed per gram of MnO equilibrium concentration of cobalt, mg/L The plot of log q The precipitation loss of cobalt from the solution due to its adsorption on the MnO After rearrangement, the Langmuir adsorption equation can be given as amount of cobalt adsorbed per gram of MnO equilibrium concentration of cobalt, mg/L Adsorption capacity for Langmuir adsorption isotherm Langmuir constant The plot of 1/q By comparing the Freundlich and Langmuir adsorption isotherm data, it was observed that except for low Mn solution with O The precipitation of manganese from the Indian Ocean manganese nodule ammoniacal ammonium sulfate solutions of high and low manganese content was carried out with different flow rates of air/oxygen in 6 The authors wish to thank Dr. T. Subbaiah, HOD, Hydro & Electrometallurgy Department and Prof. B. K. Mishra, Director, Institute of Minerals & Materials Technology, Bhubaneswar for the encouragement and kind permission to send the paper for publication.