Volar plating is one of the most used surgical treatments for dorsally displaced extra-articular distal radius fractures. However, the reduction of the dorsal tilt can be difficult. It usually requires a flexion maneuver of the wrist while maintaining and screwing the plate, which is cumbersome. Plate positioning also is a crucial step and is sometimes difficult because of the large size of the plate relative to the width of the distal radius.
                  We use an epiphysis-first technique. We place all the epiphyseal screws before reduction, and then we take advantage of the anatomical shape of a locking plate to automatically reduce the dorsal tilt by fixing the proximal radius to the plate with cortical compression screws.
                  To ensure easy and accurate positioning of the plate, we drill a distal medial pilot hole in a free-hand fashion 10 mm proximal to the watershed line and 10 mm lateral to the medial rim of the radius, without positioning the plate. This allows a clear view of the location of this first hole. The locking plate is then applied to the distal radius with help of a monocortical non-locking screw, and it is controlled under fluoroscopy. When this medial pilot hole is properly positioned and the plate correctly tilted on the anteroposterior view, the remaining epiphyseal holes are filled with locking screws. Then the plate is fixed on the proximal radius with bicortical compression screws, allowing an automatic reduction of the epiphyseal dorsal tilt.
                  We believe this technique is a safe and reproducible way to position volar plates and to reduce anatomically the dorsal tilt in extra-articular posteriorly displaced distal radius fractures (AO A2 and A3). Furthermore, the automatic fracture reduction provided by this technique decreases operation time and radiation.Volar plating is one of the most frequent surgical treatments for distal radius fractures [ One interesting feature of this epiphysis-first technique is that the osteosynthesis starts by putting a screw in the more medial and distal hole of the plate To facilitate the positioning of the plate, we drill the more medial and distal hole directly into the volar cortex of the radius without placing the plate on the bone ( Then, we place the remaining epiphyseal screws (usually 3 additional locking screws) and use the plate to reduce the fracture by tightening the cortical screws ( In our opinion, this is a simple and safe way to improve plate positioning, fracture reduction, and decrease operation time and irradiation. We use this technique only for displaced extra-articular fractures with posterior tilt. Articular fragments may be displaced by the automatic reduction provided by the plate, so we usually avoid the epiphysis-first technique for those fractures. This technique does not allow the reduction of radial translation and care should be taken that this deformation is reduced first before drilling the proximal holes ( If screws are too proximal, because of a too proximal pilot hole or a too radially tilted plate, the automatic reduction effect is not fully obtained as screws slip into the cancellous bone up to the subchondral area where they should lie at first. For the same reason, this technique requires a low-profile plate intended to run alongside the watershed line with screws reaching the subchondral bone. With first-generation locking plates, distal screws may be too proximal and prevent anatomical reduction of the posterior displacement. Finally, exposure of the epiphysis is crucial for proper positioning of the implant, especially the distal and medial aspects of the radius. Failing to expose edges of the radius may prevent the correct placement of the first screw. To ease dissection, a small Hohmann's retractor should be placed at the medial border of the metaphysis, just proximal to the radioulnar joint. The Distal-Medial Pilot Hole associated with an epiphysis-first technique allows a safe, reproducible, and anatomical reduction of posteriorly tilted extra-articular fractures of the distal radius. We now use this technique routinely in this indication. Dr Chelli has nothing to disclose. Dr Bronsard has nothing to disclose. Pr Gonzalez has nothing to disclose. Dr Blasco has nothing to disclose. Dr Gauci is paid consultant for Wright (USA). Pr Boileau is paid consultant for Wright (USA) and has received royalties for the design of shoulder implants. All the authors, their immediate families and any research foundations with which they are affiliated have not received any financial payments or other benefits from any commercial entity related to the subject of this article. No funding was received for this study. To our kind team of X-ray technicians working in the OR.