In order to develop a process to separate La from Pr and Nd, solvent extraction experiments have been done. A synthetic chloride leach liquor of monazite after NaOH digestion was used in this study and its chemical composition was La—781ppm, Pr—119ppm, and Nd—333ppm and initial pH of 4.94. Among the extractants tested in this study (Cyanex 272, D2EHPA, PC88A, and Cyanex 301), Cyanex 272 exhibited the best extraction affinity toward Pr and Nd than La. Saponification of Cyanex 272 had some beneficial effect on the separation of La from Pr and Nd. As the saponification degree of Cyanex 272 increased to 50%, the percent extraction of La was depressed to zero and thus it was possible to separate La from the solution. Batch simulation of the counter-current extraction studies with saponified Cyanex 272 confirmed that the extraction percentage of La, Pr, and Nd was 4.9%, 96.6%, and 98.7%, respectively. The co-extracted La in the loaded organic was scrubbed with pure Nd solution and stripping of Pr and Nd from the loaded organic phase was achieved with 1M HCl.Rare earths are well-known constituents in various strategic materials, such as magnets, batteries, high refractive index glass, ceramic capacitors and catalysts. The major sources of rare earth elements are the minerals bastnasite, monazite, and xenotime. It is generally known that the difficulties encountered in the separation and recovery of light rare earths (LREs) from each other is due to their similar physical and chemical properties and the separation of LREs (La, Pr and Nd) is a challenging task. Increasing research efforts have been made to invent new concepts in solvent extraction (SX) and ion exchange technologies, which could facilitate to separate them ( Morais and Ciminelli developed a process to obtain a high-grade La Among the several recent SX approaches, the use of organophosphorous extractants ( In our study on the recovery of rare earths from monazite sand mined at Korea, preliminary experiments were conducted with NaOH digestion of monazite sand followed by leaching with dilute HCl to dissolve rare earths. By adjusting the pH of the leaching solution, thorium could be separated from LREs and the obtained leach liquor contained metals such as La, Ce, Pr, Nd, Fe and Al. The impurities of base metals such as Al and Fe could be easily separated from rare earths and it deserves to be mentioned that the separation of Ce from LREs is possible using the selective oxidation method ( Bis (2,4,4-trimethylpentyl) phosphinic acid (Cyanex 272), di-2-ethylhexylphosphoric acid (D2EHPA), 2-ethylhexylphosphonic acid mono-2-ethylhexyl ester (PC 88A), and bis (2,4,4,-trimethylpentyl) dithiophosphonic acid (Cyanex 301), were purchased from Cytec Canada Inc. These extractants were used as such without any further purification. Escaid 110 was used as a diluent in the present whole work. The sodium salt of Cyanex 272 (10, 30, 50% neutralized) was prepared by adding a stoichiometric amount of concentrated and standard NaOH solution and 2% (v/v) TBP was added as a modifier ( Lanthanum, praseodymium oxides (99.9%) and neodymium oxide (99.9%) were purchased from Johnson Matthey Company and Strem Chemicals, respectively. The stock solution of rare earths was prepared by digesting the corresponding rare earth oxide in minimum concentrated hydrochloric acid and evaporated to near dryness and then made up to the mark with distilled water. The desired initial pH values of the rare earth solution were adjusted with HCl/NaOH and all the other chemicals used were of analytical grade. Throughout our experiments, the initial pH of the aqueous solution was kept at 4.94. Spectro arcos model inductive coupled plasma optical emission spectroscopy (ICP-OES) and Fischer Scientific accumet (XL 15 model) pH meter were used for the determination of metal concentrations in the aqueous phase and for measuring the pH values, respectively. General extraction and stripping experiments were carried out at room temperature by contacting equal volumes (20 The distribution ratio (D) was calculated as the ratio of the concentration of metal present in the organic phase to that part in the aqueous phase at equilibrium. From the D values, the percent extraction was obtained by using %E Two replicate experiments were carried out for each condition and the analysis of metal contents in the aqueous solution before and after extraction was performed in duplicate. The coefficient of variance determined for the results was more or less ± Initial screening experiments were conducted on the extraction of LREs (La, Pr and Nd) using Cyanex 272, D2EHPA, PC 88A and Cyanex 301 in Escaid 110 diluent at an initial pH of 4.94 and the results are shown in  It is known that the increase in the extraction of La to Nd with cationic extractants could be explained by the difference in the acidity of the metal ions and this difference is related to the systematic decrease in their ionic radii ( Compared to PC 88A and Cyanex 272, the good extractability of the LREs by D2EHPA can be explained on the basis of their pKa values and the order of decreasing pKa can be represented as follows: D2EHPA In order to determine the phase ratio and theoretical number of stages required to acquire the maximum extraction efficiency of Pr and Nd from La in counter current simulation studies, the extraction isotherm was constructed from experimental results obtained by varying the A/O ratio from 1 to 9 and the O/A ratio from 5 to 1. As is evident in Based on extraction isotherm data in During the extraction of metal by cationic extractants, hydrogen ion is transferred from organic to aqueous phase and this liberation of hydrogen ion led to lower extraction of metal owing to the decrease in solution pH of the aqueous phase. This problem can be avoided by saponifying cationic extractants with NaOH. In the extraction of metal by saponified cationic extractants, it is generally accepted that the sodium ions in saponified cationic extractants are first replaced by the LREs in preference to hydrogen ions ( The concentration of the saponified Cyanex 272 was varied from 0.001 to 2 Based on single stage extraction data of 50% saponified Cyanex 272, this particular plot ( The process parameter of the three stage counter current extraction simulation study was shown in In order to achieve effective separation of La from Pr and Nd, scrubbing of La from the loaded saponified Cyanex 272 phase has been carried out with acidified distilled water (initial pH of 1.2 to 4.9) and the results obtained are described in Preliminary experiments were conducted on stripping of Nd and Pr from SLO (Pr 222 Solvent extraction experiments have been performed to separate La from chloride solution containing Pr and Nd. Cyanex 272, D2EHPA, PC 88A, and Cyanex 301 were used as an extractant. The synthetic chloride solution used in our study was similar to the HCl leach liquor of monazite sand after NaOH digestion. The present work points out that Cyanex 272 and saponified Cyanex 272 show a good potential for the selective separation of La from Pr and Nd, among the tested extractants at an initial pH of 4.94. 1 The financial support was kindly offered by a grant from