The aim of this study was to investigate food oral processing and bolus formation in the elderly population, and their relationship with the perception of oral comfort, for two soft cereal products of different composition: sponge-cake and brioche. Twenty subjects aged 65 and over participated in the study. They were classified in two groups according to dental status (poor vs. satisfactory) and presented various stimulated salivary flow rate (SSF) in each group. Food bolus properties (hydration ratio and apparent viscosity) were characterized after three chewing stages for both groups. Results showed that chewing duration did not depend on food product but rather on physiology: subjects with a poor dental status had a shorter chewing duration. For each chewing stage, sponge-cake boli showed a higher hydration ratio than brioche boli, which showed higher apparent viscosity. For sponge-cake, perception of oral comfort was primarily driven by SSF rate, irrespective of the dental status. In the case of brioche, oral comfort was also partially explained by SSF in the case of subjects with poor dental status. This result suggests that perception of oral comfort in brioche could be driven by product related attributes rather than oral health. For both foods, a phenomenological model of bolus viscosity as a function of stimulated salivary flow and chewing duration was proposed.Acronym for the French ‘National Agency of Drugs and Safety’ Brioche Bolus hydration ratio (g of water/100 1/3 of total chewing duration, first chewing stage 2/3 of total chewing duration, second chewing stage Perceived as easy to chew Overall oral comfort perception score Dry matter (g of dry matter/100 Dental status Perceived as easy to eat Food Oral Processing Oral comfort Perceived as easy to moisten Diameter of capillary die or mouthful size (mm or cm) Poor (dental status) Principal Component Perceived pastiness Posterior functional unit Satisfactory (dental status) Sponge-cake Swallowing point or total chewing duration or third chewing stage Stimulated salivary flow rate (mL/min or mL/s) Perceived stickiness Easy to swallow Chewing duration at a given sequence (s) Water content (g of water/100 Bolus apparent viscosity at 120 Apparent shear rate (s The proportion of elderly people worldwide is growing rapidly. Over the first half of the current century, the global population aged 60 and over is projected to expand by more than three times, to reach nearly 2.1 billion in 2050 ( It is common knowledge that, beyond the physiological and nutritional functions, eating is an enjoyable sensory experience that can be source of satisfaction and pleasure ( Given this context, the aim of this study was to determine the relationships between bolus properties, oral health status and perceived oral comfort in elderly for two cereal foods: sponge-cake and brioche. Two physiology criteria were selected to assess the oral health status of participants: dental status and salivary flow rate. Other oral physiological parameters such as tongue pressure have been described also as makers of oral health in elderly ( Twenty French subjects (9 men and 11 women, aged 65–82 The salivary flow rates (mL/min) of participants were determined on the day of the experimentation with and without mechanical stimulation as described by All subjects agreed on the content of the study and signed informed consent. This study was approved by the local ethical committee and the French National Agency of Drugs and Safety ( Brioche and sponge-cake were provided by CERELAB® (Dijon, France). Their composition and density values are shown in Every subject participated in one collective and six individual sessions, for a total of seven sessions of approximately 1 Perception of oral comfort ( The rheological properties of products and boli were determined by capillary rheometry as previously described by Bolus hydration ratio was determined on part of the bolus used for rheological characterization, in order to reduce the number of collected boli and avoid subject exhaustion. After capillary rheometry, part of the extruded bolus was weighed before and after staying in an oven during 24 Differences between products and subjects for chewing parameters were investigated using a two-way Analysis of Variance (ANOVA) model (product To investigate the impact of oral health status in chewing parameters and oral comfort scores, a two-way Analysis of Covariance (ANCOVA) model with interaction (dental status Pearson correlation coefficients were calculated when needed between bolus properties, oral comfort scores and chewing parameters. Finally, Principal Component Analysis (PCA) was used to study the relationship between all of the variables cited above. All statistical analyses were performed with XLSTAT software (v.2016 18.06, Addinsoft, USA). Average chewing parameters and bolus properties regardless of dental status and salivary flow are shown in Conversely, bolus properties showed significant differences between products ( The influence of the oral health status on the chewing parameters and bolus properties was determined by ANCOVA model, and the results are presented in Hydration ratio and bolus apparent viscosity were found to be correlated (r From Unlike bolus properties, the perception of oral comfort (OC) was not significantly different between products, as reflected by the two-way ANOVA performed on the scores obtained for every of the 26 questions included in the questionnaire (see Appendix, Table A.2). Moreover, both products were considered to be very comfortable. The scores of the sensory attributes related to OC and bolus formation of the questionnaire are presented in In order to investigate the impact of oral health status in the perception of OC, an ANCOVA model was applied ( The preceding study of physiological parameters highlighted their impact in the oral processing and the bolus formation process of the elderly. So, in order to consider the simultaneous action of all these variables (physiology, chewing parameters and bolus properties) and their inner relationship with oral comfort (OC) attributes, a PCA was performed. Regarding OC, only the attributes with a significant subject effect were included. For sponge-cake, principal components (PC's) 1 and 3, which together explained 57% of the total variability, were selected for a graphical projection ( PC 2 separated subjects according to chewing duration ( For brioche ( In all, as already seen from Additionally, two PCA were performed in order to consider poor and satisfactory dental status (DS) separately. For sponge cake, the obtained projections were similar to those described above on Finally, the perception of OC was not the same across the two groups. While for the satisfactory DS, the interpretation remains unchanged from the all-subject results ( Our results have shown remarkably that for soft aerated cereal foods, stimulated salivary flow rate is the most important physiological variable that impacts the food bolus properties and the perception of oral comfort in elderly, priming over the dental status. However, increasing the amount of fat seems to lower the role of the stimulated flow rate and bolus hydration, likely by increasing lubrication. This highlights the importance of the hydration and lubrication mechanisms in the oral processing and enjoyment of eating for this type of products in the elderly. Additionally, it was seen that two products with different composition and structure show similar chewing behavior and oral comfort perception but different bolus properties and oral mechanisms. Moreover, it has been found that the evolution of bolus viscosity can be predicted through the stimulated saliva flow rate of the individual independently of the dental status. Since viscosity has been shown to influence significantly the oral comfort, this relationship could be a good basis for modelling oral processing and designing foods with the desired oral comfort for the elderly. In this study, salivary role has been only considered in terms of resting and stimulated flow. However, other salivary properties may influence bolus properties and sensory perception of cereal products, in particular salivary alpha-amylase and/or viscosity ( This work was funded and supported by  Supplementary data to this article can be found online at