Li-S batteries are a promising next-generation battery technology but are confronted with a series of fundamental challenges, in particular the notorious shuttle effect of soluble polysulfide intermediates. Current research efforts are mostly focused on designing proper host materials for the entrapment and immobilization of polysulfides. Herein, we demonstrate that electrocatalysis may play an unexpected role in Li-S batteries. Nanosized tungsten carbide particles dispersed on the carbonaceous support are prepared from the pyrolysis of phosphotungstic acid-functionalized metal-organic frameworks. Both experimental measurements and theoretical calculations demonstrate that they not only have strong affinity toward polysulfide intermediates, but also significantly accelerate the reduction of low-order polysulfides that is otherwise kinetically challenged. Using these supported tungsten carbide nanoparticles as the cathode catalyst, our Li-S batteries achieve large capacity, excellent cycling stability and impressive rate capability.Li-S batteries have been widely considered as the most promising solution for next-generation energy storage because of their high theoretic energy density and relatively low cost [ In this study, we explore the potential of tungsten carbide as the cathode catalyst to promote polysulfide interconversion. Tungsten carbide is suggested to have a “platinum-like” electronic structure, and has been widely investigated for many different catalytic and electrocatalytic reactions [ All the chemicals were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich and used without further purification. NENU-3 was prepared following the reported method with some slight modification [ As-prepared NENU-3 or HKUST-1 powders were placed in the center of a vacuum tube furnace. The furnace was evacuated down to 2.25 Torr under the Ar protection. Its temperature was raised to 800 °C at a ramping rate of 5 °C/min, then to 1000 °C at 2 °C/min, and maintained at this temperature for 30 min. After naturally cooled down to room temperature, the products were collected and re-dispersed in 15 ml of 0.2 M FeCl XRD was obtained on a PANalytical X-ray diffractometer using Cu Kα radiation (40 kV, 40 mA). SEM images were taken from a Zeiss scanning electron microscope. TEM images were collected on an FEI Tecnai F20 transmission electron microscope operating at an acceleration voltage of 200 kV. XPS spectra were obtained on an ESCALAB 250 XI XPS spectrometer. To prepare the 0.5 M Li Generalized gradient approximation (GGA) with the Perdew-Burke-Ernzerhof (PBE) method was performed for exchange-correlation. The van der waals interaction was simulated by means of the vdW-DF2 functional. All geometries were optimized until the energy and the self-consistent force were converged to 1.0 × 10  W One general challenge in the preparation of transition metal carbides is the very high pyrolysis temperature, which is essential to surmount the thermodynamic and kinetic barriers associated with the diffusion of carbon atoms into the metal lattice, but unfortunately often leads to undesirable particle sintering and affords microsized products with low accessible surface areas [ To assess the electrochemical performances of W First, we compared the cyclic voltammetry (CV) curves of W Consistent results were also garnered from the galvanostatic charge and discharge experiments at different rates from 0.2 C to 2 C (normalized to the mass of equivalent sulfur). Two distinct discharge plateaus at ∼2.3 V and ∼2.1 V are observed for W To quantitatively evaluate and compare the catalytic capability of W Besides its electrocatalytic function, W In order to better understand the electrocatalytic effect of W Having demonstrated the great advantages of W In summary, we demonstrated W This work was financially supported by the The following is the Supplementary data to this article: Supplementary data to this article can be found online at The authors declare no competing financial interest.