In the present work, the effect of carbon concentrations on the wear behavior of a Fe base alloy processed by powder metallurgy was investigated. Four Fe base alloys have been processed by mechanical alloying (MA). Mixtures of pure iron (mean particle size of 33μm) with different concentrations of carbon 0.84, 0.96, 1.16 and 1.40wt.% (370μm)–0.3wt.% Mn (33μm)–0.3wt.% Si (5μm) were milled during 72h using a horizontal ball mill in an argon atmosphere. 1wt.% of zinc stearate was added as the process control agent. Powders were uniaxially cold-pressed at 400MPa to obtain green compacts with 25mm diameter and 9.7mm height. The green compacts were sintered for 2h at 1200°C in vacuum and cooled to room temperature inside the furnace. For the wear tests, the samples were tested in dry and lubricated conditions. Pin-on-disc tribological tests according to ASTM G-99 standard were conducted under a normal load of 140N and a constant tangential speed of 0.15m/s in dry condition and lubricated condition with Chevron ultra duty grease™. The worn surfaces were examined using scanning electron microscopy (SEM) to study the wear behavior of the steel. The wear rate and the wear coefficient k were measured. The results showed that the wear resistance and hardness of the samples increase by increasing the carbon content and it was found that the sample with 1.40wt.% of carbon had the best wear resistance in lubricated condition with a dimensional wear coefficient of k
                     =2.1×10−5
                     mm3
                     m−1
                     N−1.Ultra high carbon steels are Fe–C alloys with 1–2 This kind of steels can be interesting in automotive parts like gears and bearings in which wear resistance is a relevant property. In these parts, tolerances and dimensional precision are important and powder metallurgy (PM) can be suitable for producing huge quantity of parts with high dimensional quality. Ultra high carbon steels can be produced by PM technique using high purity elemental powders in order to produce high quality steels. By means of mechanical alloying these elements can be processed to obtain homogeneous mixtures with small particle size, which improve diffusivity of the elements during sintering. The essence of mechanical alloying (MA) in PM is the action of grinder balls colliding with powder grains and the interaction of the powder grains. During the MA the local plastic distortion, diffusion displacement of components, size reduction, joining and chemical interaction of rubbing material surfaces take place. As a result of high energy grinding of powders, the mechanical alloying enables to obtain homogeneous mixtures of components, solid solutions and nanocrystalline materials in contrast to a simple mixing A number of studies dealing with wear behavior of carbon steels have been reported Wear resistance is primarily a function of hardness. The higher hardness means better resistance to abrasion by hard particles, surface plastic deformation, debonding, and microploughing Four Fe base alloys were prepared by mechanical alloying; the chemical compositions of the alloys are given in Pure iron powder (99%) with a mean particle size of 33 The milled powder was uniaxially cold pressed at 400 The metallographic analysis was done by conventional method. The sintered samples were cut and mechanically polished with diamond paste of 1 Hardness test were performed with a Mitutoyo HV-113 durometer. The load used was 200 The wear resistance of the studied alloys was obtained by carrying out wear tests in the pin-on-disc apparatus according to the standard ASTM-G 99, keeping sliding distance, applied normal load and sliding velocity constant. The wear tests were performed in dry and lubricated conditions. For lubricated condition Chevron ultra duty grease™ (kinematic viscosity at 40 The counter face of sintered discs were machined and polished with sandpaper grain 600 (see The pin and the disc were weighed in an analytical balance with resolution 0.0001 For lubricated condition, the grease was continuously added to avoid any dry damage. The wear test was interrupted each 200 In this system the initial iron powders are round shape with a mean particle size of 33 In   The friction coefficient in function of the carbon content is shown in In  The wear coefficients for these alloys are shown in  The alloy 1 (see On the other hand in lubricated condition (see  When carbon content increases, it can be seen that the final density of the samples increases by reducing the porosity. It is due to carbon reduces the melting point of the alloy Fe–C (indicated by the solidus line on the Fe–C phase diagram); for this reason, the gap between the sintering temperature and the solidus line reduces, this results in better sintering conditions at the same temperature of 1200 As consequence of plastic deformation involved in lubricated condition, plowing and detachment of material was encountered. As hardness was increased by adding carbon, the surface damage was lower. However, in dry condition the highest hardness reduces the material toughness and causes the worst wear resistance due to material that suffers microcracking on the worn surface. Hence, it is more often that some compromises between high hardness and high fracture toughness give the best wear resistance. It was found that pores act as stress concentrators suit nucleation and growth of cracks that caused a severe detachment of material increasing highly the wear rate. This work has been supported by Instituto Politécnico Nacional. Two of the authors (DHS and MVT) are recipients of COFAA-IPN and SNI fellowships. To the tribology lab, SEPI ESIME Zacatenco.