Permeability increase in coalbed methane (CBM) reservoirs during primary depletion, particularly in the San Juan Basin, is a well accepted phenomenon. It is complex since it is influenced by stress conditions and coal matrix shrinkage associated with gas desorption. Understanding the variations in coal permeability is critical in order to reliably project future gas production, or consider other gas migration issues in the reservoir. Since sorption-induced strain plays a critical role in changing the permeability, typically observed, the theoretical strain model should be incorporated into the permeability prediction models. An effort is made in this paper to couple the recently developed Liu and Harpalani sorption-induced strain model with various permeability models. The model first calculates the theoretical coal matrix shrinkage strain and, using the calculated strain, various commonly used permeability models are applied to two sets of field data. The results of the coupled models show that the agreement between the predicted permeability and that observed in the field is very good. The merit of the coupled models is that it can theoretically predict the permeability with less experimental work, making it a more time efficient and economical technique compared to models used in the past.Coalbed methane (CBM) refers to gas formed as a part of the geological processes of coal formation, and is contained in varying quantities within all coals. With increased energy demand and significant advances made in development of CBM industry during the last three decades in the United States, CBM has become a resource of global significance, with emergence of active CBM plays in China, Canada, Australia and India. CBM reserves and production in the US are both almost 10% of the total values ( Scientific understanding of, and production experience with, coalbed methane has matured significantly in the last decade although, relatively speaking, CBM industry is still young and further studies will continue in order to better understand the production behavior. Compared to conventional natural gas reservoirs, CBM reservoirs have several unique characteristics: (1) very low effective porosity/permeability, which often hinders the development of CBM plays; (2) adsorption storage mechanism since most of the methane produced in coal is stored in the micropores in adsorbed form ( With advances in scientific knowledge and field observations, a number of analytical permeability models have been developed to predict the unique permeability behavior of CBM reservoirs ( This paper is aimed at incorporating the recently developed matrix strain model into the existing and widely used analytical permeability models and evaluating its performance. Following this, effort is made to compare the modified permeability model predictions against published field permeability increase data. It provides a basis for the different CBM simulators to theoretically incorporate the sorption-induced strain into establishing the changes in permeability during history matching and projection of gas production. It also provides a theoretical basis to improve the performance of CBM reservoir simulators with only basic geomechanical and adsorption parameters as input. These parameters are either available in geologic report or easy to obtain through experiments. Hence, the coupling effort of the strain and permeability model will avoid to carry out expensive field tests and/or time consuming experiments, for instance, steady-state shrinkage and swelling tests. The first reported study of coal matrix volumetric response to sorption of gas can be traced back to After initiation of the CBM industry in the early 1980's in the US, and availability of production data for a few years, coal matrix shrinkage research gained a great deal of attention due to its impact on changes in the cleat/fracture aperture, inducing a considerable increase in the cleat permeability during later part of life of CBM wells. The coal matrix shrinkage and swelling strain has been quantified in the laboratory by several researchers ( In order to quantitatively model the sorption-induced volumetric strain, some empirical approaches have been developed to establish a link between the measured strain and reservoir pressure. For example, Other researchers ( In 2007,    C The change in permeability is then determined using the following cubic equation: Since this model was unable to successfully match the field data from San Juan basin reservoirs, it was subsequently modified ( A value of zero for ‘g’ was recommended for vertical cleats and 1 for horizontal cleats, leading to suppression of the pressure effect term (first term on the right side of Eq.  The value of cleat compressibility, C  The cubic relationship between permeability and porosity was used to calculate coal cleat permeability change, as follows: All three models discussed above are based on uniaxial strain condition. However, there are some researchers who believe that the volume of the entire reservoir does not change with depletion ( Instead of laying heavy emphasis on the pore volume/cleat compressibility, which is still a topic of controversy for CBM reservoirs, the model focuses on changes in the grain volume and then converts this to change in cleat volume, assuming that the total volume remains constant. Moreover, the authors pointed out that this model is more “friendly” due to its transparency, validation with field data using reasonable input parameters, simplicity and ability to measure every parameter required in the model.      In the strain-based models, the shrinkage/swelling effect due to desorption/adsorption is directly subtracted/added to the initial fracture porosity. The advantage of these models is that they avoid the controversial pore volume/cleat compressibility parameter. The accurate prediction of porosity change, however, becomes very critical in these models. The required model input parameters, typically obtained from history matching exercise, makes the model users somewhat uncomfortable. Moreover, there are two uncertain parameters in the P&M model, g and f, with typical values of g used between 0.1 and 0.5. Although the modelers provide a means to estimate the parameter g, it is not very clear how its value can be estimated for CBM plays with limited production data, like the Illinois basin. The authors believe that the value of ‘g’ is selected primarily to match the production data rather than estimated from the technique provided by the modelers. The S&D and C&B models are in the stress-based category. Unlike the strain-based models, the shrinkage/swelling effect due to desorption/adsorption is incorporated in the stress change term. In this category, the pore volume/cleat compressibility serves as the bridge between permeability and stress changes. Therefore, accuracy of the pore volume compressibility becomes the key factor during any modeling exercise. For both families of models, there is an assumption behind the formulation and, that is, the effective stress (Biot's) coefficient is constant and equal to unity. This assumption is not strictly correct for porous media, as pointed out by a few researchers in the past ( A quantitative comparison of the S&D and C&B models is presented below. According to There are two competing terms governing the permeability variation during depletion. The first term is the increased effective stress with reduction in gas pressure, denoted as the stress term. The second term is the matrix shrinkage term due to gas desorption, denoted as the strain term. For the stress term, the coefficients are     Using Eqs. By inserting Eq. Similar to S&D model, the permeability variation in C&B model can be rewritten as: The coupled model of Liu & Harpalani and C&B is formulated by substituting Eq. Ma et al. model can be rearranged as the following equation using the incremental matrix shrinkage matrix strain (∆ε): Substituting Eq. The San Juan basin, located in the northwestern New Mexico and southwestern Colorado, is one of the most mature gas producing areas in the world. Extensive investigations have been carried out to understand the flow behavior not only for primary production also for the CO In order to validate the coupled models presented, the formation permeability data is essential. Fortunately, several investigations have been carried out ( In the present work, Liu and Harpalani model, combined with the P&M permeability model, was used first to match the field data for one well in the San Juan basin. The required input parameters for Next, the combined Liu & Harpalani model and Ma et al. model was used to match the same set of field data. The matching results are shown in  In this study, we used the Liu and Harpalani model, combined with the S&D model, to match this set of field data, as well as Liu and Harpalani and C&B models. As in any history matching exercise, it is important to use reservoir properties that are representative of the field under study. We used the same mechanical properties, Young's modulus (E In order to improve the Liu and Harpalani and C&B model results, another history matching exercise was carried out using the same Young's modulus (E The authors would like to point out that the stress-based models, S&D model and C&B, rely heavily on the availability of an accurate estimate for the cleat compressibility. Furthermore, the two models can obtain fairly good match with the assumption of constant cleat compressibility throughout the life of a producing reservoir although the two values are very different. Based on the results presented, it is difficult to conclude which of the two models is superior unless a dependable estimate for the value of cleat compressibility is available, along with a reasonable justification that its value remains constant. In fact, calling one better than the other would not be fair. Finally, an effort was made to validate the Liu and Harpalani model and Ma et al. model with this set of field data. The results are shown in Several theoretical or empirical models have been proposed to describe the complex relationship between permeability and variations in stress, pore pressure and continued sorption of gas. Two groups of analytical permeability models have been discussed in this paper, that is, strain-based and stress-based. Every model includes the effect of matrix shrinkage, but different mechanisms, to arrive at the variation in permeability. In the strain-based models, P&M and Ma et al. models, the matrix shrinkage directly affects the cleat/fracture porosity, a key factor impacting the permeability. In the stress-based model, including both S&D and C&B, the matrix shrinkage effect first induces a change in the stress condition due to the strain–stress relationship, and the change in permeability follows, controlled by the stress changes through cleat compressibility. Due to the uncertainty about the value and constancy of cleat compressibility, we prefer strain-based models because these are more transparent and easy to understand. However, once the cleat compressibility is estimated accurately, either in the laboratory or field, the stress-based models may end up gaining wide application in numerical simulation. Apart from one exception ( Of additional interest is the comparison of P&M and Ma et al. models. The P&M model is derived based on the uniaxial strain condition whereas the Ma et al. model is based on the constant reservoir volume assumption, both strain-based models. Ma et al. boasts the “friendly” features of the model as its transparency, good history matching with field data, simplicity and ability to measure every parameter required in the model. Obviously, this paper suggests that the Ma et al. model, combined with Liu and Harpalani strain model, is more “friendly” for both field data sets. The coupled model only requires basic mechanical properties and adsorption constants to fit the field data. The P&M model is, however, more complex than the Ma et al. model, and it obviously has the potential of handling complicated permeability problems. If a model user is interested primarily in obtaining an initial permeability trend, we strongly recommend the combined Liu and Harpalani and Ma et al. models. On the other hand, P&M model can be used to obtain a more detailed permeability profiles since it takes reservoir geometry into account. However, it should be noted that the uncertainties associated with the model must be treated properly. For example, appropriate and realistic values of ‘g’, ‘f’ and initial cleat porosity must be obtained based on solid and justifiable data. Coal formation permeability is complex in that it is influenced by the stress and is affected by coal shrinkage with gas desorption and swelling with adsorption. Understanding coal permeability is critical in order to reliably predict gas production or consider other reservoir gas migration issues. Since the sorption-induced strain plays an important role in the variation of permeability, the strain theoretical model should be incorporated into the permeability prediction models. An important aspect of this paper is that theoretical sorption-induced strain model (Liu and Harpalani) is coupled with different analytical permeability models and the coupled models are validated by matching two different sets of observed field data. This coupling process significantly reduces the experimental work necessary to estimate the volumetric strain due to sorption. Based on the work discussed in this paper, a few important conclusions can be made. These are summarized below:  P&M and Ma et al. models, coupled with Liu and Harpalani model, are effective methods to predict permeability increase in the San Juan basin CBM wells operated using primary recovery. Moreover, all input parameters are within reasonable ranges. S&D and C&B models, combined with Liu model, can be validated by varying the cleat compressibility for a set of field data reported by The coupled model of Liu and Harpalani and Ma et al. model is valid for both field cases with fewer input parameters and reasonable initial porosities. The most important implication is the combining of the sorption-induced strain and different permeability models. This can become a powerful tool to predict the permeability in the early stage of any new CBM plays. It only requires the basic adsorption data and mechanical properties, which are either available or relatively easy to estimate from laboratory during the early stages of CBM development.  coal matrix strain, dimensionless parameters of Langmuir match to volumetric strain as a result of matrix shrinkage reservoir pressure, MPa volumetric strain coefficient associated with gas sorption, ton/m Langmuir volume at pressure p, m Langmuir pressure, MPa surface potential, J/kg coal solid phase density, ton/m coal solid phase Young's modulus, MPa structure model parameter, dimensionless coal solid phase Poisson's ratio, dimensionless solid phase stress, MPa pore structure model constant (1.2), dimensionless ratio a/ universal gas constant, MPa*m temperature, K (Liu et al. model) modulus of the solid expansion, MPa gas molar volume (22.4), m Young's modulus, MPa Poisson's ratio, dimensionless cleat porosity, dimensionless initial cleat porosity, dimensionless P&M model specified term, MPa initial reservoir pressure, MPa bulk modulus, MPa constrained axial modulus, MPa pressure-strain suppression factor (Palmer), dimensionless a fraction between zero and one (Palmer), dimensionless grain compressibility, MPa permeability at pressure p, md virgin permeability, md effective horizontal stress at pressure p, MPa effective horizontal stress at pressure p cleat compressibility, MPa sorptioin induced strain, dimensionless initial volumetric strain value, dimensionless horizontal strain for a single matchstick, dimensionless incremental matrix volumetric strain, dimensionless reservoir pressures at condition one and condition two inertial or turbulent flow factor, D/Mscf formation thickness, ft effective permeability to gas, md pseudopressure, psi volumetric average reservoir pressure, psia flowing bottomhole pressure, psia gas surface flow rate, Mscf/D drainage radius, ft wellbore radius, ft skin factor, dimensionless temperature, °R (Clarkson et al., 2008) The authors wish to thank Dr. Christopher Clarkson for providing the field data for model validation.