Double-hydrophilic block copolymers (DHBC) containing neutral polyacrylamide and ionizable poly(vinylphosphonic acid) blocks were directly synthesized by quantitative chain extension of a polyacrylamide macroxanthate with vinylphosphonic acid. Formation of hybrid polyion complex (HPIC) micelles was investigated at low pH with divalent transition metal ions with an emphasis on the comparison with polyacrylate-based DHBC. The tendency to form HPIC micelles as a function of the polyvinylphosphonate block length was as follows Ni2+, Co2+ < Mn2+ < Cu2+ > Zn2+; it did not follow the charge to size ratio of cations or the Irving–Williams series, but was similar to the order obtained with phosphonate-bearing nucleotides and nucleic acids. The inclination to form HPIC micelles with asymmetric DHBC at low pH was stronger with polyvinylphosphonate-based than with polyacrylate-based polymers in accordance with the higher basicity of the phosphonate group. Moreover, it increased with the polyion block length.Hybrid polyion complex (HPIC) micelles are organic–inorganic nanoassemblies which have attracted increasing interest related to their uses as reservoirs of inorganic ions and as nanoreactors for inorganic polycondensation reactions DHBCs are well-established as control agents for morphosyntheses and bioinspired mineralization processes We have recently extended this preparation route to the case of layered double hydroxides (LDH) such as Mg–Al LDH The preparation of well-defined HPICs requires access to well-defined DHBCs carrying a variety of complexing blocks. In particular, DHBCs comprising a polyphosphonate block offer new possibilities for complexation of different metal cations, as a result of the higher basicity of the phosphonate group compared to the carboxylate group. Phosphonic acid-containing polymers are typically produced by free-radical polymerization of styrene Most importantly, RAFT/MADIX polymerizations allow the direct polymerization of monomers bearing unprotected phosphonic acid groups. A few years ago, we reported the first example of RDRP of a phosphonic acid-functional monomer, vinylphosphonic acid (VPA), which was successfully polymerized by aqueous MADIX polymerization with controlled In the following report we use a similar strategy to prepare neutral-anionic polyacrylamide-poly(vinylphosphonic acid) diblock copolymers (PAm- 2,2′-Azobis(isobutyramidine) dihydrochloride (AIBA, 98%) and 4,4′-azobis(4-cyanovaleric acid) (ACP, 98%) were purchased from Acros. The  Size exclusion chromatography (SEC) was carried out using three Shodex columns (2 × SH 806 HQ and SH 802 HQ) and coupled with a differential refractometer (RI-101), a UV detector (Varian Prostar) set at 290 nm and a multi-angle laser light scattering (MALS) detector (Wyatt Dawn Heleos). The flow rate of eluent was 1 ml min  Aqueous solution containing 0.1 M NaCl, 0.25 mM NaH  Aqueous solution containing 0.1 M NaNO Dynamic light scattering (DLS) measurements were performed at 25 °C using a Malvern Autosizer 4800 spectrogoniometer, with a 50 mW laser source operating at 532 nm. Scattered intensities (I) of the DHBC solutions and of the complex mixture solutions were measured at a scattering angle of 90°, they were then corrected by the polymer weight concentration (C) to yield I/C values. Intensity-averaged hydrodynamic diameters were determined at 90°. The synthesis of the macroxanthate PAm A similar procedure was followed for the synthesis of PAm In a typical procedure, PAm The polymer was separated from the reaction mixture by precipitation from methanol and dried under vacuum. The residual amount of VPA in the copolymer was estimated at 11 mol% relative to polymerized VPA units by All further PAm- In a typical procedure, PAm All further PAm- In a typical procedure, 5 ml of 0.1 M aqueous solution of divalent metal cations was prepared. Separately, 10 ml of an aqueous stock solution of PVPA- or PAA-based polymer was prepared at a concentration of about 20 wt%, the pH was adjusted to 5.5 and passed through a 0.22 μm filter. HPIC micelle suspensions were prepared at room temperature. Sufficient copolymer solution (20 wt%) was added to 50 μl of the metal ion solution (0.1 M) to achieve a complexation ratio, R, of 2. The complexation ratio is defined as the ratio of the molar concentrations of complexing groups (VPA or AA) to metal cations. The complexation ratio of 2 used in this work corresponds to the perfect stoichiometry to form HPIC micelles. The suspensions were diluted with water to give a final concentration of metal cations of 0.05 M and passed through a 0.22 μm filter. The solution was vigorously stirred for 2 min and then kept overnight without stirring before DLS measurements. DHBCs containing a neutral polyacrylamide (PAm) segment and a charged poly(vinylphosphonic acid) (PVPA) segment were synthesized by chain extension of two PAm macroxanthates of theoretical molecular weight 5000 g·mol Details of the block copolymers thus synthesized are shown in The SEC-RI chromatograms of the block copolymers ( Further confirmation of the desired structure was obtained from A parallel series of PAm- In our previous studies of the formation of HPIC micelles with polyacrylate-containing DHBC polymers Other divalent cations, including transition metal ions, could confer additional catalytic or magnetic properties to the LDH phases or to the mixed oxides obtained from these precursors. For this reason we studied HPIC micelle formation in the presence of the divalent transition metal ions Mn The reference (I/C)  In the case of PVPA-based polymers, I The order observed here for divalent transition metal ions, as far as micelle-forming capacity is concerned, still differs from the Irving–Williams series: complexes with the manganese ion are highly favored, and this cannot be related to its ionic radius or to the crystal field stabilization. The great stability of manganese complexes with phosphate/phosphonate ligands may be explained with the Hard and Soft theory of Lewis Acids and Bases (HSAB) In different studies on the interactions of metal ions with nucleotides and nucleic acids, similar results were obtained with bioactive aminophosphonates The large difference in behavior between polyacrylate- and polyphosphonate-based DHBC was evidenced with copolymers having blocks PAm All these properties in comparison with those of carboxylate ligands can be explained by the substantial differences between phosphonic and carboxylic groups in terms of size (phosphonate bigger than carboxylate), geometry (tetrahedral phosphonate and flat carboxylate), basicity (higher for phosphonate) and charge (phosphonate can be binegative depending on the pH). These differences have several consequences for metal–ligand complex formation. First, the higher basicity of the phosphonate Furthermore, complexation with longer polyions is entropically more favored, because of the release of more water molecules upon complexation, while fewer polymer chains get bound. This is in accordance with the present set of data ( The influence of the length of the PAm neutral block on values of I We have demonstrated the preparation of double hydrophilic block copolymers containing a neutral polyacrylamide block and an ionizable poly(vinylphosphonic acid) block by chain extension of a polyacrylamide macroxanthate with vinylphosphonic acid. This method allows direct access to the desired DHBC, without any requirement for protecting group chemistry. A clean transition to higher molecular weights is observed, indicating quantitative reaction of the macroxanthate. PAm- The ability of divalent transition metal ions to induce micellization by mixing partly ionized phosphonate-based DHBC and metal ions was studied as a function of the nature of the metal cation, with an emphasis on the comparison with the polyacrylate-based DHBC analogs. The micellization efficiency follows the sequence: Ni The complexing power of polyvinylphosphonates was stronger at low pH than that of polyacrylate-analogs, within the palette of metal ions studied. Moreover, longer polyvinylphosphonate complexing blocks favor micellization with divalent metal cations. Efforts are now underway to study the effect of pH on the micellization capacity and to follow the hydroxylation of metal cations in the presence of the DHBC polymers. The following is the supplementary data related to this article: Supplementary data related to this article can be found at