A combination of pyrometallurgical and hydrometallurgical processes showed promising results for the sustainable valorisation of red mud with selective iron recovery. However; high Si content in red mud and its slags produced by pyrometallurgical treatment for the Fe removal makes these secondary resources untreatable with conventional acid leaching routes due to the formation of silica gel. In this study, red mud and slags synthesized by electric arc furnace smelting, which contain both moderate and extensive SiO2, were exposed to dry digestion aiming selective Sc recovery with suppressed Ti and Si dissolution. Various additions of concentrated sulfuric acid were investigated to find out the optimum acid consumption for this process. A promising Sc leaching efficiency was found for acidic slag (~80%), where Ti dissolution was suppressed to <10% and without Si gel formation. The mineralogical content of red mud and the two slags were analysed by QEMSCAN and XRD in order to elucidate the leaching mechanism. Using the findings of this study, an empirical dry digestion leaching model was proposed for each starting material in a comparative manner.Scandium (Sc), which is considered as one of the most promising candidates for future transportation and energy industry owing to its unique behaviours in both light weight alloys and Zr based solid oxide fuel cells, is an expensive metal due to inadequate primary sources, complex extraction and production routes ( Dry digestion, which is defined as a process consisting of the addition of a concentrated acid to the solid materials with subsequent water leaching, is reported as an effective method against silica gel formation. The principle of dry digestion method is very similar to acid-baking technique, which was utilized to form water soluble sulphates from complex ore concentrates such as enargite and monazite, by concentrated sulfuric acid at a temperature range of 160-280 °C( In this study, it is aimed to apply dry digestion on EAF treated slags of red mud which is depleted in Fe but relatively enriched in Si. We aim to enhance Sc leaching efficiency and selectivity and examine the strength of dry digestion techniques on high Si content slags. One acidic (SiO The bauxite residue (BR) from Aluminum of Greece and two different electrical arc furnace treated slags were used in this study. BR dry powder was consecutively mixed with lignite coke and lime containing 87 wt% fixed carbon and 95 wt% CaO and 98 wt% SiO Chemical composition of three starting solid materials are listed in All three solid residues were treated by direct leaching and by dry digestion to observe and compare the differences of these operations. In the direct leaching tests, a glass beaker, a heating plate, and a magnetic stirrer were used for controlling the reaction temperature and stirring speed. Starting solid materials were added into the reactor, containing the pre-heated sulfuric acid 2.5 M (H Dry digestion process was performed with concentrated 97 wt% (H Leachates were analysed with ICP OES technique to obtain leaching efficiencies. Solid samples were analysed by QEMSCAN and XRD. For QEMSCAN® analysis, the acceleration voltage was set to 25 kV. The sample current was set to 10 nA at an working distance of 13 mm. The point spacing was set to 7.5 μm per step and 2000 X-ray counts were recorded per step. Phase interpretation and further image analysis, like phase map, modal composition and elemental mapping, were performed by using iDiscover software suite (FEI). XRD analyses was performed by Bruker D8 Advanced Diffractometer, which use Bragg- Brentano Geometry and θ- θ synchronization for X-Ray tube and the detector. 10°-80° (2 θ) were scanned with a 5° /min rate. The generator voltage was 40 kV and current was 40 nA. The quantitative evaluation was carried out with the program Topas (Bruker, AXS). For Rietveld analysis, the full profile method was used 0-point errors, specimen height errors, diffraction-peak intensities, LP-factor, background and crystal structure models were refined. Particle size distribution was obtained using QEMSCAN© based image analysis. Thereby, multi-phase particles where extracted virtually from the recoded field images. Before analysis particles <10 μm were filtered out to avoid misinterpretations. The generated particle population was analysed for their size distribution by the use of equivalent sphere diameter (ESD) method according to XRD analyses given in XRD analyses revealed that by EAF treatment, a dramatic change of phase content was occurred in both acidic and basic slags. Hematite is the most dominant phase of red mud accompanied by goethite, boehmite, diaspore, gibbsite and other silicates and via depletion of iron this was replaced by Ca, Al, Si mixed oxides in both slags. Moreover, the two slags between each other also exhibit different characteristics which may in turn affect leaching behaviour. The most apparent difference is observed in the crystallinity. Well defined and narrow peaks of the basic slag are replaced with poorly crystalline phases and a high content of amorphous content due to high amount of SiO Both slags and as a reference material, red mud, were first treated by direct leaching, and the tendency to form silica gel of pregnant leaching solutions was observed, as given in As expected, increasing the Si content of the solid shortened the gelation time, which necessitates the application of the dry digestion method for enhanced recoveries and processable pregnant leaching solutions. After establishing the necessity of dry digestion for slag treatment, dry digestion was first applied on red mud. In order to have a direct comparison, the acid (15 ml) to solid material (13 g) ratio (a/s: 1.15) was kept constant with direct leaching conditions and then acid amount varied to 10 (a/s: 0.77)and 5 ml (a/s: 0.38) (keeping solid amount constant and decreasing acid to solid ratio) to find the optimum acid requirement in terms of leaching efficiency and minimized acid consumption. Leaching efficiencies for Sc, Ti and Si can be found in In the case of direct leaching, Sc and Ti extraction efficiencies were around 45 and 50%, respectively. However, here it is important to note that, there was also an important amount of dissolved Si (40%) in the leachate, which resulted in silica gel formation within 2–3 days as given in Red mud mineral distribution and their associations have been studied extensively in our previous study, which helps us to understand leaching mechanism. After removal of a substantial portion of the Fe and due to the chemical additives and high temperature in the EAF furnace treatment, the starting materials, acidic and basic slags should exhibit a completely different minerology. In order to explain the leaching mechanism of desired metals and propose a leaching model, it is crucial to understand the mineralogy and the phases of the initial materials. Therefore, acidic slag and basic slag were analysed by QEMSCAN; especially to reveal Ti entrapments as given in  Although all slags were milled with an aim to have particles smaller than 90 μm, there were some agglomerations observed in some particulates which resulted in size bigger than 100 μm. But ESD revealed that both samples exhibit mainly smaller than 63 μm. This analysis highlight acidic slag exhibit relatively bigger particle size, which may promote the surrounding barrier effect. After understanding the differences between the acidic and basic slags in terms of mineralogy, they were subjected to dry digestion in a comparative manner to the direct leaching. 4 wt% of the SiO In the case of direct leaching with sulfuric acid, 84% of Sc recovery was achieved. However, as listed in It is also important to note that the removal of Fe and enrichment of slag in terms of Ti content did not enhance Ti leaching efficiency. Ti leaching efficiency of 50% from red mud was decreased to 25%, in the case of basic slag by direct leaching. With the application of dry digestion, this value is even more lowered, as can be seen in Moreover, due to the high CaO (~43 wt%) content of the basic slag, H After basic slag, acidic slag, which is an extreme case with 38% SiO Due to the very high SiO In order to understand the dry digestion mechanism better, solid residue of basic slag after treatment was analysed by QEMSCAN, which is given in This QEMSCAN analysis proves that an unreacted core is surrounded by a gypsum layer, which acts like a diffusion barrier and prevents further interaction between the concentrated acid and the slag. Since during the dry digestion process precipitation of insoluble silica takes place owing to increased ionic strengths, similar surrounding layer but consisting of SiO Using these leaching efficiency data and mineralogical information of starting and end materials, a comparative reaction model was proposed for the dry digestion of red mud, acidic and basic slag as given in Different mineralogy and degrees of crystallinity of the starting materials lead to various leaching efficiencies of Sc and selectivity of Sc over Ti. In all cases, as a result of the precipitation of Si as SiO In this study, red mud and two different Fe depleted slags with different chemistries produced from red mud by smelting were exposed to dry digestion with the intention of recovering Sc selectively by supressing Ti and Si dissolution. The major problem of using traditional leaching methods while dealing with Si enriched materials is the formation of silica gel, and this was completely supressed in all three cases when the dry digestion method was implemented. It was found that when compared with direct leaching conditions, there is a certain suppression of the leaching efficiencies due to rapid reaction kinetics and formation of sulphates as a surrounding layer, which prevents acid to penetrate into the particle core. However, this suppression was more pronounced in the case of acidic slag where Ti (<10%) and Si (<3%) were successfully supressed, which favours the selective Sc leaching with an efficiency of 70%. Dry digestion was thus found to be a promising method to treat Fe depleted slags, clearly surpassing the direct extraction of Sc from red mud, where conventional routes are unsuitable because of the Si gel formation. Although the equipment to handle such a process should be highly resistant to corrosion due to the use of concentrated acids, the acid consumption and duration of operation are lower as well as handling of the process is easier than conventional leaching methods applied to red mud. The research leading to these results has received funding from the  Supplementary data to this article can be found online at