Background/Aim
                  The similar clinical and pathological feature in fluorosis and amelogenesis imperfect with FAM83H mutations imply that excess fluoride could have effects on the expression of FAM83H and could elaborate this process by some signal pathways regulation. The present study aims to investigate the effects of fluoride on Fam83h expression and try to explore the molecular signaling regulation between them as well as the association of high concentration fluoride with mineralization in ameloblast lineage cells.
               
                  Methods
                  Protein expression and signaling pathways of mouse ameloblast-like LS8 cells, exposed to fluoride or MAPK inhibitors, were compared to control cells without exposure. Fam83h, proteins of MAPK signal pathways (ERK, P38 and JNK) were examined by Quantitative real-time PCR and/or Western-blot. ALP activity and ALP staining were used to detect the mineralization in the cells with exposure during 7-day mineralization inducing differentiation.
               
                  Results
                  The results showed that Fam83h protein level in LS8 cells decreased in the presence of fluoride and MAPK inhibitors. Down-regulation of Fam83h by fluoride was related to suppression of JNK and P38 phosphorylation, and the descending degree of P38 was more obvious. Fluoride and MAPK inhibitors treatment significantly decreased the mineralization level in LS8 cells.
               
                  Conclusion
                  The findings suggest that JNK and P38 could be key regulatory element for Fam83h expression, and that LS8 cells can respond to fluoride by down-regulating Fam83h expression through the regulation of JNK and p38 signaling pathways.Amelogenesis imperfect (AI) is a heterogeneous group of inherited diseases which exhibits enamel malformations without symptoms outside of the dentition Fluorosis is a defection of enamel mineral content and the apatite crystals formation caused by excess fluoride intake during amelogenesis Since fluoride exhibited effects on MAPK signal pathways in some cell lines Mouse derived ameloblast-like cell lines LS8 Based on different treating reagents, the groups were named as negative control (NC) group, NaF group, SB203580 and SP600125 group. After 24 h exposure, expression of Fam83h was detected with Quantitative real-time PCR and Western-blot examination. For NaF treated cells, some MAPK signal pathway proteins of LS8 cells at 0, 5, 15, 30 and 60 min after fluoride exposure were also analyzed by Western-blot assay. To induce mineralization, when cells reached 80% confluence, LS8 cells were transferred to mineralization inducing DMEM medium containing 10% FBS, 1% penicillin/streptomycin, 10 nmol/L dexamethasone (Sigma, USA), 50 mg/L ascorbic acid (Sigma, USA), and 10 mmol/L β-sodium glycerophosphate (Sigma, USA). NaF, SB203580, and SP600125 were synchronically added into the mineralization medium respectively, or blank. The cells were divided into 4 groups and named as mineralization + negative control (M + NC) group, M + NaF group, M + SB203580 and M + SP600125 group, which were then performed 7-day mineralization inducing differentiation. Day 1 was defined as the day of mineralization medium supplementation to the cell culture. The ALP activity of the four groups was measured at day 3 and day 7. The ALP staining of the four groups was assessed on day 7. Total RNA was extracted from cultured LS8 cells using HP Total RNA Kit (OMEGA, USA). RNA was reverse-transcribed into cDNA with the RevertAid First Strand cDNA Synthesis Kit (Takara, China). Quantitative real-time PCR was performed with 50 ng of cDNA and FastStart Universal SYBR Green Mastor (Rox) (Roche, USA) using the 7900HT Fast Real Time PCR System (Applied Biosystems, USA). Expressions of the target genes were normalized to GAPDH levels and the 2-ΔΔCt method was used to calculate relative expression levels. Each experiment was performed in triplicate. Specific primers used were Fam83h, 5-TTCCAAGGCACAGAGGTCAC-3(Forward), 5-GGGCGTTCATTTCATCCAGC-3(Reverse); and GAPDH, 5-CATGGCCTTCCGTGTTCCTA-3(Forward), 5-GCGGCACGTCAGATCCA-3(Reverse). Total and phosphorylated protein levels were detected by Western blotting for different cell groups. Cells were resuspended in ice-cold RIPA lysis buffer (Beyotime, China) and PhosSTOP Phosphatase Inhibitor (Roche), followed by centrifugation (13,000 g for 5 min) to remove cellular debris. Protein quantification was performed with the Bio-Rad DC Protein Assay (Bio-Rad, USA). Equal amounts of protein were subjected to SDS-PAGE gel electrophoresis on 10% (w/v) acrylamide gel and then transferred onto PVDF membrane (Millipore, USA). After blocking with 5% BSA the blots were incubated overnight with specific primary antibodies against ERK (CST, USA), phospho-ERK (Abcam, UK), P38 (Abcam, UK), phospho-P38 (Abcam, UK), phosphor-JNK1/2/3 (Abcam, UK), SAPK/JNK (CST, USA), Fam83h (NOVUS Biologicals, USA) or GAPDH (ProMab biotechnologies, USA), followed by incubation with horseradish peroxidase-conjugated secondary antibody (Antgene, China) for 1 h at room temperature. Immunocomplexes were visualized using chemiluminescence, and then exposed. The relative integrated density of protein bands were analyzed by NIH ImageJ 1.48v, and then normalized to that of the GAPDH. Cultures of the four mineralization groups were washed 3 times with PBS buffer. The activity of the cells was measured at day 3 and day 7 in freshly prepared colorimetric substrate 0.1 M NaHCO ALP staining of the four mineralization groups was assessed on day 7. The cells were fixed in 4% paraformaldehyde for 10 min, and washed with PBS. After then, the cells were incubated with ALP staining solution (0.1 mg/mL of naphthol AS-MX phosphate, 0.5% The results of Q-PCR, Western-blot and ALP activity are showed as mean ± SD (standard deviation) from three independent experiments. Statistical calculations were performed by one-way ANOVA using Statview software (SAS Institute Inc., Lary, NC). Significance was assigned to a After exposed to NaF (50uM) for 24 h, LS8 cells showed a significantly decreased in Fam83h mRNA and protein, as compared to the cells that were not exposed to NaF ( To determine the signaling pathway by which NaF regulates Fam83h expression, MAPK inhibitors were used to identify Fam83h responses. LS8 were incubated for 24 h with inhibitors specific for P38 and JNK kinase. Real-time PCR and Western-blot analysis showed that both P38 inhibitors SB203580 and JNK inhibitors SP600125 down-regulated Fam83h expression, and the descending degree of SB203580 group was more obvious ( The activation of MAPK family members, including ERK, p38 and JNK subgroups, were examined in NaF-treated cells. Mineralization assay was used to investigate the differentiation of LS8 by detecting the ALP activity and ALP staining. As shown in Since fluoride has a wide range of effects at the cellular levels, high doses of fluoride may cause apoptosis of ameloblasts More than 20 truncation mutations in Fluoride might specifically interact with ameloblasts to affect the synthesis and secretion of enamel matrix proteins. High concentration of fluoride will cause a disturbance of enamel development and mineralization In this study, fluoride at micromolar levels can down-regulate Fam83h expression in mouse ameloblast lineage cells. It is important to be considered that by which signal pathways NaF affect the expression of Fam83h. Since fluoride appeared to affect MAPK signaling pathways in other cell types The mechanism underlying hypomineralization in fluorosis likely ascribes to the observed retention of enamel matrix and is proposed to be associated with reduced removal of enamel matrix proteins during enamel maturation, perturbation of extracellular transport, or initiation of the ER stress response pathway Clinically, it might be difficult to differentially diagnose enamel defects caused by either AI or fluorosis This work was supported by grants from the  Transparency document related to this article can be found online at