A 3D finite element model of circular borehole cluster connected in series is used as a response model to generate normalized transfer functions of a borehole thermal energy storage system under the influence of ground surface temperature variations and groundwater flow. Two response functions are obtained by convolving transfer functions of the system's outlet fluid temperature with two incremental input functions describing the temperature variation of the inlet and outlet fluid and variations of the ground surface temperature. Superposition is applied to obtain the resulting fluid temperature with respect to thermal inputs at the inlet fluid and the ground surface over the course of ten years and results are compared for various groundwater velocities. This work demonstrates that the combined effect of groundwater flow and ambient air temperature variations can significantly decrease the performance of a BTES system. The methodology used can be extended to simulate complex system.specific heat capacity (J/(kg impulse function (C) transfer function response function (C) geothermal heat flux (W/m thermal conductivity (W/(m borehole length (m) period (h) time (h) time lag (h) temperature (°C) amplitude of the seasonal temperature variation (°C) yearly mean ground surface temperature (°C) depth (m) pumping flow rate per borehole (m thermal diffusivity (m density (kg/m velocity (m/s) angular frequency (1/s) fluid aquifer borehole grout surface Darcy time step index initial conditions borehole thermal energy storage borehole heat exchanger ground source heat pump In cold climates, borehole thermal energy storage (BTES) systems have the potential to significantly reduce the overall energy consumption since they allow seasonal storage of solar thermal energy. Numerous solar assisted heating ground source heat pump (GSHP) systems established in northern Europe and Canada are already operating successfully as they are providing district heating ( BTES systems use ground heat exchangers (GHEs) such as closed loop vertical boreholes to exchange heat with the surrounding ground. During the summer, solar thermal energy is collected by solar collectors and stored in the geological medium through the GHEs. Depending on the temperature level, the thermal energy is extracted either by heat pumps (low temperature ground storage, 0–40 In recent years, some researchers studied the effect of groundwater on the heat transfer efficiency of GHEs by means of numerical models to account for various ground properties, heat load profile, borehole geometry, etc. For instance, Numerical methods are reliable but often cumbersome. For this reason, some authors used analytical approaches to model GHEs under regional groundwater flow. It is obvious that groundwater flow even at relatively low specific flow rates can significantly enhance heat transfer in the ground. For borehole thermal energy storage purpose; however, groundwater flow can be a nuisance in cases of compact configurations. Indeed, regional groundwater flow can drag the stored energy away from the borehole field. Few works in the literature focused on this topic. The modeling of a dynamic BTES system under regional groundwater flow can be quite complex as it must take into account thermal conduction and advection, which depends on local geological and hydrogeological parameters. The common approaches are based on the development of numerical models. For example, In addition to heat advection driven by groundwater flow, heat exchange at the ground surface of the borehole field can be an important factor. In fact, No studies were conducted to evaluate the combined effect of regional groundwater flow and ambient air temperature variations on the efficiency of a small BTES system. This present work focuses on the dynamic simulation of a small BTES system under the influence of regional groundwater flow and ambient air temperature variations. The analyses were based on a finite element model and comparison studies were conducted through a spectral approach. In the following section, the methodology used to simulate a complex dynamic BTES system is presented. First, Section A small BTES system composed of 18 short vertical closed loop GHEs is modeled by means of a finite element model similar to the model presented by To operate the system, a heat carrier fluid flows from boreholes on the outer periphery towards the center boreholes. Although a typical load–unload operation consists to load from the center and discharge from the periphery of the BTES, the superposition principle which is utilized in this work requires the linearity of the problem and, currently, cannot account for a change of the flow direction. Additional development is still required to improve the simulation approach used in this work. The physical properties and dimensions used for the model are summarized in Heat transfer in the BTES system involves both conduction and advection. The latter is induced by regional groundwater flow in the aquifer. The governing equation solved for the heat transfer is given by: Regional groundwater flow can be implemented easily in the model through the term Similarly to Solving a fully discretized dynamic BTES system using a sequential method can be computationally demanding and time consuming. To rapidly solve a problem involving time-varying thermal inputs, as in this case, a spectral approach is used ( Indeed, by choosing the finite element model's initial state and the boundary conditions to create a constant thermal input over the model's domain, its solution can be used to derive model-specific transfer functions The advantage of this method relies on the smooth and regular behavior of the solutions of the finite element model in response to a unit input. This property allows the user to increase the internal solver time steps as the solution progresses. Thus, the transfer function When the model is subjected to a time-varying thermal boundary The solution provided by Eq. To obtain the outlet fluid temperature  To account for a time-varying inlet fluid temperature at the beginning of a branch, use the numerical model with the boundary conditions depicted in To account for a time-varying surface temperature, use the numerical model with the boundary conditions depicted in To account for an initial non-uniform ground temperature, use the numerical model with the boundary conditions depicted in Obtain the mean outlet fluid temperature leaving the branches with Eq. Finally, to assess the influence of ground surface temperature variations and groundwater flow, the difference between The start-up operation period is an important factor. If the BTES system starts its operation at the beginning of winter, the initial stored energy might not be sufficient to supply the buildings heating demand. Starting the system at the beginning of summer will allow the system to store energy for the upcoming winter. In this work, the simulated BTES system begins its operation at the beginning of the summer, on June 21st. The initial state over the domain takes into account the seasonal surface temperature variation and the natural geothermal heat flux, given by the  First, transfer functions  For   Using the method proposed in this work to compute a temperature solution every hour for a 10-year-period required approximately 5 Underground thermal energy storage systems such as BTES can face technical challenges such as regional groundwater flow and large seasonal variations of the ground surface temperature, especially in northern climate. In this work, a small BTES system was simulated to assess the impact of regional groundwater flow and seasonal variations of ground surface temperature. To overcome the computational burden of simulating a complex dynamic BTES model with time-varying boundary conditions, a spectral method approach was adopted where a discrete convolution of the incremental function The authors would like to acknowledge the