Hierarchically mesoporous titanosilicate Ti-SBA-1 was synthesized with organic mesomorphous complexes of polyelectrolyte (poly(acrylic acid) (PAA)) and cationic surfactant (hexadecyl pyridinium chloride (CPC)) as template, tetraethylsiloxane as silica source and titanium ethoxide as titanium source. By adjusting the amount of titanium ethoxide in the synthesis, a series of Ti-SBA-1 particles with different Si/Ti ratio (79–180) were prepared. After incorporation of Ti into the silica framework the well-ordered cubic 
                        
                           P
                           m
                           
                              3
                              ¯
                           
                           n
                        
                      mesostructure remained, as well as the morphology, particle size. UV–vis DR spectra of the Ti-SBA-1 materials indicated that incorporated titanium species existed in a highly dispersed state and exhibited tetrahedral and octahedral coordination in the silica framework.Mesoporous materials with high surface areas, pore volume and ordered pore channels have attracted much interest in recent years because of their potential applications in adsorption, catalysis and biomedicine The discovery of TS-1 SBA-1 mesoporous silica possesses a cage-type structure with 3-D interconnected pores Recently, hierarchically porous materials with well-defined morphologies have attracted much attention because of the textural characteristics such as hierarchically porous structure, high surface area and large pore volume Herein, hierarchically nanoporous Ti-SBA-1 with well-ordered mesostructure was firstly synthesized by employing anionic polymer PAA and cationic surfactant CPC mesomorphous complexes as template, titanium ethoxide as Ti source. Hexadecyl pyridinium chloride and titanium ethoxide were obtained from Aladdin, China. Poly(acrylic acid) (average molecular weight 240,000, 25% solution in water) was from Acros. Tetraethylsiloxane (TEOS) was purchased from Alfa Aesar. All the chemical agents were used without further purification. The pristine siliceous SBA-1 was synthesized based on the reported method Small-angle X-ray scattering (SAXS) experiments were performed on a Bruker Nanostar small angle X-ray scattering system. Wide angle X-ray diffraction (XRD) patterns were recorded on a Bruker D8 Focus with Cu K  SEM and TEM were utilized to characterize the morphology and interior mesostructure of the synthesized Ti-SBA-1 sample by choosing Ti-SBA-1-20 as the typical example. The SEM and TEM images of the SBA-1 and Ti-SBA-1-20 sample were shown in The nitrogen adsorption–desorption isotherms and pore size distribution curves of the SBA-1 and Ti-SBA-1 samples were shown in The contents of the elements Si and Ti of Ti-SBA-1 were measured by ICP-AES and the results were presented in The coordination of the Ti species incorporated in the silica framework was characterized by diffuse reflectance UV–vis spectroscopy. Hierarchical mesoporous titanosilicate Ti-SBA-1 was successfully fabricated. By adjusting the Si/Ti molar ratio in the synthesis, a series of Ti-SBA-1 samples with well-ordered cubic This work was supported by