The adsorption of Acidianus manzaensis YN25 on chalcopyrite was investigated experimentally and theoretically. A. manzaensis showed high adhesion affinity to the chalcopyrite under acidic condition, but low adhesion affinity under neutral and alkaline conditions. The microbe-mineral adhesion was assessed by the surface thermodynamics and the extended DLVO theory. The experimental results were in agreement with the theory. Moreover, A. manzaensis grown on chalcopyrite, sulfur, and ferrous ion showed similar adsorption phenomena. The adsorptive capacity of A. manzaensis increased with increasing temperature and decreasing pH respectively, and within the range of investigation, the best adsorption was achieved at pH 2.0 and 65 °C. This study provided new insights for bio-catalytic oxidation of sulfide minerals by the thermophilic acidophilic archaea.Biohydrometallurgy, a sub-discipline of hydrometallurgy, utilizes the activity of microorganisms in aqueous extractive metallurgy for the recovery of metals from ores, concentrates, and recycled or residual materials. It is considered as a promising, environmentally benign option, especially for low-grade complex ores and metal-bearing solid wastes. It is known that the adhesion of extremophile microbial cells to minerals/solid surfaces is prerequisites in bioleaching of chalcopyrite minerals ( Since Derjaguin, Landau, Vervey, and Overbeek (DLVO) developed a theory of colloidal stability, which currently represents the cornerstone of our understanding of interactions between colloidal particles and their aggregation behavior, the DLVO theory becomes popular because it can be used to explain the behavior of both material nanoparticles such as fullerene particles and microorganisms. Generally, microbial adhesion can be explained by both the surface thermodynamics and the extended DLVO theory, in which the adhesion energy between the microbes and mineral is calculated as a function of the separation distance ( In addition, compared with the knowledge about the interfacial process of microbes such as The pure culture of The ferrous sulfate heptahydrate (FeSO The Zeta potential measurements of cells were determined with Delsa 440SX Zeta potential determinator (Beckmann-Coulter, USA). To prepare the microbial suspension, the cells in the logarithmic growth phase were passed through filter paper to remove the precipitate. The filtrate was then centrifuged at 10,000 Before measurements, the mineral surfaces were freshly polished with paper No. 4000 and dipped in ethanol to prevent any oxidation of the surfaces, and contact angles were measured within 5–10 min of polishing for the pure chalcopyrite. For contact angle measurements of minerals with biological treatment, the polished mineral surfaces were pretreated with different microbial solutions. For measuring the contact angle of microbes, the microbial lawn was prepared by filtering microbial suspension on a filter membrane, with about 1000 microbial layers depositing on the filter membrane. The filter membrane with the microbial lawn was vacuum freeze-dried, cut into strips and fixed with double-sided adhesive tape onto a sample holder. Polar liquids (water and formamide) and apolar liquid (diiodomethane) were used to measure the angles on copper sulfide surfaces and microbial lawns. The contact angles of these three liquids on solid sulfide surfaces and microbial lawns were measured using the sessile drop technique with a JJC-1 contact angle goniometer (Chengde Tester factory, P.R. China) ( The adsorption experiments were carried out in 250 ml flask with 100 ml iron-free 9 K medium (pH 1.5) containing 1% (w/v) of chalcopyrite particles with an initial cell concentration of 4 × 10 The cell concentration in pure culture solution without any particulate matters was determined by direct counting using hemocytometer under an optical microscope (Nikon Eclipse-TS100, Japan). For detecting the cell number in the adsorption experiments, the quantitative RT-PCR method with SYBR Green dye was applied. The genomic DNA of the suspension cells in the experiment liquid was extracted by TIANamp DNA kit (Tiangen, Beijing, China). The 16S rRNA gene fragments were amplified with primers ARCH 344F-GC (5′-ACGGGGTGCAGGCGCGA-3′) and ARCH 915R (5′-GTGCTCCC CCGCCAATTCCT-3′), which are for universal primers for conserved archaeal 16S rRNA ( The number of attached cells on the mineral surface was calculated by subtracting the remaining planktonic cells from the total numbers of total cells washed from the minerals. The adsorption of The Zeta potentials of  The contact angles of three liquids on the microbial lawns and the chalcopyrite surfaces were measured using the sessile drop technique with FIBRO 1100 DAT dynamic absorption tester and the contact angles and calculated surfaced energy were shown in According to the extended DLVO theory, the total interaction energy G is given by The extended DLVO curves of chalcopyrite The previous study indicated that the microbial surface attachment is very important for the sulfide mineral oxidation, making the surface different from the acid leaching ( Basing on the Real-Time PCR analysis, the microbial adsorption curves of The adsorption curves of The adsorption curves of chalcopyrite adapted    Experimental results showed close agreement with the extended DLVO theory and implied that This work was supported by supported by the Supplementary data to this article can be found online at The following are the Supplementary data to this article: 