This study investigates the relationship between chemical analyses and magnetic susceptibility of zinnwaldite through magnetic separation of various size fractions. Statistical analyses were used to increase information about magnetic properties of this mineral as a future source of lithium. Statistical modeling indicated that magnetic susceptibility (as a main factor of magnetic separation) accurately can be predicted based on cations content of zinnwaldite. However the size of particles had a significant effect on magnetic susceptibility. The small difference between the estimated and measured values for the non-linear relationship of this prediction (less than 1 (10−8
                     m3/kg)) shows that these accurate theoretical techniques can be also applied to estimate magnetic properties of zinnwaldite in other resources, and in-situ analysis.Lithium as the lightest metal in nature with its unique electrochemical properties makes it ideal for use in batteries (lithium battery production represents 70% of the total rechargeable battery market ( Some estimation indicated that the demand for lithium till 2016 is expected to increase by ∼60% ( A wide variety of lithium containing natural minerals is known and just a few of these have been commercially extracted (Aluminosilicates; spodumene, petalite, lepidolite) ( In magnetic separation, the difference in behaviour of particles in magnetic fields is based on the magnetic susceptibility (MS – In this study, statistical methods (Pearson correlation, linear and non-linear multivariable regressions) were used to study the possible relationship between chemical analyses and magnetic susceptibility of zinnwaldite (ZIN) (as a source of lithium) through magnetic separation. Various size fractions were analysed to better understand the possible relationship. To our knowledge, this is the first study that explains the statistical relationship between zinnwaldite and magnetic susceptibility as a factor of magnetic separation. For the mineralogical investigation, samples were collected from an old underground mine (Zinnwald/Cinovec deposit) located in the Ore Mountains on the German/Czech boarder. The ore comprises of 67 The first determination of the bulk magnetic susceptibility of micas was reported in 1960s ( Pearson correlation (inter-correlation) is a measure of linear association between two variables. Pearson values range from −1 to 1. The sign of the correlation indicates the direction of the relationship, and its absolute value indicates the strength, with larger absolute values indicating stronger relationships. A negative value for the correlation implies a negative or inverse association, where a positive value means a positive association. In addition, the linear and non-linear enter-remove regression methods show that the MS of ZIN is predictable based on cations content and the current for each size classification ( In order to determine the MS of ZIN particles without size class limitation, statistical methods were performed on the analyses within the entire data set, in an attempt to present a general estimation. By reviewing the literature on solid solution, it can be demonstrated that the relationship between cations and MS is not linear. Several investigators have suggested that MS is proportional to the square root of cations content (  This study was conducted to explain the relationship between the current strengths and chemical content (cations) with measured magnetic susceptibility of zinnwaldite through magnetic separation by using statistical methods. Statistical analyses demonstrated that there was a positive inter-correlation between cations and magnetic susceptibility where this inter-correlation was negative between current strength and magnetic susceptibility. Correlations demonstrated that magnetic susceptibility was accurately predictable for zinnwaldite particles. Results indicated that cations content of the sample would be a better than current strength for the magnetic susceptibility estimation. There was a multivariable linear relationship between cations and the zinnwaldite susceptibility in narrow size fractions. Within the entire data set (all size fractions) the relationship was non-linear. In the entire data set, the non-linear equation had a better accuracy than its linear counterpart, where it could predict magnetic susceptibility with the correlation coefficients (