High-iron bauxite, which is a typically unmanageable form of bauxite due to its high contents of iron and diaspore, has not been used by alumina producers. An advanced roasting technique for removing iron from high-iron bauxite, based on static pre-roasting in air and suspension roasting by hydrogen under fluidized conditions followed by magnetic separation was developed in this study. The influences of pre-roasting temperature, suspension roasting temperature, roasting time, and H2 concentration were investigated. The phase transformations of the samples were investigated using X-ray diffraction, vibrating sample magnetometry, field emission scanning electron microscopy, and Brunauer-Emmett-Teller method. After pre-roasting at a temperature of 750 °C for 30 min, diaspore (AlOOH) and goethite (FeOOH) in the raw high-iron bauxite ore were transformed into Al2O3 and Fe2O3, respectively. The optimal suspension roasting conditions were determined to be a roasting temperature of 600 °C with a H2 concentration of 25% for 4 min. The reduction sample was subjected to magnetic separation and a non-magnetic product (aluminum concentrate), with alumina recovery of 80.64% and iron removal of 85.32%, was obtained. Such a non-magnetic product could be used as a raw material for the Bayer process in the alumina production industry, while the magnetic product could be used as a supplementary material for iron ore resources.Due to the development of industrialization and urbanization, the consumption of aluminum has increased dramatically [ The separation of iron and aluminum in high-iron bauxite has been a field of interest for quite a while. For example, in the early studies of iron removal from bauxite, acid leaching [ In addition, some magnetization roasting techniques used to separate iron from other minerals [ In this paper, to address the above issues, an advanced technique consisting of pre-roasting and fluidized magnetization roasting (suspension roasting) followed by magnetic separation was developed for removing iron from high-iron bauxite. Hydrogen, a clean energy, was used as a reductant to reduce greenhouse gas emissions. The aim of the pre-roasting process is to avoid the excessive consumption of hydrogen caused by incomplete hydrogen reactions due to the introduction of hydrogen into the raw ores without dehydration. The dehydration process will create holes in the pre-roasted ore, which provides a larger specific surface area accelerating the reduction reaction in suspension roasting. To study the phase transition, magnetic property, and microstructure of the sample during roasting, X-ray diffraction (XRD), vibrating sample magnetometry (VSM), scanning electron microscopy (SEM) and Brunauer-Emmett-Teller (BET) analyses were performed. The influences of pre-roasting temperature, suspension roasting temperature, roasting time, and H High-iron bauxite from a Guangxi alumina plant (China) was used as received. The raw ore was ground and screened to 40% passing 74 μm. The chemical compositions of the raw high-iron bauxite ore are given in The experimental equipment is shown in After the magnetic products and non-magnetic products were filtered, dried, and weighed, chemical analysis was performed to determine their alumina content and iron grade. The calculations for alumina recovery and iron removal are as shown in Eqs. In this study, the X-ray diffraction patterns of samples were recorded on a PW3040 diffractometer (PANalytical B.V. Ltd., Netherlands), at a scanning speed of 12° min As seen from the XRD analysis results in The effect of roasting temperature on magnetic roasting was explored at temperatures ranging from 450 °C to 700 °C, H The effect of H According to the effect of roasting temperature and H The phase transformation of samples at each stage of the roasting process was determined using XRD analysis. The powder XRD patterns for samples are presented in The form of iron existing in the ore during roasting is an important factor in separating iron and aluminum. Therefore, the iron chemical phase was further confirmed and the results are displayed in Saturation magnetization is an important parameter of magnetic separation, which can reflect the magnetic characteristics of minerals. The saturation magnetization of high‑iron bauxite at various stages of the experiment is depicted in The microscopic morphology of the high-iron bauxite before and after roasting was observed and analyzed. The microstructure of the samples is shown in   In this work, an advanced technique consisting of static pre-roasting in air and fluidized suspension roasting by hydrogen, followed by magnetic separation, was performed to remove iron and recover aluminum from high-iron bauxite. Based on the XRD analysis of the raw high-iron bauxite, it was observed that diaspore, gibbsite, limonite, and goethite were the dominant phases. These minerals were almost completely transformed into Al No conflict of interest exits in the submission of this manuscript, and manuscript is approved by all authors for publication. I would like to declare on behalf of my co-authors that the work described was original research that has not been published previously, and not under consideration for publication elsewhere, in whole or in part. All the authors listed have approved the manuscript that is enclosed. The authors are grateful to the