The crystallization kinetics and mechanical properties of Al86Ni6Y4.5Co2La1.5 metallic glass powder have been investigated using differential scanning calorimetry (DSC), X-ray diffraction (XRD), transmission electron microscopy (TEM) and nanoindentation. The first crystallization stage of the Al86Ni6Y4.5Co2La1.5 glass powder is identified to be a surface nucleation and one-dimensional growth process while the second and third crystallization stages are characterized by volume nucleation but followed by one-dimensional growth and two-dimensional growth, respectively. The hardness and elastic modulus show opposite trends on crystallization; they are both sensitive to the precipitation of fcc-Al, growth of fcc-Al and precipitation of complex intermetallic phases. The changes of hardness and elastic modulus of the Al86Ni6Y4.5Co2La1.5 metallic glass powder with crystallization are discussed.Aluminium based metallic glass materials have higher specific strengths than most other metallic glass materials The powder metallurgy (PM) approach based on spark plasma sintering (SPS) has proven to be an effective method for the fabrication of various types of BMG alloys To exploit the PM approach for the fabrication of Al-based BMGs, it is necessary to understand the crystallization kinetics and the subsequent influence on the mechanical properties. Compared to the isothermal method, another widely used method to study the crystallization behaviour of metallic glasses is the non-isothermal approach. Non-isothermal analysis can be carried out over a wider temperature range and within a shorter period of time. Hence it can provide more details about the phase transformation phenomena involved from a processing perspective. This is important for bulk metallic glass fabrication from powder, for example, by spark plasma sintering where isothermal hold is often limited to a very short period of time. This study is focused on understanding the crystallization kinetics and mechanical property variations of the Al Nitrogen-atomized Al The hardness and elastic modulus of the powder particles that underwent different stages of crystallization were determined by nanoindentation at room temperature in air with a Berkovich indenter (the tip radius is 100 The crystallization kinetics of metallic glass materials has been investigated extensively using the Johnson–Mehl–Avrami (JMA) model described below Based on Eqs.  Using the DSC data of The value of  The hardness of metallic glasses generally increases with the extent of partial crystallization The sharp increase in the hardness of the Al Hardness and elastic modulus usually vary in a similar direction. However, several studies have revealed that this is not always the case for partially crystallized metallic glasses The elastic modulus of a material relates to the chemical bonding between component elements  The first crystallization stage of the Al Both the hardness and elastic modulus of the Al The increase in hardness at the first stage of crystallization corresponds to the precipitation of fcc-Al crystals while the decrease in hardness at the second and third stages of crystallization is caused by the growth of fcc-Al crystals and formation of complex intermetallic phases. The sensitivity of elastic modulus to crystallization is associated with variations of the amorphous matrix composition and crystal products. This work is supported by