Fe3C magnetic nanoparticles were synthesized by solvothermal assisted technique. The X-ray and electron diffractions have confirmed the formation of monophasic iron carbide (Fe3C) nanoparticles. Transmission electron microscope analysis validated that the size of the particles was around 19–34 nm. The presence of only Fe and C in Fe3C was asserted by X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS). The room temperature Mössbauer spectroscopy also corroborates the occurrence of only this carbide phase. The saturation magnetization at ±2 T and at 300 K was obtained to be around 88 Am2/kg with a coercivity of 17.3 mT and remanence of 6 Am2/kg. The oleic acid based ferrofluid of this carbide nanoparticles exhibited good heating ability in the presence of external alternating current (AC) magnetic fields. The optimum specific absorption rate and intrinsic loss power values were 85 W/g and 0.97 nHm2/kg at 23 mT and 261 kHz. Due to lack of reports on magnetic hyperthermia response for iron carbides, the values were compared with iron oxides. The values were found to be comparable.Several forms of iron carbides such as Fe The biomedical applications of magnetic nanoparticles (MNP In contrast, the iron carbide (e.g. Fe There are a few reports on the synthesis of Fe In the present work, we have synthesized monophasic Fe The synthesis of Fe The obtained powder sample was crushed by a pestle mortar and then sonicated in water for 20 min using a Probe sonicator of PKS 250FM (PCI Analytical For structural and phase analysis, XRD pattern was recorded with Cu K Selected area electron diffraction (SAED) pattern was obtained to identify the crystal structure. To find out the elements present in the Fe Heating ability of Fe  The microstructure of the sample as collected from TEM is shown in XPS analysis of the sample was performed to investigate the surface properties of Fe  In contrast, the reported value of the chemical shift found to be ∼0.18 mm/s The magnetizations vs The aqueous ferrofluids of oleic acid functionalized Fe The time dependent calorimetric measurements were performed for the Fe The duration to reach the desired hyperthermia temperature was more at the latter field though its amplitude was higher. Thus, it was in accordance with the earlier observations with iron oxide based MNPs which suggest that heating ability of the MNPs not only depends on the amplitude of applied field but also varies with the frequency of the field, structural as well as the magnetic behavior of MNPs, suspending medium and the functional materials The SAR values for the ferrofluids having different amounts of MNPs and at different fields are plotted in The single phasic Fe