The rate-dependent uniaxial compressive behavior of frozen clay soil is strongly affected by its minerals, void ratio, stress history, and pore fluid salinity. Previous studies show that an extremely low deformation rate applied on a clay soil tends to result in a lower bound compressive strength. However, the lower bound stress-strain behavior of frozen clay soil under the uniaxial compressive condition was not studied. A thorough understanding of the rate-dependent behavior of frozen clay and its relationship with temperature requires a large number of specimens with similar compositions and micro-structures. In this study, a series of laboratory tests were carried out on artificial frozen sandy clay soils to measure the rate-dependent uniaxial compressive behavior at temperatures ranging from −15 °C to 0 °C. We used two types of artificial frozen clay soils with pre-determined clay fraction, clay mineralogy, stress history, and moisture content. Our results conclude that a low temperature and a high deformation rate tend to generate brittle failure with post-peak softening behavior. A temperature close to the freezing temperature and a low deformation rate result in a diffuse failure associated with strain hardening. Temperature-dependent uniaxial compressive mechanical properties were measured and modeled using empirical relations, which are highly dependent on the applied deformation rate. A series of step-loaded relaxation tests were carried out on those artificial clay soils and creep parameters were estimated using relaxation test results and a power law creep model. A new approach of deriving the lower bound of stress-strain curve of frozen soil is proposed accordingly. The idea of determining the lower bound of stress-strain curve is based on the isotache concept, which was previously used in the soil consolidation theory.The characterization of the deformation and strength of frozen soils is important in several aspects of cold regions engineering ( As the rate-dependent uniaxial compressive behavior of frozen clay soil is strongly affected by the mineralogy, clay fraction, pore fluid salinity, void ratio, and stress history, a thorough understanding the rate dependency behavior and its relationship with temperature requires a large number of specimens with similar compositions and micro-structures. Thus, the required sophisticated procedures and the challenges to obtain in-situ frozen clay soils have delayed the theoretical study of their behavior. Most previous studies focus on the behavior at low frozen temperatures, and the study on a broad temperature range covering −15 °C to 0 °C is still limited. In addition, previous investigations on the rate-dependent stress-strain curves did not include the lower bound, which is important for the constitutive modeling the long-term performance of an engineering structure. In this study, a series of laboratory tests were carried out with two artificial frozen clay soils to measure the rate dependency of uniaxial axial compressive behavior at temperatures ranging from −15 °C to 0 °C. Creep parameters were derived using results from step-loaded relaxation tests, and the possibility of using this type of tests to determine the lower bound of stress-strain curves of frozen soils was investigated. We prepared a large number of artificial frozen sandy clay soils for the tests to warrant control and repeatability. The materials used in this research are silica sand 7030, standard Porcelain Kaolin, Bentonite Western 325 M, and saline water for preparing kaolinite-sand and bentonite-sand mixtures. According to ASTM D4083–2016, the kaolinite-sand mixture is classified as off-white, inorganic sandy clay of low to medium plasticity and well-bonded soil, while the bentonite-sand mixture was classified as grey, inorganic sandy clay of high plasticity, and well-bonded soil. The specific gravity values of both mixtures were measured as 2.65 and 2.63, respectively. The results of Atterberg limit tests are included in All mixtures consist of 50% sand and 50% clay of the total dry weight. Saline water with a concentration of 1 g/L (NaCl solution) was used to prepare the mixtures. The reason of using saline water is to simulate the saline pore fluid present in some clay soils ( All uniaxial compressive tests were carried out in an environmental chamber in the Building Envelope Performance Laboratory (BEPL) at Concordia University. As is shown in Uniaxial compression strength (UCS) tests were conducted at temperatures of −15 °C, −10 °C, −5 °C, −2 °C, −1 °C, −0.5 °C, 0 °C. The applied deformation rates were at 1 mm/min, 3 mm/min, and 9 mm/min. Same conditions were applied to kaolinite-sand or bentonite-sand samples. Kaolinite-sand samples used for UCS tests were listed in Uniaxial compressive tests have been performed on forty-two artificial frozen sandy clay soil samples, and the data of axial loads, axial displacements, lateral displacements, and post-failure pictures of samples were obtained. This study focuses on the influence of the temperature ranging from −15 °C to 0 °C and deformation rates of 1, 3, and 9 mm/min. The frozen samples were compressed concentrically and vertically through two platens on their top and bottom surfaces, and the applied axial stress was calculated by dividing the applied compressive load by the initial cross-sectional area of the frozen sample. The uniaxial compressive strength of all tested samples was picked directly from the axial stress-axial strain curve at the maximum applied stress. Different failure modes were observed for frozen samples at varying temperatures and deformation rates. Pictures showing Post-failure photos of UCS test samples at At a temperature of −15 °C, both kaolinite-sand and bentonite-sand samples display similar failure modes, and samples' integrity is mainly maintained. By contrast, samples lose their integrities in tests at a temperature of −1 °C. Shown in Measured stress-strain curves at temperatures of −15 °C and − 1 °C were obtained and displayed in Previous studies show that the UCS of frozen clay soil varies nonlinearly with temperature, and a non-linear power law equation is effective for fitting the UCS and temperature for frozen soil ( As is displayed in The Young's modulus was calculated using the tangent method at the point with half of the peak strength, and the Poisson ratio is also calculated at the same stress. The values of the deformation parameters are also found to be sensitive to temperature and loading rate. Good correlations are developed between both Young's modulus and Poisson's ratio and temperature at different deformation rates, and the power law function is effective for curve fitting. Young's modulus displayed a significant linear-like increasing trend with the decrease of temperature. By contrast, Poisson's ratio displays a nonlinear decreasing trend with a decrease in temperature. The deformation parameters are found to be strongly dependent on temperature and deformation rates, which is reflected by the increase in the constant Strength parameters and deformation parameters were needed to design and analyze stress relaxation tests. After their obtention, a series of step-loaded relaxation tests were carried out on 16 artificial frozen sandy clay soil samples, and the data of axial loads and axial displacements against the time were recorded. A selective representation of the curves at Not like a creep test that can be used for establishing a basic creep law of soil, a relaxation test is generally only able to provide experimental verification of a priori adopted creep model. According to The von Mises equivalent strain reduces to the axial strain only when the volume of the sample is kept constant. In the present study, even though the tests were conducted under an undrained stress path condition, there were still some volumetric strains and the volumetric strains for samples with different deformation rates are different ( In our study, samples were only subjected to elastic deformation before each stress relaxation test. Since a relaxation test is regarded as the inverse of a creep test, the elastic strain along the axial direction generated from stress decaying compensates the creep strain; thus, the initial strain is maintained constant during the test. The equation for the creep strain given in Eq. Using the approach by As shown in It should also be noted that the creep parameters derived from relaxation tests can only be used to estimate the primary and secondary stages of creep deformation behavior. In this study, those creep parameters were mainly used for estimating the lower bound of rate-dependent stress-strain behavior. Previous results have shown a significant rate-dependent uniaxial compression behavior for the two artificial frozen soil, and an isotach effect is noticed from step-loaded relaxation tests. For each step-loaded relaxation test, the three stresses of relaxation generally correspond to the lower bound of the stress-strain curve. However, no successful relaxation test was carried out at the stress level of peak strength like those performed on frozen sands by The experimental results can be used as a reliable data resource for theoretical modeling of the temperature and strain rate dependent uniaxial compressive behavior of frozen clay soils, as the artificial frozen clay soils have pre-determined mineralogical compositions, stress history, moisture content, and pore fluid salinity. Our study on the rate-dependent uniaxial compressive behaviors of artificially frozen sandy clay soils draws several conclusions as the following: The results show that the effects of temperature and deformation rates on sample's compressive mechanical properties are significant. A low temperature and a high deformation rate tend to generate brittle failure with post-peak softening behavior. A temperature close to the freezing temperature and a low deformation rate result in a diffuse failure associated with strain hardening. The uniaxial compressive strength-temperature relationship for the artificial frozen clay soils can be modeled using a power law function that covers a broad temperature range from −15 °C to 0 °C. The Young's modulus-temperature relation displays a linear trend under such temperature range. The parameters for the modeling function are highly dependent on the applied deformation rates and clay mineralogy. With the same clay fraction and stress history, the uniaxial compressive strength and Young's modulus of bentonite-sand samples are much higher than that of kaolinite samples. The reason is due to the higher ice content presented in bentonite-sand samples. Using a power-law creep equation, we were able to determine creep parameters of the two frozen soil using step-loaded relaxation tests. The three creep parameters are found to be significantly affected by temperatures warmer than −10 °C. Among those three creep parameters, the parameter “ The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. The authors would like to acknowledge Dr. A. Hanna, Dr. L. Wang, and Dr. H. Ge for their assistance during laboratory tests. This research is funded by