From the literature review it was observed that there is no established methodology, neither a common pattern, when selecting a phase change material for a thermal energy storage application. Melting temperature and enthalpy have traditionally been the considered thermal properties for the material selection. Therefore, the authors of this paper propose a new method of investigation on the suitability of a PCM that takes into account not only thermal properties but also health hazard and both cycling and thermal stability. Health hazard is related with the handling of the material, and both cycling and thermal stabilities with durability. This methodology is applied to five different PCM in the 150–200°C range: salicylic acid, benzanilide, d-mannitol, hydroquinone, and potassium thiocyanate. Results show that for an application in the 150–200°C range the suitable PCM are benzanilide and d-mannitol. Moreover, hydroquinone is also suitable but only in closed systems.Thermal energy storage (TES) technologies absorb and store energy for a period of time and release it according to the energy supply needs. These systems can bridge temporal and geographical gaps between energy supply and demand. According to the storage temperature needed, TES technologies can be grouped as low, medium or high temperature systems. Some of them have already showed significant levels of deployment Solar cooling technologies have become more and more important for human comfort since the primary energy used, solar energy, is the cheapest and most extensively available renewable energy. Moreover, there is a need to develop and promote environmentally sustainable cooling technologies because of the high energy consumptions and the peak loads caused by the conventional systems. There are different ways through which heat can be stored in PCM in a solar cooling facility, such as: heat storage to be supplied to the generator, produced cool energy storage and solar collectors heat storage for later use Waste heat represents a significant opportunity to improve the efficiency of global energy systems. Its use is dependent of both energy demand and availability of TES networks in nearby areas. PCM could be used to match the heat supply with the demand where temporal or geographic gaps exist To design a real equipment involving PCM in this temperature range a previous and appropriate characterization of the PCM needs to be done.  A similar approach was published by Haillot et al. DSC characterization provides both phase change temperature and enthalpy at the melting and solidification points. Moreover, melting/solidification cycles can be performed seeking for thermal cycling stability. Nonetheless, other equipment can also be used for this purpose, such as T-History  Therefore, from the literature review it has been observed that there is no established methodology, neither a common pattern, when selecting a PCM in the 150–200 The common methodology to select the suitable PCM for an application is mainly based on a basic research on the supplier product specifications and a later DSC characterization. Only few researchers perform thermal cycles to ensure PCM long life, neither IR to check chemical degradation, if any, nor TGA to know the maximum operating temperature so that the material does not decompose. These features are highly important to design a real application involving PCM in this temperature range. Therefore, the main objective of this paper is to provide a complete step-by-step methodology to follow when selecting a PCM, with a case study in the 150–200 The authors of this paper consider the methodology proposed in this article as basic, considering minimum requirements. Extra analysis could be helpful and recommendable. Five PCM with melting temperatures between 150 and 200 It can be previously seen in the literature that a PCM can be characterized by using different technologies Moreover, thermal stability analysis have been performed both in sealed and in open/pierced crucibles. The reasons why sealed and open/pierced experiments have been conducted are first, because of equipment requirements of piercing crucible lids at temperatures around 200 One important parameter to take into account when performing a material screening for a certain application is health hazard The National Fire Protection Association (NFPA) has developed a system to indicate the health, flammability, reactivity and special hazards for many common chemicals through the use of the NFPA 704 Diamond Thermal stability is another key factor when selecting a PCM for a specific application. Thermogravimetric analyses (TGA) have been performed in order to understand the thermal decomposition of the sample within the temperature range considered to be applied for solar cooling applications. The tests are run with open pans in a TGA, simulating an open system to ensure that the material can be used in the application temperature range with no mass losses. The thermogravimetric device used was a TA Instrument Simultaneous SDTQ600 under N When designing a heat storage unit, it is of great importance to ensure its long term performance, that is, the long term stability of the material used. Its thermal properties (melting temperature and enthalpy) need to remain almost constant during a specific number of cycles to guarantee the efficiency of the unit. Therefore, the cycling stability is the other essential parameter to be considered. The study is done by DSC and as some of the materials can experience oxidation with air, the first step was to decide whether the DSC pans needed to be pierced or closed. For this purpose, two samples of each PCM were prepared, piercing the pan lid in all cases to check, if so, the quantity of material lost due to the lid hole during cycling. The DSC measurements were done using a dynamic mode method between 100 and 200 In order to quantify the mass loss, the pans were weighed before and after each cycle. The following Therefore, these results made the authors decide to proceed the study with closed pans and none pierced lids. At the same time and as a preventive measure against oxidation, it was decided to fill the pans mostly to the top, leaving a thin layer of air inside the crucible; therefore the oxygen presence in the crucibles would be very low and oxidation may be neglected. The methodology is designed to study the cycling stability of all the PCM during 50 cycles. In order to see the evolution of the thermal parameters along these 50 cycles, three measurement points were established: 1st measurement (used as a reference): 0 cycle 2nd measurement: 10th cycle 3rd measurement: 50th cycle In order to achieve repeatability in the results, two samples of each one of the five PCM candidates were prepared for each measurement point. That is, ten samples for the initial measurements (cycle 0), ten samples to be cycled 10 times (10th cycle measurement point) and ten samples to undergo 50 cycles (50th cycle measurement point). The thermophysical properties were only measured at cycles 0, 10 and 50. 100 10 0.5 The authors run a previous cycle at 10 To cycle the PCM, a dynamic mode method between 100 and 200 Based on the experience of the authors and study cases FT-IR spectroscopy has been performed in order to study the chemical stability of the selected PCM after the cycling process. A Perkin Elmer MID Spectrum Two™ spectrometer that works in the 400–4000 The health hazard rating following NFPA 704 of the materials under study is shown in Thermal decompositions of the PCM under study are plotted in The decomposition/degradation of hydroquinone starts at 150–160 Two samples of a same PCM were cycled in each measurement point in order to representatively measure the variability of the thermophysical properties with time. Errors of 10% for melting enthalpy and a 5% for melting temperature are stated as acceptable for the DSC measurements   Results obtained by FT-IR in order to follow the chemical degradation of the PCM under study are presented in Finally, Summarizing the obtained results, salicylic acid is discarded as a useful PCM to be implemented in both closed and open systems operating between 150 and 200 From the literature review it was observed that there is neither a established methodology nor a common pattern, when selecting a PCM for an application between 150 and 200 This is why the authors of this paper propose a new method of investigation on the suitability of a PCM. In this sense, a list of properties that can be studied when selecting a PCM is presented. This methodology goes one step further incorporating health hazard and both cycling and thermal stability in the minimum list of properties to be considered when selecting a suitable PCM for a given application. Health hazard is important to be considered not only for the health and safety measures to be implemented for the employees in contact with the PCM but also for facilities design and maintenance. On the other hand, cycling and thermal stability provide information regarding the durability of the PCM which is a key aspect when selecting a material for an industrial application. In order to validate the experimental methodology presented in this study, five PCM from different PCM groups in the 150–200 As a final conclusion, it can be said that the experimental methodology presented in this study goes one step further in the complex process of collecting essential information for a suitable PCM selection. The research leading to these results has received funding from the