Objective
                  Non-union after intramedullary nail fixation of femur shaft fractures is although infrequent but a challenging condition to treat. The treatment options available to deal with such a situation include exchange nailing, removal of nail and re-osteosynthesis with plating, or Ilizarov fixation. We believe that rotational instability, in the presence of a nail, is one of the main reasons for most of the non-union. We present our experience of plate augmentation leaving the nail in situ for non-union of femoral shaft fracture.
               
                  Methods
                  In this retrospective study, we had operated 16 cases of the femoral shaft non-union, which were treated by plate augmentation and bone grafting (if needed) with retention of the intramedullary interlocking nail in situ. The cases of infected non-union and any fracture less than one-year duration were excluded from the study.
               
                  Results
                  Bone grafting was done only in 4 cases with atrophic non-union. We could achieve union in all the cases at an average time of 6.25 months. The average time of surgery between the primary surgery of interlocking nail fixation and the plate augmentation was 13 months. Mean surgical time for plate augmentation and bone grafting was 71min. No major complication or implant failure was encountered. An average residual shortening of the limb was 0.9cm and average range of motion of the knee was 115°.
               
                  Conclusion
                  Plate augmentation seems an effective, reliable, safe and an easy procedure for the treatment of femoral shaft non-union after an intramedullary nailing.The fracture of femoral shaft is a commonly seen injury in Orthopaedic practice and is often caused by high-energy trauma like road traffic accidents (RTA) or sometimes after low energy trauma. We believe that rotational instability, in the presence of a nail, is one of the main reasons for most of the non-union. We present our experience of plate augmentation leaving the nail in situ for non-union of femoral shaft fracture. It is an efficient technique, which provides additional rotational stability at the non-union site, and leaving the nail in situ protects the plate from bending forces. The additional advantages of this technique are that it can be done with minimally invasive technique, allows early rehabilitation of the patient and carries lesser morbidity. In this retrospective study, we had operated 16 cases of the femoral shaft non-union ( Surgery was performed in lateral decubitus, using a direct lateral approach by splitting the tensor fascia lata and vastus lateralis muscles to reach the non-union site. There were 11 females and five males in the present study with the average age of 36 years (range 26–55 years). The average time of surgery between the primary surgery of interlocking nail fixation and the plate augmentation was 13 months (range 12–15 months). Mean surgical time for plate augmentation and bone grafting was 71 The use of intramedullary interlocking nail for the femoral shaft fractures has shown excellent results in the literature. However, the critical situation arises, when these fractures fail to unite with intramedullary nails. The known causes of failure include comminuted fracture pattern or significant displacement of fragments and mechanical factors (like small diameter of the nail, insufficient locking) and malalignment of fragments. Various methods of surgical treatment have been advocated for the treatment of femoral non-union. They are associated with various advantages and disadvantages ( We agree with Choi and Kim In the present study, we could achieve bony union in all the 16 cases with no significant complication and no implant failure. Very few studies have been done on plate augmentation with a nail in situ, and they have shown results comparable to the present study. The authors have none to declare.