Previously we have proposed a continuous model of soil organic matter (SOM) transformation which was based on describing only the most general notions of this process – a gradual increase in SOM stability toward transformation, occurring concurrently with partial decomposition of SOM. The model provided qualitative description of vertical SOM distributions in different soils. In the present study this model has been modified to make the description more realistic. The study demonstrates quantitative correspondence between the calculated and averaged observed vertical distributions of SOM for different biomes.In a previous study, we proposed a simple continuous model of SOM transformation and decomposition ( Although derivation of model equations in the previous papers ( The basic equation of the model ( When plant litter input is defined by In the stationary case, solution of Eq. In this study, in order to bring the model concepts closer to the notions of the nature of soil processes, we propose a modified model, which assumes that not all matter in the soil simultaneously undergoes transformation. In any stage of transformation of the matter, only some part of this matter undergoes transformation at any given time. If reactions of both decomposition and transition to a more stable form are described by the laws of chemical kinetics, at any moment there is a part of the matter that has entered into the reaction and a part of the matter that has not. Then, Eq. Without going into great detail, we can describe the total result of the operation of these mechanisms in a generalized way as follows. The part of the SOM that is undergoing transformation at a given time will be called active SOM, and its distribution will be denoted by In the stationary case, Let us assume that In this modification of the model, only one new parameter, In order to establish one-to-one correspondence between the stationary SOM distributions along the transformation rate The stationary distribution of SOM along the scale While previously ( By solving the differential Eq. As follows from Eq. We use Eqs. The model was tested by comparing model calculations to the SOM vertical distributions observed in nature. As field data on the SOM (in carbon units) vertical distribution in real soils, we used the data averaged for biomes on organic carbon in soils at different depths presented in a study by Based on the values of total organic carbon For three biomes – boreal forest, temperate grassland, and tropical evergreen forest, we calculated the SOM distributions In the calculations, plant litter was divided into three components – leaf, root, and wood litter, each characterized by its own values of The data on the annual average amounts of litter components in the biomes studied here were taken from Calculations of For the boreal forest, we used the values of The vertical distributions of the root litter in calculations using Eq. The initial data used in calculations are listed in Data in Other authors ( The model proposed here compares favorably with the model described by The model described in a study by In this study, we demonstrated quantitative correspondence between the SOM vertical distributions calculated using the proposed model and the vertical distributions of organic matter averaged for biomes that are observed in real soils. That was achieved by using rather simple mathematical tools and a small number of parameters. Thus, the proposed model is a convenient instrument for the initial coordination of field dataset components providing self-contained description of SOM dynamics. This study was supported by the