The bacterial inactivation of Escherichia coli on Ag–cotton textiles were investigated under different experimental conditions with novel Ag-nanoparticles fixed on cotton textiles. The evaluation of the bactericide performance of the Ag–cotton was compared with the one observed for Ag–TiO2–cotton loaded textiles. The procedure used allowed us to prepare highly dispersed Ag-cluster species, 2–4nm in size, as observed by transmission electron microscopy (TEM). By depth profile analysis, the X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) revealed that the Ag profile in the 15 topmost layers remained almost constant before and after E. coli inactivation. The cotton loading was fairly low and of the order of 0.10wt.% Ag/wt. of cotton. By infrared spectroscopy no modification of the Ag–cotton could be detected before or after E. coli inactivation due to the small absorption coefficient of Ag and the very low metal loading of Ag on the cotton. The E. coli was completely abated on Ag–cotton textiles immediately after the contact took place, due to the strong bacteriostatic effect of the dispersed silver clusters on the cotton surface.Silver solutions and silver clusters have been used for the treatment of infections due to their natural bactericide and fungicide properties Ag-salts and silver solutions have some biological limitations for their practical use as a bactericide. Supported silver clusters prepared using nano-technology seem promising when fixed on adequate supports due to their increased bactericide effect. This is important in wound healing and for the control of inflammations. By decreasing the Ag crystal size the dispersion of the clusters and the active Ag contact area available for chemical reactions is increased. This in turn allows the reactions to proceed over a short time period. This study investigated the fixation of Ag on cotton (from now on cotton–Ag) that would protect wounds from bacterial contamination and growth. The bacteria existing in the wound exudates in contact with the cotton–Ag, which inhibits the growth and multiplication of bacteria, Reagents like AgNO  The TiO The bacterial strain used At the beginning of the experiments while reactors were kept in the dark (5 A Philips EM 430 (300 Measurements were carried out in a Kratos Axis Ultra instrument equipped with a conventional hemispheric analyzer. The X-ray source employed was an Al Kα 1486.6 Elemental analysis of the Ag loaded cotton was carried out by atomic absorption spectrometry using a Perkin-Elmer 300 S unit. The crystallinity of the Ag-clusters on the cotton surface was studied with a Siemens X-ray diffractometer using Cu Kα radiation. However, not enough signals were obtained to characterize the Ag crystallites due to the small size and low loading attained on the cotton textile. The ATR-IR spectra were measured in a Portman Instrument AG spectrophotometer equipped with a Specac attachment (45° one pass diamond crystal). The spectra obtained were the results of 256 scans with a 0.5  The amount of Ag found by elemental analysis was 0.10     The bactericidal activity of the Ag–TiO Reaction The solid–gas interface of the cotton Ag/TiO This study reports the working features for Ag–cotton textiles during the inactivation of This study was supported by the KTI/CTI TOP-NANO21 Program under Grant No. 6117.2 TNS, Bern, Switzerland. We also thank the cooperation of Cilander AG, CH-9100, Herisau, Switzerland.