Xylanase and mannanase were widely used in various application fields for degrading hemicellulose. The coordinated action of them could significantly improve hemicellulose hydrolysis. To enhance the synergistic action of xylanase and mannanase on hemicellulose, twelve chimeras of xylanase and mannanase were constructed and expressed in Pichia pastoris. The data presented that the types of peptide linker, the length of linker and the integration order of two enzymes had great effects on the properties of chimeras and synergistic efficiencies toward the hydrolysis of luffa cylindrica fiber. The chimera XE3M, with rigid α-helix-forming peptide A[EAAAK]3A as linker and xylanase at the N-terminal, greatly improved the hydrolysis of luffa cylindrica fiber. It revealed that the synergistic action of xylanase and mannanase on hemicelluloses could be strengthened by constructing proper chimeras. And it would be useful for developing an economical process for hemicellulose hydrolysis.Xylan, is the most abundant component of hemicelluloses, composed of a linear backbone of β- Genetic engineering has been widely used to artificially fuse different genes into a single open reading frame. Two or more genes are fused into a fusion protein which could display multiple functional properties derived from each of its components In our previous study, xylanase (Xyl11, GenBank accession no.  The amino acid sequences of the designed linkers were flexible linkers S The twelve recombinant plasmids were linearized by Protein was estimated by Bradford assay Molecular mass estimation was performed by sodium dodecyl sulfate-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (SDS-PAGE) The endo-1,4-β-xylanase and endo-1,4-β-mannanase activities were determined using the 3,5-dinitrosalicylic acid (DNS) method. One unit of the endo-1,4-β-xylanase activity (U) was defined as the amount of enzyme that produced 1 Xylanase activity was determined according to the previously described method with oat spelt xylan (X0627, Sigma) as substrate in 0.1 Mannan endo-1,4-β-mannanase activity was determined according to the previously described method with locust bean gum (G0753, Sigma, USA) as substrate in 0.1 The optimum temperatures for xylanase and mannanase activities were estimated at pH 5.0 with the temperature range from 20 to 90 Kinetic parameters ( After being crushed by micronizer, luffa cylindrica fiber with different particle size (20–70, 70–200 and >200 mesh) was obtained using sifter. Luffa cylindrica fiber (100 Synergistic efficiency or degree of synergy was calculated using the following formula:  Twelve bifunctional enzymes were constructed correctly by fusing The twelve chimeric enzymes, Xyn and Man were purified using gel filtration chromatography on a Superdex G-150 column. SDS-PAGE displayed single protein bands with molecular weight about 100–150 The twelve chimeras displayed the maximal mannanase activity at 45 All chimeras showed the same optimum working pH with Man. And they also displayed the same optimum working pH with Xyn ( The After being crushed by micronizer, luffa cylindrica fiber rich in mannan and xylan was chosen as substrate for evaluating synergism of chimeras. The main hydrolysates were hexose, pentodialdose and hexobiose, hexotriose and pentotriose after hydrolyzing 20–70 mesh of luffa cylindrica fiber by XE Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at  Xylanase and mannanase often are used together to degrade hemicellulose in many application fields. Recently, Várnai et al. revealed that xylanase and mannanase acted synergistically on the hydrolysis of softwood All the chimeras showed similar working temperature and pH properties, and their optimum temperatures and pHs were identical with Xyn and Man. Chimeras exhibited better thermostability with rigid α-helix-forming peptide as linkers than with flexible glycine–serine as linkers ( The chimeric enzyme often had kinetic advantages over the simple mixture of individual enzymes The substrate particle size also had important effect on the action of Xyn, Man and chimeras. With the increase of substrate particle size, the amount of hydrolysates increased by individual Xyn or Man. Xylan and mannan could be closely associated with cellulose bundles and lignin in luffa cylindrica, and one hinders the hydrolysis of the another by the corresponding enzyme. Thus, when XE In conclusion, the degradation of hemicelluloses rich in xylan and mannan could be improved by constructing bifunctional chimeras of xylanase and mannanase. The type of peptide linker, the length of linker and the integration order should be carefully considered during designing multidomain hydrolytic enzymes. It will be useful for developing an economical process for biomass conversion. This work was financially supported by Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at 