The influence of Zn on the strain hardening of as-extruded Mg-xZn (x = 1, 2, 3 and 4 wt%) magnesium alloys was investigated using uniaxial tensile tests at 10−3 s-1 at room temperature. The strain hardening rate, the strain hardening exponent and the hardening capacity were obtained from true plastic stress-strain curves. There were almost no second phases in the as-extruded Mg-Zn magnesium alloys. Average grain sizes of the four as-extruded alloys were about 17.8 μm. With increasing Zn content from 1 to 4 wt%, the strain hardening rate increased from 2850 MPa to 6810 MPa at (σ-σ0.2) = 60 MPa, the strain hardening exponent n increased from 0.160 to 0.203, and the hardening capacity, Hc increased from 1.17 to 2.34. The difference in strain hardening response of these Mg-Zn alloys might be mainly caused by weaker basal texture and more solute atoms in the α-Mg matrix with higher Zn content.As the lightest metallic structural metal found in the world today, Mg and its alloys have many superior properties and been widely used in various fields [ Strain hardening in magnesium alloys is an obvious feature in the process of plastic deformation [ In particular, Zn is an effective alloying element that can improve the mechanical properties of magnesium alloys [ This work investigated the effects of the Zn concentration on the strain hardening response of as-extruded Mg-Zn alloys, by means of tensile testing at room temperature. The results and related discussion provide an important basis for understanding the strain hardening of Mg-Zn alloys and developing new high-performance Mg-Zn alloys for engineering applications. Ingots of Mg-Zn binary alloys were prepared from high-purity Mg (99.98 wt%) and Zn (99.99 wt%) using an electric resistance furnace under a mixed protective gas of CO      Based on the relatively uniform deformation, these engineering curves can be converted to true stress–strain curves. Conversion standard formula assumes that the total volume did not change and that the area of cross-section along the gauge length was uniform during the deformation. True stress–strain curves are presented in The strain hardening behavior of the as-extruded Mg-Zn alloys is analyzed using the strain hardening rate The hardening capacity, Hc, of a material can be described by the ratio of ( Based on the deﬁnition of Eq. For the cause of further quantifying strain hardening behavior of as-extruded Mg-Zn alloys, the uniform plastic deformation stage in the uniaxial tensile curve is ﬁtted by the equation [ Generally speaking, slip means dislocation movement and carries plastic deformation. The process of plastic deformation closely relates to changes of dislocation density and dislocation movement, and affects the strain hardening behavior. The strain hardening behavior in metallic material occurs because of dislocation interaction. Original dislocation tangling would hinder further movement of other dislocations. Considering the effects of grain size and dislocations, a recent model indicates that [ The stress contribution related to the dislocation density can be obtained by subtracting the yield stress σ The result of the formula deduction shows that the net flow stress (  With increasing Zn concentration from 1 to 4 wt%, In the Kocks strain hardening model [ Based on rate of dislocation storage, the microscopic hardening rate could be obtained as follows: Many authors [ Various texture intensity values can change the critical resolved shear stress on basal and non-basal planes. Different textures can change the Schmid factor for basal and non-basal slips, and have thereby an effect on the activation of slip systems. In the as-extruded Mg-Zn alloys, the measured values of The CRSS on basal planes is [ In the early stages of deformation, plastic deformation is mainly carried by basal slip in the as-extruded Mg-Zn alloys. Nevertheless, stage III strain hardening is closely related to multiple slip. In order to supplement the deformation in the Since the intensity of basal texture of the as-extruded Mg-Zn alloys decreased with increasing Zn content, the average Schmid factor for basal slip increased and that for multiple slip decreased. The solute atom also had an influence on strain hardening behavior in as-extruded Mg-Zn alloys. As shown in As is mentioned about, increasing Zn content would reduce the axial ratio (c/a) value of magnesium significantly and then decrease the value of The effect of Zn on the strain hardening response of extruded Mg- The grain size did change and the intensity of basal texture decreased with increasing Zn content from 1 to 4 wt% in the as-extruded Mg-Zn alloys. Zn addition leads to an obvious increase in strain hardening ability of the as-extruded Mg-Zn alloys. With increasing Zn content from 1 to 4 wt%, the strain hardening rate increases significantly, the strain hardening exponent The variation of strain hardening behavior of the as-extruded Mg-Zn samples with different Zn contents could be interpreted by texture and solute influences. The weaker basal texture and more Zn solute atoms are able to promote initiation of non-basal slip in magnesium alloys at room temperature and lead to a higher rate of dislocation storage. This work was financially supported by the