During anodization, the properties of the oxide layer depend on the chemical composition of the titanium alloy and on the parameters applied during surface treatment. The properties of the anodized surfaces influence their further functionalization. In this paper, ceramic multilayer coatings were formed on the Ti-6Al-7Nb, Ti-13Nb-13Zr, and Ti-15Mo alloys. A silica layer with wollastonite particles was formed on all the previously anodized Ti alloy samples. Using scanning electron microscopy, Raman spectroscopy, and X-ray diffractometry, respectively, the surface morphology, chemical composition and phase composition of the hybrid ceramic layers were investigated. In addition, the adhesion and hardness of the coatings were determined. The contact angle of the coatings was between 90.0±0.2° and 114.3±5.9°, and the surface roughness was <2μm. The modified surfaces were immersed in solutions containing protein-like collagen type I or lactoferrin. The coated Ti-15Mo surface exhibited the highest influence on both types of protein concentration in phosphate-buffered saline solution. However, after 1day of culture, the adsorbed lactoferrin on the entire surface enhanced the growth of osteoblast-like MG-63 cells. Significant differences in cell culture were observed after 7days, where the number of cells was much higher on the modified surface with lactoferrin. Collagen type I did not significantly enhance the cell behaviour; moreover, a large number of dead cells were found on these samples.In 2010, in Europe alone, osteoporosis was diagnosed in 27.5 million people The functionalization of metallic surfaces depends on their applications and on the techniques required to obtain desirable effects. For the growth of bone tissue, ceramic coatings composed of one or many phases can be formed as porous materials. Usually, phases composed of calcium phosphate-related compounds have been chosen in order to obtain bioactive coatings The plasma electrolytic oxidation (PEO) process is widely used to form a thick porous oxide layer incorporating desirable compounds from an anodizing bath under DC or AC conditions. When the material is designed as an implant into bone tissue, the surfaces of light metals (e.g., Ti or Ti alloys) are usually anodized in a solution containing compounds such as calcium, phosphorous, sodium, or potassium Adsorbed proteins are one of the factors determining the cytocompatibility of materials and play a vital role in hard tissue repair In this paper, an investigation of the ceramic coatings on three different vanadium-free titanium alloys is presented. Hybrid coatings made of phosphate compounds and a silica layer with wollastonite formed by the sol–gel method may exhibit favourable properties as potential materials for bone implants. The modified Ti alloy surface was immersed in a solution containing collagen type I or LF in order to enhance the cytocompatibility of the materials, especially in terms of cell adhesion. Differences in the adsorbed protein on the hybrid ceramic coatings were observed. The coated Ti-based samples were also coated with collagen type I and lactoferrin to enhance MG-63 osteoblast-like cell adhesion. Titanium alloys including Ti-6Al-7Nb (TAN), Ti-13Nb-13Zr (TNZ), and Ti-15Mo (TM) (BIMO Metals, Poland) were modified by the plasma electrolytic oxidation method (PEO) coupled with a sol-gel process. The PEO process was carried out in a solution composed of 0.1 Using silicon precursors such as tetraethylorthosilane (TEOS, Sigma-Aldrich) and methyltriethoxy-silane (MTES, Sigma Aldrich) with water as a solvent, sols containing wollastonite were prepared by acid catalysis. The molar ratio of precursor to solvent was 1:0.51. Approximately 0.1 Morphological and cross-section analysis of the coatings formed on the titanium alloy surfaces was performed using a scanning electron microscope (SEM, Hitachi TM-3000, accelerating voltage The surface roughness and wettability of the hybrid coatings were analysed using a non-contact optical profilometer (Wyko N9300, Veeco) and a drop shape analysis system (DSA 10Mk2, KRÜSS). The parameters of the surface roughness were determined according to the procedure presented in PN-EN ISO 4287:1999 standard Raman spectra of the coatings were collected with laser excitation at 633 The phase composition of the samples was analysed using an X-Pert Philips PW 3040/60 diffractometer operating at 30 The adhesive strength between the coating and substrate and the hardness of the coatings was assessed using a Micro-Combi-Tester (CSM Instruments) to apply a Rockwell “C” diamond indenter (serial number: J-147, 100 Instrumental hardness was measured using the Berckovich indenter (Oliver and Pharr method). The penetration depth of the intender was not deeper than 10% of the total coating thickness. The loading and unloading force rates were 150 Collagen type I (rat tail, purity ≥ Investigations were carried out using the osteoblast-like cell line MG-63. The examined samples were sterilized by autoclaving at 121 Cell metabolic activity was evaluated using the Alamar Blue reagent (Sigma-Aldrich). For each sample, a 50-μl portion of Alamar Blue reagent in PBS solution was added. The cells and reagent were incubated for 4 Titanium alloy samples were anodized in a solution containing calcium hypophosphite and tricalcium phosphate, according to the procedure presented in our former papers The total layer thickness of the ceramic coatings formed on the titanium alloys was determined based on SEM images of the cross-sections ( The surface roughness of the hybrid coating was determined using an optical profilometer, and the roughness parameters, such as the arithmetical average roughness (Ra), root mean square roughness (Rq), maximum relative height on the profile curve, in a sampling length (Rt) are presented in The contact angle of the hybrid ceramic layers was similar for the TAN-W and TM-W samples ( Raman spectra of the coated titanium alloy samples and wollastonite are presented in The XRD patterns for all the investigated samples are presented in The adhesion of the hybrid ceramic layers to the substrate was investigated using scratch-test measurement. The adhesion of the hybrid ceramic layers to the substrate was investigated using scratch-test measurement. Samples with ceramic hybrid coatings were immersed in PBS solution containing 0.200 Samples with ceramic hybrid coatings were immersed in PBS solution containing 0.200 Biological investigations were carried out using osteoblast-like MG-63 cells for 7 The numbers of cells were determined using the Alamar Blue test ( The adsorption of collagen on coated TNZ surfaces ( Similar results were determined for the TM samples ( For materials used as bone-like implants, the plasma electrolytic oxidation (PEO) method is the most favourable among the electrochemical methods due to the advantages of PEO layers, such as high adhesion of the formed layer to the substrate, the porous microstructure of the layer, and the possibility of incorporating useful amounts of bioactive compounds during a short time of the process, e.g., 1–5 The first differences between these Ti alloys were observed after their anodization. The layer formed on the TM alloy was more compact and characterized by smaller pores than the others Raman spectra ( Hydroxyapatite or CaP-based materials do not present antibacterial properties. Usually, the coatings or other ceramic compounds for bone treatments are composed of silicone, chlorhexidine, silver ions, or dedicated antibiotics Several agglomerations of ceramic particles were observed on the TNZ-W surface, and for this sample, the highest Ra parameter was measured. The most appropriate ranges of surface roughness and contact angle for bone cell adhesion were determined based on the results of many investigations. For materials intended for dental implants, the surface should be hydrophilic with an Ra parameter below 2 The lowest concentration of LF in the PBS solution was determined for the TM-W sample, and this sample also showed the best cytocompatibility. Among all the modified surfaces, Ti-15Mo alloy was the best substrate for ceramic layer formation. The layer was more compact, and the contact angle indicated that the surface showed nearly hydrophilic properties. The surface roughness was 1.50 The anodized surface strongly influences the final effects of further layer functionalization. The surface of the anodized TAN and TNZ alloys was easily covered with a ceramic layer containing wollastonite using the sol-gel method. To cover a larger part of the porous oxide layer, the procedure for wollastonite deposition is repeated three times. The anodized surface of the TM alloy was covered with ceramic particles after the second layer deposition. Porous oxide layers formed on the TM alloy were less porous and more compact, which could influence the deposition of the additional ceramic layer. The formed coating was not brittle and showed good adhesion to the substrate. The coatings formed on the TNZ surface were the least uniform. The best mechanical properties were determined for the coated TAN alloy. The differences in layer adhesion were significant. The final properties depend on anodization condition and then ceramic coating formation. The highest amounts of silica-wollastonite compounds were deposited on the anodized TNZ surface; however, the characterization of the coatings showed that layer was cracked. The coating formed on the TAN surface was the most compact and crystalline. The surface roughness of the hybrid coatings was between 1.5 and 1.8 Biological investigation confirmed that all the layers were cytocompatible. The adsorption of LF enhanced cell adhesion and proliferation. The adhesion and proliferation of cells were much better than those of the control samples (including TCPS), which could be caused by the chelation of cations with LF. Surface modification with collagen type I was not beneficial for the cell growth. Adsorbed LF enhances the cytocompatibility of all the coated Ti alloys. However, the best results of the surface treatment were obtained for the TAN alloys. The following are the supplementary data related to this article. Supplementary data to this article can be found online at This work was supported by the This work was supported by the