Background
                  Although open reduction and internal fixation via the extended lateral approach is currently considered gold-standard, severely comminuted calcaneal fractures might not be amendable for reconstruction. The primary aim of the current review study was to assess the functional outcome of the primary arthrodesis in the management of comminuted displaced intra-articular calcaneal fractures.
               
                  Methods
                  The literature was searched for studies published between January 1st 1990 and December 1st 2010, to identify studies in which a primary arthrodesis was utilized for the treatment of displaced intra-articular calcaneal fractures between. The methodological quality of the included studies was assessed using the Coleman Methodology Score.
               
                  Results
                  Seven case series and one abstract were identified, reporting on 120 patients with 128 severely comminuted calcaneal fractures. Average follow-up time was 28 months and union rate 97%. Functional outcome was assessed using the modified AOFAS score in seven studies; with a weighted average of 77.4 (range 72.4–88). One study reported a 75% good to excellent outcome on the Paley score. Three studies reported on return to work, ranging from 75 to 100%. Overall reported wound complications occurred in 19.4%. The average Coleman Methodology Score was 56 (range 38–68) points.
               
                  Conclusions
                  The primary arthrodesis for the treatment of Sanders type-IV comminuted displaced intra-articular calcaneal fractures provides overall good results considering the severe nature of the injury. Therefore, in the process of choosing the best treatment modality for a severely comminuted calcaneal fracture, the primary arthrodesis should receive full consideration.Considering the long-term results after displaced intra-articular calcaneal fractures the initial treatment modality largely dictates the rate of secondary arthrodeses 1921, which became the first triple arthrodesis after Ryerson added the calcaneal-cuboid fusion in 1923 Unhappy with the results of the treatment modalities of their time, several authors turned to primary or early arthrodesis of the subtalar joint after a displaced intra-articular fracture of the calcaneus instead of awaiting late arthritic complications After the somewhat disappointing results from primary arthrodesis in the late 1950s, as delineated by Lindsay and Dewar, the primary fusion became less popular The aim of the current review study was to assess the functional outcome of the primary arthrodesis in the management of comminuted displaced intra-articular calcaneal fractures. A literature search was conducted to identify studies in which a primary arthrodesis was performed for the treatment of displaced intra-articular calcaneal fractures. The electronic databases up to January 1st 2011 of ‘the Cochrane Library’, ‘Pubmed Medline’, ‘EMbase’, and ‘Google Scholar’ were explored using the combination of the following search-terms and Boolean operators: ‘primary’ OR ‘early’ AND ‘arthrodesis’ OR ‘fusion’ AND ‘calcaneus’ OR ‘calcaneal’ OR ‘calcis’. No restriction in language and publication date was applied in the initial search. However, only studies from 1990 to 2010 were included in the final analysis, older studies were considered having only historic value. Publications were requested at the university medical (internet) library and reviewed. In addition, a comprehensive search of reference lists of all identified articles was conducted to find additional studies. An article was found eligible when it concerned (1) the surgical treatment of acute displaced intra-articular calcaneal fractures, (2) usage of primary arthrodesis, with or without initial reconstruction, as surgical technique. Series in which more than one operative treatment modality was used, were included only if sufficient data on follow-up, union rates, and outcome could be extracted on those patients treated by primary arthrodesis. The studies concerning the primary arthrodesis were tested for their methodological quality according to the Coleman Methodology Score Thirteen studies were excluded as they were published before 1990 ( The seven case series and one abstract reported on 120 patients (average 15 per study; range 6–33) with 128 calcaneal fractures (average 16 per study; range 6–37). With the exception of 1 study The average time between the injury and the primary arthrodesis was reported in five studies, and varied between six and 22 days. The weighted average (dependent on number of patients) follow-up time was reported in all studies was 28 months (range 12–59 months). Union was reported in 124 out of 128 fractures, with a weighted average, depending on number of included fractures, of 97%. Functional outcome was assessed using the American Orthopaedic Foot Ankle Society hindfoot (AOFAS) score Four studies reported on return to work, which ranged from 75 to 100% (31 patients out of 34) Wound complications was distracted from seven studies and ranged from 0 to 50%. In studies reporting on complications The abstract This review study reports on the results of seven studies and an abstract in which salvage of comminuted calcaneal fractures is performed via primary arthrodesis. With a union rate between 90 and 100%, the weighted average of the AOFAS score was 77.4 points (range 72.4–88) out of a maximum of 94 points. In the studies from the authors of the classification systems; all Crosby–Fitzgibbons type-3 fractures treated non-operatively had a poor outcome Because anatomical reconstruction of the subtalar joint in these severely comminuted fractures is frequently not possible, the secondary arthrodesis rates may be as high as 72% for the Sanders type-IV fractures Only studies from 1990 to 2010 were included in the current systematic review. Seemingly arbitrarily, this restriction in publication date was chosen as from this time on more structured disease-specific outcome scores, CT-scanning and validated classifications were applied. Secondly, the less recent publications more frequently fused the subtalar joint without initial reconstruction of the overall anatomy Improved results with initial attempt to reconstruct height and width have been noted previously There are only two studies comparing the results of primary arthrodesis with the outcome after ORIF. The first compared patients with a primary arthrodesis to a historic group of previously published secondary arthrodeses with similar follow-up time, showing almost 20 points difference in AOFAS score in favor of the primary arthrodesis The primary arthrodesis for the treatment of severe intra-articular calcaneal fractures is rare and complex surgery, which is only performed in non-reconstructable calcaneal fractures with severe damage to the subtalar cartilage. The number of Sanders type-IV ranges from 4 to 28% in the literature Current studies on primary arthrodesis are small and considerably flawed, which made a formal meta-analysis impossible. Therefore, data from the collected studies was presented in a descriptive manner without formal statistical analysis. Weighted averages and ranges were used because of the low number of patients in some studies. A multicenter prospective study comparing open reduction and internal fixation with the primary arthrodesis for Sanders type-IV calcaneal fractures is needed to determine the best treatment option for this seriously disabling injury. Currently, one prospective randomized trial comparing ORIF and primary fusion for Sanders Type-IV is running. Results of this study are expected for December 2013 ( In conclusion, the primary arthrodesis for the treatment of Sanders type-IV comminuted displaced intra-articular calcaneal fractures provides overall good results considering the severe nature of the injury. Therefore, in the process of choosing the best treatment modality for a severely comminuted calcaneal fracture, the primary arthrodesis should receive full consideration.