A new process for complete separation of Pd(II), Pt(IV), Ir(IV) and Rh(III) from concentrated hydrochloric acid solutions was proposed by employing solvent extraction. In the HCl concentration range from 1 to 6M, only Pd(II) was extracted by LIX 63 and the Pd(II) in the loaded LIX 63 was stripped by thiourea. Extraction of the Pd(II) free raffinate with TBP at 6M HCl solution led to selective extraction of Pt(IV) over iridium and Rh(III) and stripping of the loaded TBP with dilute HCl solution resulted in pure Pt(IV) solution. The extraction of iridium by TBP and Aliquat 336 indicated the possibility of Ir(IV)’s reduction to Ir(III) during the extraction with LIX 63. After adding NaClO3 as an oxidizing agent to the Pd(II) and Pt(IV) free raffinate, extraction of the resulting solution with Aliquat 336 led to selective extraction of Ir(IV) over Rh(III). Use of HClO4 solution could strip the Ir(IV) from the loaded Aliquat 336. This process can be utilized for the recovery of the four PGMs with high purity from diverse resources.Platinum group metals (PGMs) denote the group of six chemically similar metallic elements, including platinum (Pt), palladium (Pd), rhodium (Rh), ruthenium (Ru), iridium (Ir) and osmium (Os). PGMs are extensively used in automobile and chemical industries owing to their specific physical and chemical properties. Since natural resources for these metals are limited and their demand from industry is increasing, it is important to find an effective separation process to recover these metals with high purity from secondary resources. In order to recover PGMs from the secondary resources, hydrometallurgical processes are employed to dissolve these metals using high acid concentration in presence of an oxidizing agent. Separation of the individual PGMs from the leaching solutions is generally carried out by the following methods, such as solvent extraction ( In general, the extraction behavior of Pt(IV) and Pd(II) by most of the commercial amines and solvating extractants is similar. Therefore, some specific extractants, such as 2-hydroxy-5-nonylacetophenone oxime (LIX 84-IC) ( The objective of the present work was to develop a new separation process with high efficiency of Pd(II), Pt(IV), Ir(IV) and Rh(III) from concentrated HCl solution by solvent extraction. The extraction reaction of Pd(II) by LIX 63 was verified by slope analysis of the extraction data as a function of the concentration of HCl, LIX 63 and Pd(II). Tri-butylphosphate (TBP) and quaternary ammonium salt (Aliquat 336) were used for the selective extraction of Pt(IV) and Ir(IV) from the Pd(II) free raffinate, respectively. For each extraction step, an optimum stripping condition was obtained. On the basis of the results, a new process flowsheet for the separation of Pd(II), Pt(IV), Ir(IV) and Rh(III) from concentrated HCl solution by solvent extraction was proposed . A synthetic solution containing Pt(IV), Pd(II), Ir(IV) and Rh(III) was prepared by dissolving appropriate amounts of H Solvent extraction experiments were performed by mixing equal volume (10 The possibility of selective extraction of Pd(II) from the other three PGMs (Pt(IV), Ir(IV), Rh(III)) from concentrated HCl solutions was investigated by employing LIX 63 as an extractant. In general, the concentration of PGMs in diverse resources is very low and the molar ratio of the four PGMs has little influence on the extraction behavior of these metals ( In concentrated chloride media (0.1–10  Eq.  In order to find an optimum LIX 63 concentration for selective extraction of Pd(II), LIX 63 concentration was varied from 0.02 to 1 In order to verify the extraction reaction of Pd(II) by LIX 63 from concentrated HCl solution, extraction experiments of Pd(II) by LIX 63 were done by varying HCl concentration from 1 to 8 The effect of LIX 63 concentration on the extraction of Pd(II) was investigated by varying initial LIX 63 concentration from 0.0001 to 0.1 The extraction of monomeric Pd(II) species was verified by varying the initial concentration of Pd(II) from 50 to 4000 According to the In order to find an optimum concentration of (NH After separation of Pd(II), the Pd(II) free raffinate contained 100 The selective extraction of Pt(IV) over iridium and Rh(III) by TBP might be ascribed to the charge density of each complex. The charge density of Pt(IV), Ir(IV) and Rh(III) complexes is in the following order: RhCl The extraction reaction of Pt(IV) by TBP can be represented as Eq. Previous results have indicated that Aliquat 336 and tertiary amines, such as tri-isooctyl amine (Alamine 308), tri-octylamine (TOA) and tri 2-ethylhexyl amine (TEHA) can selectively extract Ir(IV) over Rh(III) from the synthetic solution containing only Ir(IV) and Rh(III) in the HCl concentration range of 1–8 Since the extraction percentage of Ir(III) and Rh(III) by Aliquat 336 was very low, oxidation of Ir(III) to Ir(IV) is necessary to separate Ir(III) and Rh(III) from the raffinate. NaClO For the purpose of Ir(IV) stripping, the loaded Aliquat 336 was prepared by contacting 0.01  The separation of Pd(II), Pt(IV), Ir(IV) and Rh(III) from concentrated hydrochloric acid solution was investigated using solvent extraction. First, Pd(II) was completely separated from the other PGMs by extraction with LIX 63 in the HCl concentration range of 1–6 This work was supported by a grant funded by