In this investigation, nanocrystalline tungsten powders prepared by either chemical method or high energy mechanical milling were sintered to study the size-dependence of the densification of tungsten powders. Results show that nanocrystalline tungsten powders produced via an ultra-high energy milling process have significantly enhanced sinterability compared to conventional submicron- or micron-sized powders. This study for the first time shows nanocrystalline tungsten powder can be sintered via a pressureless process to near-full densification at a temperature as low as 1100°C.Tungsten is an excellent material for many applications owing to its attractive properties such as high melting point and high density There are typically two approaches to improve the sinterability of tungsten. One is by the addition of small amount of transition metals such as Ni and Pd In order to further explore the effects of particle size at the nanoscale and the effects of mechanical milling, the sintering of tungsten with different particle sizes prepared by either chemical methods or high energy milling, were investigated in this study. The objective is to further understand the dependence of sintering on particle size, and to determine the lowest temperatures at which tungsten can be sintered to full or near-full density by conventional pressureless processes. Two as-received tungsten powders produced by the reduction of tungsten oxide were used as raw materials in this study. One had a particle size of ∼500 High Resolution Scanning Electron Microscope (FEI Nova NanoSEM 630) was used to characterize the morphology of the original as well as the milled powders. The grain size of C500 was estimated by using SEM images while grain sizes of MC500, C50, and MC50 were evaluated from X-ray diffraction patterns (Siemens D5000 X-ray Diffractometer) by using Williamson–Hall method  The comparison of lattice strains in all powder samples shows, however, that the differences between different powders are relatively small, especially that the lattice strains in C50, the 50  The sintering behaviors at 1250 The above results suggest that the densification of tungsten powders is affected by two factors – particle size and milling. The poor sinterability of C500 can be attributed to its relatively coarse particle size. The poor sinterability of C50, however, was unexpected considering the fact that the original particle size of C50 powder was 50 To further understand the sintering behavior of nanosized W powders, the densification of the powders as a function of temperature was examined with respect to densification during the heat-up stage of a sintering cycle as well as the onset temperature of densification. First of all,  The effects of particle size on sintering behavior can be further elucidated by examining the dependence of sintering temperature on particle size using the scaling law. In this study, the sintering temperature is defined as the temperature at which over 95% relative sintered density can be achieved by holding for less than 1 Finally, the sinterability of a powder depends not only on its particle size, but also on its grain size and internal strains. Comparing the as-received 50 In summary, the present work, for the first time, showed that nanocrystalline tungsten powders can be pressurelessly sintered to near-full density at a temperature as low as 1100 The authors wish to acknowledge