The apparent leach kinetics for an ore particle within a heap leaching system depend on the chemical conditions in the fluids around the particle, the mass transport within the particle and the reaction kinetics at the surface of each mineral grain. The apparent rate kinetics thus depend upon the distribution of the mineral grains, in terms of both size and position, within the individual ore particles, as well as the evolution of this distribution. Traditionally this behaviour has been modelled using simplified relationships such as the shrinking core model. In this paper a method for simulating this evolution and the resultant kinetics based directly on 3D XMT images of the internal structure of the particles is presented. The model includes mass transport through the gangue matrix, surface reaction kinetics and the dissolution and subsequent evolution of the individual mineral grains within the ore particle. Different minerals and mineral associations will result in different surface reaction kinetics. One of the key inputs into this model is thus the distribution of the surface rate kinetics. A method for experimentally determining this distribution is presented. The simulation results are compared to the evolution of real particles as they undergo leaching as measured using a time sequence of 3D XMT images of a leaching column. It was found that these simulations are able to accurately predict both the overall leaching trends, as well as the leaching behaviour of mineral grains in classes based on their size and distance to the particle surface. The leaching behaviour did not follow that of a simple shrinking core approximation, with the actual spatial and size distribution of the grains, as well as the distribution of their surface rate kinetics, all impacting the apparent leach kinetics. For the copper ore particles used in this work the best fit to the experiments was achieved at an intermediate value of the dimensionless group that characterises the relative importance of surface kinetics to diffusion indicating that both need to be considered for accurate modelling. This paper thus demonstrates that using 3D XMT to provide both structural and kinetic data and incorporating this information into a particle scale simulator provides an improved basis for predicting particle scale leach performance.Heap leaching is an important hydrometallurgical technology, which extracts valuable metals such as gold, silver and copper from low grade ores. The increase in global metal demand and the decline in the high grade ore resources are making heap leaching an increasingly attractive alternative to conventional processing techniques such as flotation followed by smelting. There are, though, limitations in the use of heap leaching such as long processing times and relatively low extraction efficiencies, especially for primary sulphides ( The chemical conditions and concentrations in the fluids around an ore particle, the mass (and heat) transport within the ore particle and surface reaction kinetics (often catalysed by biological processes in sulphide leaching) are the three main factors directly affecting leaching behaviour. The conditions around the individual particles will be strongly influenced by the inter-particle hydrodynamics and mass transport. The hydrodynamics and mass transport within the fluid surrounding the particles have been studied at both heap and column scale experimentally and via simulation ( Understanding these apparent kinetics and how they depend upon the chemical conditions and the extent of extraction is an important consideration in the modelling and simulation of heap leaching. Current heap leaching simulators typically make use of simplified models to describe this relationship, often based on shrinking core models and variants of this model ( The main aim of this paper is thus to develop a model that relaxes some of these assumptions in order to produce better predictions of the particle scale leaching kinetics of these systems. The purpose of this simulator is not to model an entire column or heap, but rather to model the performance of individual particles within a column. While beyond the scope of this particular paper, the ultimate purpose of this work will be to ascertain how the spatial and size distribution of the grains within the ore influence its apparent leach kinetics. This could then be used to develop apparent leach kinetic models that do a better job of incorporating mineralogical variability than the current particle scale models do and/or to understand how the fitting parameters in existing models depend upon the mineralogy and its texture. Before the variability of the ore can be incorporated into the modelling a method for measuring this variability and its impact on leach performance is needed. The technique used in this paper is X-ray micro computed tomography (XMT or micro-CT), a non-destructive method for imaging the internal structure of materials, which has been extensively used and is now being applied to the study of geological ( Within an XMT system the sample is placed in an X-ray beam, and rotated through 360° while a series of micron level 2D projection images are collected by a detector. By using mathematical principles of tomography, these 2D images record the variation of X-ray attenuation within the sample and are reconstructed to produce a 3D image where each voxel (smallest volume element, equivalent to a 3D pixel) represents the X-ray attenuation at each single point ( Within the context of heap leaching XMT has been used to track the extent of leaching within ore particles ( There has, though, been very limited work on the use of XMT to form the basis of modelling of heap leach behaviour. The first part of this paper describes the experimental methodology, including the image analysis applied to the XMT data. This is then followed by a description of the mathematical model and the computational approach used to solve it, while the final section of the paper compares the experimental and simulation results. The ore sample used in the experimental work came from Kennecott Copper's Bingham Canyon mine. The main sulphide minerals within the ore were chalcopyrite and pyrite, with small amounts of secondary sulphides also present (See Note that in this paper when we refer to mineral grains it is the mineral grains of interest that we are referring to. In the specific experimental system used in this paper these minerals are the metal sulphides, though the methodology could be applied to any leach system. It should also be noted, though, that one of the shortcomings of XMT when applied to the copper leaching system is that the attenuation of Chalcopyrite and Pyrite are very similar to one another and that the recoveries presented in this work are the total amounts of sulphide leached rather than the copper extraction (see The reason for using these small columns in this work is because it is the effect of particle scale kinetics, and thus intra-particle phenomena, that are of interest. These columns are small enough that the particles within them can be scanned at high resolution without the need to unpack the particles from them, which would disturb the leach process. The small size also means that the wetting and reagent conditions experienced by each of the particles is likely to be similar. This is not the case in large columns or real heaps where channelling/preferential flow and other mass transfer effects can result in different particles experiencing quite different leach conditions. The leaching column was scanned at a sequence of time points (Day 0 dry scan and the end of leaching Days 5, 11, 23, 43, 53, 83, 118,136, 168) using a Nikon Metris Custom Bay with a 1 The conversion for the mineral grains can be calculated by the volume difference between each scanning time point and the initial grain volume in the Day 0 dry scan. Thresholding was applied to differentiate between the rock and the air phase, including internal porosity, and between the gangue and sulphide phases. All the mineral grains within the field of view were tracked individually over the course of the experiment. The segmentation of the individual ore particles within the column is achieved by using the Otsu algorithm to set the appropriate threshold between the air and the rock, with a marker base watershed algorithm used to distinguish the different ore particles. A tracking algorithm was then used to identify the particles across different time points as they move and rotate within the bed as the leaching progresses. The mineral grain segmentation uses the Maximum Entropy algorithm ( Since the XMT image analysis algorithm gives the location, initial size and the extent of leaching of every mineral grain within the particles in the small scale columns, it can be used to obtain the grain scale kinetics. In The mathematical model takes the form of a set of partial differential equations that describe the motion of the reagents and which are coupled to a model for the mineral grain dissolution. These must then be solved numerically as the system geometry and its evolution is too complex for analytical solutions. This section describes the derivation of the governing equations and the methods used for numerically solving them. As mentioned in the Assuming that the reagent motion is predominantly diffusive, its flux, In this work, this equation is simplified by making the approximation that the behaviour is quasi-steady state. In other words it is assumed that the accumulation of reagent species within the ore particles has an unimportant impact on the flux of the reagent through the particle, which implies that the diffusion timescale is shorter than the reaction timescale: The quasi-steady state assumption does not imply that that the flux remains constant with time (in the simulations presented below both the magnitude and the spatial distribution of the flux vary quite markedly with time). What this assumption does imply is that the current flux (and concentration) distribution depends only upon the current state of the mineral grains within the particle, as well as the external reagent concentration, but does not directly depend upon the flux history as the accumulation terms are ignored. Within the bulk of the ore particles the quasi-steady state assumption means that the concentration is governed by the following equation: The diffusivity will vary with the properties of the gangue through which it is moving, particularly as a function of the micro-scale porosity, which will typically be below the resolution at which the samples in this work are scanned. While the simulation framework that has been developed allows different regions to be assigned different diffusivities based, for instance, on differences in gangue mineralogy, without data on the variability of the diffusivity it is assumed constant in this paper. It is also possible that dissolution of gangue and/or deposition of species such as jarosite could alter the apparent diffusivity with time, but as there was no measurable change in the porosity in these experiments, there was no basis on which to include this effect, though again the simulator could incorporate these effects if the data on which to base it were available. Chemical reactions occur at the surface of the metal sulphide. In general these reactions will be dependent on the concentration of both reactant and product species. For the purposes of this paper it will be assumed that there is a single limiting reagent and that the surface reaction kinetics are first order w.r.t. this reagent: At the surface of ore particle there will be mass transport between the particle and the bulk fluid. The effect of boundary layers in the fluid and other related phenomena can be modelled using an external mass transfer coefficient, Similarly to the reaction flux, the mass transfer into the particle must match the flux within the particle: As the rates will all scale with the external concentration, The following set of equations can therefore be used to model the quasi-steady state reagent concentration within the ore particle: Boundary conditions: The assumptions that the mass transport is quasi-steady state and that the surface reactions are linear are both potentially problematic, but, as was mentioned above, were chosen in this initial model development because they are both made in the most shrinking core type models. Relaxing both of these assumptions is the subject of ongoing work. The set of equations is solved in 3D using the voxelised grid obtained from the XMT imaging. It is solved using a finite volume scheme for the discretisation, with the fluxes calculated on a staggered grid (a similar method is employed in The problem is solved by matrix inversion as the assumption of first order kinetics means that the discretised equations are linear. As the XMT images are very large (10  As it is being assumed that the surface kinetics are linear in a single rate limiting species, the exact identity of this species is unimportant. Even whether this rate limiting species is a reactant or a product does not impact the mathematical form. In these particular experiments, though, the limiting reagent is likely to be the ferric ions. In future work we will be relaxing the assumption of linear surface kinetics and including multiple reactant and product species. At this point the identity of these species and their relative concentrations in the surrounding fluid will impact the results. The model can be used to calculate both the reagent concentration and its flux at each point in the system. In order to use this information to predict the dissolution process, the fluxes must be coupled to a model for the evolution of the mineral grains. If it is assumed that the ratio of the volume of the mineral grain leached to the reagent consumed is This equation on its own will only give the change of volume of the grain, but not the change in shape. In order to estimate both the change in shape and the change in volume, the equation must be applied at the voxel rather than the grain level. To avoid the dissolution of mineral within a voxel being binary, an additional scalar field As the disappearance of mineral voxels will impact the fluxes within the system, the concentration (and hence the fluxes) needs to be recalculated at every time step during which a metal sulphide voxel becomes completely leached. Between such steps, however, In addition to non-dimensionalising the concentration using the external reagent concentration, the simulation parameters also form dimensionless groups, which allows us to reduce the number of independent parameters that need to be examined. The most important of these dimensionless groups is a surface reaction Damköhler number, The simulations are carried out using a dimensionless time,   It is clear from this plot that the dissolution progresses from the outside inwards for the diffusion limited case. This inward progression of the leaching is similar to that predicted by the shrinking core model, though even when the system is very diffusion limited, as in this case, there is still not a distinct separation between the leached and unleached portions of the particle, with larger mineral grains that are close to the outer edge of the particle lasting longer than some smaller grains that are further in, with the shape of the ore particle and the distribution of the mineral grains further complicating the dissolution pattern. It is this variability in leach rate with mineral grain size that causes the variability in average extraction with distance seen in At much lower values of  While in the idealised simulations above the surface kinetics rate constant for all the grains was assumed to be the same, the situation in the real particle is that the surface rate constants will vary from grain to grain due to differences in the mineralogy of the grains and their associations. A method for estimating the distribution of these rate constants is thus required before accurate simulations of the ore behaviour can be carried out. In the leaching experiments the dissolution of every grain in the column is tracked as a function of time. This provides a lot of data as there are hundreds of thousands of grains in each column. Due to the large amount of available data, it is possible to divide the mineral grains into quite narrow categories based on their initial size and their distance from the nearest surface of the particle while still having quite a large amount of data in each category. If it is assumed that the size classes are narrow enough that the effect of particle size on the recovery within the category is small and that the distance from the surface can be used as a proxy for the chemical conditions experienced by the grain, then the remaining variability in the leach rate is mainly due to variability in the surface kinetics. Note that an assumption that the chemical conditions experienced by a grain within a category be constant with time over the time interval being considered is not required, only that the grains in a category experience a similar set of chemical conditions. The reason why distance from the surface can act as a reasonable proxy for the mass transfer resistance is that the mass transfer rate is proportional to the concentration gradient, which will be a strong function of the distance between the mineral surface and the particle surface. While it is a reasonable proxy it is not a perfect one as the distribution of neighbouring mineral grains will influence the concentration gradient being experienced by a particular grain as they will also be consuming reagent. The variability in the diffusivity of the reagent in the gangue species surrounding the particles will also impact the validity of the use of distance from the surface as a proxy for the mass transfer resistance. At time Integrating this equation gives: The ratio of the surface rate constant for grain  The slight scatter in the plots at high values of the rate constant is due to the fact that there is a finite range of rate constants that can be measured, since some of the fastest leaching grains disappear over the finite time interval (23 We can therefore use this average distribution as the basis of a Monte-Carlo type simulation in which the surface rate constant for each grain is assigned randomly based on the distribution, with the simulation repeated to ensure that the results are not strongly dependent on the rate constants assigned to specific grains (while there are a very large number of grains in the system, a lot of the grain volume is contained in a comparatively small number of larger grains). The cumulative distribution function can be converted to a probability density function and needs to be parameterised so that it can be easily input into the simulations. As can be seen from While the analysis above ascribes this variability to surface kinetic variability, in reality it will also include the effect of variability in the local mass transport resistance in the gangue surrounding the grains. De-convolution of these two effects is hard without being able to, for instance, measure differences in the mineralogy and in the porosity surrounding the individual grains, though it would be interesting to achieve in order to better understand the relative importance of the different micro-scale mechanisms involved in heap leaching. From a purely simulation/prediction perspective, though, de-convoluting these effects is unimportant as this methodology is implicitly allowing the influence of both these mechanisms to be included in the simulation results. The apparent leach kinetics of the ore particles depend on a number of factors such as particle size, porosity and mineralogy. As One of the main objective of this method is to simulate the leaching behaviour at longer times based on the initial response. The distribution of rate constants is found experimentally based on the measured leaching over the first 23  In this paper a simulation methodology for predicting the grain scale behaviour within individual particles was introduced. This model made some of the same assumptions as most shrinking core, such as that the mass transport was pseudo-steady state and that the surface kinetics were linear. Where it differed markedly was that it made use of an XMT image as its simulation grid, which meant that the effects of the actual particle shape and the spatial and size distribution of the mineral grains were captured. Another key feature of this model is that it included the effect of the variability of the surface rate kinetics in its predictions. This is important as it has a large impact on the long term evolution of the apparent kinetics. Fast leaching grains disappear first and thus the kinetics slow down with time. The variability in the particle kinetics thus impacts the evolution of the leach rate, with greater variability causing more of a slowdown relative to the initial rate. This leach variability comes from not only variability in grain size and position, but also variability in the surface kinetics. As the simulations inherently account for the effect of grain size and position, the effect of surface kinetic variability needs to be separately included. A methodology was developed by means of which the XMT data over the initial leach period could be used to decouple the effect of particle size and distance to the surface from the surface kinetic variability. It was found that approximately 5% of the grains had a zero rate constant, with the variability in the leach kinetics for the remaining grains following approximately a gamma distribution. The balance between mass transfer and surface kinetics was characterised by the Damköhler dimensionless group, The simulation was able to accurately predict not only the average leach behaviour, but also the behaviour of mineral grains within specific size and distance to the surface categories. It was found that the leaching behaviour, especially at the grain scale, does not follow that predicted by the shrinking core models and that the leach behaviour is most accurately simulated when the diffusion and reaction models are coupled to the realistic input mineral grain distributions, thus including the effects of size, spatial and surface kinetic distributions. The purpose of this modelling is not to replace existing simpler particle scale leach models, but to act as a means of testing the predictions and assumptions of those models and to help to develop improved models. While there is still a very long way to go, the ultimate aim of this type of approach is to significantly reduce the current need for very time consuming column experiments by supplementing and/or replacing them by 3D scanning and detailed simulations in which mineralogical and textural effects can be accurately accounted for. The assumptions of pseudo-steady state mass transport and first order surface kinetics are being relaxed in ongoing work by the authors and a study of the effect of these assumption will be presented in future papers. This study was performed in the Rio Tinto Centre for Advanced Mineral Recovery at Imperial College London and at the Research Complex at Harwell, which was funded in part by the