Coal fly ash, generated in thermal power plants was processed through sulphuric acid leaching for the extraction of alumina. Both fly ash and alkali treated fly ash residue, obtained after partial removal of silica, were leached in sulphuric acid medium. Solubilisation of alumina in the acidic medium was found to be more efficient while processing the alkali treated fly ash residue as compared to the fly ash. The effect of addition of sodium fluoride (NaF) on leaching of alumina was examined at varied acid concentrations, temperatures, and time of leaching. A marked improvement in leaching recovery for alumina was observed due to the addition of NaF in the acidic leaching medium. XRD pattern of the leach residue confirmed that the alumina bearing phase i.e. mullite got dissociated in the presence of fluoride ions releasing alumina to the leaching medium for which a significant improvement in leaching efficiency was observed. A process flowsheet has been developed for the extraction of alumina from fly ash and production of a by-product, calcium silicate, for the regeneration of NaOH to make the process industrially viable.A huge quantity of fly ash is being generated as solid waste from the coal-fired thermal power plants during power generation as a result of combustion of coal. The worldwide generation of fly ash is about 780 million tons per annum out of which India alone produces 180 million tons per annum ( Fly ash is usually found to contain various valuable minerals such as mullite, quartz, hematite, magnetite, CaO, TiO Currently, there is no suitable technology available for the processing of fly ash for which every year about 30 million tons of alumina, the major valuable material present in fly ash is getting accumulated as waste. Therefore, researchers have started focussing on the development of a suitable technology for the recovery of alumina from fly ash. Following the recovery of alumina and/or any other valuables, the remaining waste can be utilized for making roads, bricks or tiles which would be economically beneficial and environmentally sustainable. The greatest difficulty in fly ash processing is associated with its high silica content due to which various conventional methods are found to be unsuitable. The major alumina bearing mineral present in fly ash is mullite; therefore, unless mullite structure is broken, extracting alumina is difficult. Recovery of alumina from fly ash has been tried through different methods such as lime stone sintering ( Therefore, with this background, the present work was attempted to develop a process for the extraction of alumina from fly ash. The role of sodium fluoride on solubilisation of alumina during sulphuric acid leaching of the fly ash and alkali leached fly ash residue has been assessed at varied acid concentrations, temperatures and leaching time. Fly ash generated from the thermal power plant of National Aluminium Company Limited (NALCO), India was processed. The as-collected fly ash, which had particle sizes of 36.8 µm (d Hydrothermal alkali leaching of ground fly ash was carried out in an autoclave of 1 L capacity at a pulp density of 10% using NaOH solution of different concentrations at varied temperatures from 150–180 °C. At the end of the experiment, the slurry was filtered and then the leach residue was washed and dried for further processing through acid leaching to extract alumina. A double walled borosilicate glass reactor of 250 mL capacity was used for conducting acid leaching at a pulp density of 10%. The temperature of leaching was regulated by a circulatory thermostatic water bath through inlet and outlet ports. During leaching, the solution was agitated by using a magnetic stirrer. The temperature of leaching was varied from 40–90 °C and the leaching time was varied from 15 min to 5 h. Acid leaching of fly ash and alkali leached fly ash residue was carried out in the absence or presence of fluoride ions, added in the form of NaF. Once the temperature of the leachant was attained, the required amount of sample was added into the solution and leaching was continued for a predetermined period of time. The leach liquor obtained after filtration was then analysed for aluminium concentration and the leaching recovery of alumina was calculated. The fly ash, processed in this study, constitutes of 23–25% Al The ground fly ash was leached in sulphuric acid solution to dissolve alumina. Mullite is present as the alumina bearing phase in fly ash and it hardly responds to any leaching medium for which solubilisation of alumina is the major bottleneck in fly ash processing. Highly stringent leaching conditions such as high concentration of acid and high temperature (>200 °C) are required for its dissolution. Thus the focus of the present work was to break the mullite matrix to release the alumina for its solubilisation during leaching of fly ash in H  An alternative attempt was made to process the fly ash first through hydrothermal alkali leaching to remove amorphous silica prior to the acid leaching for dissolution of alumina. The alkali leaching behaviour of fly ash at varied concentrations of NaOH and temperatures with respect to dissolution of silica and co-dissolution of alumina is given in  The dissolved silica values can be recovered as a valuable by-product in the form of calcium silicate (2CaO·SiO The sodium hydroxide generated during precipitation of calcium silicate can be recycled back for subsequent hydrothermal alkali leaching of fly ash. The leach residue obtained after hydrothermal alkali leaching of fly ash was then subjected to acid leaching at varied H  Under the above mentioned optimum conditions of 15% H  The XRD pattern and the scanning electron micrograph of the residue, obtained after alumina dissolution by acid leaching of alkali treated fly ash residue in 15% H A typical process flowsheet ( The effect of addition of sodium fluoride on leaching of alumina from fly ash was evaluated at varied acid concentrations, temperatures and time of leaching. It can be concluded that the leaching recovery of alumina can be improved by the addition of NaF in the leaching medium and to extract more than 90% of alumina from fly ash, it must be desilicated through hydrothermal alkali leaching prior to sulphuric acid leaching of the desilicated fly ash. A maximum alumina leaching recovery of 91% can be achieved with 15% sulphuric acid and 3 g NaF while leaching 10 g alkali treated fly ash residue at a temperature of 90 °C for 2 h. The improvement in leaching recovery of alumina at varied parameters such as acid concentration, NaF amount and time are found to fit well with the polynomial regression lines, whereas, the change in alumina recovery with leaching temperature follows a linear regression line. The sodium silicate formed during desilication can be treated with lime to produce calcium silicate as a by-product and sodium hydroxide generated can be recycled back for hydrothermal alkali leaching of fly ash. XRD pattern of the acid leach residue shows disappearance of the mullite phase and presence of quartz as the predominant phase, which confirms leaching of alumina from the desilicated fly ash. A process flowsheet has been developed to successfully extract alumina from fly ash. The authors are thankful to Prof. S. Basu, Director, CSIR-IMMT, Bhubaneswar for his permission to publish this work. Authors are grateful to