Turkey has been developing since the foundation of the Republic of Turkey in 1923. Turkish Government played a leading role in energy production and in energy use, as well as in other fields, and implemented several policies to increase electricity production. By 1950s, thermal power plants were used commonly in electricity production. In the following years, hydroelectric power plants were put into operation in order to use the considerable amount of water resources of the country. Coal-fired power plants using national resources accounted for 70–80% of the thermal electricity production. After 1960s, oil, an imported resource, was replaced with national resources due to two petroleum crises. Therefore, the proportion of use of lignite in the energy field increased. By 1980s, energy production lead by the government went on. Afterwards, applications of liberal economy policies resulted in implementation of different energy production methods, and the country had a increasing tendency to meet energy demand by imports as a result of improvement in international economic relations. Natural gas became prevalent in the country as well as all over the world and accounted for 45% of the electricity production in 2003. In this paper, implemented policies in the energy field during different periods since the foundation of the Republic of Turkey in 1923 was investigated.When the Republic of Turkey was founded in 1923, the population of the country was 12 million. Installed capacity of electricity production, total electricity production, per capita installed capacity, per capita electricity production and per capita electricity consumption were 33 By the period 1940–1950, hardcoal had a dominant role in electricity production. Later, petroleum came to the fore due to decrease in petroleum prices. Petroleum crises, experienced in the years 1973 and 1979, affected both economy and energy production. Because energy cost of Turkish industry increased. Thus, lignite deposits of the country began to be used for power generation. By 2000s, the country attempted to use national resources again. Afterwards, natural gas, almost all of which was imported, became primary energy resource. Natural gas consumption in energy production, in industry and in household heating grew rapidly. In 2003, 45% of electricity production was met by natural gas. Even though Turkey dealt increasing the use of national resources, could not strike a balance between energy production and consumption due to limited energy resources. In 2003, only 28% of energy consumption was met by national resources ( In this paper, energy policies and developments in energy production of Turkey during the period 1923–2003 were investigated in order to gather the studies about this subject together and to give some help to energy planners in the country. Turkey's energy policies since 1923, can be discussed under five periods with respect to differences in the policies: Post-independency (1923–1930), first wave of industrialization (1930–1950), post-war mixed economy (1950–1960), planned mixed economy (1960–1980) and privatization and modernization (1980–2003). Implemented policies and their effects on energy production and consumption were investigated below. Fundamentals of the policies implemented during this period was determined in İzmir Economy Congress, in 1923. Liberal economy system was tried to be set up by making decisions in the congress. Only the government was authorized for petroleum exploration and production by the laws made in 1926. “Privileged companies policy” about electricity, inherited from Ottoman Time, was not changed and went on by 1930 ( The power plant with the capacity of 2 In the first and second industrialization plans prepared for the years 1933–1942 in order to increase the electricity production, to decrease the import dependency of production and to save money, it was reported that the industrialization could be possible by obtaining low-priced energy, and hydraulic and fossil energy resources should be explorated. In the second industrialization plan, the issues such as mining operations, petroleum exploration and production, coal-based synthetic fuel production and electricity power plants were included. The death of Atatürk who is the founder of the Republic of Turkey, and the start of World War II impeded the implementation of the plan. During this period, coal producer foreign companies were nationalized, and public enterprises such as Directorate of mineral research exploration (MTA), Etibank, Petrol Ofisi, and Electricity Surveys Administration (EIEI) were established. In 1940, the first petroleum productive well was drilled in the Raman Oil Field by MTA ( After World War II, a new development plan was prepared in 1945, and energy projects of Etibank were started to be carried out. In 1950s, coal-fired power plants constructed and operated by Etibank, hyraulic power plants constructed and operated by İller Bankası, diesel-fired power plants constructed and operated by several industry establishments and municipalities, were used for electricity production. The installed capacity reached 407.8 Economic policy of the period 1950–1960 was based on mixed economy and encouragement of private sector and foreign investors. However, the policy could not be implemented successfully. Public sector developed rather than private one. The most important issues in the period were World Energy Conference held in 1949 and First Energy Congress held by Turkish National Committee in 1953. In the First Energy Congress, the following decisions were made ( Large and regional coal-fired power plants and hydroelectric power plants would be constructed rather than small and domestic diesel-fired power plants. All country would be able to use electricity by regional power plants to be constructed and connected to the electricity network extending into all regions. Electricity production and distribution works would be monopolized and run by Turkey Electricity Authority (TEK). During the period 1950–1960, electricity production and consumption in Turkey increased in parallel with economic development and industrialization. Tuncbilek and Soma coal-fired power plants were constructed and started operation in 1956 and 1957, respectively ( In accordance with the Turkish Constitution, the period 1960–1980 became a period in which mixed economy policy dominated by the state was implemented, planned development was started and improved. In 1963, Turkey underwent the planned development period. In the first planned period (1963–1967) and second planned period (1968–1972) it was aimed that efficient use of the power plants would be increased and hydraulic energy resources would be evaluated. In the third planning period (1973–1977), state-control energy policy was adopted. Seyitomer and Hopa thermal power plants started operation in 1973. Keban hydroelectric power plant and Aliağa thermal power plant started operation in 1974 and in 1975, respectively. However, energy demand could not be met sufficiently in the third planning period. Primary energy resources such as coal and water could not be evaluated as much as required and, petroleum production could not be increased. Therefore, the country faced difficult situations in the energy field. In the fourth planned period, it was aimed that 53% of total energy consumption would be met by primary energy resources. However, during the planned periods, growth rate of energy production decreased despite the increase in energy consumption. At the end of 1977, import dependency in energy was 50% ( Energy investments which require high capital and profits in the long term, were realized by the state. Accordingly, the share of the private sector remained limited. Since energy investments, important income for manufacturing industry, could not catch up with the manufacturing industry investments, the country had difficulties in meeting the energy demand ( Economic growth, growth rate of primary energy production and growth rate of primary energy consumption during planned periods in the years 1963–2005 are given in Primary energy production of Turkey increased from 9.54 In the years 1973 and 1977, Turkey was exposed to two petroleum crises resulting from excessive increase in petroleum prices. Since energy consumption was dependend on petroleum, petroleum crises brought about several economic difficulties. Therefore, it was planned that the number of lignite-fired power plants would be increased. In 1978, nationalization of lignite deposits operated by private sector was started by making a law called “Mines to be Operated by the State”. Because the nationalization could not be realized consistently, lignite production decreased in 1979, and remained constant at 14.5×10 The innovation brought by planned economy policy to energy sector was abandonment of privileged private corporations. Thermal installed capacity increased from 1509.5 The period after 1980 can be seen as the time in which state-controlled economy was replaced with liberal economy ( After the second half of the 1980s, it was observed that the country had an increasing tendency to meet energy demand from imported resources. After 1987, the policy of realization of thermal power plants projects by private sector began to be implemented. Therefore, public sector investments decreased, new projects of lignite-fired power plants were cancelled, the share of imported resources in meeting energy demand increased ( During the period 1980–2003, electricity production reached 73,665 The share of lignite-fired power plants in electricity production, 42% in 1985, decreased to 16.8% in 2003. In the same period, the share of natural gas-fired power plants constructed by private sector under “build–operate” model, increased from 17% to 45.2%. The share of electricity produced by hydroelectric power plants reduced from 35% to 25.1%. Turkey became a country 60% of whose electricity was produced by using natural gas ( In 2003, almost whole country has been connected to electricity. Nevertheless, the demand could not be met completely. Total primary energy production and energy consumption were 23.8 and 83.8 Energy policies of Turkey as of 1923–2003 changed continuously and showed contradictions from time to time. At first, hard coal as a national resource had a major role in energy production, then petroleum, an imported resource, came to the fore. Petroleum crises experienced between 1973 and 1979 brought about the perception of the importance of national energy sources. Therefore, lignite having large reserves in Turkey became primary resource. After 1990s, the country turned to imported resources again, natural gas took place with increasing proportion in energy production. Recently, Turkey has not taken notice of the importance of energy based on national resources. Undervaluing of energy supply reliability threats the fundamentals of sustainable development of the country seriously. It is obvious that Turkey will face problems in meeting energy demand in the future. In order to meet the demand reliably, significant increases will be needed both in energy production and in supply in coming years. It is necessary for Turkey to meet energy demand with national resources. Exploration of new coal and petroleum deposits in the country should be increased, new technologies should be used for efficient energy production, special importance should be given for utilization of renewable energy resources and construction plans of nuclear power plants should be realized as soon as possible.