Granular materials are used in many industrial processes among various fields, such as pharmaceutical, food, metallurgy or nuclear fuel production. However, compared to other commonly used media, such as liquids, powders are known to behave unpredictably, leading to uncontrolled process operations. Since the flow behavior of the powders originates from interparticle forces, we suggest a model, linking the macroscopic flowability of powder beds, and the properties of the microscopic particles constituting the powder. A population dependent granular Bond number (Capece et al., 2016), that takes into account the particles properties such as the particles’ true density, surface energy, rugosity and the whole particle size distribution, is used. This non-dimensional number was found to correlate well with the flowability of polydispersed powder bed, which can be measured by shear testing with a Freeman FT4® powder rheometer. The results found in previous studies (Bernard-Granger et al., 2019; Capece et al., 2016) are extended and discussed using five different oxide powders exhibiting various flow behaviors. In particular, a short sensitivity analysis of the model is carried out. The results show that the fraction of fine particles within a polydispersed powder is a critical parameter for the flowability of the powder bed. Finally, the Rumpf’s theory is used to suggest a physical meaning for the model parameters.Flow behavior of powders is critical in many industrial processes involving granular materials such as pharmaceutical and chemical production or metal and mineral processing. Indeed, a poor flowability may lead to various problems such as segregation, agglomeration or arching during bulk powder handling or processing. Up to now, the link between the physicochemical properties of the individual particles and the flowability of bulk powders is still unclear. This is because granular materials exhibit highly variable and unpredictable behaviors. It is generally considered that under a certain size, around 100 µm, interparticle attractive forces start to overcome particles’ weight, resulting in cohesive behaviors ( Since a cohesive behavior originates from interparticle attractive forces, many efforts are undertaken in order to correlate intermolecular forces, such as Van der Waals, capillarity and electrostatic forces, to the bulk powder behavior. Therefore, flowability criterions based on the preponderance of either gravity or interparticle forces between individual particles were proposed ( The granular Bond number is defined as the ratio between interparticle forces and gravity contribution between two particles, A and B on where where In the above equation, The geometric mean of the weight of particles A and B is used to represent the weight of both particles ( where In case of two particles in close contact within a mono-constituent powder, particles A and B are of the same chemical nature, which means that they share approximately the same Hamaker constant, true density and asperity diameters. The granular Bond number between these two particles can then be computed using Eq. where Despite the fact that it only accounts for individual interparticle cohesion, and not for the whole bulk powder bed structure, the granular Bond number was shown to correlate well with the flow behavior for cohesive powders. Castellanos ( The correlation obtained by Capece between the flow function coefficient and the granular Bond number of pharmaceutical powders, is a power law given by Eq. Such a correlation has also been verified experimentally by investigating the rheological behavior of powder mixtures constituted by different amounts of two alumina powders ( The correlation represented by Eq. Since most investigations focus only on the Van der Waals force contributions for the calculation of interparticle forces, Bernard-Granger attempted to take also into account the capillary forces in the calculation of the granular Bond number ( Both authors show that the correlation (6) obtained between the granular Bond number and the flowability of powders has a strong potential for predicting the flowability of powder mixtures according to their formulation ( In this paper, Capece’s model will be extended, by comparing experimental results obtained with an FT4® powder rheometer, to the model predictions for non-pharmaceutical powders exhibiting various properties in terms of flow behavior, true density, particle size distributions or sensibility to relative humidity. Besides, a sensitivity analysis of the granular Bond number will be carried out in order to investigate the influence of different powder properties on the value of the granular Bond number. First, the influence of non-distributed properties, such as the true density, will be studied. Then, the influence of distributed properties, such as particle size distribution, will be investigated in order to take into account the polydispersity of real powders. Then, the physical meaning of the correlation (6) linking the flowability of bulk powders and the granular Bond number, will be discussed. In particular, a physical interpretation of the value of empirical parameters Five different powders have been used for this work. They were chosen because they all exhibit different properties in terms of flow behavior, particle size and shape distribution, true density and bed porosity: Two different grades of alumina powder (GE15 and CR6) from Baikowski®, Poisy, France. Two different grades of zirconia powder (GY3Z-R60 and CY3Z-RA) from Saint Gobain®, Courbevoie, France. An yttrium oxide powder (grade C) from H.C. Starck®, Newton, USA. In this paper, alumina GE15, alumina CR6, zirconia GY3Z-R60, zirconia CY3Z-RA and yttria grade C will be referred as Al Each powder has been characterized in terms of flow behavior, particle size distribution, true density and surface energy. Then, the granular Bond number has been computed for all powders using the methodology described in section 2.3. The flowability of the powders was assessed from the yield locus measured with a powder rheometer FT4® (Freeman, Tewkesbury, UK). Measurements were performed using a 10 mL cylindrical cell in which powder is pre-consolidated under a 9 kPa normal stress. Shear tests are then performed successively at 3, 4, 5, 6 and 7 kPa normal stresses following the Jenike standard procedure (EFCE where The Mohr circles can then be constructed from the yield locus curve, as shown on The flow index The true density of the particles Particle size distributions of the powders were measured with a LASER diffraction equipment Mastersizer 3000® (Malvern, Malvern, UK) using a liquid dispersion unit (Hydro MV®) in order to obtain adequate dispersion of the agglomerated powders. Dry dispersion (Aero S®) has also been performed but the particle size distribution is too variable and highly dependent on the transport pressure through the venturi. The Mie theory was used in order to compute the size of the particles. Ten samples per powder were analyzed and a measurement was taken ten times for each sample. The Sauter mean diameter and the span of the distributions are given in Dynamic vapor sorption was performed with a DVS system (SMS, London, UK) in order to measure surface energy of the particles. The device, illustrated on The dispersive surface energy is then computed using the method described in SMS application note 17 ( Where The Hamaker constant can then be computed using the Frenkel equation ( where DVS measurements are carried out on two different samples for Al In this study, the capillary forces have been neglected since all the samples have been dried before rheological measurements. The electrostatic forces have been measured by a tribo-electrification technique: a few grams of powder is introduced in a cylindrical vessel made of stainless steel, oriented at 40° from the horizontal, isolated from the ground and rotating at 92 revolutions per minute. The total charge acquired or conceded by the powder after a certain amount of time is obtained by placing the sample in a Faraday cage, linked to an electrometer. The magnitude of the specific charge acquired or conceded by the samples never exceeds one micro Coulomb per kilogram except from the Y here,  For real powders, it was shown that the Sauter mean diameter can be used in order to represent the particle size of one powder exhibiting poorly dispersed size distribution ( where all size classes are indexed from In order to compute the population dependent granular Bond number, using Eqs. As shown in the introduction section 1, the granular Bond number seems to be correlated to the flowability of the powders. Besides, the population dependent granular Bond number, computed in section 2.3.2, depends on various particle properties, such as the Hamaker constant, the true density, the particle size distribution and the particles’ rugosity. It is then of great interest to investigate the ranking of these different input factors according to their relative influence on the Bond number variability. Indeed, such a study would allow to identify which particle properties have the most significant impact on the population dependent granular Bond number calculated, and therefore on the powder flow behavior, according to relation The sensitivity analysis of a model consist in investigating how the variation of the output of the model can be attributed to the variations of the input factors. In particular, it can be used in order to identify the parameters that might have a significant, or negligible, influence on the output variability ( The granular Bond number, as defined by Eqs. As a first approach, we will consider that the particle size can be represented by the Sauter mean diameter The sensitivity of the mean granular Bond number according to each parameter is investigated by analyzing the variation induced by a perturbation, one at a time, of each individual parameter ( Then, the normalized sensitivity factor of first order, The sensitivity factors of each parameter were computed for perturbations in a range of −20% to + 20% around a nominal value. The measured properties of the Al The sensitivity analysis of non-distributed parameters shows that all the particles properties considered in this paper have significant influence on the value of the mean granular Bond number computed. However, among these properties, the particle size is the most critical one. According to relation Previous section showed that the size of the particles is the most important particle parameter regarding the mean granular Bond number. However, the population dependent granular Bond number uses the whole size distribution instead of the Sauter mean diameter. In order to investigate the influence of the particle size distribution on the population dependent granular Bond number, different volume particle distributions Eleven artificial particle size distributions were made up and the population dependent granular Bond number was computed for each distribution using the Al The curves corresponding to the distributions of The population dependent granular Bond number corresponding to each distribution of   Considering that the Bond number is correlated to the flowability, Previous section 3.1.2 showed that the Rosin-Rammler parameters, the span or the median diameter were not sufficient to explain the value of the population dependent granular Bond number. However, The first decile diameter is characteristic of the finest particles among a given particle size distribution. As discussed in the previous paragraph, according to the Hamaker’s theory, these fine particles are expected to be the more influent on the overall cohesion of the powder. The Sauter mean diameter takes into account the ratio between the surface and the volume of the particles. Yet, the Van der Waals force and the weight applies respectively on the surface and for the volume of the particles. Then it is not surprising to find that the Bond number, defined as the ratio between Van der Waals force and weight, appears correlated to the Sauter mean diameter. As a conclusion for this section, the population dependent granular Bond number, as defined in sections 1 and 2.3.2, depends on four physical properties of the particles constituting a powder medium: the true density, the Hamaker constant, the particle asperity size and the particle size distribution. Although the population dependent granular Bond number is sensitive to each of these parameters, the particle size distribution seems to be the most influent one. It also appears that the fraction of fine particles and the Sauter mean diameter are closely correlated to the population dependent granular Bond number, whatever the shape and the spread of the distribution. In particular, the population dependent granular Bond number seems to be proportional to the Sauter mean diameter at the power −2.6, as shown by Eq. Equation Here It is then possible to express the relationship between the granular Bond number and the cohesion between two particles by combining Eqs. where Besides, it was shown in the previous section 3.1.3 ( Where the exponent Finally, we can combine Eqs. where Then, according to the Rumpf’s theory, the flow index of a powder bed, measured using a powder rheometer under a 9 kPa pre-consolidation stress is expected to be roughly inversely proportional to the square root of the population dependent granular Bond number, and also to depend on the powder bed structure and true density. Equation On The cross symbols represents the experimental results for each powder and the error bars correspond to their standard deviations. The ZrO The dotted line corresponds to the power law fit given by Eq. It appears on The correlation represented by Eq. First, it should be noted that Eq. Moreover, some studies were carried using pharmaceutical powders with true densities in a range of 1 to 3 g.cm In order to study in more detail the influence of the powder bed structure on the correlation’s parameters, several shear tests were performed on the same powders with a FT4® rheometer under different consolidations stresses. Since the relationship between the flow index and the cohesion parameter (Eq. Finally, we can notice that the correlations obtained in this study and by Bernard-Granger ( As a conclusion for this section, the proportionality factors This paper confirms and develops the correlation found in previous investigations regarding the relationship between the macroscopic flow behavior of a powder and the microscopic properties of the particles constituting the powder bed, represented by the population dependent granular Bond number. The power law linking the flow index to the population dependent granular Bond number, introduced in previous studies ( The population dependent granular Bond number In spite of the good agreement with the empirical data, the model still has some limitations and could be improved in many aspects. In particular, the population dependent granular Bond number does not take into account the shape of the particles that are all considered spherical up to now. Finer characterization of the particle’s shape distribution would be of great interest to improve the Bond number calculation. Indeed, shape factors were shown to correct efficiently the predicted interparticle forces calculation ( Despite these limitations, the model reveals a strong potential for predicting accurately and quickly the flowability of real polydispersed powders from simple particles properties that can be measured experimentally. Besides the prediction of a single powder flowability, the model could be applied in many industrial processes handling powders. For example, the correlation could be used to predict the flowability of multi component powder mixtures according to their formulation ( The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper.