The contact angle of particles attached to fluid interfaces plays a key role in many scientific and technological aspects of particle-laden layers. In spite of the recognized importance, the laws that govern this property are still poorly understood. The main problem associated with the study of this property is that multiple variables are involved in the wetting process of particles by fluid interfaces. Such variables are associated with the chemical nature of both the particles and the fluid phases, and with the particle’s size. Understanding of the different aspects controlling the contact angle of particles is a physico-chemical challenge, and is very important because of the many technological aspects in which particle laden interfaces are involved. This review discusses the current status and the aspects to be dealt with in the near future in the study of the contact angle of particles attached to fluid interfaces.Particles at fluid interfaces are ubiquitous in nature and in technological processes The energies associated with the attachment of particles to fluid interfaces depend on the chemical nature, size, roughness and wettability of the particles. The latter plays a central role and is reflected by the three-phase contact angle, θ. However, θ is neglected in many studies of particle–laden interfaces. To shed light on this description, The contact angle of particles plays a role analogous to the hydrophilic–lipophilic balance (HLB) of common surfactants Despite all the above, most of papers published in the field of particle laden interfaces have assumed a constant contact angle value, frequently 90°. The absence of a reliable evaluation of θ has been mainly due to the difficulties associated with monitoring a single particle adsorbed at the fluid interface. The first systematic studies trying to measure the contact angle of microparticles were the ones by Paunov, who introduced the so-called Gel Trapping Technique (GTT) In the following, we will review the recent developments in the study of the contact angles of particles attached to fluid interfaces, emphasizing the physicochemical background underneath this property. The main scope of this comprehensive manuscript is then to emphasize the importance of this poorly understood property. Wettability and adhesion control the contact angle of particles, and therefore their attachment and their flotation height, h (see The most frequently used definition of θ for microparticles attached to fluid interface – neglecting τ and any adsorption of components from the fluid phases to the interface – is given by Young’s equation The energy of attachment of the particles to the fluid interface is a balance between the energy of the particle at the interface and in the bulk suspension. For spherical particles, small enough for the gravity effects being negligible, the attachment energy, ∆E Eq. Long range dipolar interactions are very important in particle laden interfaces The accurate evaluation of the contact angle of particles attached at fluid interfaces is complex, being sometimes limited by the accuracy of the experimental techniques and by the need of using an interface model for calculating θ from the experimental variables Some authors have assumed that for particles θ is the same than for a flat surface made of the same material, or for a close-packed monolayer of particles deposited onto a flat substrate Clint and Taylor proposed to calculate θ from the collapse pressure of a compression monolayer of particles attached to a fluid interface assuming that the particles form a hexagonal close-packed structure at the interface The possible modification of the contact angle of particles at the interface under compression was recently analysed by Garbin et al. The revised Washburn capillary rise method is one of the most successful methods used for measuring θ of particulate matter This method is based on the analysis of the interaction between the colloidal probe and an air bubble and is limited to microparticles The gel trapping technique (GTT) was originally developed for microparticles by direct observation using Scanning Electronic Microscopy (SEM) This method has been applied to the determination of the contact angle of different types of nanoparticles attached at both air-water interface and water–oil one An alternative to GTT that overcomes some of its problems is the freeze fracture shadow-casting (FreSCa) coupled to cryo-SEM imaging An additional advantage of the FreSCa method is that it allows one to perform an average analysis for large regions of the monolayer, thus increasing the accuracy of the measurements. Moreover, this also provides information about the heterogeneity of the wettability of the particles along the monolayer. For particles irreversibly adsorbed at fluid interfaces Grigoriev et al. applied the excluded area formalism Horozov et al. Hunter et al. developed a non invasive method to determine the contact angle of sub-micrometer particle at the air-water interface using ellipsometry Different variables can alter the wettability of particles attached to fluid interfaces. Among them, the most important is the HLB of the particles, which mainly depends on the chemical nature of the particle and on the chemical nature of the phases adjacent to the interface. This balance can be modified either by physisorption or chemisorption of molecules on the particle’s surface The effect of the particles size on θ has probably been the most studied. For most particles θ increase with the particle sizes till a plateau values (see Another critical parameter affecting the contact angle of particles at fluid interfaces is their surface charge density. As already said, this is due to the importance of the charge of the particles in the intricate balance of interactions (electric-field-induced-capillary attraction vs. electrostatic repulsion) that governs the stabilization of the particle laden interface, leading to the particles to reach their equilibrium contact angle at the interface An additional aspect that plays an important role in the wettability of the particles is their chemical surface nature. In general this can be controlled by the chemical modification of the particle surface (e.g. silanization of silica particles) Similar effects can be obtained by physical adsorption of surfactants on the particles surface. Maestro et al. Similar effects have been recently reported by Binks et al. Other variables that can play an important role in the contact angle of particles at fluid interfaces are the roughness and porosity of the particles which are especially critical as the particle size decreases Finally, the experimental protocol followed for making the particle laden interface plays a non-negligible role in the value of the contact angle obtained. Although the equilibrium contact angle is used in most papers, many questions remain open about the dynamic aspects of the wetting At low ionic strengths (strong electrostatic interactions) the relaxation processes are hindered, thus once the particles reach the interface they remain trapped at equilibrium conditions. The relaxation processes are logarithmic and much slower than expected from hydrodynamics considerations. This behaviour is similar to those observed for physical aging processes in other non-equilibrium systems The dynamics of the attachment of the particles to fluid interfaces is strongly influenced by the type of systems considered: adsorption or spreading In spite of the important practical implications in the stabilization of dispersed systems such as thin films, foams and emulsions Zang et al. It has been well established that partially hydrophobic micro- and nanoparticles stabilize air bubbles or droplets – creating the well known Ramsden-Pickering emulsions It is in this context where the wetting behaviour of solid particles, measured through the water phase, is considered as key rule for distinguishing the specific nature of a particle dispersion A transitional inversion of the curvature of an oil/water interfaces containing adsorbed particles can be achieved by modifying θ at a fixed oil/water ratio This change of wettability is not only a singular situation for emulsions, this is also valid to explain changes in the stability of aqueous foams stabilised by nanoparticles–surfactant systems In contrast to the behaviour of emulsions, the inversion of the curvature of particles adsorbed at air/water interfaces has not been observed so far by varying the surfactant concentration. Nevertheless, this inversion scheme can be achieved exploring the transition from air bubbles dispersed in water – aqueous foam – by using partially hydrophilic particles (silica particles) to water drops dispersed in air by means of hydrophobic particles. The latter are able to encapsulate isolated water drops in air creating the so-called liquid marbles as well as dry water — a free-flowing powder which contains this particle coated water drops Binks et al. San-Miguel et al. The dilational and shear viscoelastic moduli of monolayers of surface active molecules characterize the mechanical properties of fluid interfaces, which determine the stability of emulsions and foams In Ref. The interest in the study of the contact angle of particles attached to fluid interfaces has undergone a spectacular growth in the last decade due to their recognized implication in many technological aspects involving the interaction of particles and fluid interfaces such as the stabilization of dispersed systems. However, the complete understanding of the control mechanisms that govern this key property is hardly attainable due to the complexity of the theoretical and experimental tools associated with its study. Furthermore, the number of available contact angle data is in general scarce and limited to a small number of types of particles and dimensions that makes difficult to establish general rules related to the physico-chemical aspects, associated to both the particles (size, chemical nature, roughness, charge, shape, etc.) and the two fluid phases (dielectric constant, etc.), involved in the control of the contact angle of particles at the fluid interface. This review has presented a comprehensive analysis of the current knowledge on the contact angle of particles at fluid interface considering both the static and dynamic aspects as well as the different theoretical and experimental approaches developed to determine this important property. The problems associated with the development of an integrative theory that allows one to establish the role of the contact angle in the attachment of particles to fluid interface require the development of complex physico-chemical models considering both the interaction of the particles with the interface and the interaction between particles as well as the physico-chemical properties of particles and interface. The main difficulty arrives from the multiple variables to consider that make necessary the use of standard protocols to evaluate the contact angle of the particles attached to the fluid interface, thus eliminating the discrepancies due to the methodological approach. Another aspect to consider is that most of the current studies are devoted to the investigation of the contact angle of spherical particles. However, non-spherical particles have become in an interesting alternative to replace spherical ones in recent years due to their unique properties that has raised new features in the study of the contact angle at fluid interfaces. The extension of the theoretical and experimental approaches used in the study of spherical particles is an interesting new challenge on the understanding of the parameters governing the contact angle at fluid interface. The complete understanding of the physico-chemical aspects related to the contact angle of particles at fluid interfaces will open a new perspective to the study of interfaces and to the application of these intriguing systems for research and/or technological purposes. This work was supported in part by MINECO under Grant FIS2012-38231-C02-01, by ESA under Grants MAP AO-00-052 (FASES) and PASTA, and by EU under Grant Marie Curie ITN-COWET, and carried out in the framework of the ERF COST actions CM1101 “Colloidal Aspects of Nanoscience for Innovative Processes and Materials”.