Video image analysis and direct sampling of the froth surface were combined to investigate the relationship between different imaging parameters accounting for the structural features of the froth, and the separation efficiency of a flotation bank.
                  The bubble solids loading and the air recovery were measured to introduce a new structural parameter, the froth volumetric mineral loading, additionally a new image analysis measurement, the cross correlation peak, was investigated. Both parameters were shown to be linked to the mobility of the bubbles on the froth surface.
                  The cross correlation peak was found to be closely related to the volumetric mineral loading measured on the froth surface. Both parameters were found to follow a drop in froth stability and mineral attachment down the bank, which resulted in a relatively wetter and less viscous froth, and therefore a higher bubble mobility on the froth surface. As a result, the cross correlation peak was shown to be related to the mineral grade in the concentrate, while further analysis highlighted the possible use of a combination of air recovery and cross correlation peak to give a closer prediction of the bank performance.The mechanisms of attachment, entrainment, drainage and bursting have a characteristic influence on the structural features and dynamics of a flotation froth. As a result, several qualitative studies have focused on the analysis of the froth phase and showed that the froth structure could indeed be used as a useful indicator of the performance of the flotation system ( However, the estimated performance of a cell in a typical flotation circuit is still based on the visual appearance of the froth surface, which also makes the control of the process uncertain and subjective. The need for an automatic system to monitor the operation has recently resulted in the development of new quantitative measurements using machine vision technology ( As air is introduced through the mineral pulp, valuable hydrophobic particles are becoming progressively attached to the surface of the rising bubbles. Once the loaded bubbles reach the top of the pulp and enter the froth, the drainage of a large proportion of water and entrained gangue particles takes place from the slurry layers surrounding the bubbles, producing a major upgrading from the froth. Further from the pulp-froth interface, the bubble structure changes from spherical to polyhedral bubble shape. The bubbles are then separated by thin liquid films, or lamellae. Drainage occurs into the Plateau borders, the channels formed where three lamellae meet. The mobility of the froth also decreases because of the increased rigidity due to the high ratio of attached particles to water. Any further drainage causes the bubbles to coalesce or burst, therefore releasing the attached valuable material into the Plateau borders, from where it may drain back into the pulp. However, it is well known that in most flotation systems, the attachment of solids can enhance the stability of the froth by increasing the rigidity of the bubble shells and forming a tightly bound hydrophobic particle layer, which retards drainage ( These observations suggest that the structural features and dynamics of a flotation froth are closely linked to the different separation mechanisms operating in the froth, and could therefore be used as a reliable indication of the efficiency of the separation. Recent studies by A stability parameter Several studies have also identified the need for measuring the amount of valuable mineral attached to the bubble shells ( The solids content in bubble lamellae can be measured by using the method proposed by The cross correlation is an image processing technique that compares two consecutive images to find the relative alignment that maximises their correlation with each other. The algorithm, as applied by A new parameter describing the “volumetric solids loading” in the froth is introduced in an attempt to link the actual physical structure and properties of the froth to the parameters measured by video image analysis, and in particular the cross correlation peak. The volumetric solids loading is based on a combination of the information given by the mineral attachment on the bubbles and the air recovery. By considering a unit area of froth surface, both the amount of solids loaded over that area and the amount of liquid in the Plateau border above that area can be determined. The volumetric flowrate of liquid in a two-phase foam can be estimated from a derivation of the foam drainage equation ( The ratio It should be noted that the volumetric mineral loading expressed here differs from the solids loading in the froth sometimes used by previous investigators ( A plant campaign was carried out in the rougher cells of the flotation circuit at Northparkes Mine, New South Wales, Australia. The flotation bank is made up of four rectangular cells in series (each 2.66 Under steady state conditions and for each experiment the top surface of the froth was video recorded for off-line image processing. Images were grabbed and analysed to estimate the velocity of the overflowing froth, the air recovery, and the cross stability correlation peak. The image processing was performed using the machine vision system SmartFroth ( It should be noted that the cross correlation peak is a froth surface descriptor, and is the property of a set of froth images, used to indicate physical behaviour. The results shown in The results show a non-linear relationship between the cross correlation peak and the calculated air recovery over the launder. It is believed that the drop of froth stability along the bank is due to a depletion of stabilising hydrophobic particles, as they are progressively recovered in the concentrate. The stabilising effect of hydrophobic particles is illustrated in Due to the nature of the particle collection process in the pulp ( The cross correlation peak, air recovery and bubble solids loading have shown to be closely related down the bank. As mentioned previously, the cross correlation peak gives an indication of the mobility of bubbles on the froth surface. The first cells of each bank clearly display a higher value of the cross correlation peak, indicating fewer rearrangements between the bubbles (possibly because of their stability and high mineral loading), and consequently producing a dry and viscous froth. On the other hand, the cells at the end of the bank will produce bubbles with lower mineral loading and higher bursting fractions, resulting in comparatively higher water content and increased bubble mobility within the froth. The relationship between the volumetric mineral loading and the cross correlation peak is shown down the bank in  It is seen from the different froth structure parameters used in this study that the depletion of mineral particles along the bank results in generally lower bubble solids loadings, and therefore lower froth stability, leading to lower cross correlation peak measurements. In addition, the cross correlation peak was found to be closely related to the volumetric mineral loading on the top surface of the froth. The drop in the volumetric mineral loading–caused by the depletion of material available for attachment and stabilisation of the bubbles– resulted in characteristic changes in the structural features and mobility of the froth, which were accordingly reflected by a decrease in the cross correlation peak down the flotation bank.  The plot shows a non-linear relationship between the flow of Cu and the flow of bubble surface down the bank, and clearly illustrates how the amount of valuable material recovered down the bank increases with a rise in the overflow of bubble surface. However, the additional trendline drawn for illustration purposes suggests that this increase remains more pronounced for the first cells of the bank as opposed to the last cells of the bank. This can be explained by looking at the total amount of Copper recovered per unit area of froth surface overflowing. This ratio is described by the slope of the trendline on Previous studies have suggested a possible relationship between bubble solids loading and mineral grade in the concentrate (  In order to reduce the amount of scatter on  Overall, the standard error for the concentrate grade is ± The tests carried out at industrial scale indicated that a strong relationship exists between the froth imaging parameters and the structural features of the froth, allowing them to be incorporated into a predictive model to give a reliable online indication of the efficiency of the separation along a bank of flotation cells. The depletion of hydrophobic valuable material along the bank can be seen as the main reason for the changes observed in the structure and dynamics of the overflowing froth. In particular, air recovery and particle attachment were observed to have a major impact on the volumetric mineral loading of the froth, which was in turn observed to be closely related to the mobility of the bubbles estimated from measurements of the cross correlation peak on the froth surface. As expected, the efficiency of the separation was observed to significantly decrease down the rougher bank. The decrease in the overflow of valuable material per cell was linked to a drop in the bubble mineral loading and consequently lower froth stability, resulting in the overflow of increasingly uncovered bubble surfaces. Overall, the cumulative flow of bubble surface allowed to give an accurate estimation of the recovery of valuable material over the whole flotation bank for the different operating conditions. Finally, because of its link with the volumetric mineral loading of the froth, the cross correlation peak was found to be related to the mineral grade in the concentrate. Its decrease down the bank was positively correlated to a decrease in concentrate grade and thus highlighted the significant drop in mineral separation towards the end of the bank. Its combination with the flowrate of water in the Plateau borders showed that froth imaging parameters could be used to build a model for online prediction of the concentrate grade down a flotation bank.