This study was performed in order to evaluate the effects of binder droplet size and type of binder on the agglomerate growth mechanisms by melt agglomeration in a fluidised bed granulator. Lactose monohydrate was agglomerated with melted polyethylene glycol (PEG) 3000 or Gelucire 50/13 (esters of polyethylene glycol and glycerol), which was atomised at different nozzle air flow rates giving rise to median droplet sizes of 40, 60, and 80 μm. Different product temperatures were investigated, below the melting range, in the middle of the melting range, and above the melting range for each binder. The agglomerates were found to be formed by initial nucleation of lactose particles immersed in the melted binder droplets. Agglomerate growth occurred by coalescence between nuclei followed by coalescence between agglomerates. Complex effects of binder droplet size and type of binder were seen at low product temperatures. Low product temperatures resulted in smaller agglomerate sizes, because the agglomerate growth was counteracted by very high binder viscosity or solidification of the binder. At higher product temperatures, neither the binder droplet size nor the type of binder had a clear effect on the final agglomerate size.Wet agglomeration performed in fluidised bed granulators is a commonly used method to produce agglomerates in the pharmaceutical industry. The agglomeration is carried out by spraying a binder liquid into a heated bed of fluidised particles. The most frequently used binder liquids are aqueous polymer solutions. Melt agglomeration is a wet agglomeration process in which a melted binder is applied. Melt agglomeration is usually performed in a high shear mixer. Recent studies have shown, however, that a meltable binder can be an alternative to a polymer solution in fluidised bed granulation ( Previous studies with aqueous binder liquids in fluidised bed granulators have shown that larger binder droplet size ( In aqueous fluidised bed agglomeration, the agglomerate formation and growth can be described by initial formation of small agglomerates (nuclei) followed by growth by coalescence between the agglomerates (  By melt agglomeration in a high shear mixer, the binder is distributed on the surface of the powder particles due to the high shear forces, and nuclei are formed primarily by coalescence between the wetted particles unless the binder viscosity is extremely high ( The present work is based on the hypothesis that the mechanisms of agglomerate formation and growth in fluidised bed melt agglomeration are different from those seen by melt agglomeration in high shear mixers because of the lower shear forces in the fluidised bed, as well as different from those seen by aqueous fluidised bed agglomeration, because no evaporation of binder liquid occurs by melt agglomeration. The purpose of this study is to test this hypothesis by investigating the effects of droplet size and type of binder on the agglomerate formation and growth mechanisms by melt agglomeration in a fluidised bed. Lactose, 350 mesh (α-lactose monohydrate; DMV, The Netherlands) was used as starting material. Gelucire 50/13 (esters of polyethylene glycol and glycerol; Gattefossé, France) or polyethylene glycol (PEG) 3000 (Clariant, Germany) was used as meltable binder. The particle size distribution by volume of the lactose was determined in triplicate by a Malvern Mastersizer S laser diffraction particle sizer (Malvern Instruments, UK). The median particle diameter and the span were found to be 28 μm and 2.5, respectively. The span is the difference between the diameters at the 90 and the 10 percentage points relative to the median diameter. The BET multipoint surface area of the lactose, determined in duplicate by a Gemini 2375 Surface Area Analyser (Micromeritics, USA) was 0.68 m The pycnometric densities of the lactose, the solid Gelucire, and the solid PEG were determined by an Accupyc 1330 gas displacement pycnometer (Micromeritics, USA) using helium purge. Analyses were performed in duplicate. Before the analysis, the Gelucire beads were milled in a coffee mill (Braun AG 4041, Spain) for 3 s followed by a 3-s pause to prevent melting of the Gelucire. This procedure was repeated until the beads were milled for 60 s in total. The pycnometric density of the lactose was 1.550 g/cm The melting range and the peak temperature of the Gelucire and the PEG were estimated in triplicate by a Perkin Elmer DSC 7 differential scanning calorimeter (Perkin Elmer, USA) as previously described ( The densities of the melted binders were estimated at 50, 55, and 60 The viscosities of the melted binders were estimated in duplicate by a Rotovisco RV 20 (Haake, Germany) as previously described ( The water contents on a wet-weight basis of the binders were estimated in triplicate by volumetric titration as previously described ( All data on material properties presented here are the mean value of the repeated estimations. The agglomeration experiments were performed in a fluidised bed granulator, Glatt GPCG-1 (Glatt, Germany), modified in order to allow faster cooling of the product by passing air at ambient temperature into the plenum by means of a bypass valve. The nozzle (Schlick Model 970, Schlick Düsen, Germany) was pneumatic with an orifice diameter of 0.8 mm. An electrically heated tube (Isopad, Germany) was used to heat the atomising air to a temperature of ∼70 The process data were logged to a PC recording the product temperature, the inlet and outlet air temperature, and the fluidising air flow rate. During the process, data were logged with intervals of 2.5 s. The droplet size distributions by volume of the atomised binders were measured by a Malvern 2601Lc laser diffraction particle sizer (Malvern Instruments, UK). The focal lens length was 300 mm. The measurements were performed according to the procedure previously described ( A batch size of 500 g of lactose was used in all experiments. The lactose was sieved through a 1-mm sieve and charged into the product chamber. The fluidising air flow was initiated, and the flow rate was set to 60 m The air dome on the nozzle head was set in the number 2 position, and the nozzle was placed ∼15 cm above the bottom of the chamber. The addition of the melted binder heated to 70 Immediately after the end of the binder addition, the cooling of the product was started by opening the bypass valve and setting the inlet air temperature at 30 The final agglomerates were sieved on a 2-mm Jel-Fix 50 vibration sieve (J. Engelsmann, Germany) for ∼10 s, until the fraction smaller than 2 mm had passed. The agglomerate size distribution of the agglomerates <2 mm produced with binder concentrations of 16.5 and 27.5% v/m was determined by sieve analysis of a sample of ∼80 g prepared by a Laborette 27 automatic rotary sample divider (Fritsch, Germany). A series of 14 ASTM standard sieves in the range of 75–2000 μm was used for 5 min at low vibration level, and the fractions smaller than 250 μm were sieved for an additional 5 min at high vibration level by a Fritsch analysette 3 vibrator (Fritsch, Germany). The agglomerate size distributions were in good agreement with the log-normal distribution. Consequently, the mean agglomerate size was described by the geometric-weight mean diameter ( The agglomerate size distribution by volume of agglomerates produced with a binder concentration of 5.5% v/m was determined in triplicate by a Malvern Mastersizer S laser diffraction particle sizer. Samples of ∼4 g from the agglomerate size fraction 250–2000 μm were milled in a coffee mill as described above. The pycnometric densities of the milled agglomerates were determined by an AccuPyc 1330 gas displacement pycnometer using helium purge. The results are mean values of two determinations. The pycnometric densities of the agglomerate size fractions were used for indirect estimation of the binder content in the agglomerates as previously described ( Photographs of selected agglomerates were taken by a scanning electron microscope (SEM) (Jeol JSM 5200, Japan). Prior to microscopy, the samples were coated with gold/palladium by sputtering for 150 s (Biorad, E5200 Auto Sputter Coater, UK). Lactose was agglomerated with atomised Gelucire 50/13 or PEG 3000 at different nozzle air flow rates giving rise to median droplet sizes of 40, 60, and 80 μm. A binder concentration of 27.5% v/m of the amount of lactose based upon the binder volume at 60 Additional single experiments were performed with a binder concentration of 5.5 or 16.5% v/m with the droplet sizes 40 and 80 μm at two inlet air temperatures corresponding to product temperatures in the middle of and 5 Experiments, in which the inlet air temperature was maintained for 5 min after the end of binder addition, were performed in duplicate with 27.5% v/m of binder and a droplet size of 60 μm at two inlet air temperatures corresponding to product temperatures in the middle of and 5 The results of the repeated experiments shown in this paper are mean values. The range of the repeated experiments is indicated as ‘±’ in The binder properties are presented in The solubility of lactose in PEG 3000 as well as Gelucire 50/13 was found to be less than 0.1% m/m at 70 Generally, the variations between repeated experiments are seen to be small ( At the lowest product temperature, the PEG will solidify during fluidisation, because the temperature of the bed is below the melting range of the PEG. This is why only slight agglomerate growth is seen ( For the Gelucire, the lowest product temperature is in the middle of the melting range, and the Gelucire, therefore, will not solidify completely but the viscosity will be extremely high. Consequently, the experiments carried out at the lowest product temperatures are seen to result in more agglomerate growth for the Gelucire than for the PEG. For the Gelucire at the lowest product temperature, the droplet size has the opposite effect of that seen for the PEG since a smaller droplet size results in larger agglomerates ( At higher product temperatures, corresponding to temperatures in the middle of the melting range (PEG) or above the melting range (PEG, Gelucire), the binder viscosity will be markedly lower, and the agglomerate size will increase due to higher surface deformability of the agglomerates. The difference in viscosity ( At the higher temperatures (  The highest binder concentrations in the size fraction 250–2000 μm are seen for agglomerates produced at the lowest product temperature. This indicates uneven distribution of the binder. Although the binder concentration is high, no overwetting occurs, because the deformability of the agglomerates is low due to solidification or high viscosity of the binder. At the lowest product temperature, a larger droplet size gives rise to a more even binder distribution for the PEG, whereas the opposite effect of droplet size is seen for the Gelucire. Further, the Gelucire results in more uniform binder distribution than the PEG. Thus, a more even binder distribution is obtained at the lowest product temperature when the agglomerate size becomes larger ( At higher product temperatures, the binder concentrations are seen to be close to the theoretical value. The agglomerates in In previous melt agglomeration experiments with lactose 350 mesh and PEG 3000 in a high shear mixer (  The effects of type of binder and droplet size are less clear when the product temperature is kept above the melting range ( The changes in the agglomerate size distribution caused by an increasing amount of binder are similar for the Gelucire and the PEG at a product temperature 5 In order to explain the complex effect of droplet size, it is necessary to distinguish between the nucleation phase and the coalescence phase of the process. As long as nucleation is the dominant mechanism, larger droplet size will result in larger agglomerate size since a nucleus is formed from one primary droplet or from a larger droplet that has been formed by coalescence between two or more primary droplets ( When coalescence between agglomerates becomes the dominant growth mechanism, the role of the binder droplets is to wet the surface of the agglomerates making it possible for liquid bridges to form between agglomerates. In this phase, the agglomerate growth rate, d If the binder has low viscosity, the droplet will be able to spread over the agglomerate surface, and This means that the agglomerate growth rate is supposed to be inversely proportional to the droplet size. Accordingly, the smallest droplet size results in the highest growth rate for the highly viscous Gelucire ( In Maintaining the inlet air temperature for 5 min after the end of liquid addition did not result in a clear effect on the agglomerate size ( The above-mentioned results indicate the agglomerate formation and growth mechanisms that are shown schematically in  When no further binder liquid is added, the surface wetness will be insufficient for further agglomerate growth by coalescence, and the mean agglomerate size will be approximately constant during further processing ( The present study shows that melt agglomeration by atomization of a melted binder in a fluidised bed occurs by initial nucleation followed by coalescence between nuclei. The nuclei are formed by immersion of the solid particles in the binder droplets provided that the droplet size is larger than the size of the solid particles. Larger droplets will form larger nuclei. Agglomerate growth by coalescence between nuclei will occur if the surface of the nuclei becomes wetted by continued addition of binder droplets. This coalescence will be counteracted or even hindered if the droplets are highly viscous or solidify due to low inlet air temperature. The agglomerate growth rate is supposed to be practically independent of the droplet size if the binder viscosity is so low that the droplets are able to spread over the agglomerate surface. If the droplets are unable to spread because of high viscosity, the growth rate is supposed to be inversely proportional to the droplet size. These effects of droplet size are different from those seen in fluidised bed agglomeration with aqueous binder liquids, probably because the aqueous process is affected by evaporation of binder liquid. In contrast to melt agglomeration in a high shear mixer, the agglomerate growth in a melt agglomeration process in a fluidised bed is unaffected by further processing after the end of binder addition since no densification occurs due to the lower shearing forces in the fluidised bed. Because of the low densification in a fluidised bed, a higher content of binder can be incorporated.