It is well established that application of microbubbles in combination with coarser ones ensures a significant increase in the flotation efficiency of very fine (< 20 μm) and very coarse (> 100 μm) particles. The objective of this study is to determine the impact of microbubbles on the flotation efficiency of medium-sized particles (50−80 μm). In tests runs we used glass beads (ballotini) of various size grades in the range:50; 50−63; 63−71; 71−80 μm as flotation objects. We used CTAB as both a collector and a frother at the dosage of 0.06 mg per 1 g of ballotini. Prior to starting flotation by coarse bubbles, a dosage of microbubbles less than 60 μm in size in the form of a concentrated (66 vol. %) microbubbles dispersion in CTAB solution of (0.2 g L−1) produced by the MBGen-0.012 generator was fed into a flotation cell. The best flotation performance is observed for the fraction of 63−71 μm, whereas the flotation rate constants for all fractions are directly proportional to the volume dosage of microbubbles, when it does not exceed 0.2 mL g−1. The size of microbubbles significantly affects the flotation effectiveness and depends on the concentration of the collector/frother used for their production. The main mechanism of flotation performance enhancement through microbubbles application, involves formation of coarse aggregates comprising large number of microbubbles and particles, which provides for a significant increase in the capture efficiency of aggregates by coarse bubbles.Flotation is one of the most efficient methods of ore and coal beneficiation. An essential precondition for a successful implementation of this technology is the feedstock comminution needed to separate a valuable mineral from gangue. This size reduction process leads to sufficiently wide particle size distribution ranging from several micrometers to several hundred micrometers. The flotation process involves several sub-processes consisting in the interaction between particles and bubbles. The flotation rate constant and therefore the recovery is the results of the efficiency of the consecutive sub-processes such as particle-bubble collision (Ec), attachment (Ea) and stability of bubble particle aggregates (Es = 1-Ed) [ One potential solution of the challenge of fine particles flotation involves the application of a technique, now termed as the combined microflotation, when alongside with coarse air bubbles flotation also employs relatively small amounts of microbubbles. As far back as the middle of the last century, it was found [ Based on the above, we can assume that application of micro- and nanobubbles in combination with coarse bubbles can significantly intensify the flotation not only of fine and coarse particles, but also of medium-sized ones. The objective of this study was to establish the effect of microbubbles on the kinetics of pneumatic-mechanical flotation of medium-sized particles simulated by glass beads (ballotini) of various size fractions. A suspension of glass beads (ballotini) produced by SWARCO-Vestglas served as a flotation object. Flotation tests were run on tap water using a laboratory pneumatic-mechanical flotation cell Mekhanobr-FM1M having a cell volume of 3 L and the cross section dimensions of 120 × 100 mm. The air flowrate was 1 L/min, and the rotor speed (diameter 60 mm) was 1000 rpm. The air was supplied by a controlled capacity peristaltic pump. In all test runs, we used ballotini suspension in tap water; the suspension volume amounted to 3 L, with ballotini content of 0.1 kg. Cetyltrimethylammonium bromide (CTAB, C 1, 2-metering peristaltic pumps respectively for air and frother solution; 3–push button for air and frother solution metering pumps; 4- push button for disperser; 5 – disperser drive; 6 – instrument carry handle; 7– disperser head; 8 – pipe for air-in-water microdispersion discharge; 9 - pipe for feeding air-in-water mix into disperser head. During the test runs ballotini suspension was placed in a flotation cell, then a required amount of CTAB was introduced into the cell with following mixing at a rotor speed of 1000 rpm but no air was supplied. After that, for a certain set pre-defined time, MBGen-0.012 generator fed an air-in-water micro-dispersion into the flotation cell, and after that the atmospheric air was supplied. Froth samples were collected in batches: 2 × 0.5 min and 2 × 1 min. Upon the completion of the flotation test, collected froth samples were filtered, dried and weighed. Numerical results shown graphically actually present the data averaged over three measurement runs. The relative measurement error comprises 2.5–3.4 %. A laboratory unit, schematically shown in The laboratory set schematically shown in  Obviously, when microbubbles get finer, the effectiveness of their application should increase. This is proven by the data on kinetics of ballotini recovery (71−80 μm) shown in  Based on the data shown in For studying the effects of microbubbles on the flotation kinetics of various particles size, the ballotini sieved into specific size fractions, in microns: <50; 50−63; 63−71; 71−80, which were analyzed separately.  Thus, for small microbubbles dosage  These observations provided evidence that after microbubbles are fed into a flotation cell but before the start of air supply in the form of coarse bubbles, formation of aggregates occur which comprise ballotini particles and microbubbles, and the aggregate size increases with the increase of the microbubbles dosage. Thus, for example, at a microbubbles dosage of around 0.5 mL g Hence, we have every reason to argue that in the flotation of medium-sized particles, microbubbles act rather as flocculants than as flotation carriers or collectors. And since these aggregates are fairly large, they are floated comparatively well by coarse bubbles, as it generally shown in As the increased microbubbles dosage induces both aggregates growth in size and their better buoyancy, we can project that for sufficiently large dosage of microbubbles, it may be possible to exclude the use of coarse bubbles, as it is suggested by the principles of turbulent microflotation presented in [ The above research findings suggest the following conclusions: In flotation of medium-sized particles (50−80 μm) the application of microbubbles in combination with coarse bubbles provides for a significant increase in the flotation rate and the ultimate recovery. The flotation rate constant is directly proportional to the volume dosage of microbubbles, when this dosage does not exceed 0.2 mL g The size of microbubbles significantly influences the effectiveness of their application and depends on the concentration of a collector/frother used for their generation. The principle mode of microbubbles action, which enhances the flotation efficiency, involves the formation of large aggregates formed by a large number of microbubbles and particles that ensures the significant increase in the efficiency of aggregates capture by coarse bubbles. Obviously, in an actual flotation system the effects of microbubbles, particle hydrophobiciy and froth stability could not be de-coupled when the collector used acts also as a frother.  The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. This paper is supported by