This contribution describes development and application of a user-friendly finite element program, UT3PC, to address three important problems in underground coal mine design: (1) safety of main entries, (2) barrier pillar size needed for entry protection, and (3) safety of bleeder entries during the advance of an adjacent longwall panel. While the finite element method is by far the most popular engineering design tool of the digital age, widespread use by the mining community has been impeded by the relatively high cost of and the need for lengthy specialized training in numerical methods. Implementation of UT3PC overcomes these impediments in three easy steps. First, a material properties file is prepared for the considered site. Next, mesh generation is automatic through an interactive process. A third and last step is simply execution of the program. Examples using data from several western coal mines illustrate the ease of using the application for analysis of main entries, barrier pillars, and bleeder entry safety.Rational design of safe underground entries and crosscuts, barrier pillars, and bleeder entries begins with a site-specific analysis of stress. An analysis of stress identifies the critical regions of high stress concentration where yielding is likely and additional or more focused ground control measures are needed. This analysis also identifies regions where stress concentration is low and risk mitigation is less urgent. Displacements induced by mining, including roof sag, floor heave, and pillar squeeze, are also of importance to stability. The popular finite element method is well-suited for such analysis and has been in use for studying coal mine engineering problems since the late 1960s The program UT3PC has evolved from early two-dimensional versions in the era of mainframe computers Reliability of the finite element method in general and UT3PC in particular is demonstrated in a long history of mining applications. An original software application was to hard rock mine slope stability Numerous additional applications to problems in hard-rock and soft-rock mining have been done Concurrent advances in finite element technology and computer capabilities at greatly reduced costs have allowed advances in applications to ground control problems with increasing realism. Current technology allows for analysis of stress based on first principles of mechanics taking into account the effects of joint sets and the variability of strata properties in situ. The need for the elaborative “calibration” studies that involve adjusting input strata properties until a “fit” to a few mine measurements is achieved is now largely unnecessary. In any case, the user must supply the requisite strata properties. Mine design for strata control and safety begins with first principles: physical laws, kinematics, and material laws. The equations that allow for computing stress, strain, and displacements are fundamental, and numerical solution of the governing system of equations is almost certainly required and in finite element form Most rocks and soils respond elastically to an initial application of load, but the range of a purely elastic response is limited by strength of material. Indeed, strength of a material may be defined as the state of stress at the elastic limit. Any attempt to continue loading a material beyond the elastic limit induces yielding by fracture, flow, or a combination of both micro-mechanisms. The result in any case is plastic deformation. If flow or ductility is dominant, strain hardening may occur with an increase in the yield point (strength) with further strain as illustrated in In the elastic range, the stress-strain relations are a generalized Hooke’s law. In matrix form for an anisotropic material: Hooke’s law is only part of the stress-strain relations needed to describe material behavior beyond the elastic limit. First, the elastic limit must be defined, and then the computation of inelastic strains must be formulated. The elastic limit may be specified by a yield function or failure criterion, If one neglects complications caused by time- and rate-dependencies, heterogeneity, temperature dependency, and so on, then failure may be described by an implicit function, When the intermediate principal stress effect is not negligible, then a nonlinear form of DP (N-type) may be used. In case of anisotropic strata, one has Here, the axes, Beyond the elastic limit, total strains are composed of an elastic and plastic part. Thus, in differential form The elastic part is given by Hooke’s law; and the plastic part is obtained from a plastic potential. Thus, A local element safety factor concept defined as the ratio of strength to stress requires definitions of suitable measures of strengths and stress for analysis. Both arise in the context of stress-strain relations. Strength may be defined as stress at the elastic limit, so in the case of the famous Mohr-Coulomb criterion, one has User-friendly finite element analysis proceeds in three simple steps: Step 1 is specification of a materials properties file. A materials properties file containing just one material is shown in NLYRS is the number of layers in the stratigraphic column; NSEAM is the layer number of the mined seam; 2.4e+06 is the Young’s moduli in three directions; 0.15 is the Poisson’s ratio associated with three material directions; and 1.0e+06 is the shear. Moduli is in three directions; 158.0 is the specific weight in the vertical direction; 12,000 is the unconfined compressive strengths; 1000 is the tensile strength; 2000 is the shear strength; 0.0 is the orientation angle; 0.0 is the depth to top of layer (depth); and 75.0 is the layer thickness. Full details concerning the materials properties file are given in a user’s manual. Step 2 involves mesh generation that is done interactively. After typing in the name of the material properties file, requests for the number of entries follow. Additional information concerning widths of entries and crosscuts, as well as pillar widths and lengths, is typed in response to the screen request. The mesh generator computes all the files needed for a finite element run, including an output file that serves as an input file for a run. An example is shown in An initial stress field caused by strata weight is computed during mesh generation. However, an opportunity to modify the initial stress field is also presented during mesh generation. If high horizontal stresses exist, then the gravity stress field can be changed accordingly by addition of horizontal stress. In fact, any initial stress field can be obtained using the addition feature of the mesh generator. Plotting meshes is an essential practice to allow for error checking and to allow for re-generation should a first mesh be considered inadequate. In this regard, mesh generation allows for specification of element size, although element aspect ratios are constrained to two (ratio of largest to smallest element dimension). This feature allows one to generate a relatively coarse mesh with few elements or a refined mesh with many elements. Again, details are given in a user’s manual. Step 3 is simplicity itself. All that is necessary is to click on the executable finite element program file and then type the name of the runstream file.  Step 1. The material properties for this example (Mine A) are given in  As noted in Step 2  As noted in As noted in Step 3 Element yielding is confined to thin regions at pillar walls. Safety factors increase rapidly with distance into the solid coal to A second example is an underground coal mine (Mine B) in the western United States but otherwise remains unidentified. There are just three main entries in this barrier pillar problem. Step 1 Step 2. The generated mesh is shown in As shown in Step 3.   A third example problem involves bleeder entry safety as a longwall panel advances away from the bleeder entries. It illustrates the processes of mesh generation and finite element analysis for this problem type. As a reminder, bleeder entries are for ventilation and safety; they provide a secondary escape way from the mine. By law, bleeder entries must be maintained in a passable condition. This mine is an underground coal mine in the western United States (also Mine B). There are three main entries in this bleeder entry mine problem. Step 1. The problem input for “bleeder entries” mesh generation is lengthy. There are 26 layers in the geologic column; the 10th layer is the mined coal seam 3.3 m thick at a depth of 675 m. The thinnest layer is 1.2 m thick. Order of strata is from the top down. As a reminder, the last line of each stratum properties set gives the orientation, depth to the stratum top, and stratum thickness. Depth to the top of the second stratum is simply the thickness of the first stratum. Entries and crosscuts are 6 m wide. Pillars are 22 m × 54 m. Step 2. The generated mesh is shown in Step 3. Run time for this mesh was 1-1/2h. Plan and vertical section views of the distribution of element safety factors are shown in In vertical section, large zones of yielding extend above and below the longwall panel mined to the right. A large zone of yielding also extends above the left abutment of the panel and far into the roof where an abrupt termination of the yield zone occurs. Abrupt changes in contours are caused by abrupt changes in strata properties that indirectly reveal stratigraphy. Floor yielding below the abutment corner is also indicated in vertical section. Low pillar safety factors are again indicated in vertical section where entry corners are yielding and threaten roof and floor safety. As indicated in A close-up vertical section in The evidence from the finite element analysis in the form of safety factor distributions at seam level and in vertical section indicates the bleeder entries are marginally safe at best and likely to require considerable maintenance. Although the bleeder entry mesh is relatively coarse, the lesson learned from a coarse mesh/fine mesh comparison is that the conclusions would be similar if a finer mesh was used. As is evident in Improved safety of underground coal mine openings follows from better informed design decisions enabled by improved tools for engineering analysis. Using a design tool based on fundamental engineering principles is especially important in new geological settings and as mining methods evolve in new coal basins and at depth beyond past situations where empirical data no longer apply. The popular finite element method is well suited for use in the design of safe, stable mine openings. This method is a significant advance over simple rules of thumb and predigital-age empirical methods. However, general purpose software is costly and requires extensive training by potential users. The UT3PC program is a user-friendly, publicly available finite element program developed especially for coal mine design. The program allows for analysis of main entry safety, safety provided by barrier pillars, and bleeder entry safety in three easy steps including automatic, interactive mesh generation. A user’s manual accompanies the program and a graphic plotting capability is under development. Applications were made to three underground coal mines in the western United States. Distributions of element safety factors were particularly useful in providing guidance to safe design. UT3PC thus promises to be a reliable alternative and cost-effective approach to mine design. The software is expected to become available after review is completed. The findings and conclusions in this report are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily represent the views of the National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health or the University of Utah. Mention of any company or product does not constitute endorsement by NIOSH or the University of Utah.