In this study, the performance evaluation studies in five cement grinding circuits, in which HPGR is used in various configurations, were presented. Sampling surveys were performed around the circuits followed by the determination of the size distribution of the samples down to 1.8μm using a combination of sieving and laser sizing methods. The results showed that the specific energy consumption of the circuit decreases as the size reduction achieved by the HPGR increases. As given in the case studies when the size reduction ratio (F
                     80/P
                     80) changed from 308.2 to 4.4, the specific energy consumption of the HPGR was 8.02 and 4.05kWh/ton, respectively. Since various configurations offer rather different ball mill feeds, the best usage of HPGR could be attained by optimization of operating parameters of both ball mills and air classifiers. Tube mills having multichambers are traditionally used for cement grinding either in open or closed circuit operations. In the first chamber, larger balls (100–60 After the introduction of HPGR, various circuit configurations have been developed for energy efficient cement grinding. Nevertheless, due to the microcracks created by very high compression forces in the particle bed, the Bond work index of the material is further reduced for subsequent grinding operations ( The proven success in the cement industry has been attracting the mineral industry’s attention for many years. As a result of this, the number of HPGR applications in mineral processing plants is increasing ( A research group at Hacettepe University, Ankara-Turkey has been working on the modelling and simulation of cement grinding circuits. The aim of the research is to develop accurate process models based on material characteristics and extensive data collected from operating circuits. In this study, the results are given of the performance evaluation of five different cement grinding circuits in which HPGR is used in different configurations. Sampling studies were carried out at five different grinding circuits having different circuit configurations. These configurations are Open circuit HPGR–closed circuit ball mill grinding—Case Study 1. Open circuit HPGR with partial recycling–closed circuit ball mill grinding—Case Study 2. Hybrid grinding—Case Study 3. Closed circuit HPGR–closed circuit ball mill grinding—Case Study 4. Semi-finish grinding—Case Study 5. The simplified flowsheets and sampling points are given in For simple open circuit HPGR application, the sampling period was 15–20 Size distributions of the samples were determined by using a combination of dry sieving and laser sizing techniques. In order to measure product size of the HGPR, the samples were disagglomerated in a tumbling drum having the dimension of ∅70 Although they were not used in this study, for modelling purposes the impact and the compressive breakage functions of the feed materials were determined by drop weight and piston press tests, respectively. The work done on the particle bed ( In this configuration, the HPGR is used as an open circuit fine crusher. This arrangement was generally used in early applications to integrate HPGR into an existing ball mill circuit. As a result of the mass balancing exercise, the tonnages around the circuit and the measured and the calculated size distributions are presented in This configuration is similar to the application given in the Case Study 1. The difference is that the HPGR discharge is split into two parts. One portion is recycled back to the HPGR to obtain better particle bed breakage by filling the voids between the large particles. The results of mass balancing studies are presented in Another application of this case is to recycle the edge products from both sides of the rolls back to the feed to separate the coarse material from center product. As can be seen from In this configuration, a small portion of the separator reject is recycled to the HPGR together with a portion of the HPGR product. The aim of this application is the same as the open circuit HPGR application with partial recycling which is described in Case Study 2. This configuration is used when the fineness of the HPGR product recycled is not enough to fill the voids between the larger particles. The amount of the separator reject recycled to the HPGR is an important parameter for optimum particle bed formation and operation. The flowsheet of the circuit sampled is shown in In this exercise, the HPGR operates in closed circuit with an air classifier to prepare ball mill circuit feed ( Since there is a significant amount of finished material in the closed circuit HPGR product, it is logical to take this out as a final product. The semi-finish grinding configuration aims to produce this product. The HPGR circuit product is fed to the classifier which produces a final product and a coarse product which is fed to the ball mill. The flowsheet of the circuit sampled and the size distributions are shown in Typical specific energy consumption– A comparison of the fresh feed and product size distributions of the circuits is given in The 80% passing sizes for some streams are given in The specific energy consumptions are calculated both for the HPGRs and the overall circuit, based on power draws of the HPGR and the ball mill, and given in The efficiency curves given in Circulating load ratios (separator reject/fresh feed) in HPGRs in Case Study 4 and 5 were 4.2 and 5, respectively. In air classifiers used in cement grinding circuits, an increase in separator feed tonnage causes an increase in the by-pass ( The grid separator used in Case Study 5 is a special type of air classifier. The bottom part of the equipment operates as a disagglomerator for the HPGR since the upper section is used for classification purposes. During sampling survey, it was observed that because of the inefficient disagglomeration, some of the product remained in the form of cake. Therefore, the by-pass of the separator increased significantly. For this reason, the disagglomeration of the HPGR product is a critical operation in closed circuit HPGR applications. The comparison of A comparison of the size distributions of HPGR circuit product given in Case Study 4, with two different sulphide flotation feeds is given in In this paper, the performance evaluation studies of five cement grinding circuits containing HPGR in different configurations were presented. HPGR has proved its success by increasing the capacity and decreasing the specific energy consumption. Open circuit and hybrid HPGR applications can be used to increase the capacity of existing ball mill grinding circuits with slightly less energy consumption. However, substantial energy savings can additionally be obtained using closed circuit HPGR applications in the cement industry. Disagglomeration is a critical step in closed circuit HPGR applications. Any remaining agglomerates will report to the coarse product in the separator and increased the circulating load, unnecessarily. The introduction of an HPGR to an existing plant would significantly change the feed size of the ball mill circuit. Consequently, the length of the compartments of the ball mill, the ball load and size within the both compartment, the slot opening of the diaphragm between the compartments and the operating parameters of the air classifier should all be optimized in order to fully use the advantages offered by an HPGR. Authors would like to thank to Hacettepe University Research Unit and Turkish Scientific and Technical Research Council (MISAG 160 and MISAG 190) for their financial support.