Effects of increasing rainfall variability and weather extremes on litter decomposition are still uncertain, especially in agroecosystems, where the functional structure of soil communities is already affected. We conducted a mesocosm experiment to evaluate the impacts of different rain regimes and land management on litter mass loss and earthworm ecological groups (epigeic, endogeic and anecic) across European agroecosystems. We also tested if the effects of different rainfall regimes (normal, drought, flooding, intermittent) on earthworm functional diversity (FD) or community-weighted mean (CWM) of earthworm ecological groups (particularly anecic species in the case of CWM), affected litter mass loss across land-use types. We found that drought was the main factor retarding litter mass loss across European agroecosystems irrespective of management type. The effects of the rain regime on litter mass loss were coupled with the pedoclimatic conditions that were different among the studied European land-use types. Across land-use types the importance of earthworm communities for litter decomposition was higher under water depletion. These results also suggest that FD, as a proxy of niche complementarity, is crucial for the stability of the decomposition process under environmental disturbances. The FD values under drought regimes strongly indicated that climatic changes may slow down litter decomposition as a result of FD alterations that could compromise the long-term maintenance of litter mass loss. This result may be especially relevant for the European soils that are already under hydric stress, such as in most Mediterranean agroecosystems.Climate change will bring more environmental instability and extreme climatic events that will profoundly affect major ecological processes in agroecosystems ( Besides abiotic conditions, decomposition process rates depend on the comminution activity of soil detritivore communities that break down the plant litter and make it more readily available to other decomposers ( The interactive effects of pedoclimatic conditions and soil fauna communities may also be modulated by management practices in agroecosystems and, accordingly, different land-use types are expected to influence functional diversity of soil macrofauna and the consequent responses to flooding or drought conditions. Also, management intensities within each land-use type are deemed to be important. For instance, intensive agricultural practices negatively influence detritivore functional diversity by selectively decreasing the numbers of key functional groups ( In line with ecological insurance theory ( Here, we report on a full-factorial mesocosm experiment that explored the impacts of different rain regimes on earthworm ecological groups and the implications for litter mass loss across European land-use types, differing in management. We hypothesized that (1) differences in rain regime will be the main factor governing litter mass loss rates across land-use types in the decreasing order of drought, flooding and intermittent rain regime due to their impact on soil moisture conditions; and (2) different land-use types, representing different pedological conditions, and management practices will influence litter mass loss by affecting FD and/or CWM of earthworm ecological groups (particularly anecic species) under different rain regimes. The mesocosm study was set up using intact soil cores (Terrestrial Model Ecosystems – TMEs; Description of sampling sites is shown in After extraction, TMEs were transported in a refrigerated truck to the Laboratory of Soil Ecology and Ecotoxicology of Coimbra University (Portugal). Upon arrival TMEs were placed inside special carts (4 carts with 18 TMEs and 2 carts with 12 TMEs) as described by Soil cores were left to acclimatize to room conditions for 64 days and during that time they were watered three days a week (Mondays, Wednesdays, and Fridays) with 100 ml of rainwater ( After this ‘normal rain’ period the differential rain regimes (RR) started (T0), encompassing 4 different treatments (4 rain treatments x 4 TMEs each x 2 farming types x 3 land-use types): normal rain (50–60% of the WHCmax), drought (20–30% of the WHCmax mimicking a case of severe drought), flooding (70–80% of the WHCmax, mimicking a heavy rain), and intermittent rain (simulation of flooding-drought-normal cycles). These different treatments lasted for 263 days, with soil moisture assessment and watering according to the pertinent regime. In the intermittent regime, flooding, drought and normal phases lasted for 74, 125 and 64 days, respectively. The different time periods are related to the time needed to reach the desired moisture level and were maintained for 3 weeks. Prior to the start of the differential rain regimes, the vegetation in the TMEs was cut and the soil surface of each TME was covered with a 2 cm layer of grass litter obtained from the original field where TMEs were collected (Swiss TMEs: T1 sampling was a non-destructive sampling performed after the first phase of the experiment where the different rain regimes were established. At each TME, one litterbag was sampled, and litter was processed according to The T2 sampling, performed after all TMEs were returned to the corresponding normal rain regime, was a destructive sampling. On this occasion, the second litterbag was sampled, and the litter material processed as explained above. In addition, both upper (0–10 cm) and deeper (11–40 cm) soil layers of each TME, were hand-sorted to collect the earthworms (with the data from different layers being pooled). These were processed in the laboratory by estimating fresh biomass and thereafter preserving the specimens in a mixture of ethanol and formalin until further taxonomic and ecological identification. Before each intervention in the TMEs (i.e. adding the layer of crop residues and placing the litterbags, and before T1 and T2 sampling), grass was cut down to 2 cm. We calculated earthworm species richness (S), FD of earthworm ecological groups and CWM of anecics collected from each TME. FD of ecological groups (epigeics, endogeics, anecics) was calculated using Rao's quadratic entropy index, based on Gower's distances ( Differences in the average values of earthworm parameters (FD and CWM) and litter mass loss (%) collected in T2 were analysed with Generalized Linear Mixed Models (GLMMs) fitted by the Restricted Maximum Likelihood (REML) estimation method, using management type (conventional-intensive – CON - and ecological-intensive - ECO), and rain regimes (normal, drought, flooding, intermittent) as fixed factors and the study sites nested within the land-use types (Swiss croplands - CH, French alpine grasslands - FR, Portuguese agro-forests - PT) as the random factor. Fixed effects were tested using the function “anova” performed on the response variables and the fixed factors. Post-hoc Tukey tests were used to test for pairwise significant differences between variables of each factor (e.g. FR vs. PT within the country/land-use factor), by using the “glht” function from the R package “multcomp”, version 1.4–8 ( GLMMs were also performed to quantify the relative effects of S, FD and anecic CWM on litter mass loss. Previous studies have shown that abiotic factors, particularly soil moisture, can override the effects of soil fauna on ecosystem processes such as litter decomposition (e.g. All computed models were ranked on the base of the AIC (Akaike information criterion) coefficient and the model weights, which were calculated according to Average values of FD and anecic CWM were not significantly different between ecological and conventional management (FD: F Ten earthworm species were collected across the land-use types under the different rain regimes: one epi-endogeic, six endogeics and three anecics ( Ten earthworm species were collected across the land-use types under the different rain regimes: one epi-endogeic, six endogeics and three anecics ( Rates of litter mass loss were significantly explained by rain regime (F Across European land-use types the best linear mixed-effects model selected the combination of the rain regime (RR) with FD as the explanatory factors for litter mass loss, showing the lowest AIC value and highest weight ( In all models, drought significantly retarded litter mass loss, while the flooding significantly stimulated litter mass loss in comparison to the normal rain regime ( A major challenge for soil scientists and land managers is to predict how soil fertility will respond to changing agro-ecological conditions due to climate change. Weather extremes, particularly drought conditions, have been reported to affect key ecosystem processes such as litter decomposition ( In contrast to the negative effects of drought, the flooding treatment accelerated litter mass loss, particularly in the French TMEs. Previous studies have shown that litter decomposition rates increase in habitats under flooded conditions (e.g. In line with the results of litter mass loss, functional diversity of earthworm ecological groups (FD) and community weighted means of anecics (CWM) were mostly affected by rain regime and land-use type across eco-regions. Impact of land-use on FD and CWM of anecics was independent of the rain regime, although reflecting different pedological conditions and climate types among the studied agroecosystems. Indeed, the proportion of anecic species varied across the different European land-use types. CWM of anecics was much higher in the (drier) Portuguese agro-forest systems in comparison with the French alpine grasslands and Swiss croplands. This might be due to the distinct soil properties existing among European land-use types. Concretely, the intrinsic differences in terms of soil organic matter (lower in the Portuguese TMEs), has probably influenced the levels of soil moisture ( FD average values were extremely low in the Mediterranean sites, reflecting the lower number of earthworm species, particularly those belonging to the endogeic group, in the Portuguese TMEs. While previous studies have evaluated the differences in tolerance to flooding among earthworm ecological groups (e.g. Therefore, the importance of earthworm FD may be particularly significant for soils under hydric stress, where the water infiltration depends on the burrowing activity of earthworm communities, such as in the Mediterranean soils ( In contrast to the rain regime and land-use types across European systems, the management factor, i.e. whether the land-use types were under conventional-intensive or ecological-intensive management, was not an important factor determining litter mass loss. Part of our second hypothesis was that the management type would influence litter mass loss by altering earthworm community structure, for instance by decreasing FD or important functional groups. In fact, previous studies have demonstrated that intensive management can shape earthworm communities (e.g. Given the threat of climate change on soil biodiversity ( Despite this, our results indicated a positive effect of earthworm FD on litter mass loss and this finding is in agreement with previous literature pointing out that FD, as a proxy of niche complementarity ( The relationship between earthworm species richness and litter decomposition confirmed the results of FD, and a higher number of earthworm species increased mass loss in rain regimes under normal and drought conditions. Since the increase in species richness does not necessarily correspond to an increased number of ecological groups, it is expected that other species traits are also important for the complementarity effect on litter mass loss. Previous studies have demonstrated that different species combinations, among or within ecological groups, may influence a variety of soil processes (e.g. In contrast to the results of FD and species richness, effects of anecic CWM were only significant in the flooding treatment and they were negative. Considering that the great majority of species abundances in the TMEs comprised endogeics and anecics (only one epi-endogeic species with relatively low abundance was found in some French TMEs), the obtained anecic CWM values are nearly symmetrical to the endogeic CWM values (strongly negatively correlated – results not shown). Hence, the negative effect of anecic CWM corresponded to a positive effect of endogeic earthworms on litter mass loss in TMEs under the flooding treatment. In fact, anecic earthworms have been shown to be less tolerant to flooding conditions than endogeics ( Our study confirms previous findings showing that soil moisture is a key driver of litter decomposition in natural and managed ecosystems under climate change ( The following is the supplementary data related to this article. Supplementary data to this article can be found online at The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. This work was funded by the