To evaluate the vulnerability of the earthen levee of an irrigation canal in San Giacomo delle Segnate, Italy, a customized electrical resistivity tomography (ERT) monitoring system was installed in September 2015 and has been continuously operating since then. Thanks to a meteorological station deployed at the study site, we could investigate the relationship between the inverted resistivity values and different parameters, namely air temperature, rainfall and water level in the canal. Air temperature seems to have a minor but not negligible influence on resistivity variations, especially at shallow depth. A model of soil temperature versus depth was used to correct resistivity sections for air temperature variations through the different seasons. Changes of the water level in the canal and rainfall significantly affect measured resistivity values. At the study site, the most important variations of resistivity are related to saturation and dewatering processes in the irrigation periods. Although we explored the effect of drawdown procedures on resistivity data, this process, causing rapid variations of resistivity values, is still not completely understood because the canal is rapidly emptied during rainfall events. Therefore, the effect of variations of the water level in the canal on levee resistivity cannot be distinguished from the effect of rainfalls. To study the effect of water level variations alone, we considered the beginning of the irrigation period when the dry canal is gradually filled and we observed a smooth trend of resistivity changes. The effect of rainfall on the data was studied during different periods of the year and at different depths of the levee so that the resistivity variations could be evaluated under different conditions. To convert the inverted resistivity sections into water content maps, an empirical and site-dependent relationship between resistivity and water content was obtained using core samples. Water content data can then be used for the implementation of stability analysis using custom modeling. This study introduces an efficient technique to monitor earthen levees and to control the evolution of seepage and water saturation in pseudo-real time. Such a technique can be exploited by Public Administrations to reduce hydrogeological risks significantly.In the last decades, hydrogeological risks associated to levee breaches have become an important subject of study in several European countries. Nowadays, there is an increasing interest to introduce techniques that can efficiently monitor the internal conditions of embankments in order to develop early warning alarm systems. Geophysical methods have been increasingly applied to hydrogeological risk mitigation investigations to evaluate the stability conditions of dams, embankments and slopes ( In this research, we could benefit from the non-destructive nature of ERT to implement a systematic monitoring approach of river levees. Commercial resistivity meters are normally designed to investigate relatively deep subsurface layers and thus they inject large currents into the ground. This characteristic is beyond the needs of our application. Moreover, commercial instruments are portable and cannot be installed permanently because they lack appropriate features. Therefore, a prototype of resistivity meter was designed and permanently installed in a test site in 2015. The main objective is to evaluate changes in resistivity values in order to monitor water saturation and seepage zones in the structure. The prototype is designed with peculiar characteristics to investigate shallow depths, it is relatively low-price, it can be powered by solar panels, it operates and is programmed remotely and sends the data over the internet to a web server. The test site selected for permanent installation of the ERT system is the earthen levee of an irrigation canal in San Giacomo delle Segnate, Mantova, Northern Italy ( After about one year of preliminary time-lapse ERT tests with a commercial resistivity meter (IRIS Syscal Pro), the customized system was permanently installed along the levee on 15 September 2015. We dug a 0.5 m-deep trench in the middle of the levee crest where we deployed two cables equipped with 48 1 m-spaced plate electrodes ( Besides reducing hydrogeological risk, permanent monitoring can be very useful to understand saturation and dewatering of the levee structure, as well as to analyze how resistivity values are related to annual variations of the water content according to the irrigation season. The datasets recorded by the monitoring system were individually inverted with Res2DInv software using the L2-norm option. Thanks to data collected by the meteorological station in the study area, we studied the effects of temperature, water level and rainfall events on resistivity for more than two years. We point out that the meteorological station and the resistivity-meter have sampling intervals of 10 minutes and 1 day, respectively. This difference may prevent the analysis of relatively fast resistivity variations caused by intense meteorological events, although resistivity changes are generally slower than climatic ones. To tackle this drawback, the prototype sampling frequency can be modified remotely, though energy consumption issues should be considered. In order to better compare meteorological and resistivity datasets, we computed daily averages for temperature and water level data, while rainfall was cumulated over the 24 hours prior to resistivity measurements. Previous studies report that daily variations of air temperature may affect the resistivity measurements down to 1 m depth only ( At first, we produced scatter plots of air temperature, soil temperature, and inverted resistivity values at different times of the year. We used soil temperature data measured in 2016–2017 with a TDR probe placed at 1 m depth. In order to separate the influence of rainfall, which plays an important role on resistivity distribution (see following paragraph), we selected just one measurement per week, possibly far from any rainfall event. For the resistivity values, we computed the mean values of the inverted sections at 0.50 m, 1.55 m, and 2.80 m depth, i.e. at the surface, at the intermediate depth and at the bottom of the levee. The comparison that follows, where soil temperature was measured at 1m depth only, is a qualitative analysis aimed at evaluating the necessity of temperature corrections. For quantitative temperature corrections, soil temperature was modelled at different depths with an empirical mathematical relation that will be discussed later.  In order to separate the effects of water level in the canal and temperature, we considered a time span with few rainfalls, no water in the canal and large temperature variations. In more detail, we selected January 2016 because the temperature changed from >15 °C to −5 °C in a few days and few precipitations occurred. In According to Scatter plots of the mean resistivity versus air and soil temperatures in January 2016 were also created to analyze more carefully the role of temperature during winter. Similarly, the scatter plot in The analysis of data collected in January 2016 allowed to isolate short-term temperature effects from the effects of rainfall and water level in the canal. On the contrary, long-term temperature effects can be masked by other major effects with either constructive or descructive interference. Nevertheless, temperature modifies the soil electrical response to variations of other parameters. To predict and compensate the influence of periodic changes of soil temperature on resistivity, temperature variations down to >5 m could be important and thus, long-term measurements of this variable at depth are required ( After calibrating the parameters, we computed soil temperature for depths from 0.5 m to 7.5 m (penetration depth of ERT measurements) for 2016 and 2017. The soil temperature values were then used to correct resistivity data according to Eq. Having corrected the data for the temperature effect, we calculated averages resistivity values for each depth level to analyze the relation between variations of resistivity at each depth and changes of other external parameters. We considered six different depths: 0.5 m and 1 m corresponding to the shallow part of the embankment; 1.55 m, 2.15 m and 2.80 m as intermediate depths of the levee; 3.50 m as the base of the structure. We already pointed out (see We took into account the period from 15 July to 15 October 2016, in which the canal was progressively emptied. Unfortunately, no rainfall data are available from 18 August to 12 September because the meteorological station installed in the study site was damaged by a local rainstorm on 18 August. For any analyzed day, we computed the cumulative rainfall considering 24 h prior to resistivity measurement. Specifically, for a measurement performed on the Nth day at 1p.m., the cumulative rainfall is the sum of the precipitation from the N-1 In this study, we deem our analysis of the relationship between resistivity and rainfall is only qualitative because we neglected evapotranspiration that might play an important role especially during the summer. Nevertheless, we observed a strong relation between precipitation and resistivity variations. Depending on the depth, we observed three main behaviors in response to lowering the water level and to rainfall events. As expected, shallow resistivity measurements of the levee are strongly related to rainfall events ( At depths between 1.55 m and 2.80 m, resistivity values slowly decrease with constant water level, while they increase rapidly as a consequence of rainfall and of water level drop. To evaluate whether this last effect is physically meaningful or an artefact caused by inversion, In order to study resistivity changes due to the individual effect of the variations of the water level in the canal, the data collected from 5 March to 25 April 2017 were also analyzed ( As shown by the above discussion, drawdown and filling processes reveal different electrical behaviors. When lowering the water level, abrupt changes in soil resistivity are recorded, with sudden increase of resistivity at the intermediate depths of the levee. By comparing the data from the two selected periods, the rapid increase in resistivity values at intermediate depth is likely due to rainfalls rather than drawdown in the canal because the resistivity response to water level variations is slow and gradual ( Scatter plots were also created to better analyze resistivity versus rainfalls and resistivity versus water level in the canal. We studied daily variations of resistivity and precipitation from 15 July to 15 October 2016 and we considered three different depths, representing the shallow, intermediate and deep parts of the levee (  In order to estimate water content from resistivity values, we derived an empirical relation by analizing core samples obtained from the levee body. Since resistivity depends on various parameters such as water content, salinity, porosity and lithological structure, a relation between water content and resistivity cannot be found without auxiliary data. Thus, we bored a hole during the irrigation season approximately at the center of the ERT spread down to the depth of 3.30 m and we collected ten samples that were analyzed in the laboratory to determine the water content with the gravimetric method ( Analysis of soil grain size was also performed to characterize soil properties of the embankment. Results of sieve and sedimentation analysis are shown in For the shallow levee section (<0.5 m), mainly consisting of sand and with just one sample, we collected new cores from the study site and studied their electrical properties in the laboratory by relating resistivity to TDR measurements. Again, a power function was used to fit the experimental data. The calibrated relationships were used to convert all the inverted resistivity sections into water content maps. A prototypal geo-electrical monitoring system was installed on the earthen levee of an irrigation canal and daily data from the resistivity meter and from a meteorological station have been recorded since September 2015. In this work, we analyzed the resistivity variations due to different parameters in the first two years of continuous ERT measurements. In more detail, we studied the influences of temperature, water level in the canal and rainfall on resistivity changes measured at different depths. We found that daily variations of air temperature affect only the very shallow part of the levee. We analyzed seasonal air temperature trends, whose influence on soil temperature can reach depths higher than 5 m, in order to correct the resistivity datasets and to better understand the effect of other parameters, such as water level in the canal and rainfall. For our monitored site, water level in the canal is closely related to rainfall, so it is difficult to separate the effects of these two factors. However, our findings suggest that rainfall has a more important role: in the shallow and deep sections of the levee, resistivity values decrease with precipitation, while at intermediate depth we observed an opposite behavior with a fairly rapid increase of resistivity values. Laboratory-scale simulations of the test site are needed to isolate the role of each parameter and to better understand the causes of the observed different resistivity trends. An issue that is under study is quantifying the 3D effects of the levee geometry on 2D ERT measurements ( The dependence of resistivity values on changes in the soil water content makes ERT technique a valuable tool to monitor saturation distribution and seepage zones in river levees, giving the opportunity of predicting possible levee breach and of planning proper maintenance activities. The effects of external variables including temperature, water level in the canal and rainfall events on resistivity data were analyzed for different periods of the year and at different depths of the levee structure. Soil temperature variations with the depth were modelled to correct resistivity data for the temperature effect. This effect is of minor importance compared to water level and rainfall effects and thus was studied during periods when other variables are constant or negligible. The influence of variations of the water level in the canal was studied during drawdown processes and at the beginning of the irrigation season. Different electrical behaviors were observed. When the water level is lowered during rainfall events, a sharp variation in resistivity values is recorded, and when the water level is increased, a smooth decreasing trend is recorded. However, since the water level is generally lowered during rainfall events, more studies are required to separate the effect of water level from that of the rainfall. Rainwater infiltration was also analyzed. When the irrigation canal is full, infiltration can be observed down to a depth of 1.00 m with a decreasing trend in resistivity. On the contrary, increasing resistivity values observed at mid-depth layers could be attributed to the less conductive rainwater replacing the more conductive pore water. In general, shallow and deep parts of the levee experience reduction of resistivity values due to precipitation events and because of the presence of a lateral trench collecting rainwater. A function to relate water content to resistivity values was calibrated for the levee body below 0.5 m, thanks to core samples taken from the test site. The empirical relationship for the very shallow part where sand content is dominant was obtained from laboratory resistivity and TDR measurements performed on samples coming from the shallow part of the levee. Using these relationships, resistivity sections can be transformed into water content maps that can be used for different purposes, such as stability and seepage analysis. The prototype monitoring system was developed with the technical support of LSI-Lastem Srl. The research work was funded by