In the recent past detailed particle-based simulation approaches such as the discrete element method (DEM) have become popular in addition to phenomenological models for the design and optimization of operating parameters of screening processes. As phenomenological process models, a large number of probabilistic and kinetic approaches of differing complexity are available which mostly provide information on the screening rate or efficiency. So far a review and comparative benchmarking of the various available screening process models has not been performed, although they are of high relevance, especially in industrial applications, due to their simplicity and easy use. To perform the benchmarking of batch screening process models, it is not relied on experimental investigations, but on detailed DEM-simulations involving both spherical and non-spherical particles in the investigation here. The DEM-simulations allow examining different particle characteristics such as size, shape, friction, as well as overall mass and size distribution. In addition, screen characteristics such as screen dimensions and surface as well as operational parameters including vibration frequency, stroke angle and amplitude are considered. On the basis of the DEM-simulations screening efficiencies are obtained which allow the adjustment and thereon benchmarking of the process models through parameters such as the residual particle mass on the screen.In many processes in materials preparation technology, mechanical process engineering, mineral processing and energy technology individual particles of various bulk materials are often of non-spherical shape and broad size distribution For the design and optimization of screening processes particle-based simulation approaches such as the discrete element method (DEM) dating back to Cundall and Strack The first application of the DEM towards screening dates back to Shimosaka et al. Over the last years several investigations were performed of screening processes based on the DEM. Circularly vibrating screens have been studied by Zhao et al. The listed investigations clearly indicate that the DEM is capable of providing detailed insight into screening processes. The DEM was validated against experimental data In the present work addressing batch screening processes involving spherical and non-spherical particle shapes, phenomena such as particle passage and the residual mass over time are investigated in detail. These investigations form the basis to use DEM-simulations reliably for a comparative study of phenomenological batch screening process models following the idea of Shimosaka et al. The DEM can be applied to systems of particles with non-spherical shape A flexible approach to model complex shaped particles in the DEM is the multi-sphere method where arbitrary sized spheres are clustered to resemble the desired complex particle shape The normal component of the contact forces is obtained from a linear spring damper model Available phenomenological models are divided into kinetic Kinetic models are mostly based on first-order kinetics and often further extended by the probability of particle passage In contrast, more complex phenomenological models with additional input parameters consider the interacting processes of segregation and actual particle passage through the screen surface Prior to a more detailed description, an overview of all investigated screening process models is given in All phenomenological screening models allow the calculation of the overall screening efficiency The basis for many batch screening process models, particularly for the kinetic ones, is the “first-order rate law” Further investigations were carried out by Trumic and Magdalinovic Screening process models Nos. 1–3 determine the screening rate and efficiency based on the passage of the whole undersized mass, thereby requiring only one set of model parameters. In case that information on the composition of the passed material is available, Standish The overall undersized mass is calculated based on the fractional masses Another screening process model was suggested by Grozubinsky et al. Subasinghe et al. The deterministic model No. 5 was extended to a probabilistic screening model referred to as model No. 7 by the same authors Motivated by limitations of “first-order rate law” models, Subasinghe et al. Shimosaka et al. It can be seen that it is equivalent to model No. 1 from its functional form (comp. Eqs. Besides Nakajima and Whiten Based on the empirical probability function (Eq. Ferrara et al. In contrast to the models Nos. 1–12 discussed so far, the following screening models Nos. One of these models is the model proposed by Soldinger The fractional mass stream of stratified particles To obtain the rate of passage, the passage parameter The stratification parameter is obtained through The other part of In further studies Soldinger The passage rate in model No. 14 increases with an increasing amount of undersized particles in the bottom layer until a maximum value is reached when the complete screen surface is filled up by undersized particles The passage parameter The stratification parameter The part of The thickness of the layer atop the bottom layer needed in Eq. Yoshida et al. The thickness of one particle layer The number of oversized particles existing in the The probability of undersized particles passing through a particle layer The porosity of the Due to considering the particle movement as only vertically, The probability of particles passing through screen openings is based on the equation of Gaudin (Eq. For The equations for The area ratio of the boundary formed on the screen surface is Therefore, the probability of undersized particles passing through the screen openings is Further information, particularly for the more complex models by Ferrara et al. Screening of a polydisperse feed material is investigated by the DEM in a batch screen apparatus as shown in The polydisperse feed material comprises of particles with a density of 2700 Starting from the initial setup (base case), variations of the vibration amplitude and frequency, stroke angle and overall particle mass are performed for all three particle shapes varying one of the parameters at a time ( In all performed investigations, the feed consists of one of the particle shapes outlined in Particles are filled into the screen apparatus well mixed which is then vibrated for To achieve a better comparability for the analysis of the time resolved overall particle passage within the screen apparatus which is investigated in the following, the passed mass is summed up and normalized for all particle classes with diameters smaller than the apertures. Among the considered particle shapes the highest passage ability is exposed by spheres followed by the non-spherical shapes in all investigations (comp. In the first study ( The second investigation ( Initially, a stroke angle of 90° to the horizontal, is used in the simulations ( The forth investigation addresses a variation of total particle mass ( Due to a comparatively large mass applied in the base case of 4 In the sixth investigation illustrated in In the seventh investigation ( In the last investigation the particle passage through apertures generated by screen wires of rectangular and circular profiles is compared ( The simulation results as described in Section A good match of the DEM results is obtained with the models by Andreev et al. (No. 2) and Subasinghe et al. For the benchmarking over a larger number of investigations an average deviation of the simulated and model predicted mass is calculated for models considering the whole fine material as one lumped undersized fraction by In Nearly all models reveal problems for representing flat residual mass curves caused by small amplitudes or low and high vibration frequencies, respectively. The kinetic models by Andreev et al. (No. 2), Standish (No. 4) and Subasinghe et al. (No. 6) as well as the probabilistic models by Subasinghe et al. (No. 8) and Ferrara et al. (No. 12) as well as the fractional complex model by Soldinger (No. 14) attain the best overall results. However, they are relying on empirical model parameters (No. 2) or are requiring long adjustment times during fitting (No. 12) due to the non-explicit functional form used. In case of varied amplitudes the models Nos. 2 and 8 show particularly suitable results. The functional forms with an additional adjustable parameter as exponent of the time In all investigated cases ( Besides obtaining quantitative slightly better results, nearly all models represent the simulations with complex shaped particles qualitatively similar to those with spheres. Overall deviations are smaller for double cones than for volume equivalent cylinders. Model No. 15 by Yoshida et al. reveals comparatively big deviances despite its complexity due to being derived for a batch simulation setup differing from the setup here. The model No. 15 does not account for mass loss, as in the setup by Yoshida et al. In A variation in mass affects all three investigated particle types similarly as the variation of amplitudes (comp. In Although, only a few differences in particle passage occur when changing the friction coefficients ( Similar findings can be made by analyzing the diagrams of the subdivisions of particle classes. In contrast, model No. 3 gives acceptable results for complex shaped particles in comparison to models Nos. 1, 5, 7, 9–11 and 15. One reason is again the screening efficiency not converging towards 100% at the end of the investigation thereby supporting model No. 3. Another reason is that the other models have problems with representing 9 classes of complex shaped particles while not taking the different passing possibilities into account. Particularly, models Nos. 2 and 8 are able to represent these cases very well due to their additional adjustable parameter as exponent of the time.  When reducing the number of apertures, the screen apparatus contains less bulk mass, but the percentage passage remains approximately on the same level ( Using a circular profile for the screen wires can lead to more pegging of spherical particles, but then a higher passage rate is provided due to a higher possibility of getting into contact with the screen openings. This phenomenon supports the application of model No. 12 for spheres and in case of complex shaped particles the application of models Nos. 2 and 8 and of model No. 3 in contrast to the previous results. However, particularly model No. 3 and model No. 13 for spheres, Nos. 1, 5, 7, 9–11, 15 for double cones and model No. 13 for volume equivalent cylinders reveal stronger deviations when representing screening with a circular wire profile. All the other models show approximately the same deviations for both wire approximations. The discrete element method (DEM) has been used to perform batch screening investigations of varying particle characteristics such as size (coarse, near mesh, fine), shape (spheres, double cones and volume equivalent cylinders), friction (particle/particle and particle/wall), overall mass and size distribution (3, 6, 9 subclasses). Additionally, screening parameters such as screen dimensions (smaller screens) and the surface representation (rectangular/semi circular wire) as well as operational parameters including vibration frequency, stroke angle and amplitude have been varied. The investigations are transient by nature and automatically include the startup phase of the equipment which is often not considered in models for continuous screening. Results obtained by the DEM clearly unveil that the screening rate is higher for spheres than for volume equivalent cylinders and double cones due to their respective stratification and passage possibilities. The screening efficiency can be increased by enlarging the vibration amplitude and frequency in batch screening. However, in case of exceeding a critical amplitude or frequency this can lead to stagnating or even declining screening rates. Moreover an oscillating motion supports the screening while the amount of material should be adapted to the size of the screening apparatus with a non-linear influence of total mass on the screening rate. Changing the friction coefficients has no remarkable influence on the sieving efficiency except for a slightly faster stratification in case of lower particle-particle friction. However, a division of particle size classes in more subclasses diminishes the stratification and therefore the passage of particles, whereas a reduction of the size of the screening apparatus with simultaneously reduced mass leads to the same end results but causes volatile particle passage in the meantime. Using semicircular wires supports the contact probability of particles with sieve openings; but also the phenomenon of pegging is more pronounced which leads to declining sieving efficiencies particularly for spherical and cone shaped particles. The models by Andreev et al. The model by Yoshida et al. As further steps it is planned to apply the screening models for dynamic simulations in which process parameters are altered during operation. Additionally, continuous screening is planned to be investigated. Note, that the DEM simulations were not benchmarked against experimental investigations in this study. The DEM was used to derive a qualitatively realistic parameter space as could also be obtained from experimental investigations. To apply the models towards real screening investigations involving experimental equipment requires a benchmarking of the DEM against experiments. Such benchmarking has been done to some extend for the DEM applied here for continuous screening for literature data The authors gratefully acknowledge the support by