Diaphyseal femoral fractures are common and can present as isolated injuries or as part of a polytrauma situation. Management of these fractures requires an understanding of the timing of definitive surgery in systemically unwell patients, as well as the physiologic effects of reaming and instrumentation of the femoral canal. An appreciation of biomechanics of femoral nails, along with other implants, and the nuances of their application is essential in achieving a satisfactory outcome.This review will focus entirely on intramedullary nailing for diaphyseal femoral fractures in adults. Other methods of fixation, paediatric fractures and fractures of the proximal and distal femur are beyond the scope of this review. In addition, the physiological effects of these injuries and their treatment will not be covered. High-energy and open fracture patterns have been covered in a previous article The average annual incidence of femoral fractures has been quoted to range from 0.1 to 3% (up to 37 per 100 000 patient years), with peak incidence in young adult males. The femoral shaft is curved in the sagittal plane with an anterior bow. The cortex is thickened posteriorly for two reasons: it is the compression side of the bone in the sagittal plane, and also carries the linea aspera. Distally the cortex thins and expands into the metaphysis. The central anatomical axis of the neck is offset anteriorly to the central anatomical axis of the shaft in the sagittal plane. The neck-shaft angle is of approximately 130° (124–136°) in the coronal plane. The blood supply to the femoral head arises from the anastomotic ring around the base of the neck, which superiorly traverses the piriformis fossa – thus putting it at risk when using this as an entry point in nailing. Blood to the diaphysis is supplied via both the higher pressure endosteal system (from the nutrient vessels) and the lower pressure periosteal system (from the areas of muscle attachment), accounting for the inner 2/3 and outer 1/3 of the cortex's blood supply respectively. Reaming initially reduces the endosteal blood supply, although any instrumentation of the femoral canal (such as with an unreamed nail) also has a significant effect (see below). With increasing age, the morphology of the femoral diaphysis changes, with endosteal resorption and periosteal apposition of bone. This leads to the characteristically wider femoral shaft but thinner cortex, often compounded by an increase in the anterior bow. The two most commonly used classifications for diaphyseal femoral fractures are the AO-OTA system ( Winquist described the degree of comminution in a fracture and thus the degree of cortical contact or continuity. In the polytrauma and major trauma situation, patients are typically assessed and managed according to standardized protocols such as the Advanced Trauma and Life Support (ATLS) system. Femoral fractures can be a major source of blood loss and should be temporarily splinted as a means of haemorrhage control. Splintage of the femoral fracture provides the best analgesia and can allow for gross correction of rotational malalignment. This can initially be performed in the form of fixed-point traction such as the Thomas or Kendrick traction splints. These splints should be removed early to avoid the risk of pressure necrosis and pudendal nerve injury. Balanced traction (skin, skeletal) can be used in patients who are waiting for surgery but who are physiologically well. Adequate oral and intravascular analgesia and regional femoral nerve block with local anaesthetic should be considered. Rarely are fractures of the femoral shaft in adults treated without operative intervention. Skin or skeletal traction as definitive methods of fixation are now largely historical. Non-operative methods lead to high rates of malunion and shortening. The commonest surgical method of treating femoral shaft fractures is with the intramedullary nail. Modern nailing had its roots with Küntscher in 1939, but descriptions of intramedullary devices have been found from well before the 20th century. Despite early scepticism of the methods of Küntscher, the concept and use of nailing was eventually embraced and nails have now evolved into highly engineered orthopaedic devices. Nails are typically made from either titanium or stainless steel. Even though titanium has an elastic modulus approximately half that of steel, a difference in material has little effect upon union or failure rates with modern generation nails. The stiffness of the implant is related to the fourth power of the radius of the nail, therefore the fatigue strength is significantly higher in nails of a larger diameter. Nails with an external diameter of 11–12 mm have a bending stiffness over 50% greater than smaller cannulated nails. Older generation nails were typically thin walled and may or may not have been slotted. Although these nails offered excellent interference fit within the femoral canal, they were weak in torsion, Modern generation nails are thick walled and no longer rely on the slotted geometry to facilitate insertion, but rather rely more on anatomic contouring. Typically nails now have a radius of curvature (150 cm) that is nearer that of the radius of curvature of the femur (approximately 120 cm) compared to older, straight nails. Most modern generation nails are cannulated to facilitate insertion – by keeping the cannulation small, the effect of its presence on the strength of the nail is minimised. Flutes may be present to facilitate rotation of the nail, and to reduce intramedullary pressure at the tip of the nail on insertion. All modern nails offer multiple locking options proximally and distally. Femoral nailing can be performed freehand on a radiolucent flat top trauma table, or in traction on a fracture reduction table. Both can be used with the patient either supine or in a lateral position. Faster operating times and less malreduction have been shown with freehand techniques, but there is no difference in functional outcome or other parameters. Nailing freehand typically requires one assistant to apply traction or the use of a femoral distractor. Rotation is easier to assess with the freehand technique as it allows radiographic visualisation of the lesser trochanter and patella contralateral femur as a comparison. Lateral positioning is beneficial in that it provides easier access to the piriformis fossa and facilitates nailing of fractures in the proximal portion of the femur as well as in large or obese patients. However, it is not suitable in a polytrauma situation and limits assessment of rotation. Classically, the piriformis fossa was used as an entry point for antegrade femoral nailing. This was based on Hey-Groves' method of opening the fracture and reaming the proximal segment in a retrograde fashion, which brought the reamer out directly through the fossa. Earlier nails with overhanging jigs risked iatrogenic fracture using this entry point. Trochanteric entry nails have been developed with a proximal lateral bend on the nail typically ranging from 4° to 10°. The trochanteric entry portal has been shown to reduce operative time, be easier to use in obese patients, and the polytrauma situation. Nailing the femur from distal to proximal is well described. The entry point is at the anterior end of Blumensaat's line on the lateral projection, at the top of the intercondylar notch, in line with the femoral shaft. This technique is commonly used in ipsilateral neck-shaft fractures, fractures below old implants (such as compression hip screws), obese patients (where antegrade entry points are difficult to access) and in ipsilateral femoral and tibial shaft injuries, or patients with an associated acetabular fractures. It has also been used in Damage Control Orthopaedics, employing the technique of rapid nailing with small diameter implants (see Retrograde techniques have been shown to have a higher incidence of malrotation and shortening, and there may be an association with knee pain. There is little difference in functional outcome, time to union and malunion between antegrade and retrograde nailing. Unsurprisingly, antegrade nails cause more problems related to the hip, and retrograde give problems with the knee. Whilst every effort is usually made to reduce and align the fracture appropriately before the operative procedure begins, it is not uncommon for additional reduction manoeuvres to be required during the nailing procedure. The nail is inserted and locked at sites away from the fracture and zone of soft tissue injury, and intramedullary nailing relies on the applying the principles of relative stability techniques and healing by secondary intention. Every effort should be made to preserve the biology of the fracture site and open reduction techniques should be avoided if possible. Intramedullary techniques to assist fracture reduction include bending the tip of the guidewire to allow for control in guiding into the distal segment, and also the use of a rigid cannulated scoop to guide the wire across the fracture site. Another method is to ream and insert the nail into the proximal segment, and then use this as a joystick to align the fracture and pass the wire through the nail. The nail can then be backed out and reaming of the distal segment can be achieved – this technique is good for mid diaphyseal fractures and can be used in an unreamed nailing with ease ( Extramedullary techniques can be closed, instrumented or fully open. Closed techniques include use of mallets as pushers or a crutch to reduce posterior sag. The F-tool is a radiolucent device with adjustable limbs that allows for the application of countering forces either side of the fracture to aid reduction. Instrumentation of the fracture fragments may be needed. This need not be a full open procedure. The use of Schanz pins as joysticks, or attached to a femoral distractor are examples of this. Full open reductions in the acute setting should be avoided if possible. Perhaps an exception to this is the use of a clamp or cable to reduce a subtrochanteric fracture, as any malreduction here (especially varus) will lead to an increased risk of implant fatigue failure. Collinear reduction clamps have a smaller footprint than Hey-Groves or Verbrugge clamps and require smaller incisions; nonetheless, their use still leads to a disturbance of the fracture biology. Early nails were all unreamed. Although flexible reaming was developed by Küntscher, it was not popularized until the 1980s. Reaming disturbs endosteal blood supply. There is a shift in balance of blood flow in preference of the periosteal system – it is noted that the early callus in intramedullary nailing is periosteal, not medullary. Over 6–12 weeks the endosteal blood supply recovers and allows the formation of internal callus. Contrary to popular belief, unreamed nails also disturb the endosteal blood supply but to a lesser extent. However, the reactive increase in periosteal blood flow is less in unreamed nails and this may help explain why they may not offer as predictable or rapid time to union as reamed nails. Several studies have now shown that reaming increases union rates in acute fractures. The risk of non-union is up to five times higher in unreamed nails. Reamers should be sharp – blunt reamers generate increased heat and risk thermal necrosis of the endosteal bone. No significant difference has been shown between different types of reamer head design, however, the ratio of the shaft to head is important, where a narrow shaft significantly reduces reaming pressures. Reaming is a physiologic insult. Any instrumentation of the femoral canal causes a rise in intraosseous pressure that forces fat and inflammatory exudate into the venous circulation. This leads to the up-regulation of the systemic inflammatory response and can be physiologically catastrophic for the polytrauma patient – hence the advent of DCO. Correct angulation, rotation and length are the goals for all methods of fixation in long bone fractures. The use of an intramedullary nail in diaphyseal fractures lends itself to achieving correct angulation, although proximal and distal diaphyseal-metaphyseal junction fractures require careful placement of the guidewire to prevent eccentric position of the nail and thus an induced angular deformity. Poller or blocking screws have also been used in fractures of the distal femoral diaphysis or diaphyseal-metaphyseal junction. Although not discussed in detail here, when applied appropriately, Poller screws can prevent angular deformity of the distal fragment as well as neutralise shear forces at the fracture site. Rotation and length are harder to achieve. As mentioned above, different methods of set up will influence the surgeon's ability to assess and correct rotation and length. If possible, every effort should be made to assess the uninjured side preoperatively as a comparison and template. Assessment of rotation intraoperatively can be made using one of two principal methods. The first is the cortical step sign. This relies on the same cortex (medial or lateral) either side of the fracture being the same diameter, indicating correct rotation. A difference in cortical width indicates malrotation. It is important to note that the femur has differing widths to its cortical bone along its length, being widest medially in the proximal third, widest posteriorly in the middle third, before thinning significantly in the distal third. Femoral malrotation after nailing is common, reported in up to 20–30% of cases. However it would seem that only deformities of 15° or more are clinically and functionally significant, with external rotation deformities causing more symptoms. Almost all modern intramedullary nails offer the option of locking proximally and distally. It is important to note that the locking bolts are not screws, with very large core diameter to thread diameter ratios. The working length of a nail is defined by the distance between the two closest points of contact the nail makes either side of the fracture. This can be the distance between locking bolts, although if there is a good contact between nail and bone at the isthmus, this can affect the working length. Historically the gold standard for femoral nailing has been reamed, statically locked nails as shown in a series of landmark papers by Brumback. The size and number of locking bolts, and their configuration, is important. Bolts of less than 5 mm diameter have significantly lower fatigue strengths and are prone to early failure. A 20% increase in core diameter equates to a 50% increase in bending strength – hence why a 5 mm bolt is so significantly stronger than a 4 mm bolt. Although most research is in tibial nail locking bolts, the evidence advises against using narrow diameter bolts.  The set up for freehand locking bolt insertion is crucial in performing this step effectively. It is essential that the perfect circle of the locking hole is seen on the lateral view of nail. It is also recommended that the radiograph on the image intensifier is rotated to replicate the clinical position of the limb relative to the surgeon. Following a stab incision, the entry point for the drill should be determined radiographically. Once the near cortex has been drilled, the driver should be removed and the trajectory for the drill bit is to be checked. If required, this can be manipulated at this stage and once aligned with the locking hole in the nail the drill bit can be pushed through to the far cortex using gentle tapping. The far cortex can then be drilled and the appropriate locking bolt inserted. If cortical bony contact is achieved, the femoral nail will be a The systemic effects of reaming and complications of malrotation and non-union (including strategies to reduce their incidence) have been discussed above. Other complications such as iatrogenic femoral neck fracture and damage to the femoral neck vascularity have also been described. Although these are rarer with the use of trochanteric entry nails. Winquist's original series described a rate of non-union of less than 1% (even in open fractures) when using reamed nails. Infection rates of less than 1% are the norm, even in the case of open fractures. Heterotopic ossification is described as occurring radiographically in over 50% of patients although the majority are very mild and have little clinical significance. It is seen perhaps more commonly with piriformis rather than trochanteric entry antegrade nails, but there are few parameters with which to predict its occurrence. Although far more common in the tibia, the risk factors for compartment syndrome of the thigh include multiply injured patients, systemic hypotension, a history of external compression of the thigh, the use of military anti-shock trousers, coagulopathy, and vascular injury. Rarer complications include pudendal nerve palsies associated with prolonged time on the traction table Femoral shaft fractures in adults are reasonably common and can occur in isolation or in association with other injuries. They are typically high energy in aetiology especially in young adults and require special consideration to the physiologic needs of the patient. The evolution of treatment for these fractures has seen changes in the timing of surgery as well as the techniques employed, but the principles of stable internal fixation remain. Good outcomes and low complication rates can be expected if the operating surgeon has a thorough understanding of the anatomy, basic science and surgical technique relating to the treatment of femoral shaft fractures.