The interaction of a one-dimensional (1D) wave packet with a contact interface characterized by a unilateral contact law is investigated analytically and through a finite difference model. It is shown that this interaction leads to the generation of higher harmonic, sub-harmonic and zero-frequency components in the reflected wave, resulting in a pulse distortion that is attributable to contact acoustic nonlinearity. However, the results also show that the re-emission of a time reversed version of this distorted first reflection results in a healing of the distortions and a perfect recovery of the original pulse shape, thereby demonstrating time reversal invariance for this type of contact acoustic nonlinearity. A step-by-step analysis of the contact interaction provides insights into both the distortion arising from the first interaction and the subsequent healing during the second interaction. These findings suggest that time reversal invariance should also apply more generally for scatterers exhibiting non-dissipative contact acoustic nonlinearity.The application of nonlinear acoustics for nondestructive evaluation and structural health monitoring has attracted considerable research interest over the past two decades, driven by the prospect that various forms of structural damage may induce a nonlinear response that could lead to earlier damage detection than would be possible through conventional linear ultrasonics The time reversal (TR) method However, to the best of our knowledge, the issue of time reversal invariance in the presence of CAN at a localized nonlinear defect has not been investigated previously. It can be expected on physical grounds that time reversal invariance will not hold in the presence of dissipative mechanisms such as frictional sliding, but it is not immediately obvious whether or not this invariance may still hold for frictionless contact that can generate nonlinear responses such as pure clapping at the contact interface. This is addressed in the present work. Of particular relevance regarding the present work is the suggestion by Sohn et al. A simplified one-dimensional (1D) model of CAN is considered in this work, whereby a longitudinal wave packet interacts with a contact interface between the propagation medium and a rigid boundary acting as a limiter. A similar configuration has recently been used to model the vibrational response of a rod with a breathing crack in A semi-infinite isotropic and homogeneous medium in contact with a rigid plane is considered as shown in The 1D wave equation is given by: In the case of a longitudinal wave, the incident wave can generate only compression or tension at the contact interface, where tension tends to open the interface. The contact behavior is modelled by a unilateral contact law defined as follows: Considering 1D propagation with the solution defined by Eq. The medium is assumed to be initially in contact with the rigid plane. Thus the displacement at Thus, the reflected wave is the opposite of the incident wave: It follows from Eqs. (3) and Since Eq. During the contact stage, Eq. This expression gives the contribution of the backward propagating wave during the opening stage. Finally, the total displacement at the interface, or opening gap, is given by: This last equation is true as long as the interface is open. When One can see that for this 1D case it is possible to solve the contact problem analytically with a piecewise resolution. In this work, the problem is solved numerically with the FD scheme presented in the next section. Nevertheless, the analytical results presented in this section will prove useful for understanding the mechanisms involved at the contact interface. This will be especially valuable for explaining the observed results when the incident wave is the TR of an initially reflected wave. The wave equation is solved in time using the classic second order finite difference approach which allows one to obtain the solution at a new time step by a simple matrix-vector product Eq. The wave equation Eq. Finally, the last two nodes have to be considered, the discretization being directly linked to the contact condition. Thus, two cases must be considered separately. A contact state is always assumed first. During contact, the displacement of the last node The stress value When the computed value of The displacement at the interface The vector of displacements The preceding computational procedure is used to solve two distinct nonlinear propagation problems, namely the forward propagation step labelled The incident wave packet is defined as a 1  The time history of the displacement and contact stress at the interface are shown in However, this truncation does not mean that the reflected stress profile exhibits a similar truncation, contrary to what might be expected intuitively. To clarify this point, The reflected pulse at It is emphasized that this demonstration of TR invariance depends crucially on employing a sufficiently fine time interval for modelling and sampling, so as to capture adequately all the higher harmonics generated by the pulse distortion, as indicated in To provide a deeper insight into the detailed contact dynamics leading to TR invariance, the FD simulation is repeated in this section for a single-cycle pulse windowed by a Hann window. The incident pulse now has an amplitude of 3.2 A step by step analysis of the displacement and stress is first carried out in the case of the propagation  During the second half of the input cycle, the stress at the interface is positive and eventually attains the value The interface is open as long as the opening displacement Finally, the numerical solution for the displacement and the stress signals of the reflected wave received at During the second propagation step Considering the incident stress, it can be seen that the interface will open at the instant of the stress jump in Finally, when the opening displacement is equal to 0, the interface closes and the reflected displacement is equal and opposite to the incident displacement, whereas the reflected stress is equal to the incident stress, as shown in The preceding step-by-step analysis provides a detailed insight into the contact dynamics due to clapping, and the mechanisms leading to a full recovery of an original pulse shape during a correct implementation of the TR protocol. The time reversal invariance involving CAN has been investigated in the particular case of frictionless contact. A 1D FD numerical model has been used to solve the propagation problem of longitudinal waves that interact with a contact interface where unilateral contact is considered. The forward propagation step leads to the generation of new frequency components that reflect the distortions of the received reflected wave. The latter is selected and reversed in time before being re-emitted, in accordance with the TR protocol. The numerical results show that the distortions generated at the contact interface during the first interaction are locally cancelled during the second interaction with the interface, which demonstrates that TR invariance holds for the present type of contact nonlinearity. This result is not immediately obvious, but both the generation and cancellation of the distortions at the contact interface have been explained by a step-by-step analysis of the contact dynamics. This detailed analysis suggests that TR invariance should hold more generally for 3D scatterers exhibiting non-dissipative CAN. This theoretical study brings some insights regarding the retro-propagation of ultrasonic waves in case of CAN. It appears that the nonlinear clapping mechanism is not sufficient to break the TR invariance, contrary to the assumption in This study was supported in part by an