We studied the effects of long-term organic and mineral fertilization on soil microarthropods and soil chemical parameters in a field experiment under semi-arid conditions in Central Spain. Two different regimes of organic manuring, i.e. farmyard manure applied once in 3 years versus annual manuring with crop residues were compared. Soil carbon and nitrogen contents were increased markedly by farmyard manure, whereas straw and green manure had no significant effect. In contrast, the abundance of soil microarthropods was increased by annual application of straw and green manure, but not by farmyard manure last applied 2.5 years before sampling. We conclude that in the field experiment under study the abundance of soil microarthropods was influenced by the immediate food supply rather than by soil chemical parameters, such as carbon and nitrogen content or the pH. Biodiversity of soil microarthropods, as estimated by the Shannon index, was not affected significantly by straw and green manure. Obviously, other management practices, especially tillage, are limiting the species composition of soil microarthropods and thereby overshadow possible effects of fertilization on diversity.Soil microarthropods are considered to play an important role in the nutrient turnover of soils. Although the contribution of microarthropods to the total nutrient turnover is marginal ( In arable soils, microarthropods depend on the input of crop and root residues or organic manure for their food. Amount and quality of organic input is decisively determined by the farming system. Dairy farms produce farmyard manure or slurry that may be used as organic fertilizers. In contrast, on farms without animal production soil organic matter may be reproduced by straw and green manure. Farmyard manure is known to have a stimulative effect on microarthropods ( Although there is an abundance of investigations on the effects of different fertilizer regimes on microarthropods, direct comparisons between different farming systems are rare. The aim of this study was to evaluate the impact of different types of organic manuring (farmyard manure versus straw and green manure) on soil microarthropods in a long-term field experiment. We hypothesised that different regimes of organic manuring result in differences in the population densities and the species composition of soil microarthropods. The investigation took place in the International Long-term Fertilization Experiment (IOSDV) located on the experimental station “La Higueruela” in Central Spain (40°03′N, 04°26′W) at 450 Soil samples for chemical analysis were taken from spring barley plots (three field replicates) in late winter in 2 consecutive years (2001–2002). Samples were collected at 10 sampling points per plot using a drill corer (0–30 Soil samples for the study of microarthropods were taken twice in each late winter of 2001 and 2002 from spring barley plots (three replicate plots per treatment). Samples were collected at three sampling points per plot using steel cylinders (0–5 If necessary, the animals were macerated with lactic acid (30 In both years all samples were taken from spring barley plots. Due to the crop rotation, barley was grown in different plots in the second year of investigation. Thus, soil microarthropod abundances were statistically analyzed for both years separately. Two-way ANOVAs were preformed with treatment and sampling date (within 1 year) as factors. The effect of the year was not tested as a factor due to the experimental design. The datasets were log-transformed in order to achieve homogeneity of variance. The L.S.D. procedure was used as a post hoc test. For soil chemical parameters, significant differences between treatments were tested by ANOVA followed by Tukey-tests. Correlations between abundances and chemical parameters were analyzed by means of the Spearman Rank Order Correlation Coefficient ( In the field experiment under study, total carbon, total nitrogen and hot-water soluble carbon in soil were most clearly influenced by farmyard manure, especially when combined with mineral nitrogen fertilization ( In 2001, the abundances of soil microarthropods were significantly influenced by the fertilization regime. In 2002, both fertilization and sampling date had an effect on the abundances. Interactions between treatment and sampling date were not detected in either year ( With up to 9500 individuals Overall, 9 species of collembolans and 13 species of predatory mites were determined in the field experiment ( Soil carbon is closely connected with all chemical, physical and biological soil properties ( Abundances of soil microarthropods were increased markedly by straw and green manuring. In contrast, farmyard manure had no significant effect which is not in line with the results of other investigations. According to In the straw and green manure treatment organic material was annually incorporated into the soil. According to The application of mineral nitrogen resulted in higher yield of all crops in the crop rotation ( Only a few species of soil microarthropods are characterized with regard to their ecological preferences. Among the collembolans, the most abundant species Generally, the diversity as calculated by the Shannon-index did not differ significantly between the investigated treatments. We assume that other management practices, especially tillage, are limiting the species composition of soil microarthropods and thereby overshadow possible effects of fertilization on diversity. This assumption is supported by the results of Among the predatory mites, the genera The finding that soil microarthropods tend to be negatively correlated with the pH indicates that under the given conditions their abundance was not primarily determined by acidity. Different species of soil microarthropods differ considerably in their pH preferences ( Abiotic edaphic factors like humidity and temperature are known to have a marked influence on soil organisms and may even mark the effects of different management practices. In our investigation, soil temperature was between 13.5 and 14.0 It is well known that low humidity results in migration, lower reproduction and higher mortality of soil microarthropods ( We conclude that in the field experiment under study the abundance of soil microarthropods was influenced by the immediate food supply rather than by soil chemical parameters, such as carbon and nitrogen content or the pH. The annual supply with crop waste was more favourable for the development of large microarthropod communities than the addition of farmyard manure every 3 years. No differences in diversity were observed between the treatments, probably because in the experiment under study the effects of tillage are primarily determining the species composition of soil microarthropods. We are grateful to Dr. Elke Schulz (Centre for Environmental Research, Leipzig-Halle) for doing the soil chemical analysis and to the staff of “La Higueruela” experimental station for supporting us during our field work. The first author was supported by the German Academic Exchange Service (code D/01/02687).