Multielement simultaneous determination of 35 trace elements in environmental samples was carried out by inductively coupled plasma emission spectrometry (ICP-OES) after preconcentration with octadecyl silicagel, modified with aurin tricarboxylic acid (Aluminon). Optimal experimental conditions including pH of sample solution, sample volume, sample and eluent flow rate, type, concentration and volume of eluent and foreign ions effect were investigated and established.
                  Trace element ions in aqueous solution were quantitatively adsorbed onto octadecyl silicagel modified with aurin tricarboxylic acid at pH 8.0 with a flow rate of 11.0mLmin−1. The adsorbed element ions were eluted with 3–5mL of 0.5molL−1 HNO3 at a flow rate of 10.0mLmin−1 and analyzed by ICP-OES simultaneously.
                  The proposed method has at least preconcentration factor of 100 in water samples, which results high sensitive detection of ultra-trace and trace analysis. The present methodology gave recoveries better than 70% and RSD less than 16%.Environmental problems are becoming one of the most human concern all over the world. The many industrial wastewater streams contain heavy metals, which can discharge to water and waste water or into surface waters. Some examples of such industrial wastewater are the following: (a) rinsing water in metal-working enterprises, containing Cu, Ni, Zn, Sn, Cd, Pd, Ag, Al, Au, Cr, Mo, etc.; (b) rinsing water in the semiconductor industry, containing Cu, Sn, Pb, Sb; (c) wastewater from the copper industry, containing As, Se and (d) other types of water in which the presence of toxic metals causes problems Flame atomic absorption spectrometry (FAAS) is relatively simple and available technique in many laboratories for heavy metal determinations With an inductively coupled plasma source, the sample experiences temperature estimated to be in the vicinity of 10,000 The inductively coupled plasma optical emission spectrometry (ICP-OES) technique which offers fast multi-elemental analysis suffers from a poor sensitivity, because the concentration of some metals in environmental samples are below the detection limit of ICP-OES. To solve this problem, preconcentration separation procedures have been proposed. Thus, preconcentration is a very important issue for achievement of low detection limits The preconcentration method provides lower detection limits and also helps to avoid the matrix interferences in the determination of heavy elements present in environmental samples like river water, tap water, and natural and spiked water samples. This drawback can be rectified by a combination of a suitable preconcentration technique with subsequent ICP-OES determination. There are a lot of enrichment methods such as: co-precipitation, solvent extraction, electrolysis and solid phase extraction. Solid phase extraction is a very important place in preconcentration studies due to its simplicity, high preconcentration factors, environmental friendly, costs and time for sample preparation. Recently, solid phase extraction has been used for the separation and preconcentration of metal ions in water samples In this study, simultaneous ICP-OES, Thermo Scientific iCAP Series 6500, equipped with a charge injection device (CID) detector CETAC and Asx-520 Autosampler (England) has been used for the determination of elements. Control of the spectrometer is provided by PC based iTEVA software. The instrumental parameters are given in All the chemicals and reagents were of analytical grade from Merck (Darmstadt, Germany). Ultra-pure water obtained from a Milli-Q purification device (Millipore Co., Bedford, MA, USA). Standard labware and glassware were acid washed and rinsed with ultra-pure water. Multi-elemental standard solution for ICP-OES contains 35 elements of Ag, Al, As, Ba, Bi, Ca, Cd, Ce, Dy, Er, Eu, Ga, Gd, Hg, Ho, La, Lu, Mg, Na, Nd, P, Pb, Pr, Rb, Sc, Se, Sm, Sr, Tb, Th, Tl, Tm, U, Y and Yb (10 In order to condition C18 cartridges, each cartridge was rinsed with 10 The primarily study shows that the adsorption behavior of 67 elements on modified C18 with Aluminon are not quantitative and 35 elements retained on it. For this purpose 50 According to aurin tricarboxylic acid chemical structure, acidic solution is need for desorption of ions from cartridge, thus HCl, HNO The pH value plays an important role in adsorption of different ions on the modified cartridge. The acidity of a solution has two effects on metal adsorption. First, protons in an acidic solution can protonate the binding sites of the chelating molecules. Secondly, the hydroxide ion in a basic solution may complex and precipitate many metals. Therefore, the pH of a solution is the first parameter to be optimized. In order to evaluate the effect of pH, the pH values of sample solutions were adjusted to a range of 1.2–10.4 with HCl/NH The volume of eluent has influence on preconcentration factor. The volume of the eluent must be as low as possible to achieve the highest enrichment factor. For this purpose, 50 Two important factors for the quantitative recoveries and desorption of metal chelates on the solid phase extraction studies are flow rates of the sample and eluent solutions. The effect of the flow rate of sample solution was examined from 5 to 25 The effect of elution flow rate on desorbtion of analytes was investigated by keeping the elution volume of 0.5 For the study of interference by other coexisting ions, such as K In the analysis of real samples, the sample volume is one of the most important parameters influencing the preconcentration factor. In order to achieve a high enrichment factor for sample with very low analyte concentration, a large volume of samples solution is required. Therefore, the effect of sample volume on the retention of elements was investigated. For this purpose, 50, 100, 150, 250, and 500 Calibration graphs were obtained using 250 Compromise conditions for different variables affecting the metal-Aurin formation and the adsorption on and elution from the modified C18-Silica allow the simultaneous solid phase extraction of 35 elements from aqueous samples. The optimized solid phase extraction is fast (simultaneous solid phase extraction) and at least a preconcentration factor of 100 can be achieved. Our Methodology was shown to be an effective approach for improving the sensitivity of ICP-OES for 35 elements. The system is very simple, rapid, easy to use, selective and with a good sensitivity for the determination of 35 elements.