Polyacrylate anion-exchanger resins are considered economically useful for selective isolation, concentration and recovery of nickel, iron, copper and cobalt cyanide complexes. They also find wide application in food processing, pharmaceutical industry, sugar refining, etc. This kind of polyacrylate anion-exchangers has been applied by us to separate rare earth element complexes with IMDA. Strongly basic gel and macroporous polyacrylate anion-exchangers Amberlite IRA 458 and Amberlite IRA 958 were used. The following pairs of iminodiacetate rare earth element complexes were selected for separation: Sm(III)–Ho(III), La(III)–Nd(III), La(III)–Pr(III) based on the affinity of these elements for strongly basic anion-exchangers.
                  The results obtained indicate the possibility of application of anion-exchangers of this type for separation of individual lanthanide pairs in macro–micro systems. High yield of the obtained preparations is the evidence for the practical application of this method.Ion chromatography is a widely used technique for separation of ionic compounds. It is also the main method for separation of rare earth elements. Complexing eluents such as buffered solutions of citric, lactic, glycolic, α-hydroxyisobutyric acids and aminopolycarboxylic acids such as EDTA, HEDTA, etc. are useful as eluents for separation of rare earth elements on cation-exchangers. Lanthanides are eluted in the order of decreasing atomic numbers. The non-typical and non-monotonic affinity series of anion lanthanide complexes with aminopolycarboxylic acids for polystyrene anion-exchangers give new possibilities for the preparation of high-purity rare earth elements Recently, in anion-exchange chromatography, the strongly basic polyacrylic anion-exchangers such as Amberlite IRA 458, Amberlite IRA 958 as well as weakly basic anion-exchangers of this type have been used. Amberlite IRA 458 is a strongly basic anion-exchanger, which possesses quaternary amine groups Acrylate anion-exchangers are widely used for the recovery of metal cyanide complexes (Ni, Fe, Cu, Co) from the effluent of metallurgical processing plants and for removing heavy metals from industrial wastewater. Amberlite IRA 458 has been applied to remove arsenate from water The results presented are the continuation of the studies on sorption and separation of rare earth element complexes with iminodiacetic acid on the anion-exchangers and concern the investigations of strongly basic gel and strongly basic macroporous polyacrylic anion-exchangers. Based on the affinity series of anion lanthanide complexes with IMDA for the anion-exchangers Amberlite IRA 458 and Amberlite IRA 958 produced by Rohm and Haas were used in the investigations.   The complexed solutions of rare earth elements were prepared by dissolving the oxides with 1% excess of stoichiometric quantities of IMDA solution (Ln(III)/IMDA=1:2) while heating. The breakthrough curves were determined using 40 mL of the anion-exchanger in the Cl The breakthrough curves of La(III), Nd(III), Pr(III), Sm(III) and Ho(III) were determined using solutions of complexed rare earth elements at a concentration 4.0 mM. Solutions of a concentration about 2.5 g Ln The percentage of neodymium, praseodymium and holmium in the macro-component was determined by spectrophotometric analysis using a SPECORD, M 40 spectrophotometer (Zeiss, Germany). The determination was made by a direct method using the neodymium adsorption maximum The anion-exchange of rare earth complexes with multidentate organic ligands is a relatively little-explored domain. This paper describes the results of our investigations on the chromatographic separation of rare earth elements using polyacrylate gel and macroporous strongly basic anion-exchangers. In separation of these elements, anion-exchangers of this type have not been used before. In our previous papers, it was shown that the affinity of La(III) complexes with IMDA (Ln(III)/IMDA=1:2) for the strongly basic polystyrene anion-exchangers in the acetate and IMDA forms is the lowest. The position of La(III), Pr(III), Nd(III) in these series indicates possibility of purification of La(III) from all other lanthanides including Nd(III) and Pr(III) in the macro–micro system by the frontal analysis technique. Sm(III) complexes are characterised by lower affinity than Ho(III) complexes which indicates that the purification of this pair of lanthanides should be effective. The breakthrough curves of La(III), Nd(III) and Pr(III) complexes with IMDA at pH 6.0 on the strongly basic polyacrylate gel anion-exchanger Amberlite IRA 458 and on the strongly basic polyacrylate macroporous anion-exchanger Amberlite IRA 958 in the acetate form are presented in As follows from the breakthrough curves, Nd(III) and Pr(III) complexes with IMDA exhibit higher affinity for both gel and macroporous polyacrylate anion-exchangers than for the corresponding La(III) complexes Assuming that the complexes 1:2 are formed, the ion-exchange reaction can be written as: The breakthrough curves of Sm(III) and Ho(III) complexes with IMDA on the anion-exchangers Amberlite IRA 458 and Amberlite IRA 958 in the acetate form indicate higher affinity of Ho(III) complexes for the gel anion-exchanger Amberlite IRA 458 than for the macroporous Amberlite IRA 958 The results of separation of Sm(III)–Ho(III) (Ho The studies on separation of La(III)–Nd(III) complexes with IMDA in the macro–micro system (Nd The data obtained indicate that the acetate form of Amberlite IRA 458 and Amberlite IRA 958 is the most effective in purification of La(III) from Nd(III). It is shown that the polyacrylate gel anion-exchanger Amberlite IRA 458 is more effective in comparison with the polyacrylate macroporous anion-exchanger Amberlite IRA 958. The high differentiation in affinity of La(III) and Nd(III) complexes for this anion-exchanger in the acetate form indicates the possibility of applying this process for purification of lanthanum on a large scale. Unexpectedly, the best results of purification of La(III) from Nd(III) were obtained in the chloride form of both gel and macroporous polyacrylate anion-exchangers. The chloride form of the polystyrene anion-exchanger is not applicable in the separation process of rare earth complexes with IMDA. Using Amberlite IRA 458 in the chloride form with the anion-exchanger bed of 40 mL over 40.9 g La The investigations on separation of La(III)–Pr(III) complexes with IMDA in the macro–micro system (Pr It follows from the data that polyacrylate gel anion-exchanger Amberlite IRA 458 is more effective in this process than the macroporous anion-exchanger Amberlite IRA 958. The most effective is the acetate form of this anion-exchanger, however, unexpected good yield can be also obtained in the chloride form. (1) The investigations on sorption and separation of rare earth element complexes with IMDA on polyacrylate anion-exchangers indicate the possibility of their effective application in such fields as separation of rare earth elements. (2) The non-typical and non-monotonic character of series of rare earth complexes with IMDA can be interpreted by differences in the complex structure (charge of size ions) as well as in the acrylate anion-exchangers structure, flexibility, functional group mobility and the presence of hydrophilic groups. (3) Using the presented method on 1 L of Amberlite IRA 458 in the acetate and chloride forms, it is possible to obtain about 1200 and 1000 g La (4) Application of the anion-exchanger in the acetate and chloride forms is also advantageous owing to the economical aspect of the process and an additionally important factor is a small consumption of IMDA. (5) This method is simple, convenient and advantageous and the applied complexing agent such as IMDA is the most effective out of the aminopolycarboxylic acids group such as EDTA, DCTA, HEDTA applied in the anion-exchange process (