Within the context of the study 3 types of grinding aids, which were glycol-based, TEA-based and TIPA-based, were tested in dry stirred milling of cement. The objective was to evaluate their influences on mill performance and cement quality then find out the most proper type with its dosage rate. The results showed that use of grinding aid improved the grinding performance of the mill as finer size distribution than that of no grinding aid was obtained at the same milling condition. The tests at the same dosage rate indicated that, TIPA-based grinding aid had the lowest specific energy utilization with 16.8 kWh/t compared to that of glycol (17.9 kWh/t ) and TEA-based aids (19.75 kWh/t) respectively. The product size distributions showed that TIPA-based aid had finer product with d50 of 10.54μm compared to other types. Cement quality tests, which were assessed by measuring the compressive strength, implied that TIPA had the highest improvement in 28-days strength with 18.8% at 700g/t where 8.9% and 5.6% increase were achieved for glycol-based and TEA-based grinding aids respectively. As a conclusion of the study, TIPA based grinding aid was found to be the most effective one for dry stirred mill application of cement due to its provided operational benefits and quality improvements.Dry energy intensive processes, such as cement manufacturing, demand efficient grinding technologies to reduce the energy costs where inefficient ball milling technology is still in use. Development of stirred media mills improved the energy utilization in fine grinding area when compared to conventional ball milling. There have been studies compared the energy utilizations of both technologies, which reported that stirred milling is more energy efficient When cement grinding operation is considered, there is a ball mill and air separator operated in closed circuit to achieve required fineness. Within the circuit, high amount of material is circulated back to the mill owing to its coarseness. This coarse product can be ground with an efficient milling technology, such as stirred milling, hence the production rate of the circuit could be increased. Some other applications could be the use of the stirred mill on electro filter product and final product streams with the aim of improving the quality (ultimate strength) of the finished product as well as energy efficiency Up to date, the grinding aids have been used in stirred milling applications as well. Zheng et al. The photograph of the mill used in this study is depicted in The rotary valve mounted under the feed hopper adjusts the mill feed rate, which is measured from the product outlet by cutting the material flow. A torque sensor installed measures the power draw of the mill, which displays on the control panel instantly. In grinding operation of the mill, air is supplied from the feed inlet in order to improve material transportation towards the discharge end. The ground particles leave the mill from the product outlet where a product separator exists with the aim of retaining the media inside. Product separator is a cage having openings smaller than the bead size and attached to the discharge end of the mill directly as illustrated in The temperature is important parameter that should be controlled in cement manufacturing. Therefore, the measurements were undertaken via infrared or non-contact thermometer from the outside of the mill discharge end. Such information was used to identify if the product of the stirred mill was in acceptable temperature limits Although various types of grinding aids are utilized by the industry This study assumed that the mill feed and product samples had the same amount of grinding aids that means the given dosage rate was fully adsorbed by the material. Therefore, no measurements were undertaken on how much of the grinding aids were absorbed by the product. The feed sample together with the test products were characterized regarding to their size distribution curves, specific surface area and cement properties. In this context, Sympatec laser sizer (Germany) having size measurement range between 1.8 The sample used in grinding tests was collected from the finished product stream of a cement grinding circuit when producing CEM I 42.5R type cement. As reported in the literature, introducing grinding aids into the milling equipment makes the transportation easier since the material becomes fluidized owing to neutralizing the surface charges of the particles As can be followed from  From cement properties point of view, the variations in compressive strength and water demand were investigated. The results given in While testing the TEA-based grinding aid the same methodology as the glycol-based one was applied. Initially, the influences on the process performance and product size distribution curves were evaluated. The cement properties given in  Regarding to the cement properties, the strength and water demand measurements were undertaken. As can be seen from As presented in the previous chapters, the specific energy utilization of the mill, the specific surface area and the mean size parameters were considered while evaluating the influences of the grinding aids. Within the chapter the test results are illustrated in   It is also understood from the figure that, TIPA-based grinding aid has the highest development with 17.94% at 1000 Within the scope of the study different types of grinding aids, glycol-based, TEA-based and TIPA based, were tested then the influences on dry stirred mill performance and cement properties were discussed. The test studies implied that the use of grinding aids lead to having finer product size distribution and decreased specific energy consumption when compared to no aid condition. Among the grinding aids tested, TIPA-based grinding aid was the most effective one at all the dosage rates. The highest difference was observed at 700 Authors appreciate contributions of Assoc. Prof. Abdullah Obut (