In the magnetically assisted chemical separation (MACS) process, ferromagnetic nanoparticles modified by solvent extractant are used to separate hafnium from zirconium. The contaminant-loaded nanoparticles are recovered using a magnetic field. The contaminants attached to the magnetic nanoparticles are subsequently removed using a small volume of stripping agent. In this study, tributylphosphate (TBP) modified magnetic nanoparticles with particle size of 10nm were evaluated for the extraction and separation of hafnium from zirconium. Laboratory scale investigations were carried out on the effects of type and concentration of acid, and also concentration of Hf and Zr ions on the efficiency of extraction and separation stages. It was found that 4M hydrochloric acid, 10ppm Zr and 7.5ppm Hf ions gave the best results with SF=1.4 and 1.5 for the extraction and stripping stages, respectively.Several approaches have been used for the separation of metals from aqueous solutions such as, chemical precipitation, liquid–liquid extraction, ion-exchange, adsorption, filtration, reverse osmosis and membrane technologies ( Nanotechnology, is considered as one of the most important advancements in science and technology of the past decade. It is related to the manipulation of materials and systems at the nanometer scale. At this scale, materials exhibit new properties suitable for novel applications ( In the MACS process, metal ions are separated from aqueous solutions using a magnetic nanoparticle core which is coated with a selective organic material. The surface of magnetic carriers is modified with a material (an extractant) that has attraction for the targeted metals. The modified nanoparticles are added to the solution containing the metal ions, mixed thoroughly, and recovered efficiently with a magnet. As shown above, there are several reports of MACS separation processes for various ions but separation of hafnium from zirconium by MACS process has not yet been reported. In this study, tributylphosphate (TBP) modified ferromagnetic nanoparticles with a particle size of 10 In the first step, solutions were prepared using de-ionized (DI) water after 30 The following steps have been performed for modifying the surface of nanoparticles: Washing nanoparticles (three times) with de-ionized water, twice with 0.02 Drying overnight in a fume hood, Grinding the dried particles using a mortar and pestle, Adding 2 Adding 0.25 Sonication for 10 Heating in a water bath at 60 Drying the nanoparticles in an oven at 120 Partitioning experiments were carried out with suspensions of nanoparticles in nitric and hydrochloric acids and simulating solutions containing Zr and Hf. The partition coefficients for different concentrations of nitric and hydrochloric acids were monitored using Zr and Hf tracers. Measurements were made in 1-, 4- and 8 Extraction partition coefficient was calculated using the following equation: The separation factor (SF) was calculated using the following equation: The separation factors of hafnium and zirconium (SF  In this study, the MACS process was used successfully to separate hafnium from zirconium. Results showed that the type and amount of acid and concentration of the metals are the three important parameters affecting the separation factors in the extraction and stripping stages. Optimum condition achieved were 4 We are grateful to Dr. Abbas Fazeli and Mr. Abbas Abdolmaleki for the facilities, and scientific and technical assistance. We also wish to thank our honorable partners on the project for their contributions to the work reported in this paper.