Column flotation, which is a very effective process in mineral processing especially for easily floatable minerals, is one of the most important new developments to emerge in mineral processing technology in the last years. In this study, the flotation behavior of talc products having different particle shapes produced by different grinding mills (ball and rod mill) was determined by using column flotation process. Shape characteristics of the particles were investigated by the two dimensional measuring technique based on the particle projections obtained from the SEM microphotographs using a COREL Draw 10.0 program. The results showed that particles possessing higher elongation and flatness properties were recovered better during column flotation, whilst roundness and relative width had a negative effect on the flotation behavior of the talc mineral studied. Consequently, as the shape of the particles produced by the mill deviated from the ideal sphere, their floatability was increased.Size reduction is an important operation in the mineral, metallurgical, power and chemical industries. In mineral processing, size reduction by mechanical crushing and grinding is substantial to decrease the size and consequently to liberate the valuable minerals from its gangue for market requirements. For real industrial materials, particles are non-spherical. The effects of non-sphericity on different technologies vary, causing discrepancies in results and bias from the true characteristics of the sample. Applications in many fields require information about the shape of the particles in addition to their size ( Particle shape is of prime importance, in the same way as the size, in order to understand the behavior of powders ( The practical importance of shape analysis is that the shape of particles can assist in identification and analysis, influence the physicochemical properties of a powder, elucidate the process of formation and affect the behavior of the powder in its applications ( Talc, which is an extremely versatile mineral, has found a steadily increasing number of uses such as in paint, paper, plastic, ceramic and cosmetic industries ( The talc mineral used in this study was supplied from Sivas, Turkey. The chemical analysis of the ore is shown quantitatively in Different grinding mills were used to obtain the products having different shapes to show their effects on the flotation. The samples were ground with a laboratory ball mill for 32 min and rod mill for 16 min to obtain approximately 100% − The characterization of shape properties of talc mineral was carried out utilizing the two-dimensional (2D) measurement technique using a Jeol JSM-6400 SEM (Scanning Electron Microscope). Four pictures from different locals of the sample of each mill product were taken by making proper magnification. Each microphotograph was transformed into digital images as jpeg format by utilizing a scanner. The axes of particles were measured by using COREL DRAW 10 program as illustrated by the Four shape characteristics such as elongation, flatness, roundness and relative width (Eqs. As seen from the Eqs. In the column flotation study, a Plexiglas laboratory scale flotation column having a height of 75 cm and a diameter of 5 cm was used (    However, the samples were ground by different mills to obtain the whole material finer than 250 μm for flotation and shape analysis, nearly the same percentage of finer material was obtained for the two mills for subsequent analysis. Then, the mill products were screened to 45 μm size, in order to eliminate the effect of too fine sizes. Although ball mill produced a material slightly finer than the rod mill, the shape effect of these products on the column flotation appeared clearly. By taking into consideration the two separate results together ( The following major conclusions can be drawn from this study: The shape characteristics of talc particles produced by different mills were determined by using SEM. Talc minerals ground by rod mill had higher elongation and flatness than the products ground by ball mill. On the other hand, the ball mill products had higher roundness and relative width values than the rod mill products. The flotation behavior of the particles having different shapes by different milling was determined by the column flotation. The products of the rod mill gave higher column flotation recoveries than the ball mill products. Elongation and flatness had a positive effect on the flotation of talc particles by column flotation, while roundness and relative width had a negative effect on the column flotation recovery of talc mineral studied. That is, as the particles produced by the mill deviate from the ideal spherical shape, their floatability increases. Column flotation recovery, % Length of axes of particle projection, μm Width of axes of particle projection, μm Area of the particle projection, μm Perimeter of the particle projection, μm Elongation, Flatness, Roundness, Relative width.