One of the major problems with bone tissue engineering is the development of a rapid vascularization after implantation to supply the growing osteoblast cells with the nutrients to grow and survive as well as to remove waste products. It has been demonstrated that capillary-like structures produced in vitro will anastomose rapidly after implantation and become functioning blood vessels. For this reason, in recent years many studies have examined a variety of human osteoblast and endothelial cell co-culture systems in order to distribute osteoblasts on all parts of the bone scaffold and at the same time provide conditions for the endothelial cells to migrate to form a network of capillary-like structures throughout the osteoblast-colonized scaffold. The movement and proliferation of endothelial cells to form capillary-like structures is known as angiogenesis and is dependent on a variety of pro-angiogenic factors. This review summarizes human 2- and 3-D co-culture models to date, the types and origins of cells used in the co-cultures and the proangiogenic factors that have been identified in the co-culture models.Generating healthy bone for the replacement of diseased or missing bone tissue has been one of the major objectives of tissue engineering scientists in the last years. The bone consists of a mineralized organic matrix containing living cells, which together form the rigid component of the vertebrate skeleton. In addition, similar to most other tissues and organs, the bone is interlaced with blood vessels through which a continuous flow of blood supplies the cells making up the tissue or organ with the essential nutrients and oxygen to survive, while at the same time removing CO Tissue engineering is a therapeutic approach in regenerative medicine which combines a “bio” material, cells and other factors to generate a tissue-like structure. For bone, much initial research has been dedicated to finding and optimizing biomaterials which allow the attachment, growth and differentiation of osteoblasts. In particular, the goal of this research has been to It is evident from the above that if the tissue-engineered construct does not contain or allow a rapid ingrowth of blood vessels, the implanted biomaterial will not survive. Overcoming this hurdle has been one of the major areas of focus in regenerative bone tissue engineering strategies. In recent years, a substantial amount of research has been dedicated to generating a network of capillary-like structures on a biomaterial in vitro. It has been shown that pre-formed capillaries in vitro have a structure containing a lumen and tight junctions similar to capillaries in vivo A vascularized tissue is one through which blood flows via a network of capillaries. These capillaries are primarily made up of endothelial cells. Blood microcapillaries are formed in vivo by two major mechanisms, vasculogenesis and angiogenesis. Vasculogenesis is the formation of new capillary-like structures from individual cells not associated with pre-existing capillaries In both vasculogenesis and angiogenesis, specific proangiogenic factors are required for endothelial cells to migrate and form microcapillaries. These microcapillaries cannot be generated by endothelial cells themselves. Therefore, single cell cultures of endothelial cells require exogenously added proangiogenic compounds to form microcapillary-like structures A variety of endothelial cell types have been isolated from the body. The most widely used are the easily obtainable HUVECs (human umbilical vein endothelial cells) followed by HDMECs (human dermal microvascular endothelial cells, generally isolated from human foreskin tissue) Mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs) can be differentiated to chondrocytes, adipocytes or osteoblasts, although recent studies have demonstrated that MSCs isolated from the bone marrow or blood, as well as other sources, can also differentiate and yield cells expressing an endothelial cell-like phenotype under specific culture conditions The first human cells used for bone biomaterial studies were human osteoblast cell lines or primary osteoblasts isolated from bone tissue. These cells were useful in determining biocompatibility of new bone biomaterials and for establishing the differences in gene regulation based on the composition of the biomaterials Most early in vitro studies to understand and improve the vascularization of implanted biomaterials examined co-cultures of primary human endothelial cells, usually human umbilical vein endothelial cells (HUVECs), or human microvascular endothelial cells (HDMECs) with primary human osteoblasts (pOB) isolated from human bone ( Primary cells are cells isolated directly from tissue, directly mimic the characteristics of the adult healthy cells in the tissues and are thus highly relevant for evaluating biomaterials for tissue engineering applications. Co-cultures of HUVECs and pOB in 3-D spheroids seeded into collagen gels demonstrated the formation of microcapillary-like structures resembling capillaries The first 3-D co-culture studies with specific bone biomaterials (porous hydroxyapatite porous calcium phosphate, porous nickel–titanium and silk fibroin nets) demonstrated an extensive microcapillary-like network formed by HDMECs in the presence of pOB ( The co-culture system resulted in the generation of a network of capillary-like structures containing a lumen weaving through the biomaterials and the osteoblast cells In addition, a reciprocal effect was also observed. Co-cultures of HUVECs and pOB were found to stimulate pOB alkaline phosphatase activity and mineralization with a down-regulation of runx2 and osteocalcin production Adult endothelial or osteoblast primary cells are not an optimal choice for tissue regeneration on account of a number of factors, but most significantly due to their limited replication potential and expansion possibilities. For this reason, mesenchymal stem cells from the bone marrow, adipose tissue and blood have been used to differentiate cells to bone and endothelial cell phenotypes in vitro OECs in co-culture with pOB were initially shown to form capillary-like structures with a lumen similar to those observed in HUVEC or HDMEC co-cultures with pOB on cell culture plastic and starch poly(caprolactone) 3D scaffolds Mesenchymal stem or stromal cells (MSCs) exhibit a multipotent phenotype and can be isolated from a number of tissues in the body. These cells can be expanded in their undifferentiated state and subsequently differentiated into a number of different cell types. Early studies demonstrated that extracts from bMSCs produced VEGF and enhanced the differentiation and survival as well as promoting sprouting of endothelial cells in vitro A number of co-culture studies with primary endothelial cells and bMSCs or aSCs demonstrated the formation of microcapillary-like structures Most of the previously described primary endothelial cell/MSC co-culture studies were carried out on cell culture plastic. Only a few recent studies have examined co-cultures of HUVECs and MSCs on a variety of 3-D bone scaffolds or matrixes Obtaining autologous endothelial and osteoblast cells in a non-invasive way from a patient for tissue regenerating bone would be optimal from a translational point of view. A number of in vitro studies have examined co-cultures of OECs with bone-like cells derived from bone marrow (bMSC) or adipose tissue-derived stem cells (aSCs) ( In addition to being able to differentiate MSCs to osteoblasts, chondrocytes and adipose cells, cultured MSC from the bone or adipose tissue under certain conditions have also been shown to differentiate into cells exhibiting an endothelial-like phenotype Endothelial-like and osteoblast-like cells differentiated from bMSCs were co-cultured on cell culture plastic and on β-TCP scaffolds Human pluripotent stem cells from embryonic stem cells (ESCs) and from induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs) possess the capability of unlimited replication and the ability to be differentiated to a number of different cell types. iPSCs have one advantageous feature compared to ESCs in that they may be generated from autologous tissue. Both have been differentiated to endothelial- and osteoblast-like cells in vitro Endothelial-like cells derived from ESCs and iPSCs can form microcapillary-like structures in vitro as well demonstrate anastomosis and neovascularization in vivo after implantation Creating a network of microcapillary-like structures in a construct resembling a vascularized bone tissue in vitro is possible in co-cultures of endothelial cells with osteoblasts. Adult endothelial and osteoblast cells can be obtained directly from a variety of tissues. Both endothelial- and osteoblast-like cells can be derived from progenitor cells in blood, from undifferentiated stem cells from bone, adipose and other tissues, as well as from ESCs and iPSCs. A co-culture of any adult endothelial cells or endothelial-like cells with primary osteoblasts or osteoblast-like cells can lead to the formation of microcapillary-like structures in vitro. To date it is not known if similar studies with endothelial and osteoblast cells derived from ESCs or iPSCs will also exhibit these characteristics. Thus, co-cultures of osteoblasts and endothelial cells (one primary and one stem cell-derived, respectively) on the one hand and co-cultures of osteoblasts and endothelial cells (both derived from multipotent stem cells) on the other hand exhibit similar morphologies, phenotypes and expression patterns of osteogenic and pro-angiogenic factors in vitro. Surprisingly, a majority of the co-culture studies focused on the influence of endothelial cells on the differentiation and mineralization occurring in the co-cultured osteoblasts. In studies in which capillaries were formed in co-cultures, VEGF was often the only factor mentioned as being up-regulated. It should be noted that microcapillary-like structures were not observed in every co-culture system. However, in many cases, specific staining for endothelial cells was not carried out in the co-cultures. Thus, capillaries may have been present, but not detected. Also, a variety of media were used in the co-cultures, some having compounds specifically added to enhance the differentiation of osteoblasts and demonstrate mineralization. These conditions may have influenced endothelial cell gene expression and capillary formation. However, selected co-culture studies did identify pro-angiogenic factors in the cultures, although this did not always correlate with the presence of microcapillary-like structures. As can be seen in Another important feature is that nearly all of the co-culture studies were conducted on a small scale in well culture plates or on biomaterials with maximum sizes around 1 The purpose of this review was to give a concise summary of endothelial and osteoblast co-cultures to date to compare different cell sources and combinations of the two cell types for their ability to form microcapillary-like structures and elucidate which proangiogenic factors play a role in vitro. Cell sources did not have an influence on the ability to form microcapillaries. However, cell–cell communication and endothelial-osteoblast direct cell-contact were pre-requisites for capillary formation as well as osteogenesis. A pre-vascularized network could be generated in numerous cases, although a sufficient analysis of the many known pro-angiogenic factors was not consistently or extensively evaluated in co-cultures. Furthermore, although in vivo studies indicate an anastomosis of the pre-formed microcapillaries to the host vasculature (inosculation), thus attaining the goal of a more rapid vascularization, long-term studies have not been performed to determine the outcome of bone formation and successful regeneration. A major issue with respect to the vascularization process is whether the pre-formed capillary-like structures can maintain vessel stability and not undergo regression with prolonged time in vivo. In any case, these in vitro and in vivo studies must be validated in further studies prior to human clinical studies. Parts of this research was generously supported by the