Residual activities of lipoxygenase (LOX), peroxidase (POD), and polyphenoloxidase (PPO) were determined in paprika and chili powder after immediate thermal treatment of the fresh plant material. Heat treatments comprised water and steam blanching of the integral fruits and pasteurization of the comminuted tissues, respectively. PPO showed the lowest heat stability and was completely inactivated by heating at 80 °C for 10 min. Inactivation of LOX was also largely accomplished by heating at 90 °C for 5 min and at 100 °C for 5 min, whereas up to 3.5% (paprika) and 3.3% (chili) of the initial POD activities were retained even when applying rigorous time–temperature regimes. The results demonstrate that substantial inactivation of deteriorative enzymes was ensured by the recently suggested process, thus facilitating the production of high quality spice powders.Paprika and chili powders are spices of considerable economic importance all over the world. Whereas high quality products are desired, major disadvantages are implicated with conventional spice processing ( LOX (EC 1.13.11.12) catalyzes the stereospecific hydroperoxidation of polyunsaturated fatty acids, esters and glycerides containing a 1- POD (EC 1.11.1.7) decomposes hydrogen peroxide in the presence of a hydrogen donor. In PPO (EC 1.14.18.1) oxidizes diphenols in the presence of molecular oxygen with resulting degradation of nutritionally valuable compounds and enzymatic browning. Interestingly, studies on the occurrence and characteristics of PPO in In a previous study, the development of an innovative process for the production of spices has been described ( Tween 20 and linoleic acid p.a. (∼ Paprika fruits ( 2.0 kg of fresh paprika and 2.5 kg of red chili pods, respectively, were coarsely ground in a cutter for 1.5 min. Paprika fruits were comminuted in a K60 colloid mill (Probst & Class, Rastatt, Germany), whereas chili pods were minced in a corundum mill (type MK 95, Fryma, Rheinfelden, Germany), both with a gap of 1 mm. The resulting pastes were immediately heated in a hermetically sealed 3 L pilot-plant scale reaction vessel (type EL 3, ESCO-Labor AG, Riehen, Switzerland) under stirring (30 rpm) at 80 °C for 10 min, at 90 °C for 5 and 10 min, or at 100 °C for 5 min. Final temperatures were reached after approximately 1–3 min. Paprika pastes were additionally heated at 90 °C for 1 min and at 100 °C for 1 and 10 min. Alternatively, the Determination of the moisture content of dried powders and raw material was performed according to the Karl–Fischer method as described by Aliquots of the ground freeze-dried powder (200 mg) of chili and paprika were mixed with 10 mL of chilled (∼ Protein content of the enzyme extracts was determined according to Soluble POD activity was determined as described by PPO activities were determined according to  Soluble LOX activity was determined according to In a second set of experiments, LOX activity was determined as described by All spectrophotometric assays were performed at 25 °C using a Cary 100 Conc Spectrophotometer (Varian, Victoria Mulgrave, Australia) equipped with a Varian Cary temperature controller and Varian Cary Win UV 2.0 software. In the case of significant differences individual enzyme activities were compared using the Student's Blanching of raw plant materials is the usual method for the inactivation of deteriorative enzymes. Since heating of fresh spices may be disadvantageous with respect to the retention of volatile components, blanching has so far been considered unsuitable in spice production. However, as shown by recent investigations, immediate thermal treatment of the raw material prior to drying considerably improved spice quality with respect to color and microbial loads ( Protein contents of lyophilized chili and paprika powders and extracts are shown in However, obviously heat-induced denaturation or structural changes of the protein molecules may have caused poorer dissolution of the proteins and reduced binding to the Coomassie blue G dye complex, respectively. As a consequence, the formation of the protein–dye complex was inhibited. Therefore, soluble protein contents of the chili and paprika extracts significantly decreased to 0.25, 0.31, and 0.20 mg/mL enzyme extract, corresponding to 12.5, 13.3, and 10.5 mg/g dry matter, respectively, following thermal treatments at 80 °C for 10 min (CH 1, CH 5, and PA 1), and were further diminished by more rigid time–temperature regimes. The addition of Triton X and PVPP did not significantly improve protein extraction. Because Triton X may interfere with the protein dye binding assay ( Since POD may act on the pungent principles, mainly capsaicin and dihydrocapsaicin, POD residual activities in chili and paprika powders are of paramount interest. In addition, POD-like proteins, together with LOX, have been shown to contribute to carotene-bleaching of pepper extracts ( In the present study, the effects of different time–temperature regimes on soluble POD activity were investigated using tropolone and H Grinding of paprika led to a small decrease of POD activities ( Phenolic compounds in chili and paprika may serve as substrates of oxidative enzymes to yield In the present study, the cumulative activity of soluble and bound PPO activity was determined by the addition of SDS to activate latent PPO ( The occurrence of LOX in pepper fruits is well established. By its action highly reactive compounds are generated serving as initiators of a cascade reaction, which results in co-oxidation of carotenoids. As a consequence, nutritive value, and organoleptic properties, in particular color, may adversely be affected. Compared to LOX activity in vegetables such as soy beans and cauliflower, LOX activity in red pepper was found to be very low, depending on the stage of maturation ( Different methods have so far been described for the determination of LOX activity. Most frequently spectrophotometric assays are employed, utilizing the transformation of linoleic acid into hydroperoxides containing conjugated diene systems. Alternatively, indirect determinations are performed by measuring oxygen consumption or the oxidizing capacity of hydroperoxides generated by LOX. The frequently used method for the quantification of LOX by measuring hydroperoxides at 234 nm is sensitive for the determination of low LOX activities as shown for isolated soy bean LOX; however, it is also susceptible to interferences. Therefore, another method was applied utilizing the oxidative capacity of the hydroperoxides. For this purpose, linoleic acid was added to the reaction medium at a concentration sufficient to ensure substrate saturation during the first minutes of the reaction, resulting in maximum formation of hydroperoxide. Because linoleic acid naturally occurring in paprika and chili may interfere, the assays were additionally performed without linoleic substrate (EB). Autoxidation of the substrate was corrected with the control assay (SB) to compensate for the non-enzymatic increase in absorbance. In contrast to Apart from the fruit tissue, LOX is also located in red pepper seeds (  Although LOX activities observed in paprika and chili powders were very low, their detection was still possible after thermal treatment, thus confirming earlier reports of In a previous report an innovative process for preparing spices in order to obtain high quality products was suggested ( Flavor and pigments of conventionally produced paprika and chili powder usually fade within 6 months, especially in opened and translucent packages. Incomplete inactivation of native enzymes by usual drying and insufficient thermal treatment may enhance their reactivation during storage, causing deterioration of quality parameters of chili and paprika powder. The results of the present study confirm our hypothesis that immediate thermal treatment of the raw plant material largely ensures the inactivation of deteriorating enzymes, thus providing high quality products. Since even low residual activities may cause degradation of quality-determining constituents, especially carotenoids and capsaicinoids, during long-term storage, investigations on the impact of enzyme residual activities on color and spiciness during storage and studies on the reactivation kinetics of POD, PPO, and LOX are a matter of our current research. The authors would like to thank Mr. Michael Rendlen for supplying the raw material and Mr. Klaus Mix for technical assistance. One of the authors (U.S.) gratefully acknowledges the funding of the present research by the Landesgraduiertenförderung Baden-Württemberg.