The effect of the use of ultrasound in the froth phase on the flotation performance has been investigated in relation to the flotation rate of a complex sulphide ore. A series of kinetic flotation tests with and without ultrasound were conducted in a flotation machine with a 2-L cell, in which an ultrasonic probe is located in the froth zone. The results indicate that there is a considerable effect of ultrasound on separation selectivity and efficiency in the flotation of a complex sulphide ore at intermediate and high level airflow rates whereas, no significant differences in the separation performance were obtained from the flotation with and without ultrasound at low airflow rates. In addition, the results of the size-by-size analysis show that a much better cleaning action in the froth was promoted for coarse particles rather than fine particles as a result of the use of ultrasound. As a result of increase in the bubble coalescence, it was found that the use of ultrasound in the froth is more effective at shallow froths. Therefore, either effective pulp volume can be increased with a negligible loss of flotation performance or the pulp density can be decreased to obtain better product quality with the use of ultrasound in shallow froths.Ultrasonic wave, or ultrasound, can be used to improve efficiency and/or selectivity of the flotation process. Most studies have examined the effect of the use ultrasound before flotation, e.g., removal of adsorbed layer of reagents from minerals, emulsification of flotation reagents, while other recent studies have revealed the effect of ultrasonic treatment during and after flotation processes ( It is known that evaluation of the effects of altering flotation variables is easily accomplished by fitting batch data to first-order rate equations. Many parameters used in the modelling of the overall flotation performance have been derived from tests conducted in batch flotation cells ( Most of the research conducted on ultrasonic flotation with a modified cell so far to understand the reagent-valuable mineral interaction mechanisms from the overall flotation performance point of view. However, a review of the literature indicates that no work has been done with regard to effect of the use of ultrasound in the froth zone on the efficiency and selectivity of flotation. The objective of the present study is therefore to investigate the effect of the use of ultrasound in the froth on performances of the pulp phase and froth phase in flotation of a complex sulphide ore. In other words, the present study was developed to determine and interpret potential improvement in the overall flotation performance as well as the separation selectivity regarding the use of ultrasound in the froth. A copper–iron sulphide ore sample containing 1.2–1.8% Cu and 19.5–23.8% Fe was used in the experiments. Minerals of the ore sample are chalcopyrite associated with pyrite in a non-sulphide gangue (mainly quartz). The liberation size of the minerals is minus 0.038 Ultrasound may be applied during the different stages of flotation, such as prior to, or during flotation ( In order to elucidate the effect of ultrasound on performances of the froth phase and the pulp (collection) phase, kinetic flotation tests were conducted with and without ultrasound. The froth was removed at preset time intervals for all flotation tests. For each test, predetermined froth depth ( It is assumed that the recoveries of valuable mineral, gangue minerals and water can be described by a first-order rate equation ( The recovery of each pulp component (chalcopyrite, pyrite, gangue and water) obtained from the tests with and without ultrasound is given in In order to assess the net effect of ultrasound on the responses, a decent data set was generated by calculating the differences between the recoveries of the pulp components (Δ On the other hand, there is a pronounced effect of ultrasound on overall recovery of chalcopyrite at low and intermediate level froth depths. At this point, it must be noted that no froth was overflowed from the cell in the ultrasonic flotation test conducted at low level airflow rate (4 L/min) and high level froth depth (25 As can be seen from the experimental and statistical results, in general, the use of ultrasound in the froth led to a decrease of the pyrite and non-sulphide gangue content in the concentrates but an increase in the water transferred from the froth to the concentrate by floating with shallow froth layer. In other words, generally very low recoveries of pyrite and/or non-sulphide gangue and higher water recoveries were obtained with ultrasonic flotation. These results indicate that the use of ultrasound in the froth reduces the entrainment, even if it increases the recoveries of chalcopyrite and water. Since the entrainment is a non-selective process, it is expected that a decrease in entrainment causes to a decrease in the chalcopyrite recovery. The chalcopyrite recovery with ultrasound, however, exhibited a different behaviour. As mentioned previously, the results of the previous studies have shown that the use of ultrasound improves the activity of the reagents used ( Since the pyrite content of the ore is very high (∼49%), the flotation behaviour of pyrite has very important effect on grade of concentrate. As can be seen from These results clearly indicate that the predominant effect of ultrasound was on coarse particle size fraction rather than fine fraction. In other words, a much better cleaning action in the froth was promoted for coarse particles rather than fine particles as a result of the use of ultrasound. It must be noted that the results of the size-by-size mineral analysis of the feed show that about 55% of chalcopyrite and pyrite particles are distributed in fine size fraction of the feed. Ultrasound increases the water recovery and thus increases entrainment, which possibly explains the observed increase in content of chalcopyrite and pyrite in the concentrate for fine fraction. In order to determine the effect of ultrasound on the performances of the froth phase and the pulp phase, incremental recoveries obtained from the flotation tests with and without ultrasound were fitted to Eq.  The experimental results were used to estimate the model parameters (Eq. As can be seen, the low values of selectivity index of chalcopyrite over the gangue minerals (both pyrite and non-sulphide gangue minerals) obtained at high level airflow rate indicate that the effect of the froth depth on the separation selectivity of chalcopyrite over the gangue minerals is negligible in the flotation without ultrasound. Opposite to this, the selectivity index for chalcopyrite/pyrite is considerably higher with ultrasound at same conditions. Although the pulp–froth interface becomes very wavy at high level impeller speed, high separation selectivity of chalcopyrite was obtained under these conditions with ultrasound. These results agree well with a result pointed out already, i.e., the ultrasonic flotation is more effective at the shallow froths. One interesting point to be noted from  The use of ultrasound in the froth phase has resulted in significant improvement of the flotation of a complex sulphide ore at intermediate and high level airflow rates. At low airflow rates, no significant differences in separation performance were obtained from the flotation with and without ultrasound. In addition, no froth is overflowed from the cell in the ultrasonic flotation tests conducted at low level airflow rate and high level froth depth. In all cases, the results show that the water recoveries are increased, indicating the mineral particles rather than water in the froth were drained in the ultrasonic flotation. The results of the size-by-size analysis show that a much better cleaning action in the froth was promoted for coarse particles rather than fine particles as a result of the use of ultrasound. Thus, higher separation selectivity is provided with ultrasonic flotation. It was determined that there was a significant difference in the bubble size distributions between with and without ultrasound. Increase the bubble coalescence can be considered as the most important detrimental effect of ultrasound on the flotation. As a result of increase in the bubble coalescence, it was found that the use of ultrasound in the froth is more effective at shallow froths. In addition to increase the effective pulp volume in a flotation cell by using the shallow froths, the quality of product can also be increased by the use of ultrasound in the froth phase, since the efficiency of the froth depth is increased by the use of ultrasound in the froth. Thus, either an increase in the capacity of a flotation plant with a negligible loss of flotation performance can be achieved by the use of ultrasound or the pulp density can be decreased to obtain better product quality with the use of ultrasound in shallow froths. Financial support from the Scientific and Technological Research Council of Turkey (TÜBİTAK) and Scientific Research Projects Funding Unit of the Suleyman Demirel University (Project No.: 106M128) is gratefully acknowledged. The authors would like to thank Dr. A.U. Akcil for the valuable support provided carrying this study. The authors are also grateful to two anonymous referees for their helpful comments on an earlier version of this paper.