Identical mixes containing fixed amounts of ordinary Portland cement clinker and gypsum were ground in two types of industrial cement mills—viz. ball mill (BM) and vertical roller mill (VRM)—to identical Blaine fineness to examine the effect of any possible differential comminution of gypsum on cement setting times. The present investigation demonstrates that during comminution of cements, the degree of crystallinity of gypsum, as determined by X-ray diffraction (XRD), changes with used grinding mills and this causes changes in setting times of similar cements even when ground to identical Blaine fineness.A number of researchers have shown that comminution of gypsum plays an important role in determining the cement properties, particularly setting times. In 1984, Kanare and Gartner In the present investigation, the variation in setting times of industrial Portland cements of identical Blaine fineness and gypsum contents was examined in respect to the loss of crystallinity of gypsum during comminution in two types of mills. An industrial Portland cement clinker containing: −19.7% SiO Setting times of the cement samples were determined according to the Indian standard 4031-1988. XRD patterns of the samples covering dÅ from 8.85 to 2.564 were obtained using Ni-filtered CuKα radiation at 30 kV, 20 mA. Although the XRD spectra covered gypsum peaks at 2 Combined DTA/TG of the sample was conducted in the Netzsch Simultan Thermo Analyse, Model 429 with Potentiometric Recorder up to 1000 °C. The rate of heating was kept constant at 10 °C/min. The weight of the sample taken for analysis in all cases was 100 mg. In The XRD patterns of the examined cement samples recorded no other Ca-sulphate phase except gypsum DTA of the cement samples recorded endothermic peaks for gypsum at around 140 °C with corresponding weight loss in TG From Similarly, combined DTA/TG did not record any crystalline Ca-sulphate phase other than gypsum Effect of grinding on amorphism was reported by Juhasz and Opoczky Earlier, Goswami et al.