This paper presents the results of studies on the influence of unadsorbed or physisorbed flocculant on filtration and dewatering characteristics of kaolin suspension. The unadsorbed flocculant in the suspension has been estimated by measuring the desorption of the respective flocculants on washing after their equilibrium adsorption. The presence of such species in the system has been invariably found to hinder filtration and dewatering behaviour. Their removal from the suspension by washing has led to a substantial improvement in filtration behaviour evident by the reduction in specific resistance of the cake to filtration (SRF).
                  The flocculation and dewatering results have been explained in terms of the nature of polymer adsorption and conformation. It has been shown that cationic flocculant, which adsorbs predominantly by physisorption, and is in most coiled form after adsorption is most efficient in enhancing filtration behaviour. On the other hand, non-ionic polyacrylamide flocculant, which is predominantly chemisorbed on kaolin and exhibits a more stretched conformation, is most suitable for enhancing sedimentation rate. The anionic flocculant, for which the conformation is most stretched, exhibits lowest sedimentation rate and poor filtration behaviour. In either case, removal of the excess unadsorbed flocculant from the liquid leads to improvement in filtration behaviour.The use of high molecular weight polymers as flocculants for fine particle suspensions has been widespread for many years in the separation and dewatering of solid/water systems containing very fine particles ( However, in practice, the dosage conditions seldom coincide with the required dosage calculated for equilibrium conditions under controlled laboratory experiments. The flocculants are often overdosed in an operating plant. Such practice could seriously impair the separation efficiency and process economics since much of the added flocculant remains unadsorbed in the suspension without participating in the flocculation process. Presence of these unadsorbed flocculant in the liquid can also influence the filtration and dewatering characteristics of the suspension. In this paper we present an account of such influence due to the presence of unadsorbed flocculants in kaolin suspension as a model system. This paper further analyzes the nature of adsorption of the flocculants on to the surfaces of the particles and its effect on the separation properties. The kaolin clay used in this study is of high quality paper coating grade containing all the particles below 20 μm with only 11% particles above 10 μm, and having Three high molecular weight polyacrylamide (PAM) flocculants of different ionic nature namely an anionic acrylamide copolymer (PAM-A), a cationic acrylamide copolymer (PAM-C), and a non-ionic polyacrylamide (PAM-N) were used in this study. They were kindly supplied by Allied Colloids, U.K. The molecular weights for all three polymers lie within 5–7 Flocculation experiments were conducted using the conventional cylinder test procedure. The detailed procedure is already described elsewhere ( The flocculation experiments were followed by two schemes of sedimentation and/or filtration tests. In Scheme 1, the entire suspension after flocculation was transferred to a graduated cylinder and allowed to settle after inverting the cylinder five times. A clear liquid–slurry interface could be seen descending. The height of this interface was noted at a regular interval of time. Settling rates were estimated from the slope of the straight-line portion of the plot of interface height vs. settling time. In Scheme 2, the flocculated suspension was first subjected to washing with measured amount of distilled water. This was done by carefully transferring whole of the flocculated mass along with the liquid and poured into a Buchner funnel provided with filter paper. Washing was done by pouring measured volume of distilled water slowly and carefully to prevent substantial breakage of flocs. The contents were allowed to filter under gravity and the filtrate was analysed for flocculant concentration after each washing. The washing was repeated several times until there is no measurable amount of flocculant in the filtrate. The number of washing cycle for different flocculant was different, but varied between 10 to 15 cycles. The washed kaolin was then carefully removed from the filter paper and re-suspended in a requisite amount of distilled water and subjected to sedimentation test similar to Scheme 1. The sedimentation results were reproducible within an error of 2.5%. The adsorption of the flocculants from solution onto kaolin surface was estimated by determining their depletion from the solution. This was done by first estimating the unadsorbed amount in the supernatant. The difference between added dosage of flocculant and its unadsorbed amount in the supernatant is assumed to have been adsorbed on the kaolin surface. The suspension were treated with required amount of flocculant in a manner similar to flocculation study, while stirring at 25 °C, followed by equilibration for 24 h. The supernatants were then separated from the sediment by centrifugation. Equilibrium concentrations present as unadsorbed flocculant in the supernatant were determined spectrophotometrically with a Perkin-Elmer Lambda 2 model UV/VIS spectrophotometer ( Filtration experiments were conducted under two schemes, similar to the sedimentation experiments. The details of the filtration procedure have already appeared elsewhere ( The permeability ( The filterability of water with increasing concentration of each flocculant was assessed separately by measuring the capillary suction time (CST) with a standard CST apparatus, TW 166 of M/s. Triton Electronics Ltd., UK, using a 10 mm diameter reservoir. The Whatman No. 17 filter paper as suggested by The liquid is first poured into the central reservoir with the help of a pipette. The suction pressure of the filter paper then drains out the filtrate from the suspension The apparatus automatically records the time (in seconds) taken by the interface between the wet and dry portions of the filter paper exposed to the column of the suspension, to travel between two concentric circles. The recorded time denotes the interval in the movement of the liquid front from the inner circular mark to the outer circular mark. Lower the value of CST, better is the filterability of the sludge. The values reported in this work are the averages of five measurements. Reproducibility of the readings was within ± The results pertaining to the kinetics of flocculant adsorption on kaolin are presented in The adsorption isotherms of the three flocculants at the natural pH (6.4) are shown in The sedimentation rate and SRF values of kaolin suspensions flocculated by each of the three flocculants, without washing are shown in The non-ionic flocculant PAM-N has been found to be the most effective in improving the settling rates of kaolin suspension in comparison to anionic (PAM-A) and cationic (PAM-C) flocculants. A maximum sedimentation rate of 0.575 cm/s could be achieved at a PAM-N dosage of 0.50 mg/g. On the other hand, the maximum improvement in filtration characteristics has been obtained for the cationic flocculants PAM-C compared to anionic (PAM-A) and non-ionic (PAM-N) flocculants. The specific resistance to filtration (SRF) could be reduced from a value 7.81 A considerable change in sedimentation and filtration parameters was observed when the experiments were conducted under Scheme 2. Since there was difficulty in detecting and measuring the washed amount of polymer for low initial concentrations, we have conducted the Scheme 2 experiments at concentrations higher than the that corresponding to the first plateau adsorption/monolayer adsorption. A flocculant concentration of 2 mg/g of kaolin was found to satisfy this condition for each of the three flocculants. It is evident from To gain an insight into change in separation properties on washing, a knowledge on the nature of flocculant adsorption on kaolin and its conformation is necessary. To establish the nature of adsorption, desorption experiments were carried out by washing the flocculant treated suspension with distilled water. The kaolin was treated with flocculants in a manner similar to that for adsorption studies except that at the end of the equilibration time, the contents were filtered and washed with measured amount of distilled water till the filtrate did not show any trace of measurable quantity of flocculant. The concentration of flocculants in the filtrate liquid is reported as the amount desorbed on washing, and is presented in In order to have insight into the conformational state of the adsorbed polymers and their implications on sedimentation and dewatering characteristics of kaolin suspension, we have used the adsorption data presented in A comparison of the radius of gyration value suggests that the adsorbed PAM-C is in most coiled state (denoted by lowest value) of conformation compared to PAM-A which exhibits maximum stretched conformation (denoted by highest value). The conformation of adsorbed PAM-N falls in between PAM-A and PAM-C. More coiling of PAM-C chains compared to the other two means that the flocs formed will be more compact in nature and of higher density suitable for better filtration. This has been reflected in the lowest SRF value for PAM-C flocculant compared to the other two ( The flocs formed due to physisorption are generally considered to be weaker than those formed by chemisorption. During washing, the non-participating as well as the physisorbed polymer is removed from the surface. Therefore, it is expected that the flocs remaining in the system after washing are only those formed through chemisorption. These are considered to be stronger even though some of them may be smaller in size than their existence in the pre-washed stage. Accordingly, the absence of weaker flocs in the suspension has improved the filtration parameter as indicated by the decrease in the SRF value. However, washing does not bring in further reduction in the cake moisture content and remains almost the same between 38% and 39.6%. It is to be realized that simple washing of the flocculated suspension does not alter the inner structure of the flocs by any means. For this reason the cake moisture content remains almost the same for each of the cases. But removal of the physically adsorbed flocculant makes extra space for the chemisorbed loop of flocculants for changing their conformation on the surfaces of the particles forming the flocs. Washing of the suspension flocculated by PAM-C led to a decrease in the sedimentation rate. This could be possibly a result of high propensity for desorption of PAM-C from kaolin surface. Since for cationic PAM-C, the predominant flocculation mechanism is charge neutralization, hence, the removal of weakly physisorbed PAM-C from the solid surface might lead to a starvation in flocculant concentration leading to lower settling rate. Washing of the PAM-N treated kaolin suspension practically does not bring in any change in the settling rate and is almost the same as that for the unwashed one. However, it results in a substantial decrease in the sediment volume. Such reduction in the sediment volume may be attributed to the formation of weaker flocs by PAM-N addition during flocculation that breaks into smaller units while washing, leading to close packing and as a consequence lead to reduction in the sediment volume. A comparison between the unwashed and washed samples of flocculated kaolin reveals that washing has helped in reducing the SRF value substantially in each of the cases ( The separation solid–liquid separation properties of kaolin suspension flocculated with three types of flocculant were studied under two schemes of experimentation. In Scheme 1, where the flocculated mass was directly subjected to sedimentation and filtration, the separation property of kaolin suspension was found to be dependent on the nature of flocculant, their adsorption and conformation. Through Scheme 2 experimentation where the flocculated mass was subjected to washing and re-suspension before sedimentation and filtration tests, it has been established that for each flocculant type, the presence of unadsorbed flocculant in the liquid or weakly adsorbed flocculant on to the particles surface are responsible to hinder filtration behaviour of kaolin suspension. Removal of such unadsorbed and weakly adsorbed flocculant from the system has lead to a substantial improvement in filtration characteristics. It is perceived that a careful control of these unadsorbed flocculant and weakly adsorbed flocculant can lead to substantial saving in the flocculation and dewatering processes. One of the author (LB) is thankful to the Department of Science and Technology (DST), Govt. of India for the BOYSCAST Fellowship.