A novel method of fabricating freestanding electroformed metal structures using a rigid porous graphite substrate is reported. Polymethylmethacrylate’s adhesion to graphite is much stronger compared with metal-coated silicon or graphite, because of graphite’s high porosity and microroughness. Another advantage of graphite is its easy sacrificial removal by abrasion. Results are presented on the fabrication of high-aspect-ratio freestanding copper grids used as collimators in mammography and medical imaging. The method can be used in the production of micromolds for hot embossing and injection mold fabrication of microelectromechanical systems (MEMSs) and for fabrication of arrays of microparts on pick-and-place carriers for assembly into MEMS.The fabrication of high-aspect-ratio microstructures (HARMSs) using deep X-ray lithography (DXRL) and electroforming requires that the substrate provide good resist adhesion before and after exposure, that the substrate has a conductivity sufficient for the subsequent electroforming process, and that the metal structure can be released from the substrate after electroforming. Metal-coated silicon wafers are conventionally used as a primary substrate. The high conductivity of the metal layer makes the wafer suitable as an electroplating base, but the secondary radiation generated by the metals during the hard X-ray exposure can lead to adhesion failure Thin conductive carbon films have been used with some success as a plating base The properties of graphite, such as rigidity, low cost, and good thermal and electrical conductivity, suggest the uncoated graphite would be a suitable substrate and plating base for fabrication of HARMS using DXRL and electroforming. In this paper, we describe a new fabrication method of freestanding or released metal microstructures based on the use of commercially available rigid graphite sheets as a substrate. Also we discussed the potential application for microelectromechanical systems (MEMSs) of both injection molds and microparts on pick-and-place carriers. Commercially available rigid graphite sheets (Goodfellow), ranging in thickness from 0.25 to 1 Hard X-ray exposures were performed at bending magnet beamline 2-BM PMMA adhesion to graphite appeared much stronger compared with metal-coated silicon or graphite, because of graphite’s high porosity and microroughness PMMA structures patterned on the graphite substrate remained well attached to the substrate even after development in GG for ∼100 Graphite’s conductivity was found to be sufficient to perform electroforming directly without a metal base layer. Graphite turns out to be an excellent plating base for copper electroforming using acid sulfate electrolyte and for gold electroforming using sulfite electrolyte. Although copper deposition on the graphite surface usually starts well, for very high-aspect-ratio structures it was necessary to apply electrochemical activation of the carbon surface by reverse current to initiate copper electroplating. We expect graphite will perform well for other electroformed metals such as nickel, lead, and their alloys. The electroformed metal part must be separated from the plating base to provide a freestanding metallic structure. The advantage of graphite as a substrate is its easy sacrificial removal by abrasion once electroforming is complete. This broadens the range of metals suitable for electroforming and subsequently released. For example, freestanding copper and lead microstructures, which cannot be obtained by using a titanium sacrificial layer, can be easily fabricated using a graphite substrate. One of the important applications for freestanding microformed metal grids is mammography. Mammogram image quality can be significantly improved by using an antiscatter grid transparent for primary radiation and opaque to scattered radiation from all directions. Using graphite as a substrate, we were able to fabricate a freestanding copper antiscatter grid for mammography High-aspect-ratio electroformed metal molds also can be fabricated using a graphite substrate. The electroformed structure is overplated with additional metal to form the base of the mold. Finally the graphite can be easily removed by abrasion. An example of a copper mold for grid fabrication is shown in For the production of many discrete microparts in electroformed metals for later assembly into MEMS, the batch of microparts must be released, yet temporarily held to be later individually picked from the batch and placed into MEMS. This pick-and-place assembly can be facilitated by attaching a carrier to the array of electroformed parts while still attached to the graphite ( We also note that graphite substrates can be used with SU-8 negative resist. The resist showed excellent adhesion for HARMS ( We have been successful in the development of a process that uses a graphite substrate to fabricate freestanding metal microstructures and micromolds. The method can be used with both PMMA and SU-8 resists. By using rigid graphite as a substrate, we were able to fabricate a high-aspect-ratio freestanding copper antiscatter grid for mammography. The method has potential in the production of micromolds for injection mold fabrication of MEMS and for fabrication of arrays of microparts on pick-and-place carriers for assembly into MEMS. The work is supported by NIH SBIR Phase II Grant: 2 R44 CA76752 R44 CA76752-03, and by US Department of Energy, BES, under Contract No. W-31-109-ENG-38.