A method for determining the minimum practical energy for comminution was developed and is presented in this paper. An objective of the method was to determine experimentally the energy-breakage relationship for a wide size range in order to evaluate the energy performance of both crushing and grinding processes using one energy benchmarking value.
                  Single-particle compression breakage, referred to in the field of comminution as one of the more efficient forms of mechanical comminution, was the basis for a test regimen to characterize the energy-breakage properties of ores. Existing models for impact breakage were found to be valid for single-particle compression breakage when used in a modified form. A key parameter of the adopted model, the threshold energy, was also investigated for three ore types and a range of particle sizes.
                  The energy performance of comminution processes at a Canadian mining operation was determined by comparing the determined minimum practical energy, using the new method, with actual site specific energy requirements. In order to evaluate the energy performance of different crushing and grinding technologies, the proposed energy benchmarking method was used to compare the energy performance of alternative comminution flowsheets.The size reduction of ore prior to minerals extraction is a particularly energy intensive process and typically accounts for 30–70% of the overall energy used by mining operations. Showing the variation in comminution requirements across mining operations, a Canadian study on specific energy consumption in base metal underground mines demonstrated that combined crushing and grinding specific energies ranged from 15.2 to 32.1 Single-particle compression breakage has been the focus of a number of studies in the field of comminution as a method to gauge the comminution efficiency of grinding equipment. To date, significant work on quantifying energy-breakage has been carried out using impact breakage devices. Through single-particle impact testing, Incorporating single-particle compression testing and models adopted from impact testing, a methodology is put forward in this paper to determine the minimum practical energy required to reduce the size of an ore to a certain product size. The determined energy value is then compared to the actual energy consumed at the respective mining operation to determine the Benchmark Energy Factor (BEF), an energy performance indicator, of comminution processes at the plant. The BEF term was initially introduced by BC Hydro, an energy utility in British Columbia, Canada. It is applied in cases where site factors such as environmental and material conditions, which are not under control of the operator, influence energy consumption and need to be accounted for during calculation of energy performance. A key feature of the proposed method is that it is not constrained to one comminution technology, thereby allowing the comminution energy performance of plants comprising different crushing and grinding technologies to be effectively compared. The battery limits of the benchmarking effort were nominated as starting at the muckpile of blasted or caved material, and terminating before the first beneficiation process. Reflecting the battery limits of the energy benchmarking effort, the approach included testing of a wide range of particle sizes for fitting with an energy-breakage model. An instrumented MTS piston press unit, shown in Narrowly sized particles, ranging from 1.8 to 63 In order to extend the test method to finer size ranges, testing of multiple particles placed in one layer such that inter-particle effects are minimal was considered. Individually testing particles that are less than 12 The previously mentioned energy-breakage model, developed from impact breakage testing by A significant deviation from the originally proposed use of the model, as specified by Results from testing of copper-porphyry ore from the Huckleberry copper–molybdenum operation, are shown in A significant improvement in application of the model was found when using a modified form of Eq.  The relationship between cumulative percent passing of certain size fractions and the Further work was directed towards understanding the size dependency of the threshold energy, Fracture of particles was identified through real time observation of force–displacement data, visual observation of the rock particle, and the operator detecting sounds that indicated fracture extending through the particle had taken place. Post-test inspection was carried out to confirm whether the generated data was to be accepted or rejected. This included graphical inspection of the force–displacement data, as shown in The area underneath the force–displacement curve up to the point of fracture was calculated and through knowledge of the specimen weight an The relationship between the energy threshold and particle size is shown individually for the three samples in Comparisons of the multiple of particle size and threshold energy, Compression loading of single layers of multiple particles was not used to determine the energy threshold of sample types. Since a variation in particle size, shape and strength would be present within the layer of particles, the threshold energy of individual particles would be reached at different stages of a compression test. By the time all of the originally loaded particles had undergone at least one stage of breakage, the progeny of a proportion of these particles will have already gone through a few stages of breakage. Therefore, it would be very difficult to use the results of such a test to interpret the threshold energy for a given particle size. Directly derived threshold energy values were very low in comparison to the typical values of specific energy consumption associated with comminution equipment. For example, the average threshold energy for the Huckleberry copper-porphyry sample ranged between 0.006 and 0.01 In summary, the energy-breakage model was applied in a sequence of virtual comminution stages, starting from the coarsest fractions and working down to the finer fractions. For each size fraction, the specific energy input and proportion of mass subjected to compression-breakage was optimized such that: (1) the final product size distribution was the same or finer than the product of site comminution equipment (2) a minimum specific energy input resulted (3) Energy input per size fraction, The energy required to grind Huckleberry coppery porphyry ore from an F80 feed size of 3350 Energy-breakage test results and the predictive model, Eq. The comminution circuit was sampled and corresponding equipment data analyzed from plant logs. The size of feed to the primary crusher was determined through the use of Wipfrag image based software and photos of the muckpile. The total energy intensity of the major energy consumers, equating to 19.95 From the results of the benchmarking study it can be seen that the energy performance of primary crushing was significantly better than that of SAG and ball mill grinding. Results from the compression breakage tests for Huckleberry ore were also used to estimate the minimum practical energy for the crushing and grinding circuits assessed by Development and application of the proposed energy benchmarking method for comminution necessitated a thorough analysis of mineral compression breakage. Modification of the impact breakage based model, Eq. The proposed method for determining the minimum practical energy, using Eq. The crushing and grinding processes of a copper–molybdenum operation were benchmarked using the proposed method. The energy performance of alternative comminution circuits was assessed for the same operation using the BEF approach. Results showed that a two-stage HPGR – high speed stirred mill circuit provided the best energy performance. Comparisons of crushing and grinding operations using the energy benchmarking method would help determine the typical BEF values for certain comminution technologies. Further work is being carried out to extend the boundary limits of the benchmarking method to include fragmentation of in situ rock, through caving or blasting, and fine grinding. The range of tested particle sizes will be extended accordingly to reflect the change in comminution duty. BC Hydro Power Smart Group initiated the energy benchmarking project and their support was vital to the development of the methodology. Many thanks to Enkhbold Tsagaankhuu for processing images of the muckpile and carrying out size distributions. Permission from Huckleberry Mines Ltd. to publish this information and assistance received from onsite personnel is gratefully acknowledged. This section presents an example of finding the Benchmark Energy Factor (BEF) for a comminution circuit composed of a Semi-Autogenous mill, ball mill and pebble crusher (also referred to as an SABC circuit). Plant data was referenced to determine the specific energy used by the main pieces of equipment within the specified boundary limits, shown in Piston press testing was carried out using SAG mill feed sample as described in Section The main outcomes of the compression tests were the t10 values, representing the percentage of product that passes through one tenth of the original feed size, which occurred for certain energy input levels and feed particle sizes. Energy input, feed and particle sizes were related to each other through use of Eq.  The inter-relation between For the determination of the minimum practical energy, a sieve set was nominated based on a root 2 sieve series with reference to the size of the SAG mill feed and ball mill circuit product size distributions. The first column of Model A.1 was applied to the coarsest fractions of material retained in the sieve series, +187.3 Total specific energy input is targeted to be a minimum. Percentage passing of the final modeled product is the same or finer than the sampled ball mill cyclone overflow. Comminution level of at least 80% of the maximum breakage possible i.e. the t For the comminution duty of the SABC circuit, the minimum practical energy was found to be 9.44 Comparison of the actual equipment energy, 19.15