In this work, membrane electrolysis technology is used to conduct the basic research on directly preparing lithium carbonate powders with lithium chloride solution, mainly exploring the influence of electrolyte concentrations, electrolyte temperature, current density and carbon dioxide flowrate on the physical phase, micro morphology and particle size of lithium carbonate. By comparing the results of XRD analysis and SEM micromorphology, it was found that the products with higher diffraction peak representing crystal plane (−110) had mostly lamellar planar structure, while the products with higher peak representing crystal plane (002) had mostly rod-like line type structure. Under the conditions of higher anolyte concentration, lower catholyte concentration, lower temperature and lower current density, is beneficial to obtain single crystal structure with small size, but the cross growth of numerous monocrystalline will increase the final crystal size. Besides, the smallest size product was obtained under the conditions of anolyte with LiCl concentration of 300 g/L, catholyte with LiCl concentration of 50 g/L, electrolyte temperature of 50 °C, current density of 100 mA/cm2 and carbon dioxide flowrate of 1.0 L/min. The experimental results show that it has great potential and space to research on the direct preparation of lithium carbonate by membrane electrolysis.There are many kinds of lithium compounds, such as chloride, hydroxide, carbonate, sulfate, etc. In recent years, lithium iron phosphate, lithium manganese acid, lithium cobalt acid and lithium ternary materials are widely used for Li-ion battery materials. Due to its high energy density and electrochemical potential (3.04 V) ( The lithium is mainly founded in ore and saline brine in nature. Initially, the extraction of lithium was mainly carried out by pyrometallurgical technology from ore, which leads to the gradual depletion of lithium resources in ore. However, a large number of lithium resources have been discovered in saline brines, due to the process of extracting lithium from brine is simpler and the cost is lower, the extraction of lithium from saline brines has gradually become the main trend ( Most of the lithium in brine exists in the form of lithium ion in solution. The main methods( Adding carbon dioxide into lithium hydroxide alkali liquid is also a common method to prepare lithium carbonate (  Cathodic reaction: Anodic reaction: Overall reaction: The morphology of lithium carbonate powder prepared by electrolysis was observed using scanning electron microscopy (SEM, HITACHI SU8010) and SEM images were collected at 3.0 kV. A powder diffractometer (D8 Advance X, Bruker, Germany) with Cu Kα (λ = 0.15406 nm) radiation was used to analysis the physical phase and crystallinity degree of lithium carbonate powders. The result showed that the powders prepared were all high purity Li The same concentration lithium chloride were adopted as the anolyte and catholyte. The white powders were obtained with different concentration of lithium chloride electrolyte at room temperature, and other conditions contain current density of 400 mA/cm   As shown in the According to the particle size of electrolytic product lithium carbonate, 300 g/L lithium chloride was selected as the concentration of anolytes in the following electrolysis experiments. The powders were obtained with different catholyte concentration of lithium chloride at room temperature, and other conditions include anolyte lithium chloride concentration of 300 g/L, current density of 400 mA/cm   Effect of the catholyte concentration on particle size of lithium carbonate products is indicated by According to the particle size of lithium carbonate, 50 g/L lithium chloride was selected as the optimized parameter. The powders were obtained at different electrolyte temperature and other conditions of anolyte lithium chloride concentration of 300 g/L, catholyte concentration of 50 g/L, current density of 400 mA/cm The microstructure of lithium carbonate powders prepared under different electrolyte temperature is displayed in  As can be seen from According to the particle size of lithium carbonate, 50 °C was selected as the optimized temperature. The powders were obtained at different current density, and other conditions include room temperature with, anolyte lithium chloride concentration of 300 g/L, catholyte concentration of 50 g/L, time of 1 h and CO    The current density of 100 mA/cm SEM images of lithium carbonate prepared by electrolysis under different CO    According to the particle size of lithium carbonate, 1.0 L/min was selected as the optimized flowrate of carbon dioxide. However, the carbon dioxide flowrate of 1.5 L/min is beneficial to keep the cathode liquid neutral (pH = 7) in the electrolysis process. In this paper, a novel electrochemical method for direct conversion of lithium chloride to lithium carbonate was presented, and the influences of electrolyte concentration, catholyte concentration, electrolyte temperature, current density and carbon dioxide flowrate on electrolytic product Li We declare that we do not have any commercial or associative interest that represents a conflict of interest in connection with the work submitted. No conflict of interest exits in the submission of this manuscript, and manuscript is approved by all authors for publication. I would like to declare on behalf of my co-authors that the work described was original research that has not been published previously, and not under consideration for publication elsewhere, in whole or in part. All the authors listed have approved the manuscript entitled “Basic Study on Direct Preparation of Lithium Carbonate Powders by Membrane Electrolysis” that is enclosed. This work was financially supported by the