Chemical and mineralogical analyses were carried out on historical mortars from Ferrara to characterise the nature of the related raw materials. Results indicate (a) the binder homogeneity (CaCO3) confirming the widespread use of lime and (b) the remarkable heterogeneity of the silicoclastic skeleton, attesting heterogeneity of the fluvial sands available in the area. These data enable us to assign the distinct sand composition to the different rivers flowing in the Ferrara area. This investigation offers fresh insight into the historic building activity and related techniques and should provide knowledge useful for restoration and conservation processes.Sedimentary geologists use mineralogical and chemical data to relate fluvial sand composition to the source mother rocks, thus establishing the related provenance. A similar approach can also be employed as an archaeometric tool in the investigation of ancient mortars. In this contribution, chemical and mineralogical data on mortars from Middle Age/Renaissance buildings of Ferrara (in the Po River plain, northeast Italy; Results are compared with the available information on the alluvial sediments of the area to constrain as far as possible the location of the quarry areas, to highlight the building techniques employed, and to provide guidelines for the utilization of new materials in the foreseen restoration processes. In particular, the studied materials are interbrick mortars from the following buildings: the Monastery of Sant'Antonio in Polesine (built in several phases during the 12th–16th centuries), the Church of Santa Maria in Vado (founded in the 10th century and extensively modified in the 15th–16th centuries), the Cathedral of Ferrara (apse, 15th–16th centuries), Palazzo Schifanoia (“Hall of Stuccoes,” 15th–16th centuries), and Palazzo Canani (16th century), where bricks, tiles, and terracotta have already been investigated Chemical composition (both major and trace elements) of mortars from the mentioned historic buildings of Ferrara was determined by X-ray fluorescence (XRF) using a Philips PW1400 spectrometer. Major element data (analyses recalculated to 100% on H Samples from Palazzo Schifanoia display two distinct populations: Sch1 and Sch2 were clearly prepared with two distinct batches of sand. Sch2 shows compositional analogies with the above-described StA3 samples, while Sch1 is prepared from SiO Samples from Palazzo Canani and Santa Maria in Vado are roughly similar to the StA3 and Sch2 populations, whereas samples from the Cathedral are comparable with the SiO Optical observation of thin sections at the transmitted light microscope and available XRD results performed on tout-venant mortars (powdered without any preliminary preparation) confirm that samples StA 105 ML and Sch2 are enriched in quartz and depleted in femic minerals compared with sample groups StA2, StA3, and Sch2. As concerns the binding component, XRD indicates that carbonate is ubiquitous and preponderant, indicating the typical employment of lime. Traces of gypsum, found only in few samples, could derive from the plasters originally covering the considered wall portions or else could represent secondary mineralisation induced by the current SO Traces of melilite and wollastonite, usually present in terracotta mineral assemblages A direct comparison of chemical analyses (as reported in These differences can be related to the two distinct sources of sediments available in the surroundings of Ferrara, represented by the alluvial sediments of the Po River and those of the Reno River that flows down from the Bolognese Apennine Sands employed in StA1 and StA2 mortars are clearly related to the Po River. Despite the lower content in femic minerals and the paucity of mica in mortars StA3 and Sch2 besides those from Palazzo Canani and Santa Maria in Vado, the typical heavy mineral assemblage (including abundant amphibole; see On the other hand, a completely different chemical and mineralogical fingerprint (Apenninic affinity) characterises sands employed in Sch1 and those from the Cathedral (as well as sample StA 105 ML from Sant'Antonio in Polesine). This interpretation is supported by the transition element distribution reported in Different sands were used as aggregates in the mortars from several historic buildings of Ferrara. Some of them are clearly related to the Po alluvial sediments, while others display an Apennine affinity and should be linked to the Reno River. This indicates the historic availability of raw materials in different epochs. For Sant'Antonio in Polesine (the oldest building), we envisage only geomaterials from the Po River. Reno-type sediments are recorded only in younger masonry. This is coherent with the morphological evolution of the area: two different branches of the Po River surrounded Ferrara in the Middle Ages; Reno-type sediments were available only after the important hydraulic modification (15th–16th centuries) that diverted the Reno waters into the vanishing southern branch of the Po River As concerns the binder, XRD results confirm the sole presence of CaCO We emphasise that, as also highlighted by other authors Profs. L. Beccaluva and F. Siena are kindly acknowledged as the promoters of this research and for their constructive criticism. The authors are also grateful to Dr. R. Tassinari that carried out the XRF analyses.