The fracture behaviors of laminated composites of bulk metallic glass (BMG (Vitreloy 1))/crystalline layer have been examined. The composites stacked by BMG/thin Zr layer (25μm) have been bonded by electron-discharge bonding technique. The fracture tests have been carried out by non-standard self-designed subsize-charpy tester. When the number of BMG layer increases up to three layers, the fracture energy for the laminated specimen is increased due to crack redirection and absorption of the fracture energy at the crystalline layer during fracture.A fabrication of large-size bulk metallic glasses (BMGs) with a relatively slow cooling rate as low as 1 In the present study, a special attention has been given to the fracture behavior of laminated BMG/metal composites bonded by electro-discharge technique for the first time. The fracture behavior and fracture energy have been investigated by means of self-designed subsize-charpy tester. The estimated fracture energy for laminated BMG composites showed an enhancement of the fracture energy. The fracture behavior of laminated composites is presented together with an underlying mechanism for enhancement of fracture energy. Thirty grams ingots with a nominal composition of monolithic Vitreloy 1 (Zr A thin Zr metallic foil (25    A noble specimen architecture in a form of laminated composite has been attempted in several approaches in order to enhance fracture toughness and fracture energy in Al-based composite systems or ceramics It has been shown that the fracture energy for charpy tests appears useful data for estimation of fracture energy of materials The fracture behaviors of laminated composites of BMG (Vitreloy 1)/crystalline layer have been examined. The fracture tests have been carried out by non-standard self-designed subsize-charpy tester. When the number of BMG layer increases up to three layers, the fracture energy of the laminated specimen is increased by about 40%. It appears that the enhancement of the fracture energy for the laminated composite is mainly attributed to crack redirection and absorption of the fracture energy at the crystalline layer during fracture. This work was supported by Creative Research Initiatives of the Korean Ministry of Science and Technology.