The strength and ductility of bulk nanostructured and ultrafine-grained iron containing 0.39% oxygen by weight was determined by tensile tests. Samples were obtained by consolidation of milled iron powder at 500°C. Heat treatments were designed to cover a wide range of grain sizes spanning from 100 to 2000nm with different percentages of coarse and nanostructured grain areas, which was defined as a bimodal grain size distribution. Transmission electron microscopy was used to determine the diameter, volume fraction and location of oxides in the microstructure. The strength was analysed following two approaches. The first one was based on the strong effect of oxides and involved the use of a mixed particle-grain boundary strengthening model, and the second one was based on simple grain boundary strengthening. The mixed model underestimated the strength of nanostructured samples, whereas the simple grain boundary model worked better. However, for specimens with a bimodal grain size, the fitting of the mixed model was better. In this case, the more effective particle strengthening was related to the dispersion of oxides inside the large ferrite grains. In addition, the bimodal samples showed an acceptable combination of strength and ductility. Again, the ferrite grains containing oxides promoted strain hardening due to the increase in dislocation activity.The development of nanocrystalline (NC) and ultrafine-grained (UFG) materials with a good balance of strength and ductility is one of the main topics in current structural materials research. In the case of NC and UFG iron and steels, several processes based on the severe plastic deformation of ferrite grains have been implemented. Mechanical milling and, in particular, ball milling of iron have been extensively used to produce nanostructured powders that render NC and UFG bulk materials after a consolidation process Generally, the yield strength of industrial iron and low-carbon steel is evaluated by a classical Hall-Petch relationship, σ Recently, the role of particles in strengthening ball-milled iron has been investigated, and a new model has been proposed The increase in strength produced in NC and UFG irons after grain refinement is generally accompanied by a decrease in ductility. Under compression, in addition to high strength, moderate ductility has been observed even for average grain sizes close to the NC range Currently, different severe plastic deformation (SPD) techniques are used to obtain UFG iron from relatively pure materials such as Armco iron or interstitial-free steels (IF) One of the strategies developed in recent years for obtaining NC and UFG metals with high tensile plasticity is bimodal grain size distribution. Structures containing nanostructured and coarse-grained zones, in which the grains are on the micrometre scale, have been suggested to prevent failure by shear localisation The mechanical milling of pure iron and subsequent warm or hot consolidation has been one of the main techniques for obtaining bulk samples of NC and UFG iron and steels with a homogeneous grain size distribution In this context, the aim of the present study was to produce pure iron with a bimodal grain size distribution from mechanically milled powder and investigate its mechanical response by hardness and tensile tests to find a good combination of high strength and ductility. At the same time, microstructural observations were carried out to investigate the size, volume fraction and location of oxide particles in the ferritic matrix. These microstructural features were used to predict the yield strength based on the two abovementioned strengthening models. These predicted yield strengths were compared with the experimental ones to evaluate the effect of oxide particles on the strength in the NC and UFG ranges. Commercial pure iron powder with a particle size between 75 and 160 The milled powder was consolidated using a two-step process. The first process consisted in the cold compaction of the powder at 1300 The density was determined by the Archimedes method with water as the liquid medium. Microstructural analysis and determination of ferritic grain size were performed by scanning electron microscopy (SEM) using a JEOL JSM6400 microscope equipped with an energy dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDS) system (Oxford Inca X-sight) and by transmission electron microscopy (TEM) using a Philips CM30 microscope operating at 300 To determine the number of subgrain boundaries and high-angle boundaries of the as-consolidated specimens, the microstructure of some samples consolidated at 500 All of the consolidated samples showed high relative densities above 98% with respect to the density of pure iron. The microstructure of the consolidated samples and its evolution with heat treatment at different temperatures can be observed in The TEM bright-field micrograph of the as-consolidated samples at 500 It is interesting to note that the volume fractions of these oxides (Vf EBSD studies of the as-consolidated samples at 500 After heat treatment at 650 Increasing the temperature to 700 and 725 At 775  Additional heat treatment at 650 Upon heat treatment at 675 and 700 For the heat treatments performed at higher temperatures (725 and 775 First, it is interesting to discuss the development of the microstructures of the consolidated samples with heat treatment. The grain growth of ball-milled iron with increasing temperature is delayed by the presence of nanosized oxide particles in the material’s microstructure Before analysing the effect of grain boundaries and small oxide particles on the strength of ball-milled iron, two considerations must be made. The first is related to the strength values that will be used. Due to the brittle behaviour of nanostructured samples in tensile tests, it is important to consider the hardness and compression tests carried out for samples submitted to identical heat treatments. This consideration must be made because these tests are not as sensitive to porosity and bonding defects as tensile tests are. Therefore, the yield strength calculated from tensile tests, the hardness values obtained from hardness tests and the yield strength obtained from compression tests The second consideration is related to the study of the misorientations between the ferrite grains in consolidated samples. These misorientations must be examined because the exponent associated with grain size in the calculation of the effect of grain boundaries could be affected In this section, we will analyse the contribution of friction stress ( The types of microstructure defined in each model are different from those obtained by cold rolling or typical SPD processes. In the latter, the structure is divided into lamellar boundaries oriented along the deformation direction, which are HABs, and interconnecting cell dislocation boundaries, which are LABs In the first approach, the In Eq. The value of the Hall-Petch coefficient Finally, for the prediction of the strengthening related to dispersed oxides, the classical expression of Ashby-Orowan The values for each contribution and the total strength obtained by both models are displayed in As shown in Focusing on the analysis of the as-consolidated samples and the samples heat treated at low temperatures (650 and 660 We now discuss about the samples with a bimodal grain size distribution. As previously mentioned, when the heat treatment temperature was increased (675 and 700°C), abnormal grain growth was observed in ferrite, whereas little increase in the size of oxide particles was observed. Now, despite the drop in With respect to the model based on simple grain boundary strengthening, it is clear that the added contribution of oxide particles to strengthening is very low. In the nanostructured and ultrafine ranges, in which no abnormal grain growth was observed or it was very low, the predicted strength is slightly higher or very close to the experimental values. In these ranges, this model seems to be slightly more accurate than the model based on mixed strengthening. However, as the grain size increases and the volume fraction of large ferrite grains rises, the values predicted by the grain boundary strengthening model gradually deviate from the experimentally determined strength values. When the average grain size is greater than 1 From the analysis of both models, it seems that either of them is perfectly suitable over the range of grain sizes studied to determine the strength of ball-milled iron, and two conclusions can be drawn: the mixed model yields values that are lower than those measured experimentally in the nanocrystalline range and grain boundary strengthening alone cannot predict the strength of the samples when a bimodal grain distribution appears. One of the plausible explanations for the behaviour observed for the mixed model would be that the microstructure of the ball-milled iron specimens examined in this study is not exactly the same as that considered in the development of the model Another explanation would be that independently of the milling time and even the oxygen content, the presence of the “transformed regions” with a significant fraction of very fine oxide particles inside the nanometre-sized ferrite grains was very difficult to obtain. This result suggests that oxides would be located preferentially in the grain boundaries not acting as real barriers to dislocation motion. Consequently, the absence of these “transformed regions” would reduce the effect of It is necessary to note the intrinsic difficulty in measuring oxides in samples with a ferritic grain size on the border of the nanometre range. Therefore, it is reasonable to conclude that a moderate number of oxide particles measuring a few nanometres could have not been detected and that some of the locations of the oxides were inaccurate due to overlapping effects. These uncertainties could lead to an underestimation of the real value of In this section, we address the fact that simple grain boundary strengthening clearly failed when the microstructure of consolidated ball-milled iron was formed by a bimodal grain size distribution. Moreover, it is interesting to note that the difference between the observed and predicted values gradually increased as the percentage of coarse-grained areas increased. It seems clear then that a strengthening mechanism other than that related to grain boundaries is in effect. In this case, the strengthening due to oxide particles appears to be the more plausible explanation, and thus, the mixed model yields a closer fit to the observed strength. The mixed model works better because as the coarse-grained zones are formed, the oxides’ lack of mobility relative to the mobility afforded by grain boundaries causes the oxides located in former grain boundaries to be confined in new coarse grains. Consequently, there is an increase in the volume fraction of oxides inside the grains. The presence of a dispersion of fine oxides in the ultrafine and coarse grains of ferrite is clearly demonstrated in Additionally, the rate of growth of the oxides at the heat treatment temperature was very low, as reported in A careful analysis of the mixed model’s fit to the experimental values revealed that as the percentage of coarse-grained areas increases, the predicted values more closely approach the actual values. However, for the samples heat treated at 775 Now that the effect of the ferrite grain size and the oxide particles on the strength of consolidated ball-milled iron has been discussed, we can examine the results obtained from tensile tests. For the as-consolidated state, the very low tensile strength observed can be attributed to weak bonding between former powder particles. The aspect of the fracture in In the samples heat treated at 650 and 660°C, the bonding between particles was clearly improved, because the strengths obtained are very similar to the yield strength calculated from hardness values. However, the samples in each state showed no ductility, and examination of the fracture provides no support to particle debonding as in the as-consolidated state. In this case, in which the treatment temperature is well below the transition temperature Ac In the case of the samples heat treated at 675 Comparing the behaviour of the present Fe samples with the tensile curves of bulk iron made by SPS Furthermore, the volume fraction of coarse grains observed in the present study appears to be slightly smaller than that observed in To explain the lower UTS values of the present bulk iron samples with a bimodal grain size distribution, it is interesting to recall the role of areas with nanocrystalline or ultrafine grains. These areas act as hard phases imparting strength to the whole specimens. This effect, according to the grain boundary strengthening (  The microstructure of iron samples obtained by consolidation of initial ball-milled powders containing 0.39 wt% O at low heat treatment temperatures (from 500 The strength of these iron samples was not exactly predicted by mixed models in which the strength produced by particles plays an important role together with grain boundary strengthening. This finding may well be because the oxides were located in the grain boundaries without imparting additional strengthening instead of being located within nanometre-sized ferrite grains. The main reason for the low dispersion of oxides in ferrite was attributed to the low milling time and the low oxygen content. In this situation, models based on simple grain boundary strengthening for industrial irons rendered better results. In samples treated at higher temperatures (675 For the samples heat treated at 675 This work was supported by the