The stability of black carrot extract-loaded liposomes (0.1% and 0.2% extract) was presented as additional data related to the research article entitled “Physical and Chemical Stability of Anthocyanin-rich Black Carrot Extract Loaded Liposomes During Storage” (Guldiken et al., 2018) [1]. This article provides further information and data on physical and chemical stability considering lower extract concentrations during storage of extract-loaded liposomes. The lower the amount of extract and higher the lecithin concentration the faster the loss of the red color is visible.  The data can be used to show the biochemical stability of 0.1% and 0.2% black carrot extract-loaded liposomes. The data present color attributes of stored extract loaded liposomes and can be used to determine lecithin content. The figures provide visual observations of extract loaded liposomes during storage. The anthocyanin amounts in samples of extract-loaded liposomes were measured. The degradation of extract using concentrations of 0.1% and 0.2% black carrot extract incorporated in liposomes is present in Black carrot extract (BCE) (HF# 2.10592) (10 mg/g expressed as cyanidin 3-O-glucoside chloride) was provided by Döhler GmbH (AG Darmstadt, Germany). The soy lecithin (Lipoid S75) containing 69.3% phosphatidylcholine, 9.8% phosphatidylethanolamine, and 2.1% lysophosphatidylcholine was obtained from Lipoid AG (Ludwigshafen, Germany). Both were stored at −20 °C before the homogenization of liposomes. Liposomes were generated via two step homogenization as described The free and extract loaded liposomes were stored at ambient temperature in the dark for 21 days. All the samples were stored in airtight containers as full volume. All the analyses were performed on the stored samples during the storage period. All the experiments were performed at least 3 times for each triplicate sample. The average and standard deviation of all data were calculated using Microsoft Excel for Mac (version 15). Statistical analyses were performed using an one-way analysis of variance (ANOVA), followed by the Duncan post hoc test using SPSS software (version 21.0, SPSS, Chicago, IL, USA). This study was supported by a fellowship within the Doctoral Research Program of The Transparency data associated with this article can be found in the online version at 