Coal permeability is a measure of the ability for fluids to flow through coal structures. It is one of the most important parameters affecting the gas drainage performance in underground coal mines. Despite the extensive research conducted on coal permeability, few studies have considered the effect of coal damage on permeability. This has resulted in unreliable permeability evaluation and prediction. The aim of this study is to investigate the effect of coal damage on permeability and gas drainage performance. The Cui-Bustin permeability model was improved by taking into account the impact of coal damage on permeability. The key damage coefficient of the improved permeability model is determined based on the published permeability data. A finite-element numerical simulation was then developed based on the improved permeability model to investigate the damage areas and the permeability distribution around roadway. Results showed that the tensile failure occurs mainly on the upper and lower sides of the roadway while the shear failure symmetrically occurs on the left and right sides. With the increase in the friction angle value, the damage area becomes small. A good agreement was obtained between the results of the improved permeability model (γ
                     =3) and the published permeability data. This indicated a more accurate permeability prediction by the improved permeability model. It is expected that the findings of this study could provide guidance for in-seam gas drainage borehole design and sealing, in order to enhance the gas drainage performance and reduce gas emissions into underground roadways.Gas drainage has been an effective method to guarantee mining safety and lessen global warming effect However, it should be noted that previous scholars mainly focus on the influence of coal mechanical properties and gas sorption/adsorption on permeability variation, and the mechanical deformation was generally assumed to be elastic. Few studies have taken into account the effect of coal damage on permeability Therefore, in this study, a damage-based permeability model is developed based on the Cui-Bustin permeability model, and then is applied to investigate the permeability distribution of damaged coal around roadway via finite element method (FEM) numerical simulation. The damaged areas around the roadway and the effect of coal friction angle are investigated. Meanwhile, the key damage coefficient of the improved permeability model is determined based on the published permeability data around roadway. Finally, the potential guidance from the improved permeability model on the gas drainage is identified. Due to the large complexity and uncertainty of underground coal mine conditions, numerical simulation is a good alternative for onsite research. Numerical simulation allows the implementation of the sensitivity analysis. Therefore, to complete the research goals of this study, a numerical simulation model ( To reveal the effect of coal damage on permeability, a term The improved C&B permeability model is implemented into the numerical simulation model to evaluate permeability distribution around the roadway. Stress redistribution around the roadway causes coal damage, which greatly affects the permeability changes around roadway. In this study, the first strength theory is adopted to estimate the tensile failure around roadway, i.e. if the maximum tensile stress is more than the uniaxial tensile strength, then the tensile damage initiates. The Mohr-Columb criterion is adopted to estimate the shear failure around roadway.  According to the Mohr-Columb criterion, the friction angle of coal affects the damage distribution. To study this effect, four different friction angle values (10°, 20°, 30° and 40°) are implemented into the simulation model, respectively. The simulation model results are given in The damage coefficient Meanwhile, as shown in This paper aimed to investigate the effects of coal damage on permeability and gas drainage performance. The Cui-Bustin permeability model was improved by taking into consideration the impact of coal damage on permeability. Then this model was implemented into an FEM numerical simulation software. From this numerical modelling, following conclusions could be obtained. Stress redistribution around roadways results in coal damage around them. The tensile damage mainly occurs on the upper and lower sides of the roadway while the shear failure symmetrically occurs on the left and right sides. Furthermore, with the increase in the friction angle value, the damage area becomes smaller. When A good agreement was obtained between the permeability results of the improved model and the published permeability values around roadway. This shows a more accurate permeability prediction by taking into account the effect of damage on permeability. All the findings in this paper could provide scientific guidance for the gas drainage borehole design and sealing, helping to enhance the gas drainage performance and decrease gas emissions into underground roadways. This paper is financially supported by the