Calcaneus is the most common site of hindfoot fracture, frequently caused by fall from height or high energy trauma. The therapeutic strategy ranged from non-operative to ORIF (Open Reduction Internal Fixation). Indications for percutaneous fixation include soft tissue damage or relative contraindications to open surgery. Minimally invasive percutaneous calcaneoplasty should be an alternative to ORIF aiming to reach a stable reduction, early functional recovery and short hospital stay. The aim of our study was to evaluate the clinical and radiographic outcomes of calcaneus fractures treated with balloon calcaneoplasty (BCP) by using a new generation vertebral augmentation system, VBS™-Vertebral Body Stent-DePuy Synthes. A total of 10 patients treated with VBS™ system were recruited for the study. Nine fractures were caused by a fall from height and one case by traffic accident. The mean follow-up was 8.9 months (range 2.6–23.1). The fractures were categorized according to Sanders and Essex-Lopresti classifications (5: type II, 3: type III and 2: type IV; 9: “joint depression” type and 1 case “tongue” type). Radiographic measurement (Böhler’s and Gissane’s angles) were evaluated at both pre-operative and immediate postoperative time. The American Orthopaedic Foot and Ankle Society (AOFAS) Ankle-Hindfoot score as well as a subjective evaluation (Visual Analog Scale, VAS) were used for the clinical assessment at the last follow-up. Mean preoperative Böhler’s angle was 12.3 ± 8.41° (95% CI 6.3–18.3°), whereas mean preoperative Gissane’s angle was 123.66 ± 20.47° (95% CI 109.0–138.3°). At postoperative follow-up mean Böhler’s angle increased to 21.51 ± 4.17° (95% CI 18.5–24.5°; p < 0.01), and mean postoperative Gissane’s angle was 121.74°±6.82° (95% CI 116.8°-126.6°). Mean AOFAS at the last follow-up was 70.4 ± 17.44 (95% CI 57.9–82.8).
                  Our study demonstrates that percutaneous calcaneoplasty using VBS™ is an effective treatment for calcaneus fracture and capable to implement correction manoeuvre with clinical and radiographic outcomes comparable with other percutaneous stentoplasty.Calcaneus is the most common site of tarsal bone fractures. Frequently these fractures are related to a fall from a height or to high-energy trauma [ The purpose of our study was to report the early clinical and radiographic outcomes of a small cohort of patients with calcaneal fractures treated using this new system of balloon calcaneoplasty (BCP). We enrolled 10 consecutive male patients (mean age 44.1 ± 11.45 years) from January 2014 to December 2016 with calcaneus closed fracture. Fractures were classified according to Sanders and Essex-Lopresti classifications on the basis of CT scan and X-ray, respectively. The inclusion and exclusion criteria are listed in The study conforms to the Declaration of Helsinki as revised in 2008 and was approved by the Institutional Review Board. All the patients were fully informed about the surgical procedure, treatment duration, and potential complications. All patients provided written and informed consent prior to being enrolled in the study and agreed to undergo the procedure. Böhler’s and Gissane’s angles were calculated at both pre-operative and immediate post-operative time. Patient physical preoperative status was assessed using the American Society of Anesthesiologists (ASA) score. Clinical post-operative outcomes were assessed using the American Orthopaedic Foot and Ankle Society (AOFAS) Ankle-Hindfoot score and the Visual Analog Scale (VAS). Complications, type of bone graft used, and time required for full weight bearing were also recorded. Patients were positioned on supine position with tourniquet placed at tight level. The use of K-wires as traction wires or as a joystick were used in 4 cases in order to restore calcaneal alignment and to reduce percutaneously bigger fragments. A 10-mm skin incision was performed in between the posterior and the middle third of the lateral approach to the calcaneus ( Post-operative management differed among patients according to fracture classification and bone substitute type used. In case of PMMA use, protected weight bearing was allowed from the third day after the surgery, while a complete weight bearing was allowed starting at 8 weeks after surgery. A cast was applied in all but two patients in order to reduce calcaneal loading during the first 3 weeks. The patients underwent clinical examinations each 15 days up to full weight bearing was reached, then every 3 months. At the time of the last follow-up visit (ranging from 3 to 12 months after full weight bearing was reached) a clinical assessment was carried out using the AOFAS Ankle-Hindfoot score as well as VAS. Numerical data were reported as mean ± standard deviation (SD) and 95% confidence intervals (95% CIs). Student’s The mean follow-up was 8.9 months (range 2.6–23.1). Nine fractures (90%) were caused by a fall from height during work. In one case (10%) the fracture was caused by traffic accident and it was associated to a contralateral open calcaneal fracture, and to both a subtrochanteric femoral fracture and a distal radius fracture on the left side. According to Sanders classification our cohort reported the following fracture type: 5 cases - type II, 3 cases - type III and 2 cases - type IV. In 9 cases (90%) the fractures were a “joint depression” type and one case was a “tongue” type according to the Essex-Lopresti classification ( In two patients we used a PMMA cement as bone graft to fill the bone defect. Radiological findings were summarized in Clinical outcomes were showed in The surgical strategy for calcaneus fractures is still matter of debate in the scientific community and the postoperative results have been jeopardized by the frequent complications. Anatomic restoration seems to be crucial to reach good clinical outcomes [ Balloon kyphoplasty is commonly used and considered a safe procedure for vertebral augmentation in osteoporotic acute fractures. Some of those instruments provided kyphosis-reduction capabilities to revert the kyphotic deformity [ Literature about this surgical procedure is very poor. In general, calcalneoplasty is indicated not only for acute fractures but also for non-union. In a case report, Godavitarne et al. defined percutaneous calcaneoplasty as a safe and well-tolerated technique in the management of osteoporotic insufficiency fractures with the main purpose to reduce pain [ On the other hand, BCP is used to treat displaced and reducible calcaneus fragments with primary aim to reconstruct articular surface. In particular, VBS™ stents positioned inside the collapsed calcaneus allows both height restoration and reduction conservation. Bano et al firstly reported in 2009 a case of a 45 years-old man with intra-articular calcaneal fracture treated with balloon assisted augmentation and injection of calcium phosphate cement [ In a case series of 20 patients treated with BCP, Biggi et al. reported very encouraging results consisting in an average Böhler’s angle correction of 22.97° with a mean follow-up of 24 months [ Jacquot et al. focused their research on balloon calcaneoplasty in two different studies and proposed a more conservative post-operative protocol: partial weight bearing was allowed after 2 months, while full weight-bearing after fracture (3 months) [ One of the most extended case series was performed by Vittore et al. [ Our study demonstrates results comparable with others researches in terms of clinical and radiographic outcomes with a statistically significant Böhler’s angle correction. However, the small sample size influenced our findings, even about the complication rate. The balloon reduction using stenting technology is an excellent tool to achieve reduction avoiding an extensive approach that might damage the surrounding soft tissues. Additional techniques may be developed in the future to better address particular demands, as the use of K wire to obtain better reduction. Our study has some limitations related to the study design, such as the small number of patients, the lack of a control group and randomization. Moreover, a priori sample size calculation was not performed. We believe that further high-quality studies and longer follow-ups are necessary to confirm our results and to assess the maintenance over time of the correction obtained. Despite the limitations of our research, we can conclude that calcaneus stentoplasty, using VBS™, is an effective and minimally invasive treatment for reduction of displaced calcaneus fractures. Furthermore, it is able to decrease postoperative pain and improves correction manoeuvre. In conclusion, the lack of complications typical of ORIF, the early full weight bearing, the minimal invasiveness, and the good clinical and radiographic outcomes make it a valuable treatment choice in selected cases. Authors certify that they have no affiliations with, or involvement in, any organisation or entity with any financial interest or non-financial interest in the subject matter or materials discussed in this manuscript. No funding source was involved.