The selective leaching of a low-grade calcareous phosphate rock using acetic acid was investigated. It was found that the leaching rate of the carbonate material increased with increasing the acid concentration, temperature, reaction time and decreasing pulp density. A shrinking core first-order kinetics model is presented to describe the dissolution and to analyse the data. The activation energy for leaching was found to be 41.0 kJ/mol and consequently, the rate of the reaction based on a reaction-controlled process could be expressed as 1− (1−
                     α)1/3
                     =3.68×104 e−41.0/RT
                     t. Depending on the leaching conditions, it was found that the P2O5 content could be upgraded to 32.1%, with recovery of about 81%. Therefore, it is possible to produce a phosphate concentrate from low-grade calcareous phosphate, using this leaching approach.Phosphate rocks are vital nonrenewable resources and are essential components in fertilizers and phosphorous based chemicals but require processing to reduce the contents of gangue minerals such as carbonates, silicates, and clays to meet the requirements of the phosphate industry. They should not contain more than 8% carbonates in order to be economical. Effective beneficiation can be achieved by using various processes, depending upon the liberation size of phosphate and gangue minerals and other ore specifications. Different processes like screening, scrubbing, heavy media separation, washing, roasting, calcinations, and flotation may be used ( For igneous phosphate ores, flotation is the best approach, but in the sedimentary phosphate ores, separation of phosphate from carbonate gangue using flotation is extremely complex. This is due to their similarities in physico chemical and surface properties of constituent minerals and also to their complex solution generated by the dissolution of salt-type minerals in the system ( Calcination is a thermal decomposition of calcareous material and demands a higher amount of thermal energy to achieve the required degree of beneficiation ( Investigations regarding the dissolution of carbonate ores using organic acids are limited. Organic acids have high selectivity for carbonate material in low-grade phosphate rocks ( Organic acids are promising leaching agents for the beneficiation of low-grade phosphate rock depending on reaction conditions, nature, and size of the particles ( Results from leaching the Greek Epirus phosphate rocks in acetic acid suggest that the dissolution process is a two-step procedure ( This investigation is focused on the application of the leaching method to process samples taken from Lar Mountain phosphate ore mine, which is located in southwest of Iran. Iran consumes about 1 million tons of phosphate rocks annually and most of this material is imported from abroad. Lar Mountain is a low-grade phosphate ore with high carbonate content. It has about 81 million tons of phosphate ores reserves and is the largest phosphate deposit in Iran ( In this study, leaching with acetic acid was applied to remove as much carbonate gangue from ore as possible to achieve a suitable concentrate and increase its P The rock samples were crushed and sieved to collect various size fractions for further analysis after drying at 110 °C. The chemical analysis of representative samples taken from Lar Mountain phosphate mine is presented in The − Clearly, the price of acetic acid and its recovery are key parameters for the economics of the process. Acetic acid can be recovered by a number of routes. By reacting calcium acetate with any strong acid, like sulphuric acid or by using ion exchange methods, it is possible to recover and recycle the acetic acid in the reaction. The reaction between acetic acid and calcareous materials is presented as follows: This reaction continues to completion dependent upon product solubility, acetic acid concentration, process temperature, reaction time and other process conditions. However, the dissolution kinetics controls the overall rate of selective leaching of calcareous minerals in the low-grade phosphate rocks. The mechanism of carbonate dissolution in acetic acid solution involves the initial formation of Ca(CH  The time required for carbonate dissolution depends on the particle size and the nature of the adherent materials existing in the phosphate rocks. For Lar Mountain samples, the reaction was observed to reach equilibrium after 60 min. Further leaching of the calcareous material was prevented by the build up of clay minerals and other insoluble silicates which are present on the calcareous materials. Therefore 60 min was selected as the optimum leaching time. The effects of acid concentration were investigated for a leach time of 60 min at 22 °C. As observed from The major factors that influence the results were types and character of the carbonate rock and the acid concentration. With regard to the acetic acid price and its recovery, the optimum acid concentration was 15% (w/w).  At higher pulp densities, the consumption of acetic acid clearly increased, thus with constant initial acid concentration, this leads to lower overall dissolution. Considering the process performance and economy, the results indicate 15% as the optimum percent solids. The effect of temperature was examined in the range 20–70 °C for a reaction time of 60 min in 15% acetic acid. As observed in The higher temperatures improve the reaction rate and reactant diffusion and provide slightly higher grades but there is no benefit in leaching above 40 °C. The more refractory calcareous material remains unreactive. By optimization of the leaching parameters summarised in In heterogeneous solid–liquid reactions, the soluble reactants diffuse across the interface and/or through the porous solid layer. Afterwards, chemical reactions occur. The reaction rate is controlled either by the diffusion of reactant through the solution boundary layer, or through a solid product layer, or by rate of the chemical reaction at the surface of the core of unreacted particles ( The shrinking core model considers that the leaching process is controlled by fluid film diffusion or chemical reaction control. The simplified equations of the shrinking core model when either diffusion or the surface chemical reactions are the slowest step can be expressed as follows, respectively (  The rate constants values, After the evaluation of activation energy and pre exponential factor, the kinetics model for the leaching process (Eq. This value of activation energy clearly suggests chemical reaction control for the process ( It is possible to recover acetic acid from the leached acetate solution by several routes. By the reaction of the calcium acetate with any strong acid, an insoluble salt is formed and acetic acid will be recovered by filtration. Sulphuric acid is a promising and important reagent for recovering acetic acid from acetate solution as shown by following reaction: It should be added that the by-product such as calcium sulphate could be used and/or sold to meet the cost of acetic acid and its recovery by sulphuric acid. It is necessary to consume sulphuric acid in the reaction and recover pure acetic acid, free from sulphuric acid, in order to prevent any attack on the phosphate minerals. Other methods to recover acetic acid are classified by the use of ion exchange resins. By this method, it is possible to recover the whole of the acetic acid in the reaction. No acid is expected to be lost as long as the acetate solution is recycled to the process. There are also some thermodynamically possible methods for acetic acid recovery like reversal of reaction (1) under certain conditions (pH, pressure, temperature, etc.). Another possible route is by the reaction of the calcium acetate solution with the hydrofluoric acid produced during phosphoric acid production to produce insoluble CaF. These methods need further investigation for the economical recovery of the acetic acid. Acetic acid was used to reduce the carbonate content in low-grade phosphate rock taken from sedimentary Lar Mountain of phosphate deposit in southwest of Iran which contained about 10% P The dissolution kinetics of the calcareous material with acetic acid solution was found to fit the shrinking core model for a reaction-controlled process. The activation energy was determined to be 41.0 kJ/mol consistent with a chemically controlled reaction.