In this research a 3D Synthetic Rock Mass (SRM) method is used to numerically characterize the strength and damage of hard rock pillars. The SRM is an integrated model incorporating a Discrete Fracture Network (DFN) within a Particle Flow Code 3D (PFC3D) particle assembly. Based on the numerical results of a joint-free pillar model, laterally fixed loading platens are suggested to simulate uniaxial compression tests on rock pillars. An internal-strain loading method is meanwhile used to ensure more realistic model behaviour. The peak strength, post-peak strain-softening gradient and deformation modulus of a series of jointed pillar models are then quantified, in order to investigate the effects of the inserted joint sets. The simulated peak strengths demonstrate a U-shape relationship when the joint sets are rotated; the peak strength also decreases with increasing joint size. A brittle post-peak behaviour is observed for pillar models with vertical joint sets of low persistence, the post-peak behaviour becoming more ductile when the joint sets are inclined and of higher persistence. A correlation is identified between the post-peak pillar behaviour and the simulated tensile cracking events, where a brittle post-peak corresponds to a high cracking rate. The effects of the joint sets on the pillar deformation modulus are observed to be similar to the effects on the pillar peak strength. Particular attention is given to the characterization of the crack initiation stress (σ
                     ci) and crack damage stress (σ
                     cd) thresholds of each pillar model, where the ratio of the crack initiation stress/peak strength is between 0.3 and 0.45, and the ratio of the crack damage stress/peak strength is between 0.75 and 0.98. The simulated cracks are compared between the jointed pillars and detailed cracking modes are plotted as 3D views and as 2D thin layers for selected pillar models.Pillar strength and associated damage characteristics are of major importance in hard rock mine design. To date, there is however arguably no accurate and efficient in situ testing method with which to characterize the pillar strength. Numerical methods are therefore increasingly applied to provide a better understanding of the pillar mechanical behaviour under external loading. In most models the pillar is treated as a continuum material, where in comparison with the rock sample strength, the pillar strength is reduced in order to implicitly involve pre-existing joint sets In order to explore a more robust pillar design tool, we use a state-of-the-art 3D Synthetic Rock Mass (SRM) approach to characterize the rock pillar strength and damage The SRM model is constructed by integrating a Discrete Fracture Network into a PFC3D-based particle assembly The boundary condition and loading scheme are two important factors in rock pillar simulations. The stiffness of loading platens has a significant influence on the model behaviour, as verified by Tang et al. A prism-shaped joint-free pillar was initially constructed as a base element of the subsequent jointed pillars ( After the joint-free pillar construction, a SRM pillar can be built by incorporating a DFN into the particle assembly. For real pillar simulations, the distribution of each joint set is determined using the scanline mapping on simulated DFN traces in the same manner as in the in situ mapping campaign As a reference for the jointed pillar models, the results from the simulated uniaxial compression tests on the joint-free pillar are initially presented.    In addition to the orientation, the peak pillar strength is also controlled by the joint set length. The peak strengths of the jointed SRM pillar models are compared with the empirical pillar strengths calculated from the existing empirical formulae The effect of the joint set orientation and size on the pillar post-peak behaviour has also been characterized. The SRM method is capable of simulating the post-peak strain-softening behaviour without defining any softening parameters. The strain-softening gradient is controlled by intact rock failures and the subsequent shear-sliding along joints and failed rock bridges. As discussed previously, the post-peak behaviour of the joint-free pillar showed two stages, a stage of rapid decrease in stress followed by a more ductile response (  To summarize the simulated pillar post-peak behaviour, The post-peak strain-softening gradient of the jointed pillars is also influenced by the joint set size. A decrease in gradient Deformation modulus of a jointed pillar can be directly calculated using the SRM technique. The modulus could then be used in a continuum-based code, such as FLAC3D Crack initiation and crack damage stress thresholds may be important in the characterization of pillar failure mechanism. In this research the term “crack initiation” is used to refer to the onset of stress-induced cracking in the simulated pillar models, and the term “crack damage” as the onset of macroscopic fracture coalescence The stress thresholds for rock samples have been identified by the acoustic emission (AE) method Characterization of the two crack stress thresholds is challenging for jointed pillars, due to the difficulty in monitoring the pillar global deformation. As no specific solutions currently exist, the damage characterization is largely based on direct monitoring and instrumental measurement, such as acoustic emission and microseismic monitoring  Once the axial strains corresponding to the crack stress thresholds are recorded in To summarize, preliminary SRM simulations provide results for ratios of crack stress thresholds to the peak pillar strength that in general agree with previous research. The ratio of Tensile cracking in the SRM models is a quantitative indicator of the pillar rock bridge failure. A high tensile crack number implies a high percentage of failed rock bridges in the global pillar failure. Detailed cracking modes are initially characterized for three selected pillar models R1-30, R1-60 and R1-90 at the end of the simulations. These pillars are selected as the visual crack coalescence data is more informative with shorter joint sets (R  In this research we used the SRM approach to numerically investigate the strength and damage characteristic of rock pillars with varied inclination and size of the joint sets. The numerical results of the joint-free pillar model suggest that the lateral platen freedom results in different pillar failure modes (hour-glass failure vs continuous shearing), and the platens are suggested to be laterally restricted for rock pillar simulations. The internal-strain loading scheme provides a lower peak strength and a more brittle post-peak response, and is used to ensure more representative and liable numerical results. The peak strength of the jointed pillar models is influenced by the orientation and size of the inserted joint sets, and a U-shape relationship is simulated when the joints are rotated. The pillar peak strength meanwhile is reduced with the increase in the joint set size. The simulated post-peak pillar behaviour is predominantly brittle when the inserted joint sets are less favourable for rock block shear-sliding, and the post-peak becomes more ductile when block shearing controls the pillar failure. A correlation exists between the post-peak strain-softening gradient and the simulated tensile cracking events, where a brittle post-peak corresponds to a high cracking rate. The U-shape relationship is also observed for the pillar deformation modulus when the inserted joint sets are changed. The simulated pillar crack initiation stress ( The authors would like to acknowledge the very helpful discussions and support with Dr. Matthew Pierce and Dr. Jim Hazzard (Itasca Consulting Ltd), and Don Roberts (Golder Associates Ltd). Funding for this research was provided by an