In this study, an economical and sustainable bio-hydrometallurgical route was evaluated for the recovery of aluminum from low-grade bauxite using the marine-derived fungus Aspergillus niger. Firstly, four different solid media were tested for high-yield spore production. Organic acid production capacity by A. niger was also evaluated in a medium supplemented with glucose or low-cost molasses as a carbon source using fungal spores or pellets as inoculum. The concentrations of the produced organic acids were determined by High-Performance Liquid Chromatography (HPLC). The results showed that oat-agar can be used as an inexpensive solid medium for greater fungal sporulation, while the liquid medium supplemented with molasses as a low-cost carbon source can be used for higher organic acids production. Among the conditions tested, A. niger spore inoculum showed the highest yield of the total produced organic acids (122.40 g L−1 or 81.6% (grams of sucrose used per grams of total acid) and also the highest (1.02 ± 0.02 g L−1 h−1) acids production rate using molasses as an inexpensive carbon source. This cultivation condition was selected for the bioleaching studies with low-grade bauxite. Among the three different bioleaching methods tested, the direct two-steps bioleaching process resulted in higher aluminum leaching (91.2%) compared to indirect (84.8%) and direct one-step (82.8%) bioleaching process. According to the results obtained using marine-derived A. niger under the established culture conditions, proved to be an eco-friendly and cost-effective way for aluminum recovery from low-grade bauxite ore and has the potential to be adopted on a pilot scale.Bauxite is the mineral rocks containing hydrates of aluminum oxides which is the major and primary source of aluminum ( The use of microorganisms in leaching and beneficiation of low-grade ores and minerals is widely considered an efficient, economical and environmentally benign alternative to conventional hydrometallurgical operations ( Worldwide production of citric acid by filamentous fungi is more than 2 million tons annually with an annual increase rate of approximately 3.7% ( Although some studies on the bioleaching of aluminum from bauxite were previously reported ( Brazil is the biggest sugarcane producer in the world and produced around 650 million tons of sugarcane in 2017 ( Bauxite ore was collected from Alcoa Alumínio, Sao Paulo State, Brazil. The mineral was crushed, ground and was sieved to obtain the size fraction of 80 mesh (100% ˂ 180 μm). The microwave-assisted acid digestion was performed by following EPA method 3052 ( The Ascomycota fungi To choose the culture medium for increased fungal spore production four solid growth media were tested: Sabouraud dextrose agar, Czapek agar, potato dextrose agar, and oat ( For organic acids production, two liquid culture media were utilized: a) Glucose medium as described by To prepare the spore suspension, the surface of five days old colonies grown on oat-agar medium was scraped with a sterile spatula and the fungal spores were transferred to a falcon tube containing sterilized 0.9% NaCl solution, homogenized and then filtered through glass wool. The spores were counted using a Neubauer counting chamber under a microscope (Zeiss Axio Imager 2, Jena, Germany). The final spores concentration was adjusted to 1 × 10 The vegetative inoculum (pellets) of In 250 Erlenmeyer flasks containing 100 mL of the fermentation media supplemented with 10% molasses (15% total sugar), or glucose (15%) was inoculated with either 1% ( Citric acid and oxalic acid produced by Bioleaching experiments were carried out in 250 mL Erlenmeyer flask containing 100 mL sterilized molasses medium inoculated with 1 × 10 The sterilized molasses medium was added to a flask containing 1% ( The spores of After the growth of X-ray diffraction (XRD) technique was used to determine the mineralogical composition of bauxite ore using SIEMENS model D5000, DIFFRAC PLUS XRD Commander. The data indicated that bauxite ore contains oxide minerals such as corundum (Al The textural and surface morphological analyses were carried out using a high-resolution field emission scanning electron microscope (FEG-SEM; JEOL model 7500F). The Energy Dispersive X-ray (EDX) analysis shows the presence of aluminum with various other elements including O, Fe, Na, Mg, Si, P, Cl, K and Ca. The EDX spectrum of the bauxite ore sample and the weight percentage of various elements present are shown in the supplementary Fig. S1(B). Laser-induced Background spectroscopy (LIBS) was used for the determination of various elements in the bauxite ore sample as depicted in the supplementary Fig. S1(C). The LIBS system (Ocean Optics, USA) equipped with a 1064 nm Q-switched Nd:YAG laser (Quantel, Big Sky Ultra 50, Bozeman, USA) operated at 50 mJ maximum power energy with four spectrometers Ocean Optics (HR2000+, Dunedin, USA) was used. LIBS technique is a well-known analytical method based on spectroscopic analysis of the emitted radiation by a micro-plasma induced on the analyte surface by a laser pulse. Laser-induced plasma is generated by focusing a pulsed Nd:YAG laser on the target in the air at atmospheric pressure. The relative simplicity of the LIBS principle makes this technique very attractive for a large variety of applications ( To achieve the highest production of fungal spores, various solid growth media were tested including Sabouraud dextrose-agar, Czapek-agar, potato dextrose agar, and oat ( Oatmeal ( In the present study, The biomass production and final pH as a function of growth time of These results support previous studies that the type of inoculum has significant effects on the productivity of the citric acid fermentation ( During the fermentation process, CO According to Max et al., for higher production yields of organic acids, the pH of the fermentation media should be low ( An organic acid structure with more carboxyl groups is preferable for metal leaching to form stable ligands. Citric acid, with 3 carboxyl groups, is more suitable for leaching metals than oxalic acid and malic acid with 2 carboxyl groups. Gluconic acid with only one carboxyl group has the least ability to leach metals ( In the present study, the aim was to get higher concentrations of citric acid rather than oxalic acid because the citrate aluminum complexes are more stable and hamper Al precipitation at higher pH. For this, a comparative study was carried out to evaluate organic acids productivity by Supplementary Fig. S2 shows the HPLC chromatograms and the concentrations of the citric acid and oxalic acid produced by Comparatively, the results obtained in the present study were superior to those described in the literature. Ikram-Ul et al. ( Studies have shown that citric acid production is strongly influenced by the type of carbon substrate used. For the higher production of citric acid, the presence of carbohydrates that are quickly taken up by fungi has been found essential ( According to the results, the cultivation of The effect of pH on the recovery of aluminum using controlled and different bioleaching conditions are demonstrated in In the direct one-step bioleaching experiment ( In the direct two-steps bioleaching ( In the indirect (spent-medium) process, the initial pH was 1.42 before the addition of bauxite. An increase in the pH (2.6) occurred on adding the bauxite sample (1%). A gradual increase in the pH occurred, which kept on increasing until the last (10th) day of the bioleaching experiment as shown in Comparing all three different bioleaching conditions, the direct two-steps bioleaching process showed best results in the bio-recovery of aluminum from bauxite by The aluminum dissolution profile as a function of time using control and different bioleaching conditions is presented in There are three possible pathways for the maximum Al bio-dissolution from bauxite i.e. (i) mechanical fragmentation (ii) chemical degradation and (iii) leaching with produced organic acids. (i) Mechanical fragmentation occurs by the penetration of mycelia (extension of hyphae) into the interior of the bauxite particles through the physical destruction force. Due to such physical forces, the bauxite particles are fractured. Furthermore, about 10–20 μN/m Dai et al. studied the corrosion of aluminum alloy using The surface micro-morphologies of the controlled and bioleached bauxite samples are depicted in Infrared absorption spectra of raw and various bioleached bauxite samples are depicted in the supplementary Fig. S3. The spectral bands around 3400–3600 cm The bioleached Al from the pregnant solution was recovered by precipitation in the form of its hydroxide Al(OH) Due to high cost and low-aluminum recovery, the Bayer process is considered unfavorable in processing low-grade bauxite ores. Sustainable economic bio-recovery of aluminum from low-grade bauxite is considered an attractive route for the industries due to the higher recovery yields and lesser generation of the solid residue like red mud as compared to the conventional chemical leaching. The results reported in the present work indicate that it is possible to obtain high yields of organic acids produced by Manuscript title: Environmentally sustainable and cost-effective bioleaching of aluminum from low-grade bauxite ore using marine-derived All persons who meet authorship criteria are listed as authors, and all authors certify that they have participated sufficiently in the work to take public responsibility for the content, including participation in the concept, design, analysis, writing, or revision of the manuscript. Furthermore, each author certifies that this material or similar material has not been and will not be submitted to or published in any other publication before its appearance in the S. S. Shah: Acquisition of data, analysis and/or interpretation of data, drafting the manuscript. M. C. Palmieri: Conception and design of study, software. S. R. P. Sponchiado: Co-supervision, revising the manuscript critically for important intellectual content. D. Bevilaqua; Conception and design of study, supervision, drafting the manuscript. Approval of the version of the manuscript to be published:  The authors declare that they have no conflicts of interest. The authors would like to express gratitude  Supplementary data to this article can be found online at