Some chelating resins were used to remove a small amount of V (0.35 g/L V2O5) from ammonium molybdate solution with Mo concentration around 90 g/L. The results showed that vanadium can be easily extracted over molybdenum from ammonium molybdate solution by DDAS, CUW or CW-2 resins. More than 99.5% V and less than 0.27% Mo was extracted with a contact time of 60 min at pH=7.4 and ambient temperature. The effluent was pure ammonium molybdate solution with a Mo/V gram ratio of more than 50,000 from an initial 255. Stripping of loaded resin was excellent using 5% ammonia solution, with a maximum V concentration of 20 g/L in comparison to 0.8 g/L Mo in the eluate. The mechanism for adsorption of V from ammonium molybdate solution by chelating resins was also proposed.China is the second largest nation of molybdenum resource and production in the world ( The traditional method of removing vanadium from molybdenum is to precipitate V as NH Ammonium molybdate solution containing molybdenum and vanadium similar to the actual solution in industry was synthesized, with the concentration of Mo and V being 90.1 g/L and 0.353 g/L, respectively. The pH of the synthetic solution was around 6.5–9. Chelating resins of DHDS, DHES, DHFS, DD1 S, DDAS and DGES from China and CW-1, CW-2 and CUW from U.S.A were used in a thermostatic magnetic beater of JKA WORKS for batch adsorption experiments or a glass column of φ1.3 cm The resins were first soaked in distilled water for 24 h, and then alternately soaked in 2 mol/L NaOH and 1 mol/L H In the process of producing ammonium molybdate from the leach solution of Ni–Mo ores, anions of Mo and V were extracted by a weak base resin, leaving Ni The adsorption of some transition metal cations such as Cu The adsorption of V and Mo on different chelating resins using static method with a rotary speed of 400 r/min at feed pH As can be seen, amongst all the chelating resins, DDAS, CW-2 and CUW exhibited the best performance in the extraction of more than 99.9% V. The extractions of Mo with the three resins were 0.83%, 0.80% and 0.78%, correspondingly. DDAS, CW-2 and CUW resins were thus used in the following experiments. Static method was used to investigate the effect of contact time on V loading of DDAS, CW-2 and CUW resins at feed pH It can be seen from Dynamic method was used to study the effect of feed pH on V loading of CUW resin with a flow rate of 15 mL/h at ambient temperature. Previous study revealed that, without any other impurities, when the concentration of V in an ammonium molybdate solution containing 120 g/L Mo was higher than 0.003 g/L, the colour of ammonium molybdate crystal with the content of V being above 0.0015% precipitated from the solution was buffy. When the concentration of V was lower than 0.003 g/L, the colour of ammonium molybdate crystal with the content of V being below 0.0015% was pure white. The breakthrough point in dynamic test was thus set to 0.003 g/L of V in the effluent. The plot of work capacity (the volume ratio of effluent/resin) against equilibrium pH is shown in Dynamic method was used to study the work capacity of V and Mo on DDAS, CW-2 and CUW resins with the flow rate of 15 mL/h at feed pH It can be seen from The mechanism of vanadium adsorption from ammonium molybdate solution by chelating resins can be explained below: when the chelating resin was transformed by acid from Na-type to H-type, the N atom in the functional group of resins can also form the coordination bond with H It can be also seen from The loaded resin was stripped using 5% ammonia solution with a flow rate of 15 mL/h. Test results are shown in It can be seen from Plenty of white crystals were observed in the column at the beginning of stripping. With the processing of stripping, the crystals dissolved and the V concentration in the eluate reached maximum. This phenomenon, most probably, can be attributed to the change of pH value. At the beginning of stripping, the pH value decreased and the fine crystal ammonium metavanadate formed when pH was lower than 9; with the pH gradually increased, the crystal started to dissolve. The reaction equations of stripping can be described as follows: Based on the results obtained from the current work, the following conclusions were made: V can be selectively extracted over Mo by chelating resins of DDAS, CUW and CW-2 from the ammonium molybdate solution containing 90.1 g/L Mo and 0.353 g/L V. The loading of V on the resin during adsorption increases with the contact time. Even though, more than 98% of V can be extracted by DDAS, CUW and CW-2 resins with the contact time of less than 60 min. The best pH for separating vanadium over molybdenum from ammonium molybdate solution is in the pH range of 7.4–8.0. Ammonia solution exhibits an excellent performance as the stripping reagent. The maximum concentration of vanadium in eluate can be as high as 20 g/L when using 5% NH The product of ammonium molybdate with high purity of the Mo/V gram ratio of more than 50,000 from an initial 255 can be obtained.