Evaporation is an essential process in alumina refineries both to produce water for such applications as residue washing processes, and re-concentrating process liquor back to the main process circuit for further digestion. This article reports on the application of a re-concentration process driven by low grade heat. It couples flash and falling film evaporation, fed by a low-grade heat source, to recover heat and concentrate process liquor. Process condensate is the stream used for this evaluation. The condenser of the re-concentration process is cooled barometrically by water from the recovery lake. The freshwater generated is either discharged or sent to the freshwater lake so as to manage the water balance of a refinery. For 200m3/h process condensate simulated at two fixed temperatures of 75°C and 85°C, the process generates up to 36% more re-concentrated process liquor, and about 10% less specific capital cost compared to the conventional multi effect falling film evaporation system.The evaporation process is one of the key parts of an alumina refinery. It consumes a large amount of thermal energy. It controls the water balance of the plant, and provides liquor for digestion and fresh water for washing and impurity removal. Evaporation is typically run by low pressure steam and is one of the more energy intensive sections in an alumina refinery plant ( Evaporator has to suit process liquor which is viscous and prone to scaling. Tube falling film and flash evaporators can be used. A plate falling film evaporator is used by Aluminum Company of Shanxi and Guizhou Alumina ( Evaporation and flashing configurations are shown in Alternatively, a combination of heat exchangers and flash vessels known as multi stage flash (MSF) can be used ( This article introduces a novel process (  As shown in A simulation model has been developed to quantify the efficiency of the flash boosted MEE system ( Mass and concentration balances are written as The energy balance in the first effect can be written as below:   For the second effect,  Sometimes the feed saturation pressure is more than the effect's pressure, as in the second effect of the conventional MEE and the third effect of the FB-MEE process. In this case, before the feed is being distributed into the tubes, a negligible amount of feed (less than 1%, which corresponds to about 7 For the second and third effects of both processes, the area needed for de-superheating has a significant effect on the capital cost of the evaporator. This will be discussed in detail in In the FB-MEE process, the impact of the injected vapour from the flash vessels that mixes with the superheated vapour from the relevant upstream MEE effect has to be considered in arriving at the mixed superheated vapour temperature. For the condenser,  In all the above equations,  As shown in For the flash vessel section (applicable only to the FB-MEE process), the energy balance equation is expressed as Eq.   The total amount of freshwater generated is the sum of the condensate from each of the MEE effects (Eq. The generalised reduced gradient (GRC) method, which imposes boundary conditions from thermodynamic laws and operational, technical and economic constraints, is used to solve the above equation set (  A waste–heat performance ratio (  The major rate of electrical consumption is related to the pumping power consumption. The pumping power is calculated according to the equation below. ΔP, This pump conveys the cooling water through the condenser. The required head for this pump is taken to be 1.5 This pump is used in the FB-MEE system to recirculate the re-concentrate through the liquid–liquid heat exchanger and the flash vessels. The head of this pump is a function of pressure drop across the heat exchanger, spray pipe, control valves, pipelines, geodetical and pressure heads (that is calculated based on the inlet and outlet saturated pressure difference across the flash vessels) ( This pump is used to extract the condensate from the primary MEE unit. The required head for this pump is taken to be 2 This pump is used for both conventional MEE and FB-MEE processes, and pumps the main heat source medium through the evaporator (first effect) of the primary MEE plant and the liquid–liquid heat exchanger of the FB-MEE process. The required head for this pump is taken to be 0.5 There are two extraction pumps for the re-concentrated liquor - one to extract from the primary MEE and the other from the flash vessel unit. The required head for this pump is 2 The feed pump pumps the feed stream to the evaporation unit. A 1 To remove the generated non-condensable gasses (NCG) and the air leakage into the system, a water ring vacuum pump has been considered to remove 1% of the vapour in the condenser as NCGs (  Capital costs depend on the material and equipment specifications. For the purpose of comparison, the focus herein is on the relative capital cost increase of the FB-MEE compared to the conventional MEE process and its impact on the specific capital costs. The latter is defined as the ratio of the gross capital cost to the total freshwater production rate, or equivalently to the re-concentrate production rate since the feed-to-vapour ratio is 2, which means that there is an equal production of freshwater and re-concentrated process liquor. For conventional thermal desalination plants (both MEE and MSF processes), the capital cost can be approximated based on the GWI/IDA database (IDA, 2011). For the capacity range up to 10,000 The capital costs for MSF and MEE systems are subdivided into five main sectors (   This correction should be applied to the three Following this correlation, the FB-MEE scheme incurs around 20% higher total capital costs as compared to a conventional MEE unit ( A flash-boosted MEE process has been developed for the exploitation of waste heat streams in an alumina refinery plant to minimise the steam consumption of evaporation units and reduce overall fuel consumption. Its performance has been benchmarked with a conventional MEE system in terms of freshwater and re-concentrated process liquor production and waste–heat performance ratio. The flash boosted MEE scheme has been demonstrated to be around 36% better than the optimised conventional MEE process with respect to the production rate over the range of waste heat stream temperatures considered. The specific electrical power consumption of this system is 53% and 24% for the inlet heat source temperatures of 75 and 85  evaporator area (m boiling point elevation (°C) total process condensate production rate (m enthalpy (kJ/kg) enthalpy of saturated liquid (kJ/kg) enthalpy of saturated steam (kJ/kg) total process condensate mass flow rate (kg/s) mass flow rate (kg/s) non-condensable gas non-equilibrium allowance for flashing stage (°C) pressure difference (kPa) pressure (bar) waste heat performance ratio heat transfer rate (kW) temperature (°C) overall heat transfer coefficient (kW/(m volumetric flow rate (m evaporator area coefficient factor overall pump efficiency cost function  first effect second effect third effect coolant or condenser calculated distillate the flashed vapour generated in the flashing chamber module of the FB-MEE process (m total process condensate production rate (m feed flash boosted MEE process heat source (for effects), hot side (for the condenser) flashing chamber number inlet injected total number of flashing stages MEE effect number the total number of MED effects outlet re-concentrated process liquor (feed) saturated temperature Vapour zone 2 of the temperature profile zone 5 of the temperature profile zone 7 of the temperature profile We gratefully acknowledge the financial support of the