An environmentally friendly method using the metal ion-reducing bacterium Shewanella algae was developed to recover soluble Rh(III) from dilute solutions. Rhodium nanoparticles were deposited intracellularly in S. algae. Resting cells of S. algae were able to reduce aqueous Rh(III) to metallic Rh(0) at room temperature and neutral pH within 60min, using lactate as the electron donor.Platinum group metals (PGMs) are rare and valuable metals that are used industrially as heterogeneous catalysts in numerous reactions in the pharmaceutical, agro-chemical, fine chemical and automobile industries. The primary use of palladium, platinum and rhodium is in a three-way catalyst for minimizing automobile emissions. Recycling of PGMs from end-of-use products is increasing because of gradual depletion of natural mineral resources and increased consumer demand. A number of wet chemical methods, such as crystallization and precipitation, hydrolysis, solvent extraction, adsorption, and metal reduction, have been used to separate and purify individual PGMs dissolved in aqueous solutions ( Some studies have investigated bioreduction of Pd(II) to Pd(0) using the sulfate-reducing bacterium  An anaerobic glovebox was used to carry out microbial recovery experiments, as described previously ( The  A slight decrease (1.0 To confirm the reductive deposition of rhodium, The oxidation state of rhodium could not be determined by EDX analysis and XANES was used for this purpose. The rhodium deposition process can be broken down into two steps: (1) uptake of soluble Rh(III) into the bacterial cells, and (2) microbial reduction of soluble Rh(III) to metallic Rh(0) with lactate as the electron donor. A similar study investigated deposition of metallic Pt(0) nanoparticles from Pt(IV) ions in An environmentally friendly method was developed for recovery of soluble Rh(III) from dilute solutions using the iron(III)-reducing bacterium This work was supported by a Grant-in-Aid for Scientific Research (B) (Gant No.