This chapter talks about air jet milling. The first versions, developed in the late 19th century, used a jet of compressed air to project solids against a target. Such devices have the severe disadvantage of target wear and subsequent contamination of the products but have lead to the development of other versions with opposed jets, tangential intersecting jets and more recently opposed jets in a fluidized bed. Air jet milling, or more correctly fluid energy milling, uses high velocity jets of gas to impart energy to particles for size reduction. Air jet mills have mainly been developed for producing fine particles of below 50 mm. Most models are available in many sizes from lab-size versions (as low as to 1 gram/h) up to industrial versions (up to 6 tonne/h), making for easy testing and scale-up. However, a disadvantage is that air jet mills require ancillary air compressors that can assure high flow rates at pressures up to about 10 bars. In addition, the chapter also discusses different types of air jet mills.diameter of mill chamber (m) gas kinetic energy (J) specific energy consumption (J mass solid (kg) gas pressure (Pa) solids flow rate (kg specific surface of product (m velocity (m constants (–) Air jet milling, or more correctly fluid energy milling, uses high velocity jets of gas to impart energy to particles for size reduction. Albus Air jet mills have mainly been developed for producing fine particles of below 50 Two types of nozzles are used (Albus Produce very fine particles, typically less than 40 Good control of particle size and distribution by integral classification Applicable to a wide range of material hardness Autogeneous action giving low contamination Mechanically simple with few, if any, moving parts Relatively costly in energy. Other features are that the adiabatic pressure release at the nozzles and high ratio of transport gas to solids loading makes for good cooling capacity allowing for processing of heat sensitive materials. There is also the possibility of simultaneous drying or re-hydration, of operating in an inert atmosphere or on the contrary providing for gas–solids chemical reactions. Finally, most models are available in many sizes up from lab-size versions (as low as to 1 In a fluid impact mill particles are projected against a fixed target by a jet of gas. It was historically the first type of jet mill introduced in 1882 by Goessling This type of mill is now not in general industrial use as it has only a low throughput and there is excessive wear of the target. A more modern variant is the Coldstream impact process introduced in 1962, which produced grinding by impact on a labyrinth of replaceable balls. Another is the Alpine Micron Jet in which input material is accelerated and impacted on a target ring slowly rotating round the vertical axis of an integral classifier ( Impact on a target is also used in many different forms as a laboratory test method for impact grinding Projecting one jet of particles against another is one way to overcome the problem of wear on the impact anvil. This method was introduced by Willoughby in 1917 The test rig of Mebtoul Tangential jet mills were introduced in 1934 by the Micronizer Company. Two names are used for the same mill: either “spiral jet” mills or “pancake” mills. In this type of mill, feed particles are injected by a venturi into a flat disk-shaped chamber fed with high-speed peripheral inclined fluid jets. This produces a high-speed flat fluid vortex in rotation in the chamber where comminution occurs by particle-particle impact at what is called the grinding circle. This has been visualized by Rumpf and co-workers These mills are now in extensive use in all sectors of industry due to their high capacity for fine grinding of substances with a Moh's hardness of less than 3.5. They are especially favoured in the pharmaceutical for their simplicity and ease of cleaning. Several companies propose such mills with different variants such as, the shape of the grinding chamber (flat cylinder Hosokawa, octagonal, Jet Pharma, Elliptical FPS), the number of nozzles and whether their angle can be adjusted or not and separate outlets for air and ground particles or just one single outlet with air–particle separation. Some equipment manufacturers make small single use spiral jet mills for small quantities of high value active ingredients. Recent studies reported by Nackach Torus chamber mills have many similarities with tangential jets mills. The main differences are that the grinding chamber is oval or “bean” shaped rather than circular and is fixed vertically rather than horizontally. Also, the fluid jets are fewer and mainly located at the base of the mill near the product entry ( This type of mill was first introduced in 1941 by the Jet-O-Mizer Company. One derivative was a double side-by-side version which added opposed jet impact to the fluid jet grinding action. As with spiral jet mills the product particle size distribution is a function of the specific energy. In general, these mills have higher capacities than spiral jet mills and grinding rates of up to 6 In fluidized bed opposed jet mills, air jets are used to give high-energy impacts between particles which are in suspension in a fluidized bed. Thus, these mills have high particle concentrations in the grinding chamber but the nozzles only carry air and are less subject to wear than the two phase opposed jets in the mill described in These mills are in use in many industries and are available as standard in sizes from a chamber diameter of 10 There are two main theoretical approaches to describe the operation of air jet mills. The first is by correlations based on parametric studies of operating variables and specific grinding energy, the second by population balances. A useful performance parameter is the grinding ratio defined as the ratio of feed specific surface to the product specific surface. Considering spiral jet mills, Midoux The diameter of the grinding chamber conditions the capacity of the mill. Taking the volumetric flow rate as proportional to the square of the chamber diameter and the feed rate proportional to the volumetric flow rate to the power 1.4±0.1 leads to the following relation between the grinding capacity and the diameter of the chamber: Here A specific energy consumption in air jet milling can be defined as the kinetic energy of the gas flow divided by the solids flow rate. This allows expressing operating conditions independently of different mill types and working conditions. It is found that the specific surface of the ground product is a power function of the specific surface energy. Experimental results indicate that in given conditions with a given type of mill there exists an optimum feed rate above which there is a coarser product. This may also be expressed in terms of a critical value of specific energy required to obtain narrower product size distribution. For example, Schurr The population balance method has been used to model a fluidized bed opposed jet mill by Berthiaux This approach has been taken further by de Vegt Fluidized bed opposed jet mills are used for the industrial production of talcum powder, a lamellar structure magnesium phyllosilicate. The first stage of grinding of mineral from the quarry is done by rotating pendular mills to about 50 It is well known that the type of grinding can have a strong effect on the physico–chemical characteristics of the ground product. Palaniandy The pharmaceutical industry has specific requirements for milling processes. Nakach Drug administration by dry powder inhalation has many advantages for the patient but requires careful control of particle size to have drug substance reach the inner lung for exchange with the blood stream. This requires conciliating large particle sizes for reproducible inhaler dosing and fine particle sizes of 2–7 Co-micronization of drug substances with tensioactives can improve the rate of dissolution and enhance dispersion. Boullay The market for toners for photocopiers and printers both black and white and coloured is in constant increase. These products are high-value powders with very tight specifications for physical characteristics, in particular particle size and distribution. After formulation and mixing, the material is extruded in the form of granules of about 2 