This study investigates the effect of surfactants and key design parameters on the removal efficiency (RE) of paramagnetic colloidal particles by high-gradient magnetic filtration, and attempts to predict the effect of these parameters by a trajectory model. Magnetic filtration offers an advantage over conventional filtration in that it can achieve a reversible and selective separation. An aqueous suspension of paramagnetic colloidal ferric oxide (Fe2O3) particles was treated with sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS) and delivered through a column containing a stainless steel wool filter matrix, which was mounted between the poles of an electromagnet. The RE of the surfactant-treated particles was measured by analyzing effluent samples for Fe2O3 concentration. The effect of the applied magnetic induction, fluid velocity, and radius of the stainless steel wires on the RE was tested and compared for both surfactant-treated and untreated particles. These three factors had a marked effect on the RE of surfactant-treated particles. An increase in applied magnetic induction from 0.2 to 0.5T increased the RE from 79.9 to 93.4%, a decrease in wire radius from 49 to 15μm increased the RE from 60.2 to 93.4%, and a decrease in fluid velocity from 0.5 to 0.1cm/s increased the RE from 69.5 to 95.3%. In the absence of a magnetic field (0T), the RE was 10.8%. The predictions of the trajectory model agreed closely with these results. The same factors had a negligible effect on the RE of untreated particles. Over the range of all three parameters, the RE varied from 90 to 99%, but these variations were not statistically significant. In the absence of applied magnetic induction, the RE was 90.1%. These results differed markedly from the trajectory model predictions and demonstrated that nonmagnetic filtration mechanisms are primarily responsible for the capture of particles without SDS. Regeneration experiments indicated that the particles were captured in the primary minimum of the potential energy. On the other hand, these results showed that the magnetic filtration mechanism is primarily responsible for the removal of particles treated with SDS and that these particles are captured in the secondary minimum of the potential energy. Therefore, surfactant adsorption onto colloidal particles can potentially preserve and enhance the advantages of magnetic filtration (e.g., reversibility and selectivity).High-gradient magnetic filtration (HGMF) relies on a magnetic force between particles and filter collectors as a mechanism for capturing magnetic colloidal particles. Used widely in the steel and mineral processing industries, HGMF also has many potential wastewater-treatment applications. Researchers have shown HGMF to be effective for the removal of phosphates and sludge from water The advantages of HGMF over conventional filtration are that HGMF can achieve a highly efficient separation of colloid-size particles that is potentially both reversible and selective. These advantages are inherent in the magnetic force mechanism, which captures the particles onto the filter collectors. Particle capture by this mechanism is reversible because the magnetic force can be easily eliminated by simply shutting off the magnetic field. Particle capture by this mechanism is also selective because it captures particles based on their responsiveness to the magnetic force, which is measured by a physical property of particles called These advantages of reversible and selective particle capture in an HGMF process require minimal influence from nonmagnetic filtration mechanisms. Nonmagnetic filtration mechanisms do not distinguish between nonmagnetic and magnetic particles, and, unlike the magnetic force, the forces that attract particles to the filter collectors cannot be easily removed. Thus, particle capture by nonmagnetic filtration mechanisms is neither selective nor reversible. The efficient use of reversible particle capture also requires that particle capture onto the filter collector take place in the secondary minimum of the potential energy between a suspended particle and the collector surface or between a suspended particle and a particle that has already been captured by the collector. Colloidal forces, such as the electrostatic and van der Waal's forces employed in the Derjaguin–Landau–Verwey–Overbeek (DLVO) theory, determine the profile of potential energy versus distance. The van der Waal's potential energy is attractive and is given a negative sign, while the electrostatic potential energy is repulsive and is given a positive sign ( The magnetic potential is attractive and of longer range than the electrostatic and van der Waal's potentials. Thus, when added to the potential energy of a system with an energy barrier like the one of These advantages of magnetic filtration can be realized when the particle size is small in relation to the porosity of the filter. Larger particles are more susceptible to other mechanisms, including interception. Because colloidal-size particles are typically too small to be removed efficiently by nonmagnetic filtration mechanisms, common practice is to first destabilize particles by coagulation in order to promote particle aggregation before filtering. These destabilized aggregates are more likely to be captured by short-range van der Waal's forces in the irreversible primary minimum. Thus, higher removal efficiencies can be achieved for larger particles, but it is more difficult to recover the particles from the filter when they are attached in the primary minimum. The same theory applies to magnetic filtration. When the goal of a magnetic filtration process is not only to achieve an high removal efficiency (RE) but also to selectively separate and recover the particles for reuse, aggregation prior to filtration is undesirable. Instead of destabilizing particles to promote aggregation, it would instead be advantageous to stabilize particles to prevent aggregation. One way to stabilize colloidal particles is by surfactant adsorption onto the surface of particles. Surfactants have been shown to stabilize magnetic particles. Chin et al. The purpose of this study was to test whether adding surfactant to a suspension of colloidal particles prior to filtration would both minimize the capture of particles by nonmagnetic filtration mechanisms and influence the magnetic filtration mechanism to capture particles in the secondary minimum of the potential energy. The effect of three key design parameters – applied magnetic induction, wire collector radius, and fluid velocity – on the RE of ferric oxide (Fe In the present study, a trajectory model was developed to investigate the effects of experimental parameters (e.g., applied magnetic induction and fluid velocity) on the RE of HGMF. Many researchers One important objective of the trajectory analysis is to determine the limiting trajectory, which is the exact path that divides the approaching particle trajectories into those leading to particle capture by the collector and those passing. The distance between the limiting trajectory and the axis parallel to the flow direction is defined as the In the present system, which is under a low Reynolds number flow, the inertial force is much smaller than the other forces and can therefore be neglected. By considering only the external forces acting on a particle, the force balance equation can be written as: Among the forces (external and interparticle) involved in the system, the magnetic and drag forces are the most significant ones and also compete with one another. The performance of magnetic separation is, therefore, examined in terms of magnetic velocity ( The size and magnetic susceptibility of the particles are usually specific to a process and thus are not considered as control parameters. The separation performance is, therefore, affected by the applied magnetic field, matrix material, and superficial velocity. In the present study, the effects of these parameters on the RE of the HGMF are examined experimentally and theoretically. Comparisons between the experimental data and model results based on these three variables are also presented and discussed in a later section. The parameters and their values used in the trajectory model are listed in Filtration experiments were conducted with Fe The feed was composed of Fe To achieve a packing density of 4.4%, 1.36 The magnetic field strength delivered by the bipolar electromagnet was controlled by a Precision Bipolar Magnet Controller (Applied Magnetics Laboratory Inc., Baltimore, MD). The applied magnetic field strength was set by adjusting the electric current on the controller. The level of current was determined by an empirical correlation between current, field strength, and spacer thickness, provided by the manufacturer. Effluent samples were collected at periodic intervals, the length of which depended on the total run time. From each sample, a volume of 1 or 2 The design parameters tested were applied magnetic induction, fluid velocity, and wire diameter. The effect of the magnetic field strength was tested at 0.2 and 0.5    By stabilizing the particles and making them adhere weakly to surfaces, SDS adsorption lowers both the collector and the collision efficiency of the filter and thereby essentially eliminates the impact of the nonmagnetic mechanism on the overall RE of this process. SDS also makes the particles less adherent to surfaces. Two observations support this claim. First, when particles are treated with SDS, they do not leave behind an orange-red residue on the surface of the glass feed tank or the Teflon tubing. Second, it is much easier to regenerate filters that contain SDS-treated particles by simply turning off the magnetic field. Samples of the fluid from the filtration column were collected after filtration experiments were performed with and without SDS, using the same parameters, and the Fe Previous research on the effect of SDS adsorption on the agglomeration and breakup of magnetic particles sheds light on why surfactant treatment results in superior recovery of particles The effects of applied magnetic induction and SDS treatment on filter breakthrough were also tested in this study. The results are displayed in A comparison of the effects of applied magnetic field, radius of the ferromagnetic wire in the filter, and fluid velocity on the RE shows a good agreement between modeling and experimental results. That these experimental results closely parallel the trends predicted by the trajectory model further substantiates the claim that the removal of SDS-treated particles is due primarily to the operation of the magnetic mechanism. If the experimental filtration mechanism corresponds to the filtration mechanism simulated by the model, then the sensitivity of the experimental process and the sensitivity of the model to changes in the design parameters should be similar. The impact of changes in the levels of the three design parameters on experimental and modeling results shows a remarkable consistency between model and experimental sensitivity to an increase in It is noteworthy that the trajectory model works well, even though it does not consider the repulsive forces between the particle and collector caused by electrostatic and steric interactions. Although these forces are related to particle removal by a nonmagnetic mechanism, they are overwhelmed by the magnetic force and thus present negligible opposition to capture by this mechanism. These findings have important implications for the use of HGMS to remove paramagnetic particles from water or from a suspension of a mixture of particles. First, if the particles targeted for removal have properties similar to those of Fe Second, HGMS could be useful for separating paramagnetic particles via magnetic filtration from diamagnetic particles (particles with very low and negative magnetic susceptibility). To achieve this separation, it would be necessary to minimize the impact of nonmagnetic filtration mechanisms to ensure that the magnetic filtration mechanism determines particle capture. This can be achieved by increasing particle stability. This study showed that SDS treatment stabilizes the particles and, overall, results in lower RE. Thus, although such a treatment provides more favorable comparisons with the trajectory model, adding SDS would offer an advantage in a separation process that aims solely to remove these particles from wastewater. However, if the goal of the process is not only to remove the particles from water but also to isolate them for the purpose of recycling and reuse, then SDS treatment coupled with HGMS is a promising strategy. If the wastewater contains diamagnetic particles, dispersing and stabilizing these particles with SDS would decrease their removal by ferromagnetic filter wires via nonmagnetic mechanisms. However, the paramagnetic particles, also stabilized, would be retained by magnetic filtration under a high applied magnetic field. Third, optimization of an HGMS process must account for these three design factors. To achieve the maximum RE, the applied magnetic induction and wire thickness must be varied to achieve the strongest magnetic force, and the flow velocity must be varied to achieve the weakest drag force. However, in an industrial process, other considerations must be taken into account. A filtration process must be capable of handling sizable throughput. To achieve a high throughput, it is necessary to increase the flow rate, the filter size, and possibly the fluid velocity. Operating cost is another important consideration. Generating a strong magnetic field requires electrical power. Achieving high throughput from a magnetic filter would require a stronger magnetic field and thus higher operating costs. However, lowering the throughput would also raise costs. Therefore, these factors must be optimized. Fourth, SDS treatment could be useful for recovering particles from a magnetic filter. In industrial wastewater-treatment operations, the contaminants are often valuable materials that could be reused in the process. Therefore, it is important to be able to recover the contaminant from the filter. When filtration is due primarily to nonmagnetic mechanisms, the task of recovering particles from the filter is more difficult than when filtration is due primarily to a magnetic mechanism. This phenomenon occurs because it is more difficult to relax or reverse the attractive forces that are responsible for particle attachment. However, relaxing the magnetic force is a simple matter of turning off the electromagnet. If the magnetic force is primarily responsible for particle attachment, then the particles will more readily detach when the force is removed. A nonmagnetic filtration mechanism is primarily responsible for the removal of bare Fe The reliability of a trajectory model depends on including the relevant forces in the right form. This model inadequately predicts the effect of the parameters on the removal of bare Fe Better agreement with the predictions of a trajectory model does not justify the use of SDS in an HGMS process. If the performance of HGMS is measured by its RE, then SDS treatment is a disadvantage. However, SDS treatment can potentially improve other aspects of HGMS performance. SDS treatment allows for better recovery of particles from the filter when the magnetic field is disabled, making filter regeneration much easier. SDS treatment also allows for selective separation of nonmagnetic particles from magnetic particles. Stabilized nonmagnetic particles would escape capture in a magnetic filter, while stable magnetic particles would be retained. Thus, SDS treatment has the potential to preserve two chief advantages of HGMS: the reversibility and the selectivity of the magnetic force. Future studies should focus on testing these advantages of surfactant treatment. To study how well surfactants increase the selectivity of an HGMS process, magnetic filtration experiments should be performed that measure the effect of surfactant treatment on the removal of Fe Also of interest would be a more thorough investigation of the effect of different types of surfactants on particle removal. Using SDS in a large-scale wastewater-treatment process might be infeasible economically and undesirable environmentally. Therefore, less expensive, more environmentally friendly surfactants should be studied. Finally, in order to minimize the cost of the surfactant, the effect of surfactant concentration on reversibility and selectivity should be investigated to find an optimal concentration. This problem would also require a better understanding of the mechanism of surfactant adsorption. Partial support for this work was provided by the Office of Basic Energy Sciences, Division of Chemical Sciences, U.S. Department of Energy, under contract DE-AC05-00OR22725 with UT-Battelle, LLC, and by Georgia Institute of Technology. The authors are also thankful to Dr. Marsha Savage for editing the manuscript.