Many kinds of cancer are difficult to treat because of their highly metastatic abilities. Thus, seeking new anticancer drugs or therapy strategies, which could reduce the motility of cancer cells or inhibit the migration and invasion of the cells, is an urgent affair. Several recent reports suggest various techniques (such as layer-by-layer assembly and biomimetic mineralization) aimed to functionalize human cells and microbial with polyelectrolytes, nanoparticles, or mineral coatings. Inspired by these studies, an artificial mineral shell could be formed to enclose cancer cells under the regulation of SIBLINGs-like proteins. Consequently, the connection between the cancer cell and substrate would be interfered or inhibited. Therefore, the motility of cancer cells would be weakened or inhibited due to the restriction of the artificial mineral shell. This hypothetical strategy might be as a new concept for cancer therapy.For decades, many great progress on cancer therapy have been achieved from the molecular mechanism to the clinic. Large numbers of nuclear acids, proteins, peptides, and other bimolecular have been discovered to reveal cancer pathogenesis or facilitated for cancer therapy. On the base of these, many signaling pathways of cancer metabolism have been proposed. However, in chemical terms, these processes and mechanisms all focused on the effect of organic components (proteins and nuclear acids). The impacts of some vital inorganic constituents (metallic ions, phosphate, Cl As we know, there is a consecutive exchange of inorganic and organic substances between the extracellular and intracellular systems. During the course, the organic substance may be regarded as a template to guide inorganic substance forming a martinet like organization within the organism. Thus, the organic and inorganic substances both play very important roles in regulating the cellular functions such as cell viability, morphology, proliferation, adhesion and differentiation. In recent years, several reports suggest various techniques aimed to functionalize human cells and microbial with polyelectrolytes, nanoparticles, or mineral coatings It is known that the progression of tumor cells requires complex interactions with the host tissues. In order to effectively stop the cancer progression, there should be some key molecular to interfere with the multiple stages of cancer cell invasion and dissemination. It is indicated that an emerging group of proteins named small integrin-binding ligand N-linked glycoproteins (SIBLINGs) were involved in many of the crucial steps in malignant progression Inspired by the fabrication and formation of functional shells on the surface of cells, we can also modify cancer cells biologically or chemically with LBL assembly and biomimetic mineralization. This hypothesis provides a special viewpoint to treat cancer with only polymers and inorganic materials. The strategy might be a novel and interesting technique to control cancer cell motility. Taken together, it is proposed that there might be some biomimetic mineralization regulating molecular secreted by cancer cells. Then, deliver the tricalcium phosphate (TCP)-loaded tumor targeting microparticles to the cells; some ions, such as Ca Is this proposal suitable for all types of cancer cells? If true, the hypothesis would provide a new therapeutic concept for cancer treatment. During the past few years, there are two strategies for cancer treatment after surgical resection, radiotherapy and chemotherapy. However, they both damage the normal tissues along with killing cancer cells. In recent years, drug delivery systems (DDS) were designed to solve this problem. In particular, the targeted DDS, which are prepared by coupling the targeted molecular with drug carriers (polymers), were concerned widespread. Therefore, many methods and techniques were applied to obtain the targeted molecular. Among them, phage display technology is one of the most effective methods. Based on the technology, many short peptides that bind to particular tumor cells or tumor vascular with high affinity and specificity were discovered As we know, killing the tumor cells is the ultimate goal of treatment. However, it is thought that the killing concept is inadvisable as the immune systems are inevitably damaged or the drug resistance is yielded. As there are different types of cancer cells, we only take the hepatocyte carcinoma (HepG2) cells as an instance in the hypothesis. Thus, the experimental approaches for testing the hypothesis may be conducted as follows: (1) with phage display technique, isolating the key molecular (peptide, protein or nucleic acid) which could specifically target to the tumor cells, then fabricating the drug delivery system composed of tricalcium phosphate (TCP), targeting molecular, and functional polymers (usually polyelectrolytes). (2) Delivering the tricalcium phosphate (TCP)-loaded tumor targeting microparticles to the cells through intravenous injection. During the process, the polyelectrolytes would bind to the cancer cell surface due to the static electricity between the polyelectrolytes and the proteins on the surface. Then, the Ca As mentioned above, the components, charge, and morphology of the shells strongly affected cell functions such as viability, morphology and proliferation. In addition, the mineral shells were used in the field of bio-electronic devices, biosorbents and catalysts, cells and implants protection, immobilization of cells in biosensors, tissue engineering and multicellular assemblies, and directed cell delivery in cell-based therapies in the previous research Mineral shell preparation on the cell surface may be useful as a novel method to control cancer cell motility. Compared with the methods mentioned above, this proposal might be safe and mild, and the therapy costs would be reduced (no expensive anticancer drugs required). However, there will be also some risks in the process. First, whether the DDS particles target to the tumor cells is the pivotal one. This depends upon the specificity of the targeting molecular. Second, the components, charge, and morphology of the mineral shell directly prepared on the cell surface strongly affected cell functions. In addition, how does the mineral shell metastasize after the treatment? Whether are the shell degradation components toxic to the normal tissue or cells? Last, though the mineral shell only inhibits the motility of cancer cell, the cancer cell inside the shell might still be survival In conclusion, forming an artificial mineral shell to enclose cancer cells by means of biomimetic mineralization might effectively reduce the motility of cancer cells through by the space suppression. Thus, it might provide a new concept for anticancer therapy. None declared.