Liposomal systems are promising carrier systems for the delivery of phenolic compounds. However, the commercial usage of aqueous liposomal dispersions is still challenging. In this study, an aqueous liposomal dispersion which was loaded with sour cherry phenolics (SCE) were converted into powder form by spray drying to make the use of such delivery systems industrially applicable. Then, the obtained SCE loaded liposomal powder was incorporated into a stirred-type yoghurt system. During 21-day storage at 4 °C, sensorial and physicochemical properties such as pH, color, and whey syneresis of yoghurt with SCE loaded liposomal powder were investigated. According to the results, SCE was successfully encapsulated in aqueous liposomal dispersion and spray dried. Spray drying process did not degrade phenolic compounds that were encapsulated by liposomes. The structure of liposomes in the sample contained spray dried liposome encapsulates with SCE (Y-encapsulated SCE) was the most stable in yoghurt during storage which also affects the stability of SCE. Thus, SCE showed the lowest degradation level in this sample among all samples in terms of total phenolics and antioxidant capacity. This means that the SCE in yoghurt with liposomal encapsulates was protected during the storage period. The spray drying process also led to an increased total dry solid and reduced syneresis. Although syneresis of yoghurt containing liposomal powder with SCE and without SCE was the lowest, control yoghurt was chosen to be the best according to the sensorial evaluation.Liposomes are bilayer vesicles in which an aqueous volume is entirely surrounded by a phospholipid membrane. Thus, they are attractive encapsulation systems for water-soluble phenolic compounds ( This study aimed to employ sour cherry ( By liposome encapsulation technique, interactions between phenolic compounds and milk proteins are reduced as well as the astringency of the added phenolic compounds is blocked ( Sour cherry concentrate with 65 °Brix was kindly provided by the Turkish Fruit Juice Industry Association (MEYED) (Istanbul, Turkey). Freeze-dried commercial yoghurt culture (YC-350, 50-U pouches) was a gift from Chr. Hansen (Istanbul, Turkey). Skim milk powder was manufactured by Pinar Süt Mamulleri San. A.Ş. (Izmir, Turkey). Lecithin (Soybean phospholipids, 97%- Ultralec® P) was obtained from Rotel (Istanbul, Turkey). Chitosan (TM 3790, 79% degree of deacetylation) was granted by Primex® (Siglufjordur, Iceland). Acetone (purity ≥ 99.5%), hydrochloric acid, potassium chloride, sodium hydroxide, and gallic acid were obtained from Sigma-Aldrich Chemie GmbH (Steinheim, Germany). Triton X100, glacial acetic acid, sodium acetate trihydrate, and Folin-Ciocalteu reagent were purchased from Merck KGaA (Merck, Darmstadt, Germany). 20 DE value of Maltodextrin (MD) was provided from Tunckaya Kimyevi Maddeler Ticaret ve Sanayi Inc., Turkey. Sephadex G-50 was supplied from GE Healthcare Life Sciences (Uppsala, Sweeden). In brief, 10 mL of sour cherry concentrate was mixed with 100 mL of 70% methanol and stirred for 15 min for 3 times. Methanol was removed under reduced pressure using a rotary evaporator (Bibby Sterilin RE-100, Bibby Scientific Limited, Staffordshire, UK) at 40 °C until the acetone had been removed. The remaining aqueous extract was collected and freeze dried (Alpha 1–2 LDplus, Martin Christ Gefriertrocknungsanlagen GmbH, Osterode am Harz, Germany). A lecithin dispersion (2%, w/w) in acetate buffer (pH 3.5 ± 0.1; 0.1 M) was prepared. Then, freeze dried sour cherry extract (SCE) (0.2%, w/w) was dissolved in lecithin solution. For homogenization of the lecithin dispersion, a high shear disperser (DI-25 Yellowline, IKA) was employed for 10 min at 9500 rpm. A high pressure homogenizer (Microfluidizer Processor M-110L, Microfluidics, Newton, USA) was operated at homogenization pressure of 25,000 psi to obtain primary liposomes without SCE and with SCE (0.2%, w/w). Lecithin solutions with and without SCE were passed five times through a high pressure homogenizer. The chamber of homogenizer was cooled during the homogenization with ice water to prevent the heating of samples. Secondary liposomes were produced via layer-by-layer deposition method. For this aim, liposomes with and without SCE were added to chitosan solutions (0.4%, w/v) in acetate buffer solution (pH = 3.5 ± 0.1; 0.1 M) stirred overnight at room temperature. Therefore, the surface of negatively charged primary liposomes was covered with a positively charged chitosan layer. MD was used as a drying aid to facilitate spray drying. The mixtures of 20% (w/w) MD, 0.5% (w/w) lecithin, 0.2% (w/w) chitosan, and 0.05% (w/w) SCE, secondary liposomal dispersions with and without SCE were prepared. To use SCE powder (0.05%, w/w) as a blank, SCE (0.1%, w/w) was dissolved in acetate buffer, mixed with MD (1:1) (40% w/v in acetate buffer). Similarly, secondary liposomal dispersions were mixed with MD (1:1) and stirred overnight at room temperature. Prepared liposomal dispersions and SCE solution in MD were spray dried using a laboratory scale spray dryer (Mini Spray Dryer B-290, Büchi, Switzerland). The spray dryer was operated with a 1.5-mm nozzle atomizer at an atomizing air flow of 5 cm The liposomes in the dispersions were characterized by measuring the ζ -potential and z-average mean diameter immediately after production. The ζ-potential was determined using a particle charge titration analyzer (Stabino®, Microtrac Europe, Montgomeryville, PA, USA). The particle size distribution was determined by a static light scattering instrument (Mastersizer MS2000, Malvern Instruments, Worcestershire, UK). The average particle diameters were calculated via the volume mean diameter ( SEM analysis was carried out using a FEG 250 scanning electron microscope (FEI, USA). Prior to analysis, the samples were gold sputter-coated in a Leica vacuum coating unit in order to prevent the charging of the specimen. Operating conditions such as accelerating voltage, magnification, and working distance are indicated on the SEM images. For stirred-type yoghurt manufacturing, yoghurts were formulated using a skim milk powder with 1.25% (w/w) fat content which diluted in distilled water to a total solid content of 13% (w/v). Then, they were placed in heat treated glass jars at 95 °C for 15 min in the water bath. After cooling to the fermentation temperature (42 °C), the mixtures were subsequently incubated with the bacterial culture (0.4%, v/v) containing The pH of the samples was determined using a digital pH meter (Hanna pH 211 Model pH meter, USA). All measurements were performed in triplicates. The color parameters L*, a*, b* values were measured by using a colorimeter (CR 400, Minolta, Japan). A white tile was used for standardization. All measurements were performed in triplicates. Whiteness Index (WI), hue and chroma parameters of the samples were calculated using the equations below ( The amount of syneresis was determined by calculating water holding capacity (WHC), according to Freshyl collected yoghurt samples were extracted in defined days (1st, 7th, 14th, and 21st day) to determine the stability of encapsulated SCE in yoghurt formulation according to the method of The total phenolic content (TPC) was measured by the Folin-Ciocalteu assay according to the method of Total antioxidant capacity (TAC) was performed according to the Cupric ion reducing antioxidant capacity (CUPRAC) method described by The Quantitative Descriptive Profile (QDP) Method was used to conduct sensory analysis ( The general linear model procedure was used to investigate the treatment and interaction effects via a statistical program (Minitab, Version 17, Minitab Inc., State College, PA). Tukey test was used to determine the differences between mean values. p value of <0.05 was chosen to determine significant differences. All analyses were repeated at least three times using triplicate samples. The mean particle diameter of primary liposomes without SCE was found approximately 146 nm after the homogenization at 22.500 psi. The Location of phenolics can be the interior of liposomes, partially in the phospholipid membrane or onto the surface of liposomes. The primary liposomes containing 0.1% (w/w) extract showed the highest encapsulation efficiency (71.2%), which means that 71.2% of the SCE was attached to the surface and the interior of the primary liposomes. Our results are comparable with the results reported before by Liposomal powders were imaged by Scanning Electron Microscope (SEM). According to Change in pH of yogurt samples was evaluated during 21 days of storage ( Change in syneresis of yoghurt samples during 21 days of storage is shown in Change in the luminosity (L*), chroma (C* Mean scores of the sensory evaluation parameters were statistically analyzed and the results are given in Physico-chemical stability of SCE encapsulated by liposomal powder in yoghurt formulation was observed via total phenolic content (TPC) and antioxidant capacity (TAC) in defined days (1st, 7th, 14th, 21st day) ( In conclusion, it is obvious that the liposome structure did not change and SCE was stable in Y-encapsulated SCE sample among all yoghurt samples during storage. Therefore, it is possible to say that liposomal encapsulation provided SCE stability in terms of TPC and TAC. Moreover, the spray drying process did not damage the liposome structure as well as did not degrade SCE phenolics. These findings showed that this system was a suitable phenolic delivery method through yoghurt product. Although Y-spray dried SCE sample was employed as a control sample in this study, spray drying also served as a microencapsulation technique. As a result, SCE in Y-spray dried SCE sample was protected better than Y-freeze dried SCE, but not as much as Y-encapsulated SCE. As expected, phenolic concentration of Y-freeze dried SCE degraded faster during 21 days. This research has not been submitted for publication nor hasit been published in whole or in part elsewhere. We attest to the fact that all Authors listed on the title page have contributed significantly to the work, have read the manuscript, attest to the validity and legitimacy of the data and its interpretation, and agree to its submission to the Food Hydrocolloids. This project was financially supported by the Erasmus Scholarship for European Internship in The following is the Supplementary data to this article: Supplementary data to this article can be found online at