Rock materials, which are involved in a myriad of engineering projects, are often subjected to cyclic loading, such as earthquakes. Understanding the dynamic deformation properties of rock materials under cyclic loading is necessary for evaluating the stability of rock engineering structures. This study numerically investigated the influence of cyclic loading conditions (e.g., waveform, frequency, maximum loading stress and amplitude) on the deformation properties of rock samples using the finite element method (FEM). On the basis of the Drucker–Prager (D-P) yield criterion and sub-loading surface theory, a dynamic constitutive model for reproducing the hysteresis loops and the accumulative plastic deformation of rock materials subjected to cyclic loading was established, numerically implemented using FEM, and validated through comparison with experimental results on basalt and granite model materials. Then, cyclic uniaxial loading tests were simulated with a range of loading parameters, and the deformation properties of rock samples were analyzed. The results indicated that the hysteresis loops and accumulated plastic deformation of rock materials during the cyclic process can be numerically reproduced in an effective manner. The loading parameters significantly affected dynamic deformation properties such as the maximum strain, irreversible strain and hysteresis loop. The simulation results were almost consistent with the experimental results in the published literature. Therefore, through the proposed dynamic constitutive model, FEM can be used to numerically simulate the influence of cyclic loading conditions on the deformation properties of rock materials.Geometric center of the normal-yield surface and the sub-loading surface (MPa) Material parameters for kinematic hardening (−) Strain matrix and volume of element Parameters related to the cohesion and internal friction angle (−) Cohesion (MPa) and internal friction angle (°) Material parameter of Elasto-plastic matrix and elastic matrix (GPa) Plasticity multiplier (−) Plastic strain increment (−) Young's modulus (GPa) and Poisson's ratio (−) Function of hardening variable Yield stress function (−) Internal force and external force of element Hardening variable (−) First invariant of the stress on normal yield surface and the current stress on sub-loading surface (MPa) Second invariant of the deviator stress on normal yield surface and the deviator current stress on sub-loading surface (MPa) Current load (MPa), amplitude (MPa) and frequency (Hz) Ratio of the size of the sub-loading surface and similarity-center surface to that of the normal-yield surface (−) Minimum set point of Similarity-center (MPa) Similarity-center of the sub-loading surface and normal-yield surface considering Point on the normal-yield surface and conjugate to the point on the similarity-center surface with respect to Permissible minimum (−) Material parameter and function for similarity ratio (−) Maximum value of Dual stress on the normal yield surface of the current stress (MPa) Current stress on the sub-loading surface (MPa) Stress on the normal loading surface and is conjugate to Vector difference between Mean normal stress of Average strain rate (/s) and stress rate (MPa/s) Rock engineering, such as underground caverns, mountain tunnel engineering and mining engineering, may be damaged during strong earthquakes, which directly affect the projects and may even be life threatening. Therefore, it is necessary to study the stability of rock engineering materials under earthquakes. Seismic action is very complex, but it is usually equivalent to cyclic loading [ Over the past few decades, considerable efforts have been made to evaluate the mechanical response of rocks under cyclic loading via laboratory experiments. In cyclic loading tests, the loading and unloading curves do not coincide to form a closed plastic hysteresis loop. Meanwhile, as the number of cycles increases, the hysteresis loops move in the direction of increasing strain, and the irreversible plastic deformation of rock materials increases with the strain [ According to relevant studies, the mechanical properties of rock materials under cyclic loading were studied mainly through experiments and rarely through numerical simulation. Numerical simulation is a complementary method of experimental methods, and also a useful method for solving problems, such as those involving high-frequency cyclic loads and time consumption, and the focus of numerical simulation is on the mechanical properties of jointed rocks under cyclic loading using the discrete element method (DEM). For example, Nemcik et al. [ A constitutive model of rock materials is a comprehensive description of their strength and deformation and a macroscopic representation of their internal cracks. Therefore, the dynamic constitutive model of rock materials under cyclic loading should be a comprehensive reflection of the hysteresis loop and plastic deformation accumulation. Regarding the mechanical properties of rock under cyclic loading, Liu et al. [ As mentioned above, a dynamic constitutive model for rock materials should describe the hysteresis loop and cumulative plastic strain in rock materials under cyclic loading. Therefore, based on the theory of a sub-loading surface, this article chooses the D-P yield criterion as the normal yield surface to construct a dynamic constitutive model for rock materials. The basic theory of the sub-loading surface model assumes that there is a sub-loading surface within the normal yielding plane and that the current stress point is always located on the sub-loading surface. Compared with those of the elastoplasticity model, the transitions of the elasto-plastic phase of the sub-loading surface model can be smooth. The sub-loading surface is shown in The sub-loading surface model is highly adaptable and accurately reflects the deformation characteristics of materials under cyclic loading [ Based on the D-P criterion, the sub-loading surface of the dynamic constitutive model can be established by inserting Eq. According to the consistency condition, Eq. From Eq. According to the assumption that the similarity-center surface is within the normal yield surface, the following inequality must hold. The inequality (15) or (16) is called the enclosing condition of similarity-center. The following relationship can be derived from the enclosing condition of the similarity-center [ To meet the requirements of Eq. For geotechnical materials, cyclic loading and dynamic problems should adopt hardening or mixed hardening conditions [ During the loading process, the sub-loading surface gradually approaches the normal yield surface but will not pass it. When the sub-loading surface reaches the normal yield surface, Substituting Eqs. The similarity ratio By transforming the above equation, the similarity ratio Based on the elastic prediction-plasticity correction, the numerical implementation of the dynamic constitutive model is created through FEM (the integration is explicit). The detailed flow of the model is seen as follows: Selecting the initial internal variables: when the time step is Performing the elastic prediction: when the time step is Determining the yield judgments: the corresponding stress invariants If inequality (35) is satisfied, then the stress at this time is the stress in step (2) and ③ in step (4) should be performed; otherwise, the corresponding plasticity correction should be performed. Performing the plasticity correction: the purpose of the plasticity correction is to obtain the correct stress so that the yield function can coincide with the yield surface. ① Solving for the plasticity multiplier: ② Updating the internal variables: ③ Solving for the similarity ratio Determining whether the internal force and external force are balanced: If Eq. The parameters of the dynamic constitutive model are A cylindrical compression test for basalt (diameter of 48.58 mm and height of 99.92 mm) is carried out on an RDT-10000 rock high-pressure dynamic triaxial test system developed by the Wuhan Institute of Rock and Soil Mechanics, Chinese Academy of Sciences. The test system is shown in This paper aims to study the influence of the deformation properties of rock materials under cyclic loading through numerical simulation, and the fatigue life of rock materials is not considered. To reflect the influence of different loading waveforms, three commonly used waveforms are designed, as shown in  In nature, the influence of the loading waveform, amplitude and frequency on the mechanical properties can be integrated into the influence of the loading rate [ The average stain rate of the triangle wave can be expressed by For the trapezoidal wave, the average stain rate can be calculated as follows: The average strain rate of the different loading waveforms is shown in The main frequency band of the seismic wave is generally between 0 Hz and 10 Hz; therefore, cyclic loading with a fixed maximum loading stress of 20 MPa, a fixed amplitude of 10 MPa and 3 frequencies (i.e., 0.1 Hz, 1 Hz and 10 Hz) is applied.  Studies showed that the stress level is a primary factor that affects the deformation of rock materials under cyclic loading [ The influence of the maximum loading stress on the deformation characteristics of the rock samples can be explained by the micro-fracturing mechanism of rock during the cyclic loading process [ Four loading amplitudes were evaluated to analyze the influence of different loading amplitudes (i.e., 10 MPa, 8 MPa, 6 MPa and 4 MPa) on the deformation characteristics of rocks. All cyclic loads are applied with a given maximum loading stress of 20 MPa and a fixed frequency of 1 Hz. The stress-strain curves of the rock samples under different loading amplitudes are shown in The influence of the loading amplitude on the deformation characteristics of the rock samples can also be explained by the micro-fracturing mechanism of rock [ The above sections analyzed the influence of loading amplitude and maximum loading stress on the deformation of rock materials. It can be found that the relationships between deformation and these two factors are opposites. Therefore, to further reveal the relationship between rock deformation and these two factors, this section focuses on the common influence of the maximum loading stress and loading amplitude on the deformation characteristics of rock. Four conditions were devised: to maintain the average loading stress, the maximum loading stress is evaluated at 20 MPa, 18 MPa, 16 MPa and 14 MPa, and the loading amplitudes and frequencies are the same as those of Sect. 3.5. The stress-strain curves of the rock samples under different maximum loading stresses and loading amplitudes are shown in Exploring the mechanical behavior of rocks subjected to cyclic loading is important for rock engineering design and construction. However, the dynamic responses of rock samples subjected to various cyclic loading conditions have been investigated rarely via numerical simulation. In this study, a dynamic constitutive model based on the sub-loading surface theory and D-P criterion is proposed, and cyclic loading tests are numerically simulated on rock samples. The dynamic deformation properties of rocks subjected to different cyclic loading conditions, including different waveforms, frequencies, maximum loading stresses and amplitudes, are systematically studied. The main conclusions and discussions are reviewed here: The proposed dynamic constitutive model can effectively reproduce the hysteresis loops and the accumulated plastic deformation of the rock samples during both the loading and unloading stages. The hysteresis characteristics and rock deformation under a sine waveform is worse than that under a square waveform but better than that under a triangular waveform when the loading frequency and amplitude remain constant. With increasing frequency, the maximum and residual strains of the rock specimens decrease. The results are almost in line with the experimental results, which indicates that the dynamic constitutive model can reflect the strain rate effect to some extent. Both the maximum strain and residual strain are approximately linearly proportional to the maximum loading stress. The maximum strain of the rocks remains approximately unchanged with an increase in the loading amplitude, while the residual strain is inversely related to the loading amplitude. Considering the combined effect of the maximum loading stress and the loading amplitude, the evolutions of the size of the hysteresis loop, maximum strain and residual strain are different from those under the influence of the loading amplitude or maximum loading stress. These simulation results are basically consistent with experimental results or published results. The work reported in this paper is financially supported by the