The improvement in the solubility of lipophilic drugs may play a vital role in the designing of products to attain not only high bioavailability but also therapeutic value at the site of interest. Importantly, nearly 40% of novel chemical moieties emerge with several hurdles at the time of screening in the pharmaceutical industry especially in the designing as well as in the formulation owing to their poor solubility in the aqueous phase, which also decreases bioavailability. Further, the drugs that come under Class II and Class IV in Biopharmaceutics Classification System (BCS) list those drugs which exhibit not only poor solubility in water but also reflect less poor dissolution rate and bioavailability. This chapter expounds different methods to improve solubility of drugs especially of hydrophobic nature, for instance, formation of complex with the drugs, solubilization by emulsification, solid dispersion methods, formation of salts, application of cosolvents, microemulsions/nanoemulsions, micronization of particles, crystal engineering, formation of micelles, and development of drug nanocrystals. In context to improve the solubility of the drug, surfactants include a large number of pharmaceutical excipients that have been utilized in many formulations in different ways (e.g., emulsifiers, wetting agents, solubilizers, foaming agent, etc.) to solubilize drug. The solubility enhancement of drugs is attained in different ways, for instance, the formation of micelles was utilized for solubilization by using surfactants such as sodium lauryl sulfate (SLS), which is a good solubilizing agent ( BCS is the most promising scientific platform for classifying drug agents that are usually built on their solubility in the aqueous medium, dissolution rate, and permeability in the intestine. Moreover, it is an important drug development tool that consents to monitor the contributions of the three above-mentioned key factors that generally have a great impact on the absorption of molecules via the oral route. Several studies have been conducted to determine the dissolution rate of the BCS Class II drugs in various naturally occurring liquids (e.g., milk) and other biorelevant fluids to monitor not only the dissolution rate but also the extent of absorption of a drug via the oral route ( However, in terms of quantitative, the solubility of solute (drug) can be defined as the concentration of the solute that is present following saturation state of the solution at a particular temperature condition ( More often, hydrophobic drugs need large size of dose to attain therapeutic concentration in the plasma following oral delivery. Although, the majority of the drugs come under weakly acidic and weakly basic groups with a lack of solubility in the aqueous phase (  The solubility is regarded as one of the vital constraints to attain an ideal concentration of the active agent in blood for attaining the desired pharmacological effect. Lipophilic molecules more often need a large size of doses to have therapeutic effects following delivery. Low drug solubility in the aqueous phase can be the key problem that is normally observed with other formulations of NCEs/generic drugs. Enhancement in the solubility of poorly water-soluble drugs can overcome various demerits of hydrophobic drugs such as slow drug absorption, which may result in decreased bioavailability and mucosal toxicity in the GI (  Physical methods. Chemical methods. Miscellaneous methods. The reduction in the size of the particle can be attained via employing two methods namely, nanosuspension and micronization. Moreover, these methods use diverse types of equipment for decreasing the size of the particles. For instance, a study suggested decrease in the mean particle size of nanoparticles (NPs) between “Micronization” is a term used to describe the size reduction technique where the resulting particle size distribution is less than 10 Further, in a study, scanning electron microscopy (SEM) images of itraconazole incorporated micronized preparations of succinic acid and l-tartaric acid along with D-mannitol are shown in  The micronization process is employed to enhance surface area which also increases dissolution rate. The microcrystals produced by this technique are in situ surface-modified due to the adsorption of hydrophilic polymers which enhances wettability ( The in situ micronized crystals form homogeneous suspensions with less sedimentation due to the small particle size and hydrophilized surface which can be easily dispersible ( Micronization enhances the surface area of particles, which also improves the dissolution rate of active molecules. In situ micronization gives microcrystals with high drug load compared to other techniques like spray drying, where yield is 20%–50% (  It does not increase equilibrium solubility. In situ micronization of hydrophilic drugs may lead to the formation of larger particles ( Controlling of crystal size is not an easy task in this method ( The process of micronization is not considered appropriate for those active molecules, which show a large dose number since this does not affect the saturation solubility of the active molecules ( Nanosuspensions can be defined as a colloidal dispersion of drugs that contain particles in a submicron size range and are normally stabilized using surfactants (  Enhanced surface area of particles improves the dissolution rate ( Some parameters such as the low value of critical micelle concentration (CMC) and uniform particle size distribution hamper Ostwald ripening (  In this method, the reduction in the size of particles may usually result in a change of high-energy polymorph to one of the low-energy crystalline states, which render drug therapeutically less effective ( Surface active agents enhance the solubility of poorly water-soluble drugs due to the formation of micelles ( SMEDDSs are systems which exist as an isotropic mixture of three components namely, active agent, lipids, and surfactants/cosolvents. Further, these systems incorporate some hydrophilic molecules (i.e., cosolvents/coemulsifier) to improve stability (  More solubilization of drug is achieved with great stability ( Guard solubilized drug from hydrolytic reaction ( Enhance the bioavailability of drug molecules via oral delivery and also improve drug loading ability ( Decrease the intrasubjective and intersubjective inconsistency (  Not a good in vitro model to evaluate products efficiently. There are large chances of chemical-related instabilities of drug molecules in the presence of a large amount of surfactants (e.g., ciprofloxacin hydrochloride and cetyltrimethylammonium bromide) ( Cosolvents with volatile nature may penetrate in the shells of soft/hard capsule of gelatin, which may lead to precipitation of the hydrophobic drugs. The release of the drug can be attained only after the digestion of the products ( Microemulsions are being considered as a promising carrier for drugs due to their stability and capability to load an extensive range of drug molecules with erratic solubility. In a study, duloxetine microemulsion revealed a 1.8 times increase in the bioavailability of the drug than duloxetine through suspension ( In contrast to other techniques, where external processing conditions like mechanical force, temperature and pressure are required, the drug can also be obtained in micron size during the crystal formation ( When water is used as solvent and drug is associated with this, then this solvate is called as hydrate. These hydrates require less energy to breakup the crystal than anhydrous forms. In a study, the development of salt hydrates of norfloxacin with three other drugs, that is, diclofenac, diflunisal, and indomethacin showed significant improvement in the solubility of the drug for buffer solution (at pH 7.4) ( The majority of drugs show polymorphism, which can be explained as the capability of the active molecules to occur in different crystalline forms ( Complexation can be defined as the association of two or higher molecules to produce a definite stoichiometric unit without using the bonding mechanism. For instance, a water-soluble pillar[6]arene works as a promising solubilizing agent to improve solubility and bioactivity of the anticancer drug tamoxifen (a poorly water-soluble drug) via host–guest complexation ( IC is prepared via inserting the nonpolar domain of the molecule or molecule itself, which shows a nonpolar property. Moreover, this inserted part of the molecule is normally termed as guest, whereas the cavity in the group of another molecule or the molecules is called a host. The most frequently used host molecule is CDs. Naturally occurring CDs (i.e., α, β, and γ) generally contain six, seven, and eight units of the glucopyranose with size 5, 6, and 7 Moreover, the CDs inclusion technique is considered a molecular phenomenon, where usually a single guest entity fits in the cavity of a CD molecule to form a stable unit. The incorporation of various pharmaceutical excipients, for instance, surfactants, water-soluble polymers, and preservatives may significantly affect the solubilizing potential of CDs; however, it can depend on the physicochemical properties of the incorporated excipients ( Spray drying is a comprehensive technique where it requires high shear rates and specialized atomizer for the micronization of drug substances where the size of the atomizer determines the particle size of the resulting drug In this technique, various molar fractions of drug with suitable polymers are solubilized in solvent/solvent mixture at a specific temperature. Further, coprecipitation of compounds mixture can be obtained in supercritical antisolvent process (SAS) technique by varying operating parameters such as solution concentration, drug/polymer mass ratio, pressure, temperature, and solution flow rate. For instance, in a study, the coprecipitation of curcumin/poly(vinyl pyrrolidone) was achieved in 70–30 (v/v) acetone–ethanol mixture by employing SAS technique. This method is regarded as an ideal process to produce a porous and an amorphous powder by using a high level of interaction among active molecules and CDs polymer. However, in this method solvent phase is removed by employing the freeze-drying method at low pressure. In this context, a curcumin–HPβCD-IC was synthesized by a cosolvent incubation-lyophilization method using the water–ethanol solvent mixture to combat not only poor aqueous solubility but also for improving oral bioavailability of drug ( In this technique, a slurry is developed by adding drug molecules and a right polymer in various proportions in a mortar and then this mixture is triturated by further adding a little amount of ethanol. Afterward, in this slurry, the drug is added at a slower rate following continuous trituration. Later, the slurry is allowed to air-dry at room temperature for 1 day (i.e., 24 This method uses irradiation reaction among the drug molecules and complexing agent in the oven. Briefly, the drug and CDs in the right proportion are solubilized in a solution prepared using water and an organic phase in the round bottom flask. Afterward, this mixture is allowed to complete the reaction for 2 Stacking complexes are generally developed by overlapping the planar areas of the aromatic moieties. Also, nonpolar components show a tendency of squeezing out from the water molecules owing to the strong H-bonding interactions in the molecules of water. However, this phenomenon results in a decrease in contact with hydrocarbon moieties with water due to the aggregation of these hydrocarbons. Besides, stacked complexes can be self-assembled (homogeneous) or mixed complexation. In this context, Jagusiak et al. synthesized a self-assembled complex system of single-walled carbon nanotubes, Congo Red, and doxorubicin. This complex system enhanced drug-carrying capacity and prolonged drug release effect at different pH conditions ( Solid dispersion can be defined as a group of solid formulations comprising of a minimum of two components with different properties, usually a lipophobic matrix and a lipophilic drug agent. Besides, the matrix phase of the dispersion system might have either amorphous or crystalline nature. The drug molecules might be distributed molecularly in the amorphous or crystalline particles. Consequently, conferring to their molecular reorganization, six diverse kinds of solid dispersions have been confirmed. However, fine particles exhibit promising bioavailability of drugs, which are poorly soluble in an aqueous medium ( This technique is applicable for either amorphous or crystalline type molecules. Moreover, solid solutions with amorphous property generally Hot-melt extrusion technique is a single-step method, which is being utilized since 1971. In several types of research, it has been reported that melt extrusion process usually produces an amorphous solid solution by utilizing miscible constituents, on the other hand, immiscible components following extrusion results into the dispersion of amorphous drug, generally drug mixed in the other crystalline components (  Solid dispersions generally show small size of particles, which enhance the bioavailability of drugs owing to increase surface area and dissolution rate ( Wettability is enhanced in solid dispersion which also improves the solubility of the less soluble molecule. In solid dispersions, the porosity of particles improved to a great extent which also increases drug release ( Solid dispersion contains drugs as metastable polymorph B in the supersaturated solution (  The key disadvantages with solid dispersion formulations can be associated with their instability owing to temperature and humidity ( Many solid dispersion systems have exhibited a decrease in the dissolution rate with aging at high humidity and temperature conditions ( Some solid dispersion prepared from PEG, PVP, and polyvinyl caprolactam (PCL)–polyvinyl acetate (PVAc)–PEG may not allow them to easily handling owing to tackiness ( In a solvent evaporation technique, drugs, as well as other excipients, are solubilized in a solvent phase ( The eutectic mixture had been first reported by a research group, Sekiguchi and Obi in 1961; they described it as a solid dispersion ( Neuberg was the first scientist, who described hydrotropic phenomena in the year 1916. They suggested enhance in the solubility of BCS Class II drugs in the aqueous phase Cocrystallization can be defined as a molecular complexation method, which is employed to develop cocrystals. However, a cocrystal can be a crystalline substance containing equal to or more than two molecular species that are generally held together with the noncovalent forces. Despite this, among all available cocrystallizing agents, only three agents (i.e., acetic acid, nicotinamide, and saccharin) are generally recognized as safe. Eventually, cocrystallization can be an alternative method for salt formation, especially for neutral compounds. Ibrahim et al. reported enhancement in the solubility of the drug gliclazide after forming cocrystals with malonic acid by using cocrystallization process ( Cosolvents can be the mixtures of water and/or other water-miscible solvents that may form a solution exhibiting boosted solubility for substances, which shows lack solubility such as the mixture of cosolvent polymers, that is, propylene glycol, ethanol, and PEG 300. In a study, Soares et al. reported an increase in the solubility (i.e., 194.2±4.1 times) of lignin in a mixture of ethylene glycol:tetra-butyl phosphonium chloride (2:1) by using cosolvency mechanism ( The pH shift method is well suitable for drugs with pH-dependent solubility. In this method pH of the system needs to be altered slowly from basic to acidic or vice versa ( It is an effective technique to enhance not only solubility but also to improve dissolution rates of drugs of either type (i.e., basic or acidic nature) ( Nanomorph technology generally changes the crystalline form of drugs into an amorphous state, which usually enhances solubility and improves dissolution rate. However, in Drug nanocrystals are generally the form of the nanoscopic crystals derived from parent compounds with a size of <1 Many nanonization methods have been developed to improve not only dissolution rates but also the bioavailability of several drugs which are less soluble in aqueous medium and decline systemic side effects. Moreover, the nanonization technique largely involves the use of nanomaterials (<100 In this technique, a liquid stream of a solution containing a polymer along with drug molecules is generally subjected by maintaining a potential value in the range from 5 to 30 In this method, the liquid melt of solid dispersions is directly filled in the capsules that are made of hard gelatin. Since this method avoids grinding-step, no significant variations are observed in the crystalline properties of the used active moieties. Further, this molten dispersion produces a solid plugin the capsule following cooling, which generally decreases cross-contamination, attains better weight filling, and good content uniformity over the powder-fill method. In 1997, Ulrich et al. established this method to ease the crystallization of several molecules, for synthesizing round particles using melted solid dispersions, which results in a greater dissolution rate. Moreover, this method does not utilize organic solvents, and hence, overcome various challenges associated with the employed other techniques (e.g., solvent evaporation method) ( This method generally utilizes carbon dioxide (CO The solubility of the drug is an important aspect to attain maximum response since good solubility of drug enhances not only absorption rate but also improves the availability of desired drug concentration at the site of interest. Further, solubility parameters are also crucial for designing and development of formulations for specific drugs. Several techniques have been discussed in this review, which can be employed to improve the solubility of drugs that show poor solubility in an aqueous medium. However, the selection of an appropriate method can be a crucial aspect of enhancing the solubility of lipophilic drugs. Moreover, these methods must be used by considering some specific properties of the drug (i.e., compatibility and interaction of the drug with other components, the stability of drug formulation conditions and storage, etc.).  3-dimension area under the curve Biopharmaceutics Classification System cyclodextrins cinnarizine critical micelle concentration carbon dioxide calcium silicate hydrate 2,2-diphenyl-1-picrylhydrazyl ethylene diamine tetraacetic acid ethylene glycol tetraacetic acid fenofibrate field-emission scanning electron microscopy gastrointestinal high-pressure homogenization high-performance liquid chromatography hydroxypropyl-β-cyclodextrins hydroxypropyl-γ-cyclodextrins inclusion complexes methyl-β- cyclodextrins new chemical entities nanofibers nanoparticles polyvinyl caprolactam polyethylene glycol polyvinyl acetate polyvinylpyrrolidone small-angle neutron scattering supercritical antisolvent process synchrotron small-angle X-ray scattering supercritical fluid supercritical carbon dioxide scanning electron microscopy sodium lauryl sulfate self-micro emulsifying drug delivery systems glass transition temperature melting temperature United States Pharmacopoeia β-cyclodextrins