Collector 733, a sodium soap (C12
                     –
                     16COONa) is widely used industrially for scheelite flotation. Low selectivity of 733 collector is always observed. In this study, a collector mixture of 733 and MES (sodium fatty acid methyl ester sulfonate) demonstrated a high selectivity for the flotation of scheelite from calcite and fluorite. An optimal mass ratio 4:1 of 733:MES was found, producing a 65.76% WO3 concentrate grade with a recovery of 66.04% from a feed material containing only 0.57% WO3. In addition, the effect of water hardness and water glass addition were studied. The results indicated that the presence of Ca2+ or Mg2+ had little effect on the adsorption of the collector mixture at the scheelite surface. Addition of water glass for depressing calcite and fluorite had no significant effect on the adsorption of the collector mixture on the scheelite surface. The advantages of this new collector mixture (733+MES) include lower cost, low dosage, high tolerance against water hardness and high selectivity, and this collector mixture has great potential for industrial application.The flotation separation of scheelite from other calcium-containing minerals such as fluorite and calcite, is problematic, due to their similar solubility and the same active Ca Collector 733, a sodium soap of fatty acids (C A more selective collector, with low cost and dosage, is required for scheelite flotation. A collector mixture is a good choice for this purpose. Recent research showed that, the flotation separation efficiency of Ca minerals could be enhanced using a mixture of anionic collectors with nonionic reagents, and collector mixture demonstrated three synergetic effects, namely enhanced mineral recovery, improved adsorption behavior of the main collector on the target mineral surface, and enhanced adsorption selectivity ( In this study, sodium fatty acid methyl ester sulfonate (MES), was considered as an assistant collector, as MES is a low cost, low irritation and low toxicity reagent with biodegradability and high tolerance against water hardness. An attempt to improve the selectivity for the flotation of scheelite from calcite and fluorite was made using a collector mixture of MES and collector 733. The mechanism of the selective separation was investigated through zeta potential measurement. Pure fluorite and calcite were sourced from Fujian, China; and scheelite from Qinghai, China. X-ray powder diffraction data confirmed that the scheelite, fluorite and calcite samples were 95%, 99% and 99% pure, respectively. The −74 The sources of flotation reagents were as follows: analytical grade MES (RCH(SO Single mineral flotation tests were carried out in an XFG flotation machine with a 40 Zeta potential measurements were conducted at 20 Firstly, the flotation separation using 733 or MES at a dosage of 50 As shown in From The flotation behavior of scheelite, fluorite and calcite individually using a collector mixture of 733 and MES at different mass ratio was investigated. A series of flotation results demonstrate that the collector mixture of 733 and MES at a mass ratio of 4:1 achieves the best flotation separation performance, as shown in It should be noted that, when the mass ratio of 733 and MES is more than 4:1, the selectivity is slightly improved while the ability of 733+MES to collect scheelite is relatively diminished. With a mass ratio of less than 4:1, decreased selectivity is obtained. The effect of water hardness (i.e. Ca A feed material containing 0.57% WO In this study, zeta potentials of scheelite, fluorite and calcite minerals in the absence and presence of various flotation reagents were measured. From    From the above, 733+MES (4:1) has a much stronger adsorption on scheelite surfaces than 733 alone, while 733 and 733+MES (4:1) exhibit a similar interaction towards fluorite and calcite. More importantly, the addition of WG prior to collector addition has an adverse impact on the adsorption of 733+MES on calcite and fluorite, but has little influence on the 733+MES adsorption on scheelite. The collector mixture of 733+MES at mass ratio of 4:1, is selective to scheelite than 733 alone. The addition of WG prior to collector addition has little impact on the adsorption of 733+MES towards scheelite, but has an adverse impact on the 733+MES adsorption on fluorite and calcite. The 4:1 collector mixture 733+MES with WG (3.0 This work was supported financially by the We would like to thank Jan Cilliers, Imperial College London, for his valuable discussions and comments on this paper.