The presence of hydroxylated metallic sites on mineral surfaces promotes the adsorption of polysaccharides on mineral surfaces. In this study, the interaction of calcium chloride and sodium lignosulfonate on talc was investigated through flotation tests and zeta potential, contact angle, adsorption measurements, X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy and infrared spectroscopy studies. Artificial mixed mineral flotation tests indicated that the combined action of calcium chloride and sodium lignosulfonate can reduce the content of talc in the flotation concentrate. Zeta potential and contact angle measurements showed that the combined inhibitory effect of calcium chloride and sodium lignosulfonate on talc is more effective than the individual effects of these reagents. The adsorption densities of calcium chloride and sodium lignosulfonate on talc revealed that the addition of Ca2+ contributes to the adsorption of sodium lignosulfonate on the talc surface. X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy and infrared spectroscopy provided evidence in support of a chemical interaction between Ca2+, sodium lignosulfonate and talc. The findings of this study are of great significance for reducing the Mg grade in the flotation concentrate of chalcopyrite.Chalcopyrite, a common copper-bearing sulfide ore, is the main raw material for industrial copper smelting [ Talc is a typical layered silicate mineral with a TOT-type structure that consists of two silicon tetrahedral sheets sandwiching one Mg–O(OH) octahedral sheet. Talc, owing to its low hardness, is prone to overgrinding during grinding processes. A considerable amount of talc mud is produced, which makes it difficult to inhibit its floatability [ The objective of this study was to explore the selective inhibition of fine-grained talc by calcium chloride (CaCl Natural chalcopyrite sample was obtained from Daye City, Hubei Province, China. Natural talc sample was purchased from Baoding City, Hebei Province, China. High-grade raw ore was carefully crushed to −2 mm, from which high-crystallinity ore was manually selected and then ground using a porcelain grinding ball to obtain flotation samples. A -74 + 45 μm size fraction of chalcopyrite and a −25 μm size fraction of talc were obtained by elutriation and sieving, respectively. Previous publications [ Butyl xanthate (collector) was an industrial product, methyl isobutyl carbinol (MIBC, frother) and sodium lignosulfonate were chemically pure, and CaCl Artificial mixed ore flotation tests were performed in a flotation apparatus ( In a typical flotation test, the mineral pulp was prepared by adding 2 g of artificial mixed ore (1:1 mass ratio of chalcopyrite and talc) to a 50 mL breaker with 50 mL of distilled water and conditioned for 2 min. CaCl The contact angle of a liquid on a material surface is an important parameter for evaluating the wettability of the liquid on the material surface, and the advancing contact angle can be approximated to the ideal Young contact angle [ The contact angle measurements were performed by the sessile drop technique using a JC2000 A contact angle goniometer. Prior to the test, the talc and reagents were mixed thoroughly in a beaker. Subsequently, the pulp was centrifuged and filtered, and the precipitate was vacuum dried at 40 °C for 12 h. Afterwards, the precipitate was embedded in resin and then ground with a diamond grinding disc to obtain a flat surface, subsequently the surface was polished with 0.05 μm alumina powder solution. During each measurement, a stable and suitable water drop of approximately 4.5 μL was deposited on the sample surface with a microsyringe, and the contact angle was measured by capturing images of the water droplet profile by computer. The contact angle measurements were repeated at least six times and the mean and standard deviation were calculated. The zeta potential of talc was measured before and after interacting with reagents using a Malvern Instruments Nano-ZS90 zeta potential analyzer. First, 20 mg of talc (−5 μm) was conditioned in 50 mL of water with 1 × 10 The talc–reagent interaction was investigated by infrared spectroscopy using a Nicolet 380 FT-IR spectrometer. The samples for infrared spectroscopy were prepared by adding the flotation reagents to 2 The amounts of Ca The suspension was centrifuged and the supernatant was collected, then the Ca The content of element on the talc surface was analyzed by XPS using an ESCALAB 250 X-ray photoelectron spectrometer. First, 2 The effect of CaCl  The effect of sodium lignosulfonate dosage on artificial mixed mineral flotation in the presence of Ca The zeta potential of talc was investigated before and after treatment with CaCl  To further investigate the inhibitory mechanism of Ca As shown in XPS is commonly applied to study the valence states of elements on particle surfaces and for semi-quantitative analysis of surface elements [ To further study the mechanism by which CaCl Infrared spectroscopy is typically used to investigate the interaction mechanism between flotation reagents and mineral surfaces. The infrared spectra of talc, CaCl For bare talc, the peak at 1437.40 cm As observed in The above results suggest that both CaCl The artificial mixed mineral flotation tests indicated that the synergistic effect of CaCl In this study, the inhibitory effect of CaCl The artificial mixed mineral flotation tests indicated that the combined action of CaCl The authors gratefully acknowledge the financial supportprovided by the