The transport of manganese and cobalt ions from sulphate solutions through a supported liquid membrane containing DP-8R (acidic extractant) dissolved in Exxsol D100 as a mobile carrier was investigated at 20 °C. The transport system was studied as a function of several variables: stirring speed of the source and receiving phases, concentration of the strippant in the receiving phase, pH of the source phase, diluent of the membrane phase and extractant and metal concentrations in the membrane and source phases, respectively. Higher selectivity in the separation of manganese and cobalt was obtained when the source phase presented higher [Co]/[Mn] concentration ratios.Increasingly growing purity demands on metals production has led to the implementation of more efficient (and economical) purification methods to meet the actual metallurgical and quality requirements of metal characteristics. One such example is the case of cobalt processing in which the appearance of growing manganese contents in a particular ore body has led to developments for the application of solvent extraction technology in the processing plant to substitute the now less-effective classical cobalt precipitation method Besides solvent extraction and other separation techniques, supported liquid membranes have attracted much interest for the separation of valuable metals due to the possibility of combining extraction and stripping reactions in one step A supported liquid membrane in a planar or flat geometry is very useful to obtain laboratory data before scaling-up to the form of hollow fibre or spiral wound membrane configurations. The literature has reported the use of flat-sheet supported liquid membrane configuration in the transport of cobalt (II) Thus, a supported liquid membrane has been implemented in the format of flat-sheet configuration to obtain data on the transport and selective Mn–Co separation. As membrane carrier, DP-8R extractant had been used and variables, which affect the transport of both metals, have been investigated. The acidic extractant DP-8R was obtained from Daihachi (Japan) and was used without further purification, the active substance of the extractant being di(2-ethylhexyl) phosphoric acid. Organic diluents Exxsol D100, Escaid 100 and Solvesso 100 (ExxonMobilChem. Iberia, Spain) and Iberfluid (CS, Spain) were also used without further purification. Stock (typically 1 g/L) manganese (II) and cobalt (II) solutions were prepared by dissolving the corresponding sulphate salt (Merck) in distilled water. Except in the experiments in which the metal concentration in the source phase was varied, these phases present a molar [Mn]/[Co] concentration ratio near 1 (typical of leach solutions). All other chemicals were of AR grade. The characteristics of the cell used in the present work were similar to those reported in the literature The organic membrane phase was prepared by dissolving DP-8R in the diluent to obtain carrier solution of various concentrations. The membrane was impregnated with the corresponding phase by immersion for 24 h, then left to drip for 10 s before being placed in the cell. The support used in the present investigation was Durapore GVHP4700; its physical characteristics can be obtained elsewhere The acidic nature of the carrier suggests a counter-transport mechanism for the metals. The driving force of the process is the excess of proton concentration in the receiving solution as compared with that in the source phase. A schematic representation of the concentration profile for the system is shown in Previous experiments were performed to establish adequate hydrodynamic conditions. The percentage of metal transport was studied as a function of the stirring speed in the source solution side, keeping the agitation of the receiving solution constant at 650 min The effect of varying the stirring speed in the receiving solution was also investigated using the same solutions as described in  In order to asses the significance of the role of the pH of the source phase solution during the transport of manganese (and cobalt), pH variation studies in the range 2.5–6.5 were carried out using a receiving phase of 50 g/L sulphuric acid, the concentration of the membrane carrier being 30% v/v in Exxsol D100. The effect of the pH of the source phase on metals transport is shown in The results concerning the transport of manganese and cobalt from the source phase containing 0.005 g/L Mn and 0.005 g/L Co at pH 3.5 and the receiving phase 50 g/L sulphuric acid and varying concentration of the carrier in the range 5–40% v/v dissolved in Exxsol D100 showed The maximum in the percentage of manganese transport can be related to a limiting permeability value, The influence of the diluent on both the stability and the efficiency of supported liquid membranes for the transport of several metals has been reported in the literature   The transport and selectivity in the separation of manganese (II) and cobalt (II) from sulphate aqueous solutions through a flat-sheet supported liquid membrane containing DP-8R have been investigated. The metal transport is influenced by a number of variables, i.e. pH of the source phase, extractant and metal concentrations, etc. Conditions for the selective separation of manganese and cobalt were established as: pH of the source phase around 3.5, extractant concentration in the 20–30% v/v range and using an aliphatic diluent, sulphuric acid concentration in the receiving phase no less than 50 g/L and processing source phases with the highest molar [Co]/[Mn] ratio as possible (i.e. 1 g/L Co and 0.005 g/L Mn), though in continuous processing, the efficiency of separation process can be improved by using a more effective membrane unit, i.e. hollow fibre modules. The authors would like to acknowledge the CSIC for support. Also, thanks are given to Mr. Bascones and Mr. López for technical assistance.