The present study discusses the potentiality of using anaerobic Packed Bed Bioreactor (PBR) for the treatment of acid mine drainage (AMD). The multiple process parameters such as pH, hydraulic retention time (HRT), concentration of marine waste extract (MWE), total organic carbon (TOC) and sulfate were optimized together using Taguchi design. The order of influence of the parameters towards biological sulfate reduction was found to be pH > MWE > sulfate > HRT > TOC. At optimized conditions (pH - 7, 20% (v/v) MWE, 1500 mg/L sulfate, 48 h HRT and 2300 mg/L TOC), 98.3% and 95% sulfate at a rate of 769.7 mg/L/d. and 732.1 mg/L/d. was removed from the AMD collected from coal and metal mine, respectively. Efficiency of metal removal (Fe, Cu, Zn, Mg and Ni) was in the range of 94–98%. The levels of contaminants in the treated effluent were below the minimum permissible limits of industrial discharge as proposed by Bureau of Indian Standards (IS 2490:1981). The present study establishes the optimized conditions for PBR operation to completely remove sulfate and metal removal from AMD at high rate. The study also creates the future scope to develop an efficient treatment process for sulfate and metal-rich mine wastewater in a large scale.Sulfate and metal-rich acidic wastewater generated from the mining industries is known as acid mine drainage (AMD). It possesses a serious environmental threat to the mining area because of its acidity and dissolved metal contents ( The nitrogen is considered as an important constituent of cellular molecules like purine, pyrimidine, amino acids and enzyme co-factors ( Moreover, the role of pH, hydraulic retention time (HRT), concentration of sulfate, total organic carbon (TOC) and nitrogen in the feed have advocated the importance of process parameters towards the growth of SRB ( The objective of present study is to investigate the prospect of using packed bed bioreactor (PBR) for treatment of AMD collected from different sources. The process parameters governing such complex biochemical reaction includes pH, HRT, feed concentration of sulfate, TOC and MWE. The optimization and understanding the degree of influence of these parameters was done using Taguchi design. Under optimized process parameters, treatment of AMD collected from the coal and metal mine was executed using PBR for 150 d. To the best of our knowledge, the present study is a novel approach towards optimization of bioreactor operation by simultaneously considering multiple parameters to improve the metal and sulfate removal from AMD. The AMD was individually collected from coal and copper mine in India. The underground coal and open cast copper mine are located in different locations in India, such as Chhattisgarh (23.33° N, 82.49° E) and Madhya Pradesh (22.02° N, 80.43° E), respectively. It was reported that both the mines produced AMD rich in sulfate and various dissolved metals ( In the present study, a laboratory scale PBR was used to treat the wastewater collected from the mining industries. The PBR was operated towards upflow direction and contained the following components; an influent reservoir tank, a peristaltic pump (Miclins India, PP20EX), a fixed bed column and an effluent tank ( The inoculum was collected from the mixed bacterial culture that was growing in the MSRB medium and contained 96% SRB population ( When the PBR reached a steady state condition in terms of sulfate reduction, the residence time distribution (RTD) study was performed to find out the flow characteristics of the column packed with polyurethane beads. The study was carried out using 2 mg Li The optimization of the process parameters were performed using Taguchi method. This method is applied to determine the outcome of an analytical approach consisting of variable factors. Significant variance in the factor level is determined and thus it predicts the combination of standard factors for optimal factor level. In the present study, Taguchi design was used to find out the effect of variables such as feed pH, HRT, feed concentration of TOC, sulfate and MWE on sulfate reduction. The experimental design consisted of a large number of experiments described as orthogonal array (OA). Besides reducing error, such design approach could also enhance the efficiency and reproducibility of laboratory experiments ( In the equation, L(y), k and m indicates loss function, proportionality constant and target value, respectively. L(y) depends on ‘y’ which can be obtained from each experiment. In the equation, n presents the number of samples. In the experimental design, five variables such as feed pH, HRT, TOC, sulfate and MWE were considered with three levels of factors to study their effect on sulfate reduction ( The AMD collected from the two different sources were treated in two different but identical upflow PBR as described in During the reactor operation, samples were collected on each day interval and filtered using 0.2 μm membrane filter before analysis. Sulfate was measured by the spectrophotometric method as proposed by The AMD collected from the coal and metal mines contained a significant quantity of sulfate and dissolved metals as presented in The residence time distribution of the upflow PBR has been presented by tracer response curve (C curve) in Using the data of response curve the calculated mean retention time, variance and dispersion number were 55.38 min, 124.27 min Different sulfate reduction efficiency was observed on performing experiments in accordance to the orthogonal array ( The probable reason of pH being the most influential parameter could be that it governs the metabolic flux of SRBs which eventually results in lesser accumulation of growth inhibitory products such as H From Section The influent of pH was maintained at its optimum value (7.02–7.03) in both the bioreactor. As the operation started, the pH increased to 7.7–7.8 in both the reactors after 21 and 30 d. in R1 and R2, respectively ( ORP in both the reactor decreased gradually below −300 mV ( After dosing of alkaline agent, the alkalinity increased to the range of 4500–4345 mg/L CaCO The acidity in the influent of the reactor R1 and R2 were 340 and 385 mg/L CaCO The profile of sulfate removal percentage, sulfate removal rate and dissolved sulfide generation, both in R1 and R2 is presented in From the steady state condition to the end of bioreactor operation, the rate of sulfate removal rate in R1 and R2 was (769.7 ± 13.1) mg/L/d. and (732.1 ± 16.1) mg/L/d., respectively. Dissolved sulfide was produced in both the bioreactor due to the activity of SRB ( The influent of both the bioreactors contained Fe, Cu, Ni, Mg, Zn and Mn ( The concentration of Cu in the influent for R1 and R2 were 0.3 mg/L and 266 mg/L, respectively. The addition of alkaline agent resulted in Cu removal by 25–28% in the influent storage tank of both the bioreactors. Simultaneous activity of SRB inside the bioreactor column resulted in gradual increase in Cu removal ( The AMD collected from the metal mine contained higher concentration of Cu and Zn. The overall removal rate of Cu and Zn from the metal mine AMD using R2 was (175 ± 2.2) mg/L/d and (59 ± 0.7) mg/L/d., respectively. The rate of Cu and Zn removal obtained in the present study was much higher than that reported by In the present study, majority of the Ni was removed by alkaline addition both in the effluent storage tank of R1 (67%) and R2 (65%). The bioreactor column removed the remaining Ni, resulting in overall removal of 97% in both the R1 and R2 ( The present study clearly indicates that the optimization of PBR operation could enhance the sulfate and metal removal rate, and successfully treat AMD collected from two different sources. The level of the contaminants (sulfate and metals) in the treated water was decreased below the permissible limit of industrial discharge as proposed by Bureau of Indian Standards (IS 2490:1981) ( In the present study, perspective of the PBR was studied to improve the treatment of AMD. Optimization of the operational parameters using Taguchi design revealed that pH and MWE concentration were the most influential followed the concentration of sulfate, HRT, and TOC. Under optimized process parameters, the AMD from coal and metal mine was successfully treated using the PBR. Almost complete removal of sulfate and metals was achieved at high rate lowering their concentration below the permissible limit of contaminants for industrial discharges. This study could help in the development of an efficient process for the treatment of sulfate and heavy metal-rich mine wastewaters in a large scale. The authors gratefully acknowledge the The following is the supplementary data related to this article: Supplementary data related to this article can be found at