The biosorption of different metals (Cu2+, Cd2+, Zn2+, Ni2+ and Pb2+) was investigated using activated sludge. The optimum pH was 4 for Cd, Cu and Pb sorption and 5 for Ni and Zn. Biomass metal uptake clearly competed with protons present in the aqueous medium, making pH an important variable in the process. Protons consumed by biomass in control tests versus protons exchange in biosorption tests confirmed a maximum exchange between metal cations and protons at pH 2. The study of the influence of biomass concentration revealed that the amount of protons released from biomass increased with biomass concentration. This would confirm the hypothesis of ion exchange between both types of ions.
                  The application of the Langmuir and Freundlich models showed a better fitting of experimental data to the first model. The maximum sorption uptake of the studied metals by the activated sludge showed the following decreasing order: Pb>Cu>Cd⩾Zn>Ni.
                  Desorption experiments showed that HCl was a good eluent for the five metals tested, particularly at low pH values (1 and 2). At pH 3 or 4 the desorption yield was significantly lower. However, its use did not allow the reuse of biomass in subsequent loading and unloading cycles. EDTA was also a good desorption agent, achieving the total recovery for the five metals tested at a concentration of 1mM, with the advantage that biomass could be reused for three sorption–desorption cycles.The disposal of effluents containing heavy metals is related to a great number of industrial operations, such as: electroplating, chemical manufacture, leather tanning, oil refining and especially mining and mineral processing. The removal of such contaminants up to levels approved by national or international agencies has not totally been solved by conventional chemical precipitation procedures. Biosorption processes, defined as the sorption of metal ions by biomass, are being employed as an alternative technique for the decontamination of industrial effluents and for the recovery of the retained metals ( Interactions between metals and biomass lead to the binding of both depending on the functional groups contained in the cell walls or the biopolymers of dead microorganisms, such as carboxylic, amino, phosphate and sulphate groups, among others ( This approach has been the starting point of the present work, where the biomass used was activated sludge. This biosorbent, composed of different types of microorganisms (mainly bacteria, fungi, yeasts, algae and protozoa), is easily available (in sewage treatment plants) and has a great potential for application ( Activated sludge was supplied by a sewage treatment plant in Arroyo de la Vega (Madrid, Spain). The tested samples were collected from a settling tank where the activated sludge, consisting mainly of bacteria, fungi, protozoa and small nematodes, was separated from the effluent by decantation. The interest in this kind of complex biomass lies in the fact that it is easily available in adequate amounts and at very low cost for its use at industrial level. Dry biomass pellets were obtained after centrifugation in an Eppendorf centrifuge model 5804 at 5000 Experiments were performed using synthetic stock solutions of 1000 Biosorption tests were carried out with 250 The amount of adsorbed metal was calculated from the following expression: The conditions for each experiment were as follows:     Bibliographic literature reports that activated sludge presents at surface level a negative net charge which facilitates its binding with positive metal cations ( The influence of pH on the biosorption capacity for the different metals is shown in At very low pH values (with a high proton concentration) cell wall ligands would be closely associated to H The experimental study included control tests (without metal in solution), in which the biomass was contacted with acid solutions at pH values between 1 and 6. The amount of protons consumed by biomass as a function of the initial pH and the pH reached at equilibrium in the control experiments (pH The results obtained are shown in  The importance of this variable is related to the optimum concentration combined with the maximum efficiency in the sorption process for each metal. A series of calculations similar to those previously mentioned were done to complete this study.  The amount of protons exchange between the biomass and the metal solution increased with biomass concentration. These observations would confirm the hypothesis of ion exchange proposed in the previous section.  The affinity between the biomass and the different metals was quantified by fitting the obtained sorption values to the Langmuir isotherm: In addition, the Freundlinch isotherm was also applied: Parameters defined by both models were evaluated from experimental data of Linear regressions of both models are shown in It is interesting to compare the sorption uptake of activated sludges with that of other adsorbents very common in industry, such as activated charcoal, ion exchange resin, BGH, bacteria ( Sorption studies can be complemented with desorption ones that recover the metal retained and reuse the biomass in subsequent loading and unloading cycles. The literature reports several different types of eluent agents ( In an attempt to determine the optimum pH value to obtain the highest metal recovery yield, a series of tests at different initial pH (1, 2, 3 and 4) were performed, using HCl as acid reactant. In this study, desorption kinetics were followed for 1500 Unfortunately, it was not possible to reuse the biomass in a new sorption–desorption cycle due to the lack of biosorbent capacity. This fact points out the aggressive effect that hydrochloric acid exerts on molecules of biological tissues, for that reason its use as eluent does not allow for more than one sorption–desorption cycle. The way that EDTA is associated to protons greatly depends on the pH value of the medium. As pH decreases, EDTA, symbolized by letter “Y”, passes through a series of complexes of higher coordination index according to the following order: Y In this case, the experimental procedure was similar to the one used for HCl. The following concentrations of EDTA were tested: 0.1, 0.25, 0.5, 0.75 and 1 The possibility of reusing the biomass in a new sorption–desorption cycle was demonstrated in this case, but at the expense of losing a high sorption capacity of the biomass in the third cycle, except for lead. These results could be justified by the higher affinity of biomass for this metal. For the rest of metals, the third cycle should not have been considered. These results are shown in The loss of biosorption capacity by activated sludge after each cycle can be associated with interactions between the complexing agent and the functional groups or active sites of the biomass. It is expected that these sites were blocked in an irreversible way by metal already adsorbed in the previous cycle ( pH had a clear influence on the sorption capacity of activated sludge for Cu, Cd, Ni, Zn and Pb. The competition between metal and protons sorption was greater at pH 2. This value coincided with the pH at which uptake of protons by the biomass reached a maximum. Biomass concentration was a main variable in the biosorption process with activated sludge. The release of protons from the biomass increased with increasing biomass concentration, confirming the ion exchange between protons and metal cations during the process. The data pertaining to the sorption dependence upon metal ion concentration fitted the Langmuir isotherm better than the Freundlinch model. HCl and EDTA were good desorption agents for the five metals, yielding the highest metal recoveries at pH 1 and 2 in the former case and at a concentration of 1 The authors wish to express their gratitude to Spanish Ministry of Science and Technology for the funding of this work.