Properties of hydroxyapatite (HA) or fluorapatite (FA), such as bioactivity, biocompatibility, solubility, and adsorption properties can be tailored over a wide range by modifying the composition via ionic substitutions. This research aimed to prepare and characterize Mg-doped FA (Mg-FA) nanopowders. Mg-FA nanopowders with different Mg contents were prepared by sol–gel method. The designated degree of substitution of Ca2+ by Mg2+ in the mixture was determined by the x value in the general formula of (Ca10−x
                     Mg
                        x
                     (PO4)6F2), where x
                     =0, 0.25, 0.5, 0.75, and 1. X-ray diffraction (XRD), scanning electron microscopic (SEM), transmission electron microscopy (TEM), atomic absorption spectrophotometer (AAS) and Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy (FTIR) techniques were utilized to characterize the obtained powders. Results showed that Mg ions entered into the fluorapatite lattice and occupied Ca2+ sites. The incorporation of Mg ions into the fluorapatite resulted in the decrease of the lattice parameters. The obtained powders had crystallite size of about 30–100nm.Hydroxyapatite (Ca Fluorine-substituted HA (Ca Mg is one of the most important substitutes for calcium in biological apatites. Dentin, Enamel, and bone contain 1.23, 0.44 and 0.72 Considering the above points in view, Mg-FA materials may then be superior to pure FA for implant applications. In this work, we prepared Mg-FA powders in order to integrate the advantages of Mg with the low soluble ability of FA. The powders with different Mg contents were prepared by sol–gel method, and the effects of Mg incorporation on the powders were investigated. The flowchart of the preparation method of Mg-FA nanopowder in this study is shown in Phase structure analyses were carried out by X-ray diffraction (XRD) using a Philips X’Pert-MPD diffractometer with Cu Kα radiation ( Lattice parameters (c and a) were calculated from peaks (0 The functional groups of samples were analyzed with Fourier transform infrared (FTIR, Bomem, MB100) in a mid-IR spectrum range in the range of 400–4000  As can be seen ( Crystallite sizes of the prepared FA with different degrees of Mg content, calculated using XRD data, are shown in FTIR spectra of the obtained FA powders with different Mg contents are shown in Chemical analysis of the Mg-FA powders is shown in  The morphological shape and size of FA5M powder obtained from TEM are shown in Bioceramics with a grain size lower than 100 Mg-doped fluorapatite (FA) nano powders with different Mg content were fabricated by sol–gel method. FTIR result combined with the X-ray diffraction indicated that substitution of Ca The incorporation of Mg ions into the fluorapatite led to the decrease in the lattice parameters. Our results indicate that just partial amount of Mg entered into the FA lattice and the remainder formed MgF The authors are grateful to Isfahan University of Technology for supporting the present research.