The high-cycle fatigue behavior of ARMCO iron severely deformed by Equal Channel Angular Pressing (ECAP) at room temperature through route Bc until 8 passes, with an average grain size of ~365nm, was studied and compared with the same material in the annealed state with an average grain size of ~72µm. The fatigue limit of the 8 passes ECAPed sample increased with respect to the annealed material by more than 250% rising from 274MPa to 717MPa. Striations and dimpled relief were observed on the fracture surfaces of the fatigued ultrafine and coarse grain fatigue samples. The microstructure was characterized by Electron Backscattered Diffraction (EBSD) before and after the fatigue tests and it was observed in both samples an increment in the fraction of Low Angle Grain Boundaries (LAGB) at high number of cycles to failure. A texture analysis for the materials after the fatigue failure was done. This study shown a preferential orientation towards the γ fiber for both conditions.Fatigue is associated with the processes of damage accumulation and the resulting fracture of materials under cyclic loading at stress levels below the tensile strength or even the yield stress. The total fatigue life is conventionally divided into two regions corresponding to the times required for crack nucleation and crack propagation There is a great demand for high-strength materials in structural applications in order to obtain light structures. One of the most important methods to achieve this goal is through grain refinement. Ultra fine grained (UFG) materials can be obtained through different techniques, but the so called Equal Channel Angular Pressing (ECAP) is one of the favorite ones because processing can be carried out with no porosity and no contamination Up to now, studies on fatigue strength for materials processed by ECAP mainly cover non-ferrous metals, such as copper, aluminum, magnesium, titanium, nickel and their alloys A commercial ARMCO (acronym from American Rolling Mill Company trademark) iron (Fe-0.01%C-0.01%Si-0.059%Mn-<0.01%P-<0.010%S-0.02%Cr-<0.005%Mo-0.038%Ni-0.013%Al (in wt%)) was received in the form of 8 The microstructure and texture of the annealed and deformed samples before and after fatigue tests was characterized by Electron Backscattered Diffraction (EBSD). The samples were cut from the centre of the billets and mechanically polished from 2500 grit SiC paper up to 0.04 The specimens for fatigue and tensile tests were also machined from the annealed and deformed billets. To determine the fatigue S-N curves, 16 samples of the annealed and deformed condition were tested at a load ratio A cycle of fluctuating stresses can be defined by two components: one average or stationary stress  The GNDs density can be calculated from EBSD measurements Due to orientation differences in all three directions between pixels Five components of the Nye tensor can be determined from two-dimensional mapping. From those components a truncated scalar value can be calculated, namely   One of the most important parameters to increase the strength of UFG materials is the average grain size reduction as predicted by the Hall-Petch equation, which states that the yield stress, By taking into account the influence of two types of boundaries, i.e. HAGB and LAGB, the strengthening contribution to the yield stress can be given by: The Peierls–Nabarro stress can be calculated with the following formula EBSD analysis also enables an evaluation of LAGBs contribution to the increase of strength. This can be treated as dislocation strengthening (Taylor strengthening) The The mayor contribution to the material strength is coming from the HAGB, for the processed material. However, an increase in the amount of the LAGB contribution can be seen in The fatigue curves (S-N curves) for both materials are displayed in As the fatigue behavior of nanomaterials cannot simply be explained by the Hall–Petch effect, several aspects such as microstructural stability, shear banding, or grain size distributions are some of the key parameters to explain their behavior The EBSD maps obtained for each point over the HCF curve can be seen in The microstructural properties (grain size, aspect ratio and %HAGB) are presented in The fracture surfaces have been also analyzed in Recrystallization together with grain growth have been reported to occur in UFG materials during fatigue tests To characterize the texture of the material, it is important to know the ideal texture orientations. In this case the ideal components for BCC materials deformed by conventional methods In order to identify the initial symmetry, the material in this investigation was analyzed in monoclinic symmetry. The texture evolution in the annealed material ( For the sample processed by eight ECAP passes an initial texture due to the severe plastic deformation is observed ( The main components developed in the deformed material after fatigue are To understand the effect of crystallographic orientation on the formation of HAGB, the evolution of HAGB fraction has been calculated both for A noticeable reduction in the grain size was observed between the initial material and the material after eight ECAP passes. This behavior is a consequence of the continuous generation of new grain boundaries from the grouping of dislocations until the formation of subgrains which finally evolves in grain boundaries with the future strain. As a consequence of the reduction in the grain size, the material after eight ECAP passes presented a considerable increment in the tensile strength as well as for the HCF strength (>190% in increment) with respect to the annealed material, where the main contribution to the tensile strength was coming from the HAGB according with the modified Hall-Petch relationship. However, an important reduction in the ductility of the processed material was also observed. This reduction was attributed to the lost in the strain hardening capability of the material. The study of the microstructures after the fatigue tests for both materials (zero and eight passes) showed some changes with respect to the materials before the fatigue test. Initially a marked change in the microstructure morphology is observed, especially for the material with eight ECAP passes at high number of cycles, but also for the annealed material at low number of cycles. The annealed material showed a reduction in the grain size and the fraction of HAGB, while the processed one highlights an increase in the grain size and the fraction of HAGB. It is also evident a change in the material texture after the fatigue test where most of the grains present a preferential orientation towards <101> direction, especially the sample processed by ECAP. A clear increment in the fraction of grains oriented towards the γ and α fiber was noticed in both conditions after the fatigue tests. The main components developed in the deformed material after fatigue were JAMB thanks the FPU scholarship received by the