Granitic pegmatite is used as raw material for industrial minerals in the production of feldspar and quartz for glass, ceramic and porcelain. One of the most important quality parameters in the feldspar is the content of iron (Fe). At the Lillesand plant, Norway, pegmatite is floated to produce quartz, albite and microcline products. Fe is mostly removed through flotation and magnetic separation, but some Fe is still present in the final products, the amount depending on the raw material source. Rietveld X-ray Diffraction (XRD), Point counting by optical microscopy, and Electron Microprobe Analysis (EPMA) combined with image analysis of Back-Scatter Electron (BSE) images was used to quantify the mineralogy and to map the distribution Fe in the pegmatites. The study showed that Fe is present as mineral inclusions in feldspar, in addition to its occurrence in minor mineral components such as mica and chlorite. The frequency of Fe-mineral inclusions was higher in albite than in microcline, and they were often associated with micro-fractures and areas of alteration. These findings reveal a potential for reducing total Fe2O3 in the microcline products.Granitic pegmatite is mined for the production of quartz and feldspar used in products like porcelain, ceramics, glass and glass fibre. Because of the generally heterogeneous nature of pegmatites, with respect to both grain size and chemistry, it is necessary to blend different raw materials to meet quality specifications. The most important quality parameter is the content of Fe because of its colouring effect in further processes. The quality specifications generally state a maximum Fe content, and may include a requirement of low variation for other elements such as K and Na in the mineral concentrates. To meet the specifications it may be necessary to remove Fe-containing phases in the raw material by mineral enrichment processes. Due to the nature of the enrichment processes and the mineral textures, the Fe content in the resulting mineral concentrates is not necessarily dependent on the Fe content in the raw material. These specifications and requirements point to the importance of understanding the occurrence of Fe in the granitic pegmatite raw material. This paper presents a case study from the Glamsland pegmatite field, Lillesand, Southern Norway. In recent years, raw material from different deposits, have been blended as feed to the dressing plant. The mineral enrichment process consists of crushing, grinding, and flotation in three steps, drying and high-intensity magnetic separation, before storage and shipping to customers ( The aim of this paper is to characterize the occurrence of Fe in key raw material types of the Glamsland pegmatite field in order to understand their different behaviours in the mineral enrichment process and different product qualities. The focus in the investigation will be on the feldspar minerals, since the Fe content of quartz from the Glamsland deposits is known to be stable and low ( Identify the Fe-bearing minerals and their Fe content. Document and quantify the textural relationship between the feldspars and other Fe-bearing minerals. Document the variation of Fe as a function of particle size range. Estimate the total contribution of Fe from the different minerals in each pegmatite type. The importance of this investigation lies in the ability to utilize the deposits in the best way both economically and environmentally ( The sample materials used in this study were different raw material types of the Glamsland pegmatite field, Lillesand, Southern Norway. The mineralogy of these raw materials was investigated by The deposits of importance in recent years of mining have been Lørdagsheia (LH), the C-deposit (C) and Heståsknipen (HK). In these deposits nine types of raw material have been defined ( Each sample was stage-crushed to 100% passing −1.68 This study focuses on Fe-bearing minerals in the raw material types of the Glamsland pegmatite field. The bulk chemistry of the key raw materials was measured using X-ray Fluorescence (XRF), while Rietveld X-ray Diffraction (XRD) and point counting using an optical microscope were used to quantify the mineralogy. Image analysis (IA) on back scatter electron (BSE) images was used to identify Fe-bearing mineral phases related to the feldspar minerals. Mineral chemistry analysis from points and element mapping was done with an Electron Probe Micro Analysis (EPMA). XRF analyses were performed on powder tablets using an ARL Advant’XP instrument with Thermo software. During analysis the electric current was 70 Powdered samples were analysed by XRD. The data were collected on a Bruker X-ray Diffractor D8 Advance using 40 Point counting of polished thin sections for the sample size fractions was carried out using a Nikon Optiphot optical microscope with CFW 10× Oculars and magnifications of M Plan 5 DIC 0.1 NA and M Plan 10 DIC 0.25 NA. The point counting tool was a PELCON Point counter using software Version 1.8.with a Sandberg Auto gear 9 digits key-pad. The principle of point counting superimposes a grid is introduced onto a two-dimensional surface, where the relative amount of points collected for each mineral constituent reflects the volume fraction of each constituent ( IA was performed on BSE images to quantify mineralogy in polished thins sections of the respective size fractions based on the grey level intensities in the BSE image ( EPMA was used to determine mineral chemistry in polished thin sections of the respective size fractions. The analysis consisted of measurements of defined points in the mineral particles using wavelength dispersive spectrometry (WDS) and element mapping of selected mineral particles ( Quantitative Rietveld XRD analysis on bulk powder samples and point counting on polished thin sections were applied to quantify the mineralogy of the key raw materials ( Image analysis (IA) was performed on BSE images of polished thin sections of the respective size fractions.  The mineral chemistry was determined by EPMA point analysis (WDS) ( From the mineral chemistry structural formulas of feldspar in the key raw materials have been calculated; LRT1 albite Na Element mapping (55 maps in total) was performed on several areas in the polished thin sections of whole rock samples to illustrate the location of Fe. In this element mapping the position of Fe-rich minerals were located, revealing that Fe-rich minerals was present as individual minerals like biotite and sulphides in between feldspar and quartz grains. They were also present as mineral inclusions along micro-fractures in these main minerals, and as mineral inclusions inside feldspar. The distribution of Fe in the mineral compositions of the key raw materials is presented in With respect to albite particles, the +212  LRT1 had the highest values of total Fe In This investigation, performed with high resolution electron microscopes and other quantification methods, has given new and important knowledge about the occurrence of Fe in the industrial pegmatites of the Glamsland pegmatite field. The mineral content of the granitic pegmatite rock was quantified by point counting and Rietveld XRD. Based on the mineralogy by point counting, LRT3 contains less microcline and mica than LRT1 and LRT4 ( From the structural formulas calculated for feldspar it is visible that the feldspar itself is not very different in the three key raw materials investigated. The differences lie in type and number of inclusions and interlocked minerals inside the feldspar. From the calculation of the distribution of Fe Biotite and Fe-minerals (Fe-oxides and Fe-sulphides) are the dominant contributors of Fe Semi-quantitative element mapping, as presented in Image analysis of albite particles ( One of the objectives in this paper was to investigate differences in total Fe Sources of error in this investigation are firstly the number of samples investigated, which might not be enough to get a representative distribution. The thin sections of fractionated material investigated were chosen to represent a fine, middle and a coarse particle size, and the sample material was extracted using normal lab procedures which included splitting of the material to get a representative sample. Still, using standard procedures for splitting, mica minerals often get electrostatic when handling and can therefore either be over- or under-represented in the sample. The making of thin sections can include several errors. The surface area of the mineral particle depends on the cutting of the cemented epoxy column, and in polished thin sections mica particles can lie under the epoxy surface and therefore not be included when point counted. The outcome of these two factors might be an over- or under-estimation of the flaky minerals like biotite. Also minerals with textural intergrowths like perthites and anti-perthites can be cut along the intergrowth planes exposing larger areas of the intergrowth minerals for quantification than the volume actual present. An example of this can be seen in the standard deviation for albite and microcline in connection to the microcline particles ( The industrial value of the mineralogical characterization performed on key raw materials from the Glamsland pegmatite field is in the increased knowledge of the Fe distribution in the minerals of the deposits in production. This knowledge gives an advantage in the optimal utilization of the deposits both economically and environmentally. Such knowledge of the different raw material types makes it possible to sort the raw material early in the production process, and be able to mine more selectively. Selective mining can give both financial and environmental benefits, for instance by decreasing the transportation and processing costs by eliminating low quality raw material as feed to the plant. Such raw material will contaminate the flotation process and the concentrates, and increase the waste ending up in the tailings. A question that can be asked is if it is possible to remove more Fe to make a cleaner concentrate. The results from the mineral characterization performed are positive regarding the possibility of a cleaner microcline (potassium) product but not regarding an albite (soda feldspar) product. Since the presence of albite particles in the microcline concentrate results in a higher Fe content, improved liberation of albite and microcline could reduce the content of Fe The lesson learned from this project is that methods like XRF, Rietveld XRD, point counting using optical microscopy, image analysis of BSE images, and EPMA for mineral chemistry and element mapping are useful for studying this kind of pegmatite raw material. Automated methods like mineral liberation analysis (MLA) ( Mineralogical characterization of three key raw materials from the Glamsland pegmatite field in Norway has resulted in the following conclusions: Fe as individual minerals in between mineral particles of quartz and feldspar; as mineral inclusions along micro-fractures in quartz and feldspar; as mineral inclusions inside feldspar particles; Biotite and albite particles are the two dominant sources of Fe In the albite particles, biotite and Fe-minerals (both oxide and sulphide) are the most important Fe contributors, while in the microcline particles, Fe-minerals are most important. There is no clear trend in Fe occurrence by size fraction in the key raw materials investigated. LRT1 has the highest content of total Fe LRT3 has the lowest content of total Fe LRT4 has a higher content of Fe-minerals inclusions and total Fe From all key raw materials investigated it can be concluded that; Within the albite particles, Fe Within microcline particles, the Fe Future work with these raw materials may include automated methods like PTA, QemSCAN or MLA to quantify liberated and locked mineral grains within particles. Thereby the best grain size for process optimization could be estimated. This, however, was not the scope of this investigation. This study is financially supported by the Norwegian Research Council and Sibelco Nordic as a part of an industrial PhD programme started in August 2008. The work was performed at Sibelco Nordic in Lillesand, and at the Norwegian University of Science and Technology, Norway. The authors would like to thank Terje Malvik (Norwegian University of Science and Technology) for inputs to the project, Irene Solås (Sibelco Nordic) who performed semi-quantitative XRF analysis and Morten Raaness who performed the EPMA analyses. Thank you for inputs from the two anonymous reviewers.