This paper presents a numerical study of solid separation in a jigging device, which is a high yield and high recovery gravity separation device widely used in ore processing. The mathematical model adopted is a combination of computational fluid dynamics (CFD) for the liquid flow and discrete element method (DEM) for particle motion. The motion of individual particles is 3 dimensional (3D) and the flow of continuous liquid is 2 dimensional (2D), considering the bed thickness is only 1/3rd of the bed width, and one CFD computational cell is used through the thickness. Periodic boundary conditions are applied on the front and rear walls to emulate a bed of larger thickness using a relatively small number of particles. Stratification is heavily dependent on fluid motion through the jig. The study explores 5 different pulsation profiles. The profiles used are — sinusoidal, triangle, sawtooth-backward, sawtooth-forward, and trapezoidal. The initial packing conditions consist of a binary-density particle system where the light particles and heavy particles, have respective densities of 2540 and 4630kg/m3. There are 1130 particles each 1cm in diameter. As an initial comparison, all simulations are conducted using a fixed peak–peak amplitude and pulsation period. Their relative performances are compared in terms of solid flow patterns, separation kinetics, energy, and mean particle position. The underlying mechanisms are explained in terms of particle–fluid interaction force. These quantitative comparisons demonstrate significant differences in the segregation rate and energy used for various pulsation profiles.Jigging is a gravity separation method commonly used by the mineral industry to separate coal, diamonds and other minerals on the basis of particle size and/or density ( Much of the published research performed in jigging has been experimental ( Modern investigations of jigging phenomena using numerical simulation techniques have shown to be a fast growing area. Only a few jigging studies have adopted the DEM–CFD approach ( Previous studies using the DEM–CFD model have used a sinusoidal pulsation profile with the exception of The DEM–CFD model has been well documented in the literature. For brevity, only the outline of the model structure is described below. The solid phase is treated as a discrete phase and solved using DEM. The translational and rotational motions of a particle at any time, The liquid phase is treated as a continuous phase moving through a porous medium created by the particles, and is modelled similarly to conventional two fluid models in which porosity (or liquid volume fraction) modifies the standard single phase Navier–Stokes equations. The governing equations are then the conservations of mass and momentum in terms of the local mean variables over a computational cell, given by: DEM is solved numerically with an in-house code ( The model consists of a rectangular domain filled with a binary-density spherical particle system and liquid. The particles were divided into 50% light glass particles (2540 The liquid flow was considered in 2D using only one cell and hence not considering detailed flow fields in this direction, whilst DEM modelling of the particles was in 3D, with a bed thickness equal to five particle diameters. Two-dimensional simulations can represent cases were the flow is by nature two dimensional, where the flow variations (space and time) are significant in two directions and negligible in the third direction. Significant differences have been shown in literature of numerical simulations of circulating fluidization units for the same numerical parameter, between 2D and 3D simulations, as the instantaneous local flow physics is highly three dimensional ( Uniform liquid flow was injected through the inlet and varied with time according to the pulsation profile simulated. The inlet flow for the sinusoidal pulsation profile was established using a sine wave equation, whilst the other profiles used the heavy side step function. The jigging profiles were selected carefully as the large heavy particles adopted have relatively long particle relaxation times and not every oscillating frequency and amplitude chosen will ensure sufficient oscillatory particle displacement. The pulsation profiles are compared on the basis that, peak-to-peak amplitude and period are held constant, at 3 Solid flow patterns are checked first to obtain a visual understanding of the stratification process. The mean displacement position (see The mean position of each type of particle gives a good understanding of the separation process. Starting from a well mixed state where each type of particle has a similar mean position, the light particles move upward faster than the heavier particles during the pulsion period. During the suction period, both types of particles fall down, but the heavier particles fall faster than the lighter particles. Following separation more and more lighter particles aggregate on top of the heavier particles. The lighter particles receive less constrain from the heavier particles, and move higher during the pulsion period as demonstrated by their mean position until a dynamically stable state is reached. The mean positions remain constant for a significant period during the suction process for the SINE, TRI, STB, and STF profiles, indicating that the particles fall down quickly to form a fixed bed. The results imply an opportunity to optimise the profiles to improve the jigging performance, as the period corresponding to the fixed bed is a waste of time and energy. To highlight the difference in segregation between profiles, The concentration profile helps visualise and quantify the degree of separation achieved in each case after 6 The values in There are three mechanisms which govern the principle of separation by jigging in a viscous medium. The equation of motion of a particle settling in a viscous fluid is given as: As the volume of the particles is equal to the volume of the fluid displaced: After more time the particles will reach terminal velocity where the particle has ceased accelerating. Here the drag force becomes relevant which is dependent on particle diameter. The terminal velocity varies directly with the ratio of weight to drag. During terminal velocity the drag force will equal the particle weight. In the mono-size binary-density system presented here the particle diameters and hence the form drag of both particles is equal. As the form drag is equal the terminal velocity is dependent only on the particle weight. An increase in weight means a higher terminal settling velocity which promotes segregation. This phenomenon is termed ‘hindered settling’ and favours heavy particles and introduces particle size as a factor. At the end of the down stroke ‘interstitial trickling’ occurs where smaller particles have the opportunity to trickle between the interstices of larger particles under the influence of gravity. This phenomenon is not applicable in a mono-size system. The force values shown in In the pulsion stage the light particles have a larger upward force overcoming their gravitational force whilst the heavy particles have only slightly more. As the cycles progress this gradually reverses because the light particles move further to the top of the bed where the porosity gradually becomes higher and less drag is experienced. Initially, the bed is in a well mixed state and the light particles have In the initial cycles the light particles contribute to more of the total bed lift but later the heavy particles are the main contributors. As the bed segregates, the heavy particles descend to the tightly packed portion of the bed and experience a greater drag. At this point, the light particles are residing at the loosely packed portion on top of the bed and have an insufficient force ratio to create lift and hence are lifted using support from the heavy particles beneath. The heavy particles cannot penetrate back through to the top of the bed. As they collect toward the lower portion of the bed they become susceptible to a loosening wave which begins from the bottom of the bed and travels vertically to the top, and further they also have higher settling velocities. The loosening wave arises from the interfacial instability at the bottom of the bed and fluid interface which causes particle to ‘rain’ down. In the 1st cycle in During suction in the first jigging cycle, the light particles have the greatest negative All the pulsation profiles react differently when considering the non-dimensional particle fluid interaction force. In the triangular profile, the heavy particle Using the Sawtooth-backward profile (see The Sawtooth-forward profile Finally, the trapezoidal pulsation profile unlike other profiles studied shows some unsteadiness in There are various parameters to judge the performance of a jigging device. In addition to the separation speed and the final degree of separation as already discussed, the power input is one important concern in industrial processes. The following formula is used to calculate the input power, where power is a product of total pressure drop The power values calculated are not absolute power values and only yield qualitative results. The model does not consider the fluid pushing through a distributer plate at the inlet which would cause substantial drag on the fluid. Whether more power is consumed during pulsion or suction depends on the type of profile and how many jigging cycles have occurred. Power values for the sinusoidal profile can be seen in During pulsion two parameters are the most influential on the power requirements. The first parameter is the mean pressure drop in pulsion which is approximately the same for all profiles. The second and most influential parameter is the flow rate which is multiplied with the almost constant pressure drop to yield power. All pulsion pressure drop values are similar but the injection velocities vary greatly. There are two ways of evaluating power. Firstly, maximum values are important to find the maximum requirements needed for operation. Secondly, because instantaneous power values change the average value is important. For example a profile may have a high maximum power peak but other values in the profile may be quite low. Focusing on peak power values in It is not sufficient to focus solely on power and the number of cycles to reach segregation. A profile which requires high power consumption may need only a few cycles to achieve separation and will prove more favourable than a profile using little power over many cycles. The particle separation process in a jigging device under five pulsation profiles has been studied using a DEM–CFD model. The present study selected one amplitude and cycle period. With these settings all the five pulsation profiles demonstrated potential for particle separation, but subject to different separation rate, final degree of separation, and power usage. Solid flow patterns indicate that different phenomena exist according to the pulsation profile adopted. The inlet velocity affects particle movement. If a high inlet velocity is present at the onset of pulsion the bed will move as a whole, and will either display slugging or complete transport behaviour. If the inlet velocity develops slowly i.e. sinusoidal profile, the particles will not lift as a whole and the loosening wave will dominate in the beginning of the cycle. Further, if a low and constant inlet velocity is adopted fluidization is present, e.g. sawtooth-forward profile. Both the solid flow patterns and mean particle displacement values show that all pulsation profiles exhibit segregation. The particles remain in a fixed bed position for a significant time during the suction period in all of the pulsation profiles with exception to the trapezoidal profile, demonstrating potential opportunities to improve the jigging process using an optimised pulsation profile, e.g. reducing the suction period of the profile. Non-dimensional particle fluid force values confirm the solid flow pattern behaviour. It was shown that drag force values for heavy and light particles change with jigging due to porosity developments. As local porosity changes occur, the bottom of the bed becomes more tightly packed and the drag force on heavy particles increases. The most influential parameter related to power during pulsion was the inlet flow rate. All pressure drop values were similar but the injection velocities varied greatly. It was found that power values gradually increased during suction in conjunction with gradual local porosity developments. The present study based on one set of peak-to-peak amplitude and period cannot fully assess the relative performance of different pulsation profiles. However, the work demonstrates the usefulness of DEM–CFD model, as an effective numerical model, to study the jigging process. Further work with the consideration of different amplitudes and periods of the five pulsation profiles, as well as some optimised pulsation, will be performed to fully clarify this issue in detail. This work was supported by a A 1. Summary of jigging profiles (