Nickel and cobalt are invariably associated with other transition element impurities like copper, zinc, iron, etc. It is essential to remove these impurities in order to attain the high standards of purity required for specific applications. Solvent extraction is a well-tested route for this purpose. The present paper describes the application of two novel concepts, viz. mixed-metals isotherm and log–log McCabe Thiele's (MT) diagram in solvent extraction. Mixed-metals isotherms can be applied to a system in which two metal ions compete for a single extractant. If these two metal ions are required to be extracted as a group, mixed-metals isotherms can precisely predict their behavior. Log–log MT diagrams are useful in determining the requirement of the number of stages in counter current extraction, especially when the feed and raffinate concentrations differ by several orders of magnitude. The two concepts have been successfully applied to develop a process for the separation of high purity cobalt and nickel from ocean nodules leach liquor.Ocean nodules contain a large number of metals like nickel, cobalt, manganese, copper, zinc, iron, etc. Vast resources of these nodules are found at the ocean bed. In countries like India, where the land resources of some metals like cobalt and nickel are scarce, ocean nodules are expected to become an important source of these metals. The leaching of ocean nodules was effected through the reductive ammonia leaching route in which metals like nickel, cobalt, copper and zinc were solubilised as their amine complexes leaving iron and manganese in the residue ( A number of methods involving different types of extractants have been developed and applied for the recovery of base metals ( Typical process streams contained 0.9–1.8 g/l Cu, 0.6–0.8 g/l Zn, 0.15–0.18 g/l Fe, 1.66–1.92 g/l Co and 17.5–22.0 g/l Ni. Hence, synthetic solutions of this composition were used as feed for collecting the basic data. The organic phase composed of 0.5 M DEHPA, with 5% isodecanol in kerosene. The extractant was saponified to the extent of 50% by adding requisite quantities of standard sodium hydroxide. McCabe Thiele's diagram was constructed at the optimum After removal of impurities, the process streams contained 1.71 g/l Co and 19.9 g/l Ni. As in the case of Cu and Zn, equilibrium data for Co and Ni was collected at equilibrium pH values of 4.0, 4.5 and 5.0 using 50% saponified 0.5 M PC-88A and 5% isodecanol in kerosene. Scrubbing and stripping isotherms were generated using 0.2 M H The extent of saponification was determined by titrating the extractant with standard alkali in alcohol medium. The equivalence point was determined using bromo cresol purple as the indicator. The major constituents were analyzed by UV–visible spectrophotometry using the three-wavelength method ( The removal of copper and zinc is achieved by simultaneous extraction with DEHPA. The extraction of zinc competes with that of copper. Hence, the study of their individual extraction behavior is not relevant in this case. For practical use in the current program, combined extraction isotherm data for (Cu In order to ascertain the number of stages required to completely extract copper and zinc, MT diagrams were constructed using equilibrium isotherms of pH The organic phase loaded with copper, zinc also contained minor amounts of cobalt and nickel. The cobalt and nickel were scrubbed from the organic phase with 0.1 M H In the second circuit, the separation of cobalt from nickel in the first circuit raffinate was attempted. The aqueous and organic concentrations were plotted to generate isotherms for Co extraction. The separation factors were also calculated at the equilibrium pHs mentioned ( The primary aim of the third circuit was the upgradation of nickel solution. Hence it consisted of extraction and stripping. The equilibrium aqueous and organic concentrations of nickel were plotted to generate the extraction isotherm. The saturation loading was found to be 13.88 g/l of Ni ( The process with the deduced parameters was implemented in mixer settlers of 150 ml mixer capacity using actual leach liquor. The operational data of each module, namely, extraction, scrubbing and stripping was collected for all the three circuits ( As seen in the figures, the process parameters were optimized with the help of MT diagrams plotted on log–log scale instead of a linear scale. Log–log MT diagrams are particularly useful when a high degree of recovery and purification is to be achieved. The operating lines were generated using the following equations: For extraction, Flow rate of aqueous phase. Flow rate of organic phase. Metal ion concentration in barren organic phase. Metal ion concentration in the raffinate that can be tolerated. Metal ion concentration in scrubbed/stripped organic phase that can be tolerated. Metal ion concentration in the fresh scrub/strip solution. In the above equations, metal ion is referred to the metal ion/ions of interest that are to be extracted, scrubbed or stripped in the individual cases. In most of the cases, where the values of Concentration of metal ion in the stream. Flow rate of the stream. The number of stages in the extraction module was deduced using this effective feed concentration. The requirement of stages deduced using log–log MT diagrams was compared with those obtained using the following Kremser's equation (  Metal ion concentration in the feed. Metal ion concentration in unscrubbed/unstripped organic phase that can be tolerated. Distribution ratio at raffinate end. Distribution ratio at scrub/strip inlet end. (Geometric mean of distribution ratios) The data obtained is shown in A novel approach of mixed-metals isotherm technique was employed for (Cu The authors are thankful to Dr. S Baneerjee, Director, Materials Group and Director, Bhabha Atomic Research Centre for his keen interest and inspiration during the course of this work.