The pregnant leach solution produced in the final leaching stage of base metal refineries (BMRs) operated by platinum producers contains impurities such as selenium and tellurium as well as other precious metals (OPMs, which include Rh, Ru and Ir). The aim of this project was to propose operating conditions for a thio-urea precipitation process that would allow maximum OPM recovery and impurity precipitation from the leach solution with minimal copper and nickel co-precipitation. Experimental results illustrating the effects that operating temperature (80°C and 160°C), pressure (atmospheric pressure and seven bar), stirring rate (250rpm and 500rpm) and thio-urea quantity (200% and 320% excess) have on the precipitation behaviour are presented.
                  Virtually all of the Rh contained in the solution was precipitated irrespective of the values of the process variables studied. The maximum percentage Ru and Ir precipitation achieved were 87% and 60%, respectively. Complete Se precipitation was observed at all process conditions, while Te precipitation increased as the operating temperature was increased. Increasing the reagent quantity and temperature did, however, also result in increased copper and nickel co-precipitation.
                  Regression models were used to perform numerical analyses to determine suitable operating conditions. Predictions with this numerical approach suggested that precipitation with 200% excess thio-urea at a temperature of 80°C and a pressure of 7bar would yield 98% Rh, 75% Ru, and 48% Ir precipitation with less than 5% Cu and Ni co-precipitation; these results could be experimentally validated.The base metal refineries (BMRs) operated by platinum producers utilise multiple leaching stages to recover nickel and copper by-products while producing a high grade platinum group metal (PGM) concentrate from nickel–copper converter matte. The first leaching stage achieves nickel dissolution and copper cementation, while the second leaching stage is aimed at complete nickel and copper dissolution. The pregnant leach solution produced in the final leaching stage contains impurities such as selenium and tellurium as well as other precious metals (OPMs, which include Rh, Ru and Ir). Selenium and tellurium are typically removed by precipitation with sulphurous acid prior to electrowinning of copper. While a small percentage of the dissolved OPMs precipitate with the selenium and tellurium, the largest portion remains in solution and is recycled to the first stage leach after copper electrowinning. The recycling of OPMs could negatively affect the performance of the process in two ways. Firstly, it causes a relatively large amount of OPMs to be locked up in the process and hence increases the time required to recover OPMs from the converter matte. Secondly, a high concentration of OPMs in the recycled solution places more stringent requirements on the operation of the first leaching stage as any OPMs that are not precipitated will be lost to the nickel product stream. Reducing the OPM concentration in the recycled solution could hence contribute to reduced OPM losses and a reduced OPM plant inventory. The most commonly used methods for the removal of selenium and tellurium from sulphate leach solutions are precipitation by the addition of sulphurous acid, by the addition of metallic copper, or by addition of a combination of these reagents ( Sulphurous acid also reduces cupric sulphate to cuprous sulphate (Eq. Metallic copper can be added to the leach solution, or it can be formed by the disproportionation of cuprous shown in Eq. Tellurium precipitation generally does not proceed via direct reduction with sulphurous acid or cuprous sulphate, but rather by cementation as copper telluride according to reactions To the best of the authors’ knowledge, reaction pathways for the precipitation of selenium and tellurium from acidic aqueous solutions by thio-urea addition have not been published in literature. It is, however, expected that the reactions occurring when using thio-urea as reducing agent will be similar to the reactions when sulphurous acid is used as precipitation reagent. Published information regarding the behaviour of dissolved iron upon the addition of the different reducing agents supports this notion. Iron present as ferric in the leach solution will consume precipitation reagent according to reactions Thio-urea is also known to react with Cu Very limited information regarding the precipitation mechanism of OPMs with sulphurous acid or thio-urea is available in the published literature. Apart from Precipitation is dependent on a number of physical and chemical conditions of the process. In order to properly design and optimise control of precipitation process, knowledge on the influence of operational parameters on precipitation process is important ( The operating temperature can influence the rates and yields of precipitation reactions. Increasing temperature would increase the equilibrium conversion of an endothermic reaction and decrease that of an exothermic reaction ( Several researchers have investigated the influence of temperature on the precipitation process.  According to The pregnant copper sulphate leach solution used in this study was a real plant solution obtained from the process stream feeding the Se/Te removal section of an industrial base metal refinery. Laboratory tests were carried out in a 2.0 Heating of the reactor vessel was achieved by utilising electric heating elements placed around the reactor shell, while cooling was achieved by means of cooling water flowing through tubes located in the reactor shell. The temperature control strategy implemented on the programmable controller allowed the reactor vessel temperature to be maintained at levels close to the set value (±0.5%). For the addition of reagents, a stainless steel reagent cylinder was fitted to the reactor vessel. One open end of this cylinder was attached to the reactor valve fitted on the reactor cover plate while the other open end was attached to the nitrogen cylinder stream line. In this way it was possible to pressurise the reagent cylinder after filling it in order to obtain a pressure difference required for the reagent to flow into the reactor vessel at the point of reagent addition. In order to collect samples the bottom drain valve of the reactor vessel was used. A tube with an additional valve was connected to the reactor drain valve. This allowed samples to be collected without the possibility of solution splashing from the reactor due to sudden pressure drop. The samples collected were allowed to cool down below the solution boiling point by keeping it in between the drain valve and the additional tube valve. The identification of potential process variables and selection of their level values were based on the literature study and practical considerations. The variables that were identified and their respective levels studied are summarised in After filling the autoclave with one litre of the pregnant copper sulphate leach solution, the required solution volume of reagent was measured out and placed into the stainless steel reagent cylinder. The reagent cylinder was then pressurised to the required pressure using nitrogen gas. The autoclave’s internal agitator was set to the required speed and the power was switched on. Next, the temperature controller was switched on and set to the required temperature value. When the solution temperature in the reactor reached the set value, a solution sample was taken and the reagent cylinder valve was opened to allow the reagent flow into the reactor. The autoclave bottom drain line was used to take 15 The liquid samples were analysed for rhodium, ruthenium, iridium, selenium, tellurium, copper, iron, and nickel concentrations using ICP-AES. In order to identify the phases of the precipitate compounds formed, the solid precipitates were analysed using x-ray diffraction (XRD) analysis with a fixed 0.19 The precipitates obtained from the reaction between the process solution and thio-urea at 80 SEM analyses indicated that small irregular shaped particles precipitated at 80 To identify the most influential variables and their possible interaction effects on the rate and extent of OPM and base metal precipitation as well as the particle size distribution of the precipitate, experiments were conducted according to the full factorial experimental design. The results reported in this section compare the average precipitation percentage values of Rh, Ru, Ir, Cu and Ni obtained for all the experimental tests performed at low level of a particular variable with the average precipitation percentage obtained for the experimental test performed at high level of the particular variable. The results for the average OPMs, copper and nickel precipitation as a function of temperature are shown in It was important to note the extent of influence exerted by the investigated variables on selenium and tellurium precipitation. Identifying the significant variables would provide useful information regarding the variables that could be manipulated should one consider the design on an integrated flow sheet to recover OPMs along with selenium and tellurium. Temperature was found to be the process variable with the most significant effect on selenium and tellurium precipitation. The average selenium and tellurium precipitation achieved after eight hours increased from 93.7% to 97.5% and from 9.7% to 96.9%, respectively, when increasing the temperature from 80  The effect of operating temperature on PSD of the solid precipitate was also investigated. The results from PSD analysis were recorded by plotting the cumulative percentage volume finer against the particle size on a semi logarithmic graph. The particle size distribution The results for the influence of reagent quantity on the extents and rates of OPMs, copper and nickel precipitation are shown in In addition, the influence of reagent addition on particle size distribution (PSD) was also investigated. The results are displayed in The results for the variation in operating pressure on the rates and extents of OPMs, copper and nickel precipitation are displayed in The effect of agitation speed on the extent and kinetics of OPMs and base metal co-precipitation was studied at agitation speeds of 250 Results from the study of the influence of agitation speed on the PSD of the precipitates showed that variation in agitation speed had significant influence on the particle size of the product precipitates. The size distribution plots of the precipitates generated at 250 Suitable parameter levels for the OPMs, nickel, and copper precipitation process were determined by deriving regression models to predict precipitation behaviour and by subsequently using the numerical optimisation function of Design Expert version 8.0.4. A temperature of 80 In order to verify the validity and repeatability of the predicted recoveries, three additional confirmatory experiments were performed using the proposed variable settings. The results obtained are displayed in The experimental results obtained in this study illustrated that utilising thio-urea as precipitation reagent will result in improved OPM recovery from a copper sulphate leach solution compared to sulphurous acid conventionally used in the Se/Te removal sections of base metal refineries. The effect of thio-urea addition on downstream unit operations and the overall mass balance does, however, need to be taken into account when determining the feasibility of using it as a precipitation reagent. Thio-urea is used as grain refiner in copper electrowinning processes ( The most influential process variables on the rate and extent of precipitation of OPMs, Cu and Ni as well as precipitate characteristics were in order of increasing significance: agitation speed, reagent quantity, and operating temperature. The operating pressure had no significant influence on the process. The precipitates obtained at both temperatures investigated were predominantly amorphous with bornite (Cu Feasible operating conditions for OPM precipitation from copper sulphate solutions were determined using an objective function defined from regression models. The optimal operating conditions can only be determined by considering the regression model predictions in conjunction with an evaluation of the processing requirements and economics. Maximum Rh, Ru and Ir precipitation of 100%, 87% and 60%, respectively, were achieved. These OPM recoveries achieved when using thio-urea as precipitation reagent are significantly higher than the values previously reported when using sulphurous acid as precipitation reagent.