This study allowed the development of an in vitro model of a high-energy ballistic fracture. Direct fractures are more heavily contaminated than indirect fractures, and the spread of contamination is more extensive than examination of the wounds, particularly the entry wounds, would suggest. The major spread of contamination is along tissue planes, and we would recommend that these are thoroughly lavaged in the management of the fracture. The fracture site is heavily contaminated, with endosteal spread in direct fractures. However, there appears to be relatively little bony contamination beyond the fracture site.Wound debridement and stabilisation of the fracture site are the mainstays of treatment of open fractures The aim of this work was to study the fracture pattern and extent of contamination in an in vitro model of a ballistic fracture. The study was carried out using a sheep model of a long bone fracture. Three separate groups were studied. In Groups 1 and 2 the sheep femora were used and in Group 3 a complete hindleg was used, creating a tibial fracture. All soft tissues were removed, and the bones were individually suspended in a 20% gelatin solution (Croda Colloids Ltd. Widnes, Cheshire, UK) to form blocks measuring 30 cm in length with a cross-section of 15×15 cm To assess the contamination of the fracture site, gauze pre-soaked with 1 ml of fluorescein solution (Martindale Pharmaceuticals Ltd., Romford) was placed on the outer surface of the gelatin block, and the projectile passed through the gauze prior to striking the bone. Aiming at the mid-point of the lateral cortex in the transverse mid-diaphyseal plane produced direct fractures. The entrance velocity of the ball bearing was measured using an electronic sensor (Skan chronoscope® MK 7, DRSC, Reading, UK). The experimental set-up was similar to that described above. In this group, however, the projectile was aimed 5 mm posterior to the bone. This resulted in a reproducible indirect fracture. Following the creation of the fracture, the gelatin blocks and bones were dissected under ultraviolet light to assess the spread of fluorescein. Left hindlegs were obtained at post-mortem from six sheep. The limb was disarticulated at the hip joint, the skin was shaved, and the limb was suspended from a stand with a metatarsal clamp. A sheet of cotton, pre-soaked in fluorescein, was placed over the midshaft of the tibia. Legs were shot to produce a direct fracture. Using the laser sighting device a 7.62 mm bullet (NATO 7.62×51 L2A2 ball ammunition −9.4 g) was fired at the midshaft of the subcutaneous surface of the tibia from a range of 2.3 m. Antero-posterior and lateral radiographs of the leg were taken ( All skin from the leg was excised by dissection in the subcutaneous plane, and the wound in the deep fascia was measured. The area of subcutaneous contamination was calculated by measuring the extent of fluorescein spread under ultraviolet light. Finally the periosteal spread of fluorescein was measured, and related to the extent of the fracture, both on the radiograph and at dissection. The mean velocity of the projectile in Groups 1 and 2 was 599 ms Group 1: A multifragmentary fracture was produced in all bones, with a median of seven fragments (range 6–12). In all cases there was widespread contamination of the wound track, including the medullary cavity, by fluorescein. The median spread of fluorescein along the periosteal surface of the bone was 4.0 cm (range 2.0–5.0) proximally and 3.0 cm distally (range 0–5.0). Group 2: Only 14 of the 17 bones were fractured, and the three intact bones were excluded from further analysis. Of the 14, a simple two part fracture was produced in nine specimens; there was one additional fragment in four specimens, and two additional fragments in one bone. Only three of the 14 bones had evidence of medullary contamination. The median spread of fluorescein along the periosteal surface was 0.2 cm (range 0–5.0) proximally, and 0.5 cm (range 0–6.0) distally. There was a significant difference in the spread of fluorescein along the periosteal surface between Groups 1 and 2 ( In Group 3 entry and exit wounds were produced in all legs, and widespread contamination of the soft tissues was noted at dissection. This was greater than the macroscopic appearance suggested. The extent of the soft tissue wound and contamination is presented in The median extent of contamination of the fracture was 45% (range 34–52%) and extent of comminution was 50% (range 27–62%). There was no significant difference between the extent of comminution or contamination at the fractures. Although this was an in vitro study, a number of observations can be applied to the clinical situation. The multifragmentary nature of the fractures is consistent with those reported clinically. Rose et al. in a retrospective review, reported that with high-energy weapons such as military or hunting rifles, all fractures were complete, and comminuted (multifragmentary). By comparison, for low-energy weapons, such as handguns, 60% of the fractures were incomplete, and only 22% were multifragmentary Further confirmation that high-energy injuries are associated with greater bony damage came from a study by Ragsdale and Josselson. They reported that an increasing pre-impact velocity was associated with an increased cavitation effect and increased fragmentation. For a handgun with a pre-impact velocity of approximately 200 ms A fracture may also occur despite the projectile not actually striking the bone. These indirect fractures are thought to be due to the cavitation effect, with the acceleration of bone away from the missile track. This type of fracture is usually only seen with high-energy transfer wounds, and is simple rather than the multifragmentary pattern seen when a projectile hits bone The study of Group 3 was performed in vitro but was made as realistic as possible. All soft tissues were retained, and the tibia rather than the femur was used. This permitted an intact joint and bone to be maintained above the fracture, so allowing the soft tissue envelope to be optimised. All the legs were shot within 4 h of death, and most within 1–2 h, to minimise the effect of post-mortem changes. Spread of contamination was greater than the superficial wounds suggested, consistent with clinical observations Results from all three groups confirm that all of the fracture site must be considered contaminated, and that with direct fractures this contamination is more extensive. The results from Group 3 would suggest, however, that there is little spread beyond the fracture site, and adequate exposure and thorough washout would be sufficient to remove contamination. Adequate wound debridement and stabilisation of the fracture site are the mainstays of treatment of open fractures Given these findings, adequate wound debridement is essential in the management of military wounds and knowledge of the extent of contamination is necessary. Whilst this was an in vitro study, it allows a number of observations to be made on the spread of contamination. With direct, high-energy fractures endosteal spread is universal, and is more extensive than that following indirect fracture. The extent of contamination of the fracture mirrors the extent of comminution. The latter can be estimated from radiographs taken prior to debridement, and we would recommend that radiographs be taken prior to surgical treatment of military fractures. We believe these models also allow recommendations to be made regarding the treatment of military fractures. Whilst minimal skin excision is necessary, the subcutaneous space and all tissue planes should be thoroughly washed out. The excision of muscle should be based on clinical appearance, with removal of necrotic, non-contractile tissue. This would appear to be adequate to remove contaminated tissue. The fracture site, however, should be considered highly contaminated, and while many fragments will appear viable, the wounds must be washed out, and if necessary fragments should be excised to minimise the risk of infection.