In this article, the influence of perovskite electrode composition on an electrochemical based mixed potential sensor response is reported. Specifically, various stoichiometry of Strontium doped Lanthanum Chromite materials were used as the sensing electrode. Yttria-Stabilized Zirconia was used as the solid electrolyte and Pt as the counter electrode. The effect of varying doping levels of Strontium on the sensor response was studied. NO, NO2, C3H6, and C4H10 were used as test gases. The sensor response was studied under open-circuit and current biased conditions.
                  Based on sensitivity and selectivity evaluations, the device configuration ‘La0.9Sr0.1CrO3/YSZ/Pt’ was found to behave as a selective total hydrocarbon sensor at 500°C when operated under open-circuit conditions. On the other hand, ‘La0.7Sr0.3CrO3/YSZ/Pt’ exhibited minimal cross-sensitivity to hydrocarbons facilitating its use as a selective NO
                        x
                      sensor when operated under a current bias. The variation in the sensor response and selectivity for different electrode materials indicate that it might be possible to develop multi-electrode sensor platform for identifying a suite of analytes with improved selectivity and sensitivity.Research investigations on monitoring atmospheric pollution and detecting high-energy explosives have taken national and global priority Based on a unique sensor design, the authors have developed mixed potential sensors for detecting NO In this article, the focus is on the choice of electrode material and their influence on the sensor performance. The material selection for the electrodes in the case of mixed potential sensors is primarily based on their O Lanthanum Chromite (LaCrO The sensor consists of a La After fabricating the sensor, it was mounted on an alumina rod with Pt leads, which was then placed in a quartz tube and heated in a furnace to the desired operating temperature (500 In the current study, the flow rate of the various gas mixtures were controlled using analog MKS-brand mass flow controllers, while the voltage from the sensor was monitored using a Keithley 2400 Source Measure Unit (SMU, detection error ±0.015%) with the Pt electrode connected to its positive terminal. The flow rate of the mix gas was adjusted so as to give the appropriate concentration of the sensing gas in the test mixture. Air was used as the base gas (partial pressure of oxygen: 21%). The total flow rate was maintained at 500 The device sensitivity is defined as the difference in e.m.f. generated upon exposure to the test and base gas respectively. The selectivity was computed as the ratio of the sensitivities of the analyte of interest to other gases. For each sensor, the total NO  In particular, fractional substitution of La with divalent ions such as Sr Derived from the experimental evidence based on In an earlier article, Mukundan et al. This in turn is expected to decrease the interfacial impedance. Based on the NO From In summary, the variation in the sensor response and selectivity as a function of electrode composition indicates that it might be possible to develop a multi-electrode sensor platform for identifying a suite of gases with improved selectivity. By using doped perovskite electrodes of different stoichiometry, selective HC and NO In this article, the influence of Strontium doped LaCrO The authors wish to thank Roland Gravel of the DOE Office of Vehicle Technologies for providing the funds to enable prototyping of mixed potential sensors. Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at Fig. S1. Sensor response from ‘La