Introduction
                  Isolated fracture of femoral condyle in the coronal plane (Hoffa fracture) is rare and surgically challenging to treat. The purpose of this study is to introduce a new classification for this fracture, evaluating its utility in treatment guidelines and its reproducibility.
               
                  Materials and methods
                  103 patients with Hoffa fracture were operated in our tertiary care centre from 2004 to 2014. Computed tomography (CT) was done in all cases preoperatively. Many fractures had variable patterns which could not be defined and categorized as per Letennuer's classification. A pilot study with first 25 cases were analysed and certain morphological fracture patterns were observed in CT. The fixation methods and failure models were also noted. This resulted in development of a new classification specifying the fracture patterns and the preferred fixation methods for a better outcome. Next 78 consecutive fractures were then classified preoperatively as per our CT classification and treatment executed according to the protocol. Outcomes were measured using Neer's scoring system and International Knee Society Documentation Committee (IKDC) Functional Score.
               
                  Results
                  Out of 78 patients, 69 had excellent outcome, 7 had satisfactory and 2 had unsatisfactory outcome which corresponded with the specified fracture severity pattern. Uniformly excellent results were obtained in all simple pattern fractures, whereas comminuted fractures especially posterior cortex comminution and articular comminution yielded less favourable outcomes.
               
                  Conclusion
                  We conclude that therapeutic outcome is significantly affected by articular comminution, posterior cortex comminution, achieving anatomical reduction and stable fixation. Pre-operative fracture classification and treatment guidelines gives a predictable outcome with least complications and has good interobserver reliability thus instrumental in surgical planning.
               
                  Level of evidence
                  III.  Subtype B.1 - No articular impaction. Subtype B.2 – With articular impaction.   Hoffa fracture is an uncommon partial articular coronally-oriented fracture which extends through either the medial or lateral condyle.First described by Albert Hoffa, these accounts for less than 1% of distal femoral fractures. Hoffa fracture is classified as type 33B3 fracture as per AO/OTA Muller classification. Letennuer Most surgeons make their treatment decisions essentially based on their personal experience since at present there is no valid classification having prognostic significance or any impact on treatment guidelines. A standard classification system relevant for preoperative planning is a necessity. Hence, we intended to throw light on this perspective. Our prospective study on next 78 patients using the CT based morphological classification developed along with treatment guidelines for surgical method of internal fixation correlated proportionately to the functional outcome and prognosis thus validating the study. In the treatment of more complex fractures, present classification systems draw some limitations. First, some fractures cannot be exactly grouped as per Letennuer's classification especially the ones with posterior cortex comminution or combination of articular comminution with posterior cortical comminution. Secondly, classification for such complex fracture should not be based on X-rays alone as the fracture personalities are better understood with CT scans and 3-D reconstructions. Finally, a fracture classification system should strongly recommend treatment selection, but existing ones fails to provide clear treatment guidelines. The development of the new classification is based on our in-depth literature review, initial pilot study details and abundant clinical experience obtained at our tertiary care trauma centre. In our experience, the lack of acquaintance of posterior cortex comminution and failure to attain disimpaction of articular fragments or failure to maintain them in good alignment (i.e., loss of reduction) results in poor outcome. Accordingly, lot of revisions were performed to address the two factors - fixation failure and loss of reduction. There is a lack of understanding on which fractures needs simple interfragmentary fixation and which needs buttressing plate in addition. Initial 25 patients were analysed for their fracture pattern, treatment given and their end result. We could group them into 4 different types based on the fracture pattern in CT. Subsequent results of the various treatment done were analysed along with the type of fixation. The reasons for failure of fixation were studied thoroughly in terms of the fracture pattern (4 types) and the type of fixation attempted. This threw light on certain facts like four different types of fracture pattern were identified, CT based classification was essential, and each group needed different type of internal fixation rather than treating all fractures in similar manner and the use of antiglide plate just based on a whimsical idea of the surgeon. A treatment algorithm for each classified fracture pattern was designed and subsequently a prospective study of 78 patients was carried out using the new CT based fracture classification and its reliability was also assessed. This CT classification considers all aspects of fracture morphology and would provide accurate delineation of all significant fracture planes and comminution (not possible to judge from two dimensional X-rays). In the prospective study, 78 consecutive fractures fulfilling the inclusion criteria were treated after classifying them as per the CT classification and fixed as per the protocol formulated in between 2005 and 2014. All our patients were less than 50 years, average age being 36 years (ranging from 21 to 49 years). Inclusion criteria were skeletally mature, closed fractures presenting within 2 weeks and isolated Hoffa fracture. Fracture in association with intercondylar or ipsilateral femur fracture or same leg tibial fractures or open injuries or comorbid conditions were excluded. Average follow up period was 66 months (ranging from 2 years to 10 years). . Based on CT images, fractures with single tangential fracture line in coronal plane which represents the classical type are designated This classification helped us in preoperative planning and decision making. Each case was accurately classified based on CT findings. Out of the 78 patients, 35 were type A, 15 were classified as type B (5-B.1, 10-B.2), 18 were type C and 10 were grouped as type D.63 involved the lateral condyle and 15 involved the medial condyle. As per our understanding from the pilot study, we ascertained the method of fixation in each type of fractures as follows. For type A fractures ( TYPE C fractures ( Type D fractures ( In case of one bicondylar fracture, the fracture patterns in each condyles were separately taken into account (both corresponded with our TYPE A) and accordingly treated. The preferred fixation as per fracture type are summarised in Three observers were chosen involving one trauma surgeon, one radiologist specializing in musculoskeletal radiology, and one senior registrar, all of whom were not in charge of patient selection. Each were given a diagrammatic scheme and verbal description of the CT classification and made familiar with it, and then asked to evaluate the CT scan images independently on two occasions (3 weeks apart). They indicated their choices on a predesigned form with schematic representation of the type of fracture. The series was randomly arranged and marked with numbers. The choices made by observers during first evaluation were not available to them during second viewing and neither were they provided with any feedback after the first viewing. Shuffling of case series was done for the second opinion given by the same person. All analysis were performed using SPSS 2017 (Version 25).To analyse the reproducibility of the classification made by same observer on different occasions (intraobserver) and separate observers on same occasion (interobserver) we used Cohen's kappa coefficient ( Standard antero-posterior and lateral radiographs were obtained of the knee joint and then CT was obtained (with 3-D reconstruction) in order to delineate fracture line(s) along with the degree of articular surface involvement, detect comminution and subsequently to classify according to our CT-based classification. This allowed in understanding and addressing all parts of the complex fracture. After pre-operative work up, patient was taken for surgery on the same day of admission or next day. All surgeries were performed by the same surgeon under tourniquet control and image intensifier guidance in supine position. The surgical approach (standard lateral or medial parapatellar approach - Care was taken to protect fat pad and meniscal attachments.  Postoperative radiograph was assessed and graded as acceptable (< 2 mm articular step) or poor (≥2 mm articular step).  The resultant score was compared with normative data Neer's Scoring considered two variables- At 3 months review all cases had complete union both clinically & radiologically, and there had been no serious complication such as poor surgical technique or loss of fixation unlike the failure models of pilot study cases. All the knees were stable. An average range of movement of 120° was achieved at the end of one year postop with no infection. Only 2 patients with articular and posterior cortex comminution (corresponding to Type D fracture) had poor functional outcome in regards to limitation of flexion and fixed flexion deformity (20° - 90° and 10°-80° respectively). At two years follow up, 69 patients had Neer's Functional Rating of more than 85 and IKDC subjective knee score more than 80, which implies excellent outcome. All 35 cases of type A fractures had excellent outcome .7 patients had a Neer's Functional Rating score ranging from 70 to 85 and IKDC subjective knee score between 70 and 79 implying satisfactory outcome. Only 2 patients had unsatisfactory/poor outcome with Neer's Functional Rating score as well as IKDC subjective knee score less than 70 and both were type D. The tabulated form of the functional outcome measurements as per using International knee Documentation Committee (IKDC) 2000 subjective knee evaluation form & Neer's Functional Rating for lower extremity evaluation score are mentioned in The mean Using the CT classification, the mean Hoffa fracture can be easily missed out unless the surgeon has a careful look.Often despite evident clinical findings, radiographic interpretation is difficult and missed out in regular anteroposterior projection by an intact anterior portion of condyle & even in lateral view in case of minimally displaced fractures. CT scan is therefore a must in evaluation of these fractures. We found that the fracture type had a direct bearing on the functional outcome and prognosis as per IKDC and Neer's scoring system. All type A fractures (35 cases) had excellent functional outcomes as per IKDC and Neer's score, whereas two patients who had unsatisfactory functional outcome as per IKDC score and poor functional outcome as per Neer's score were both type D. We also found that specified fracture patterns requires particular type of fixation, viz., Type A and most B fractures were well managed with cannulated cancellous lag screws. Few type B fractures (6 in number) required separate articular fragment fixation (countersunk screws).All type C and type D fractures required antiglide buttress plate in addition to cannulated cancellous lag screws to resist the shear forces during axial loading across the posterior metaphysio-diaphyseal aspect of condyle. Hence, we propose the preferred fixation guidelines in addition to the CT classification as per the described fracture patterns from our clinical study ( According to literature there is no role for conservative management in displaced Hoffa fracture as it can lead to articular step (leading to limitation of movement), non-union The need for the classification arose to describe the severity of fractures, the increased requirement of surgical skill and expertise, the type of fixation preferred and also to predict the final prognostic outcome. In consideration to rarity and uniqueness of this fracture very few classification had been described in literature. Muller AO/OTA classification identifies these fractures as 33-B3 but provides little information about the various fracture patterns and their prognostic or treatment implications. In a study of seven Hoffa fracture by S.L. Lewis et al. In a prospective review of operative management of Hoffa fracture, Gavaskar et al. Another retrospective functional outcome analytical study by Trikha et al. Pires et al. Another study proposing a radiological classification system of Hoffa's fracture by Bagaria et al. However, we were able to reproduce the results in our prospective study carried on 78 patients by using the classification in treatment decision and assess intraobserver and interobserver reliability successfully. Also the functional evaluation carried out using two different scoring systems - Neer's Functional Rating for lower extremity evaluation score and IKDC 2000 subjective knee evaluation form, the latter being a patient-reported outcome measure (PROM), further validates our classification. Two complications were encountered – first being screw backout in one type D which was due to early weight bearing (non-compliance) and required revision fixation, and the second was inability to reach full knee range of movement in another type D fractures (20°–90°). This was attributed to a little distal placement of the antiglide plate down the condyle than usual to buttress the posterior cortex comminution which probably caused a mechanical restriction to flexion. The strength of the study lies in the fact we were able to address certain lacunae in existing literature on Hoffa fracture management based on CT classification of fracture pattern which are reproducible. The classification aids in defining the methodology, type of fixation and also gives the prognosis. The shortcomings of our study are non-homogenous nature of study population and non-consideration of confounding variables. Future prospective, mutlicentric randomized control trials using the suggested CT classification and following the described fixation protocols as per fracture anatomy with long term follow up shall help to further strengthen the reliability for a better outcome. Hoffa fractures are uncommon challenging intra-articular fractures that demand careful evaluation, precise preoperative planning and vivid surgical expertise. Our proposed classification system helps in this step to describe and grade the fracture pattern, and then decide the fixation required. This rational approach combined with unrestricted immediate range of motion of the joint and protected weight bearing is of paramount importance to envisage optimal outcome. This research did not receive any specific grant from funding agencies in the public, commercial, or not-for-profit sectors. All procedures performed in studies involving human participants were in accordance with the ethical standards of the institutional ethical committee and with the 1964 Helsinki declaration and its later amendments or comparable ethical standards. Informed consent was obtained from all individual participants included in the study. None. All authors would like to thank Dr Chandrabose (Managing Director) for providing support in numerous ways. All authors would also like to thank Dr Premanand (Musculoskeletal Radiologist) for his input and contribution in the study and finally the operation theatre staffs for their kind assistance and support during the surgeries.