The solubility of oxygen in mattes of various compositions was determined based on the study of the equilibrium of the copper–lead matte–gas phase system. The experiments were conducted with different compositions of synthetic matte with copper content ranged from 25% to 45%. The behaviour of iron and lead compounds and their effect on the oxygen content in copper–lead matte were studied. The pattern of oxygen solubility was established and factors affecting the formation of quantitative ratios of the forms of oxygen in copper–lead mattes were identified. We put forward a statement that oxygen in copper–lead matte dissolves in the form of wustite (FeO) and magnetite (Fe3O4). The content of Fe3O4 is directly dependent on the content of FeS in copper–lead matte and strongly correlated with it. An increase of the content of non-ferrous metals in copper–lead matte leads to a reduction of the content of FeS and consequently of that of Fe3O4.
                  The research revealed that unlike the copper-rich mattes, the main characteristics that determine the properties of copper–lead mattes are the content of copper, lead and oxygen, as well as the quantitative ratio of the forms of iron.
                  Regression equations were constructed to predict the content of FeO and Fe3O4 in copper–lead mattes depending on their composition.Determination of the solubility of oxygen in mattes is related to the study of the equilibrium of the matte–gas phase system. A comprehensive study of this system is dictated by the necessity of identifying the nature of the interaction between its components, and to determine the quantitative dependence of oxygen on the composition of the matte. The thermodynamics of the Cu–Fe–S–O system related to the traditional copper smelting to obtain matte has been studied quite thoroughly in the literature The authors of works One of the widespread methods of studying the solubility of oxygen in mattes is the gas flow method widely used in a number of works The question of the solubility and forms of oxygen in copper mattes remains controversial. In article In article From the system under discussion, the most interesting is the study of the quasi-ternary system Cu  The observed course of the curves shows a relatively good agreement of the results: the solubility of oxygen in the matte decreases with an increase in the Cu Analysis of data from the literature shows that most of the studies were carried out with copper mattes containing more than 25% copper. Despite the availability of extensive material on the study of matte compositions, there is no consensus among researchers, even within the well-studied Cu–Fe–S–O system. This makes it necessary to find more accurate methods for determining the oxygen content in mattes, establishing the forms of its presence and their quantitative ratios. There is a great theoretical and practical interest in the field of studying the composition of copper–lead mattes obtained in lead production. The development of pyrometallurgical methods for the production of lead from various types of lead raw materials was a prerequisite for the creation of their special processing using blast concentrating smelting (BCS) at KazZinc Ltd. to obtain copper–lead mattes. The process is characterized by low technological performance, which is significantly influenced by the compositions of the resulting mattes The compositions of the obtained copper–lead mattes with a high lead content (up to 25%) affect the mechanism of the transition of non-ferrous metals into slag and their redistribution in the negative direction between the smelting products. As a result, the current state of the BCS technology does not ensure the achievement of high technological indicators: the extraction of copper to matte is ∼83%, zinc to slag ∼60%, lead to rough lead ∼60%. The mechanism of dissolution of non-ferrous metals into slag is complicated by the influence of a number of factors: the partial pressure of oxygen, the process of formation of phases, the rate of their separation, and other factors In this work, the influence of the composition of copper–lead mattes on the content and forms of oxygen in them is determined. The basis was the study of the equilibrium of the copper–lead matte–gas phase system under the conditions of controlled values of The study of the equilibrium of the copper–lead matte–gas phase system is based on the method of dynamic gas flow of a CO As the basis for calculations of the equilibrated gas phase in the CO–CO Synthetic mattes were prepared based on the required total copper and lead content and their ratio by mixing pure sulfides of copper, lead and iron. The compositions of copper–lead mattes varied widely and covered the range of variation in the composition of real mattes. The copper content in matte varied from 10 to 45 Preliminary experiments showed that equilibrium in the matte-gas phase system is achieved within 7 The mattes were removed from the furnace after the required time, grinded and subjected to elemental analysis for the contents of non-ferrous metals, the total iron (Fe The study of the industrial plant mattes of blast concentrating smelting of KazZinc Ltd. was carried out along with experimental studies. In terms of composition, industrial mattes of lead melts can be characterized by a complex multicomponent system 13 samples of copper–lead matte of blast concentrating smelting were selected for the research purpose. Real mattes were melted (1300 In order to clarify the results and increase their reliability, the matte samples obtained after the experiments were subjected to additional mineralogical studies and phase analysis. Mineralogical studies were carried out using a Neofot microscope (Carl Zeiss AG, Germany). Micro- and morphological analysis of the surface of individual matte samples was carried out using a JEOL EDS System (USA) scanning electron microscope. The study of the phase composition of matte samples was carried out on an automated X-ray diffractometer DRON-3. Conditions for recording diffraction patterns: In the entire studied range of changes in the compositions of mattes, two oxygen-containing phases of iron (FeO, Fe The research results obtained experimentally by using synthetic mattes (experiments 1–12) and for the study of industrial copper–lead mattes (experiments 13–25) are given in The oxygen content in mattes was calculated as the sum of the oxygen bound to iron in wustite (FeO) and magnetite (Fe Analysis of the quantitative dependence of the total oxygen content from the matte composition ( It is seen that the maximum oxygen content (3%) in the copper–lead matte is achieved in the Fe–S–O boundary system. Oxygen content drops to 0.3% with decreasing of iron content in the matte composition. To predict oxygen content in the copper–lead mattes of blast concentrating smelting depending on their composition the multiple correlation equation is obtained as a result of mathematical processing: Clarification of the forms of oxygen presence in copper–lead matte was carried out on the basis of thermodynamic analysis of possible reactions occurring in the matte-gas phase system. The interaction of the components of copper–lead matte and the gas phase can be described by the system of reactions shown in Thermodynamic calculations for the oxidation reactions of iron sulfide The change in Gibbs energy for reaction The Gibbs free energy ΔG The Gibbs energy for reaction The change in Gibbs energy for reaction High values of the Gibbs energies for FeS oxidation reactions indicate the highest affinity of iron for oxygen than copper and lead. Moreover, as thermodynamic calculations show, the probability for occurring the reactions Thus, it can be argued that oxygen in copper–lead matte dissolves in the form of wustite (FeO) and magnetite (Fe The dependences of the FeO and Fe It is easy to notice that the nature of the curves is similar to the patterns of variation in the oxygen content depending on the matte composition ( The drop of the PbS content in copper–lead matte (experiments 7–12) due to an increase of the Cu:Pb ratio from 1 to 1.5 leads to an increase of the FeO content and decrease of the Fe The formation of Fe Under the equilibrium conditions of the copper–lead matte–gas phase system, the values of The value of the equilibrium constant of reaction Solving Eq. From expression With an increase in the PbS concentration in the matte, a smooth decrease in the content of FeO and Fe The equilibrium constant for reaction 7: Then, by equating the right-hand sides of expressions Thus, a decrease in An increase in the concentration of copper sulfide in the matte due to a decrease in the PbS content reduces both the FeO content and the Fe With an increase in the concentration of FeS in copper–lead mattes due to a decrease in the total content of non-ferrous metals in them, the content of FeO and Fe The steeper character of the obtained curves compared with the previously established dependences on A decrease in the PbS content in the matte due to an increase in Cu:Pb from 1 to 1.5, with a constant FeS content, significantly reduces the Fe A comparative analysis of the compositions of solid mattes obtained during the blast concentrating smelting and synthetic mattes shows that industrial copper–lead mattes were processed at oxidizing and sulfidizing potentials identical to the values specified in experimental studies (see As a result of mathematical processing of the obtained data, multiple correlation equations were constructed, which make it possible to adequately predict the contents of FeO and Fe The results show that the composition of copper–lead mattes is highly dependent on the conditions of their production and has a number of features. Thus, Eq. The obtained results fully confirm the previously made assumption that for calculating the compositions of copper–lead mattes and the equilibrium of the matte-gas phase system, it is necessary to take into account the effect of the content of dissolved oxygen in the mattes. Consequently, the representation of a complex multicomponent system Cu–Pb–Fe–S–O in the form of a quasi-ternary system Cu When carrying out thermodynamic calculations, it is necessary to take into account the content and forms of oxygen, the quantitative ratio of which largely determines the final composition of copper–lead mattes and the distribution of non-ferrous metals between the products of blast smelting. To estimate the quantitative ratios of FeO and Fe The authors declare no conflicts of interest.