Les fractures de Mac Farland sont des fractures articulaires de la cheville chez l’enfant, dont le trait de fracture traverse la partie médiale du cartilage de croissance de l’extrémité distale du tibia. Ces fractures ont une mauvaise réputation en raison du risque de formation d’un pont d’épiphysiodèse ou d’un défaut de réduction intra-articulaire, qui peuvent donner ultérieurement une désaxation et une arthrose. Le but de cette étude était d’évaluer le pronostic fonctionnel et radiologique de ces fractures à partir des résultats d’une série rétrospective de 26 cas. Les patients ont été revus avec un recul moyen de 28,4 mois (19 mois — 63 mois).
                  Les résultats ont été classés, au cours du suivi et après consolidation, en bon (pas de raideur, pas de douleur, pas de boiterie, pas de désaxation, pas de complication chirurgicale, pas de trouble cicatriciel), en moyen (raideur et/ou douleur et/ou boiterie et/ou trouble cicatriciel sans désaxation, ni complication chirurgicale), en mauvais (désaxation ou complication chirurgicale).
                  Le résultat final a été jugé cliniquement et radiologiquement bon dans 24 cas et moyen dans 2 cas (cicatrice adhérente et cicatrice hypertrophique).
                  Dans notre étude, nous avons choisi un traitement chirurgical avec arthrotomie pour juger de visu de la réduction de la fracture.
               
                  Purpose of the study
                  MacFarland fractures are known to have poor prognosis. There is a major risk of misalignment due to the formation of an epiphysiodesis bridge. The purpose of this study was to evaluate the functional and radiological outcome of these fractures in a retrospective series of patients.
               
                  Material and methods
                  We analyzed retrospectively the cases of 26 patients (14 boys and 12 girls), mean age 11 years 6 months (range 7-15) with MacFarland fractures. The Salter and Harris classification was Salter III (n = 17) and Salter IV (n = 9). Surgery was used for 21 patients and cast immobilization for five. Mean follow-up was 28.4 months (19-63 months). None of the children were lost to follow-up. Outcome was noted good (no stiffness, no pain, no limp, no misalignment, no surgical complication, no healing problem), fair (stiffness and/or pain and/or limp and/or healing problem without misalignment, no surgical complication), or poor(misalignment or surgical complication).
               
                  Results
                  The three-months postoperative assessment showed three patients with ankle pain, five with stiff ankles, one with a medial problem (snapping) and two with wound healing complications. The long-term outcome was considered good for 24 patients and fair in two (one wound adherence and one hypertrophic scar tissue). There were no poor outcomes.
               
                  Discussion
                  We used surgery more than is generally reported by other teams, opting for surgery when the displacement was 1 mm rather than the 2 mm used by others. Surgical treatment was arthrotomy in all cases to achieve anatomic reduction under direct view, followed by osteosynthesis. For some, this therapeutic scheme may be considered too surgical. In order to achieve anatomic reduction, we use an epiphyseal lag screw for cancellous bone to achieve better compression of the fracture line. A washer is also used to improve compression and maintain perfect reduction. Theoretically, the washer could raise the risk of perichondral virola and consequently an iatrogenic epiphysiodesis bridge, but we have not had any problems in our experience. Arthrotomy did not lead to ankle stiffness, which is feared by some, in any of our patients.