The applicability of the N2 method, the modal pushover analysis (MPA) and an adaptive pushover analysis method are investigated for estimating the peak seismic responses of unreinforced masonry buildings with flexible diaphragms. The performance of nonlinear static procedures are compared against the nonlinear time-history analyses of three low-rise building models with various levels of stiffness eccentricity, type of failure mechanisms of piers (rocking or shear), and a range of diaphragm stiffness representing timber floor and roof systems. The results indicate that the MPA is unsuitable for unreinforced masonry buildings with flexible diaphragms, if the building response is shear-dominated. The adaptive method provides the most accurate estimates when the diaphragms are relatively stiff. When the diaphragms are relatively flexible, none of these methods can provide accurate predictions of peak seismic demands. However, conservative results may be obtained with the N2 method, by taking the envelope of pushover analyses carried out using the force distributions proportional to the uniform and linear displacement shapes along the height of the building. The present study has also identified the most suitable parameters/methods for the use of various nonlinear static procedures, such as the location of the control node used in the N2 method and the modal combination rule used in the MPA, for unreinforced masonry buildings with flexible diaphragms.Location of control node Hysteresis model for the computation of target displacement using equivalent SDOF system Lateral pushover force distribution Location of control node Mode combination rule Conversion procedure from pushover curve to equivalent SDOF system An essential component of the performance-based seismic assessment of a building is the prediction of the peak inelastic seismic response of the building subjected to a predetermined level of earthquake shaking. For the prediction of seismic response, it is well recognised that the linear elastic analysis used in traditional force-based assessment is inadequate in capturing the redistribution of internal forces, as well as the distribution of damage, after the onset of inelastic deformation In order to address these issues, nonlinear static procedures (NSPs) based on pushover analysis have been developed in the past decades, with the aim of attaining a balance between the accuracy of analysis and the suitability for practical use. The simplest form of NSPs (e.g. the N2 method A limitation of the single-mode pushover analysis method is that it cannot capture the responses of buildings containing multiple dominant modes. This limitation has led some researchers to propose multi-mode NSP, an example of which is the Modal Pushover Analysis (MPA) The adaptive pushover methods were developed with the aim of capturing the changing characteristics of the structure as it enters into the inelastic range. Various proposals have been made for modifying the pushover forces based on the instantaneous damage state of the structure It was observed during the initial application of the adaptive method that constraints were needed on the force distribution, The seismic behaviour of URM buildings with flexible diaphragms have been investigated in the past, both experimentally and analytically The first issue is the uncertainties in the selection of analysis parameters when using the NSPs. These uncertainties include the suitable hysteresis rule to be used in calculating the target displacement, the suitable location of the control node, the modal combination method used in MPA, and the procedure to convert the pushover curve to an equivalent SDOF system definition for the adaptive method, considering the continuously changing lateral force distribution pattern. Some of these uncertainties arise because the NSPs were originally developed for buildings with rigid diaphragms. For example, while the location of the control node can logically be placed at the centre of mass of the roof for buildings if the diaphragms are rigid, the most suitable location is not immediately apparent when the diaphragms are flexible. Other issues concern the nonlinear static analysis of URM buildings more generally. For example, while the use of equivalent SDOF systems with idealised hysteresis models for estimating the target displacement have been studied for RC or steel frame buildings The second issue requiring further studies is the identification of the applicable ranges of the NSPs. While intuition suggests that more advanced methods (e.g. MPA and the adaptive NSP) are able to provide better estimates of seismic responses than the single-mode N2 method for a wider range of diaphragm stiffness values, systematic evaluations have not been undertaken to verify the accuracies of various methods. Furthermore, no studies have been conducted to identify the factors affecting the accuracies of NSPs for URM buildings with flexible diaphragms. The study reported herein aims to address the above issues associated with the NSPs for URM buildings with flexible diaphragms. The applicability of the N2 method, the MPA and an adaptive NSP utilising the pushover algorithm of Galasco et al. Three building models, broadly representing low-rise isolated URM buildings commonly found in New Zealand and Australia The floor and roof diaphragms were representative of flexible (or non-rigid) timber systems with identical constructions at all floor levels. Six different configurations of these systems were considered for each model. They corresponded to single straight sheathing (D1), single diagonal sheathing (D2), double straight sheathing (D3), double layered panels (D4), and two additional levels representing hypothetical retrofits (D5 and D6). The reference diaphragm stiffness ( The TREMURI program  The nodal masses were assigned based on tributary areas considering the horizontal (inertial) forces. Such masses were computed separately for the nodes belonging to the diaphragms and the walls, and were combined (or added) together where the diaphragm and wall nodes coincide at the wall corners and intersections. It should be noted that assigning nodal masses in this manner is appropriate for the dynamic analysis of low-rise buildings where the direction of induced excitation is primarily horizontal. However, additional nodal forces (vertical loads and moments) were imposed on the structure to obtain the correct gravity load distributions prior to carrying out the dynamic analyses. The Rayleigh viscous damping was used for the NTHA, with a 5% initial damping ratio assigned at (1) the lower frequency corresponding to the secant stiffness to collapse, identified as the point at which the base shear resistance reduced below 80% of the peak value, and (2) higher frequency corresponding to the lowest elastic mode containing 90% mass participation. In calculating the lower frequency, an initial single-mode pushover analysis was carried out to identify the point of collapse. A limitation of the adopted modelling approach is that the out-of-plane wall failure mechanisms and the possible separation of the walls and diaphragms have not been considered in the analysis. This simplification reflects the current analysis approach of URM buildings, whereby the NSPs are used to evaluate the global building behaviour assuming the local effects, such as the out-of-plane wall failures, are prevented by providing adequate connections between the walls and the diaphragms. Nevertheless, it is likely that the local wall failures would affect the global building response, and further studies are needed to incorporate the effect of local wall behaviour in the global building assessment. Twelve natural accelerograms were selected from the database of Pacific Earthquake Engineering Research Centre As the existing NSPs have been developed for modern rigid diaphragm constructions, several uncertainties are associated with their application for URM buildings with flexible diaphragms. The analysis parameters investigated in the present study are summarised in For the N2 method, the main uncertainties for the application of the method are (1) location of control node, and (2) the computation of target displacement using an equivalent SDOF system. In order to identify the most appropriate control node location, the accuracies of the target displacements computed at the control node placed at the roof levels of each in-plane loaded wall and the diaphragm mid-spans are investigated. In addition, four different hysteresis models are used for calculating the target displacement using the NTHA of the equivalent SDOF systems. The hysteresis models correspond to elastic-plastic, modified (thin) Takeda, origin centered, and bilinear elastic rules It should be noted that in practice, the computation of the target displacement needs to be carried out without conducting a NTHA of the equivalent SDOF system. According to seismic codes and guidelines Several load patterns are also considered for the N2 method in the present study, namely (a) mass multiplied by “uniform” displacement shape (uniform pushover analysis), (b) mass multiplied by “linear” displacement shape along the height of the building (linear pushover analysis), and (c) mass multiplied by displacement shape corresponding to that calculated using the response spectrum analysis with the square root of squares (SRSS) combination rule (SRSS pushover analysis). The analysis parameters investigated for the MPA are (1) location of the control node, and (2) mode combination rules used for combining the “modal” pushover analysis results. The control node locations investigated are (a) location that displaces the most in the elastic range, and (b) location that displaces the most at the ultimate state of the structure. The considered combination rules consist of SRSS and the complete quadratic combination (CQC) rules. The calculation of the target displacement is conducted for each mode by the NTHA of the equivalent SDOF system, using the most suitable hysteresis model identified for the N2 method. In the present study, the number of modes considered encompassed more than 90% of mass participation. The analysis parameter investigated for the adaptive NSP is the conversion of the pushover curve to the equivalent SDOF system, accounting for the continuously changing force distribution during the analysis. Three conversion methods are investigated in the present study. The first approach (ADAP1) uses the current displacement shape of the structure to calculate the conversion parameters. The second method (ADAP2) is similar to the ADAP1, but uses the displacement shape back calculated from the pushover force profile of the current step. The difference between ADAP1 and ADAP2 is that the pushover force distribution As the ADAP1 procedure uses the computed displacement shape, it is independent of the control node location. ADAP3 is also independent of the control node, as it does not require any displacement to be monitored during the pushover analysis. On the other hand, ADAP2 requires the control node in constructing the pushover curve, as the constraints imposed on the pushover force distribution lead to an inconsistency between the actual displacement shape and that used in the conversion. For ADAP2, the control node is placed at the mid-span degrees of freedom of the most flexible roof for all building models. The suitability of using equivalent SDOF systems with idealised hysteresis rules for the calculation of target displacement is investigated first. The plots show that the two hysteresis models with limited to no hysteretic energy dissipation capacities (origin centered and bilinear elastic) give highly conservative estimates as the excitation intensity increases. The overestimations appear to increase exponentially, and significant errors can be expected as the inelastic behaviour increases. The elastic-plastic model, on the other hand, provides good predictions on average. However, the large variability about the equality line indicates the potential for significant errors (including underestimations) for individual ground motion. The most suitable hysteresis, that gives (on average) results closest to the NTHA analysis with the smallest variability, is the modified Takeda (thin) model. Indeed, the responses of URM walls generally show a combination of the rocking and shear failures, which are approximated most closely by the modified Takeda model. In assessing the suitability of the control node, it may be recognised that the location of the control node affects the pushover analysis insofar as determining how far the structure is to be pushed. Hence the most suitable control node location is where the estimated target displacement matches the NTHA results on average, with the smallest coefficient of variation (measure of scatter). The ratio (  The mean ratios show that consistently good estimates are obtained when the control node is placed at the mid-span of the (most flexible) roof diaphragm. This is the only location where acceptable accuracy can be attained for all diaphragm stiffness levels, the assumed displacement shapes, and the building models. Furthermore, the similar values of the coefficient of variation for the different control node locations indicate that there is no particular location that consistently gives the smallest coefficient of variation. The mid-span of the most flexible diaphragm (i.e. Roof 1 for Model 3) hence appears to be the most suitable control node location for the N2 method. The estimation of the target displacement at the mid-span of the (most flexible) diaphragm is also reasonably consistent for different levels of inelastic behaviour. For the MPA, the most suitable location of control node, and the mode combination rules are investigated. In The differences between the two combination rules are generally negligible, despite the fact that some modes were closely spaced due to the similar values of diaphragm stiffness at all floor levels. The CQC rule is nevertheless preferred in the present study as it gives more conservative predictions. Three conversion procedures (ADAP1, ADAP2 and ADAP3 as described in Section From the analyses conducted, following recommendations are given for the application of NSPs to URM buildings with flexible diaphragms. These recommendations will be adopted in studying the accuracies of various analysis methods in Section For all methods: target displacement of the equivalent SDOF system to be obtained using modified (thin) Takeda or similar hysteresis. N2 method: control node to be located at the mid-span of the most flexible diaphragm at the roof level of the building. MPA method: (1) for each mode, control node to be placed at the location that displaces the most in the elastic range; (2) use CQC rule to combine the modal responses. Adaptive method: conversion to the equivalent SDOF system to be based on the equal work done on the MDOF structure by the pushover forces using the procedure of Hernández-Montes et al. The applicability of the N2 method is investigated by comparing the plan displacements at the roof level and interstorey drift ratios of in-plane loaded walls against the NTHA results. Three different pushover force distributions, uniform, linear and SRSS, are considered. The comparisons of the displacements at roof level are shown in The linear pushover analysis can be seen to give the most conservative roof displacement predictions for all building models. The estimated interstorey drifts are more uniform along the height than those obtained by the NTHA, leading to general overestimations of the upper-storey drifts for all diaphragm stiffnesses. The uniform pushover analysis predicts more constant plan displacement shapes than the NTHA, and this leads to the underestimation of the flexible side and the overestimation of the stiff side when the stiffness eccentricity of the building is large (Models 1 and 3). For Model 2, when the stiffness eccentricity is small, the uniform pushover analysis over-predicts the responses of both in-plane loaded walls. The computed interstorey drift by the uniform pushover analysis is concentrated in the ground storey, which becomes most pronounced when shear damage is the dominant failure mechanism of the critical storey. The upper-storey drifts are typically underestimated by the uniform pushover analysis. The SRSS force distribution generally gives better correlations with the NTHA for both the roof displacements and the interstorey drifts. However, large underestimations can occur (for example, Model 1 with D4 in In general, regardless of the type of pushover force profile, the accuracy of the N2 method is mainly dependent on the level of diaphragm stiffness. Other factors, such as the level of stiffness eccentricity and failure mechanism, appear to be of secondary importance in comparison. The exact NTHA results indicate that the interstorey drift demands reduce when the diaphragm flexibility is increased. The single-mode N2 method cannot capture this reduction associated with the multi-mode behaviour of the buildings, and their predictions increasingly overestimate those of the NTHA results. In addition, no single pushover force distribution is found to provide the most accurate predictions for all diaphragm stiffnesses. However, conservative displacement and interstorey drift estimates can be made if the envelope of the uniform and the linear pushover analysis results is considered. The plan displacement shapes computed from the MPA are compared against the NTHA in The interstorey drifts for shear-dominated Models 2 and 3 also show large underestimations of the critical storey, as indicated in The underestimations of the MPA are caused by the assumption of independent modal responses, and this is highlighted in the present study due to the definition of the macroelement used in the analysis. In the macroelement definition, the rocking behaviour is almost elastic (although nonlinear), while the shear behaviour is highly inelastic, defined by a monotonically increasing scalar parameter that accounts for the macroscopic representation of cumulative damage occurring at mortar joints. Such cumulative damage cannot be captured by assuming independent modal responses, and this leads to the underestimations of responses by the MPA when multiple modes contribute to building behaviour. The assumption of the independent modal responses also creates a difficulty in identifying the damage level of the piers. This problem is illustrated in The plan displacement shapes computed from the adaptive pushover analysis are compared against the NTHA in The analyses indicate that the N2 method and the adaptive NSP typically underestimate the diaphragm deformation ( In order to obtain more accurate estimates of the diaphragm deformation, a simple strategy is proposed based on the following assumptions: (1) the diaphragms remain elastic throughout the excitation, and (2) the in-plane loaded walls are sufficiently stiffer than the diaphragms so that they can be considered essentially rigid for the purpose of calculating diaphragm deformation. The first assumption is consistent with the numerical modelling used in the analyses. The second assumption may be considered reasonable when the diaphragm flexibility is relatively large. Using these assumptions, the peak diaphragm deformation can be approximated by the elastic spectral displacement value corresponding to the diaphragm period. The accuracy of such simple spectrum approach is shown in The analyses show that all considered pushover analysis methods have limited applicability. The accuracies of the methods are found to depend on two main factors, namely (1) the failure mechanism of the in-plane loaded walls, and (2) the level of diaphragm flexibility. While both factors affect the applicability of the investigated NSPs, the MPA is primarily dependent on the failure mechanism of the piers in the critical storey. In contrast, the applicability of the N2 methods and the adaptive procedures are mainly dependent on the level of diaphragm flexibility. Based on these observations, recommendations are provided for the applicable ranges of various pushover analysis methods for URM buildings with flexible diaphragms. The applicability of the MPA for URM buildings with flexible diaphragms in practice appears to be limited, due to the large underestimations of response estimates for buildings which undergo shear-dominant failures. Furthermore, it is difficult to identify the damage levels of walls when multiple modes are present in the building response. For these reasons, the use of the MPA is not recommended for URM buildings with flexible diaphragms. For the N2 method and the adaptive NSP, the analyses become erroneous when the presence of multiple modes result in the reductions of the “exact” displacement (or interstorey drift) demands of the in-plane loaded walls. In a previous parametric study conducted using idealised single-storey systems  Large errors can be associated with both the N2 method and the adaptive NSP when λ The applicability of the N2 method, MPA and the adaptive pushover method developed by Galasco et al. The analyses indicated that the accuracy of the MPA was primarily dependent on the failure mechanism of the buildings, while those of the N2 and the adaptive method were influenced mainly by the level of diaphragm flexibility. When the building response remained almost elastic, or when the piers predominantly responded in rocking, the MPA provided the most accurate predictions of the peak displacements and interstorey drifts. However, when the buildings experienced significant inelastic shear damage, the MPA consistently underestimated the displacements and the critical interstorey drifts. The underestimations were attributed to the assumption of the independent “modal” responses in the MPA, which did not capture the cumulative nature of shear damage implemented in the numerical model. These results suggest that the MPA is not suitable for URM buildings with flexible diaphragms. The adaptive method provided the most accurate predictions of the roof displacements and interstorey drifts ratios when the diaphragm was relatively stiff. The applicable range of the adaptive method may be estimated by λ When λ Finally, the most consistent predictions of the target displacements are expected when analyses are carried out in the following manner: N2 method: control node to be located at the mid-span of the most flexible diaphragm at the roof level of the building. MPA method: (1) for each mode, control node to be placed at the location that displaces the most in the elastic range; (2) use CQC rule to combine the modal responses. Adaptive method: conversion to the equivalent SDOF system to be based on the equal work done on the MDOF structure by the pushover forces using the procedure of Hernández-Montes et al. The target displacement to be calculated using hysteresis models similar to modified (thin) Takeda model, or by spectrum-based approximate procedures developed using such models. Further studies are however recommended to identify/develop inelastic displacement ratio expressions appropriate for URM buildings. The authors gratefully acknowledge the financial support provided by the