Besides the direct syntheses of nanoparticles via pyrolysis, sol gel or precipitation processes, wet grinding in stirred media mills is suitable for producing nanoparticles. Important requirements for nanomilling processes are low grinding media wear on the one hand and an against reagglomeration stabilized suspension on the other hand. For process design and optimization the prediction of grinding kinetics enables the comparison of the energy efficiency of grinding processes at different operating parameters and for different stabilizing additives. In this study the grinding kinetics of fused corundum in a stirred media mill was investigated using different acids as electrostatic stabilizing additives in distilled water. Based on the results a kinetic model, which was developed for dispersion processes and is based on the stress intensity and the stress frequency acting in the stirred media was enhanced regarding the product stability. The results of the grinding experiments using different stabilizing acids are transferable to the parameters of the enhanced grinding kinetics and the calculated particle–particle interaction potential.Currently the demand of nanoparticles in many industrial applications, e.g. chemical and pharmaceutical industry as well as ceramic and microelectronical industry, increases strongly. Besides the direct syntheses of these nanoparticles via pyrolysis, sol gel or precipitation processes, wet grinding in stirred media mills is suitable for producing nanoparticles In case of stressing single particles between grinding media by compression and shear stress in a stirred media mill the stress intensity SI is inversely proportional to the third power of the particle size Using Eq. For the determination of the grinding kinetics a fused alumina (Martoxid MZS1, Martinswerk GmbH) was ground in distilled water. The median particle size of the fused corrundum is about 1.7 The grinding experiments were carried out in circuit operation mode using the stirred media mill Labstar LS 1 (Company Netzsch). The solid concentration was 20 The grinding results were investigated by measuring the particle size. For each experiment the average agglomerate size as a function of specific energy and comminution time was analyzed via disk centrifuge measurements (CPS, CPS instruments) and the primary particle size and zeta potential via ultrasonic spectroscopy (DT 1200, Dispersion Technology). The standard deviation of the ultrasonic spectroscopy measurement was determined on the basis of a round-robin test of the DT 1200 done by the “Federal Institute for Materials Research and Testing” using an alumina test suspension (BAM: RV BAM-V.4-Zeta/PG-2009). The specific energy is defined as the quotient of the net energy input and the sum of the solid feed particles' mass For characterizing grinding or dispersion processes the product fineness is usually presented as a function of specific energy or grinding/dispersing time. From The integration of this equation results in an equation for the achievable particle size For infinite long grinding times and, thus, high specific energies the particle size using equation (Eq. Eq.  Besides using the dispersing time as kinetic parameter (see Eq. For a better presentation of the grinding experiments' kinetic results and for an adjustment of the fit parameters via linear regression the kinetics of Eq.  Previous studies conducted by Stehr In contrast to dispersion processes the grinding progress for short grinding times depends strongly on the particle strength and, thus, on the stress intensity transferred to the product particles. The stress intensity decreases rapidly with decreasing grinding media diameter or tip speed (see Eq. At the beginning of the grinding process, the grinding progress GP is a measure for the effective stress frequency which leads to a sufficient comminution of the particles. In contrast to this, the theoretical stress frequency calculated using Eq. For most grinding processes the prediction of the grinding kinetics is necessary for comparing the energy efficiency of the grinding process at different operating parameters. The new model of Schilde et al. Generally, the grinding processes in a stirred media mill can be described well by the model. The values for The results of the grinding experiments with different acids as stabilizing additives can be compared to the particle–particle interaction In this equation The repulsive interaction potential The particle–particle interaction potential as a function of the distance from the particle surface of the different stabilizing acids calculated for a particle size of 150 The model of Eq.  For most grinding processes the prediction of the grinding kinetics is necessary for comparing the energy efficiency of the grinding process at different operating parameters and for different stabilizing additives. In this study the kinetics and efficiency of grinding fused corundum in a stirred media were investigated using different acids as stabilizing additives and different operating parameters. Based on the investigations the prediction and an energetically optimization of the grinding process at various process parameters with a much higher accuracy compared to previous methods are possible. Furthermore, the recently developed kinetic model was enhanced to consider the suspension stability. A parameter The authors gratefully acknowledge for the financial support by the