This study reviews our experience with primary total elbow arthroplasty in the management of acute distal humeral fractures by use of the iBP unlinked elbow prosthesis. We followed up 9 elbows in 9 patients (including 2 with rheumatoid arthritis), with a mean age of 73 years, for a mean of 3.5 years. Functional outcome was assessed with the Mayo Elbow Performance Score and the recently developed Liverpool Elbow Score. Clinical examination and radiologic assessment were performed by an independent surgeon. All elbows were stable at the latest follow-up examination, all patients were able to perform daily activities, and pain relief was satisfactory. The median value for the Mayo Elbow Performance Score was 95 (range, 65-100). This is the first report of the use of an unlinked prosthesis for the treatment of distal humeral fractures. Our results show that this method of treatment provides a reliable and effective way of dealing with these very difficult fractures when internal fixation is not a viable option.Distal humeral fractures represent a constant challenge to the most experienced surgeon. The local anatomic constraints, the difficulty of achieving a stable and anatomic reduction, and the frequent presence of poor bone quality and comminution reflect the demanding nature of these injuries. Although rigid osteosynthesis and early motion have comprised a major advance in the management of these fractures, results are often associated with an unsatisfactory outcome. From July 1999 to May 2002, 13 iBP (Biomet UK, Bridgent, England) unlinked elbow arthroplasties were performed in 13 patients with acute fractures of the distal humerus. All elbows were operated on by a single surgeon. The principal indication was poor bone quality, combined with fracture comminution, that would make successful internal fixation extremely unlikely. Of the patients, 4 died of causes unrelated to the operation, leaving 9 elbows in the study. The remaining 9 patients comprised 8 women and 1 man, the mean age was 73 years (range, 45-86 years), and 8 elbows were on the dominant side ( The Liverpool Elbow Score is a validated elbow-specific instrument that combines a 9-item patient questionnaire and a 6-item clinical evaluation of strength, motion, and ulnar nerve involvement. The surgical approach depends on the personal preference of the surgeon. Any surgical approach that is routinely used for an elbow arthroplasty can be used. In this series, we used a modification of Campbell's triceps-splitting approach, which has been extensively described. The 4 deceased patients had regular clinical and radiologic follow-up, and according to our review of the medical records, no complications were recorded and the patients were satisfied with the daily function of their elbows. Of the 9 remaining patients, 1 (patient 7) was not available for the final clinical assessment; however, he had completed 4 years of follow-up without clinical or radiologic complications and had a satisfactory subjective result ( Radiographically, none of the patients had evidence of subluxation or dislocation. Hardware failure was not seen, and there was no evidence of proximal migration of the humeral component. One elbow, at 4 years postoperatively, had ulnar radiolucent lines at the bone-cement interface that were not present immediately after the operation. The patient had an excellent functional result; however, this is worrisome ( There were no major complications, such as dislocation, ulnar nerve dysfunction, or deep infection. One case of delayed wound healing with drainage and superficial epidermolysis resolved with the oral administration of antibiotics within 4 weeks. There is little information currently on the use of elbow arthroplasty in acute elbow trauma. There are a few reports on the management of acute fractures of the distal humerus with elbow replacement by use of the Coonrad-Morrey linked prosthesis in low-demand elderly patients with comminution and osteopenia. The choice of an unlinked prosthesis is purely made based on the preference of the surgeon, and there are no studies to compare the 2 types of elbow arthroplasty. However, in acute fractures, to use an unlinked elbow arthroplasty, there should be adequate preservation of the distal humeral columns to provide support for the prosthesis ( In degenerative joint disease, the medial collateral ligament (MCL) contributes significantly to the flexion contracture frequently seen. In these cases, restoration of normal limb length by insertion of an elbow prosthesis would result in asymmetric loading across the implant, as it would hinge about an intact but pathologically altered MCL. The MCL itself may be a cause of instability, as retention of the diseased ligament when performing total elbow arthroplasty does not allow proper soft-tissue balancing. Our short-term results demonstrate that unlinked, noncongruous elbow arthroplasty can be a successful alternative in the management of acute distal humeral fractures, when internal fixation is not a viable option.