The present study was conducted to investigate the gold bioleaching factors from ore by cyanide producing bacterium Chromobacterium violaceum. The optimal condition for cyanide production by C. violaceum was pH 9 and 5g/L of glycine in YP medium in 2-days of incubation. In shake flask culture, gold bioleaching from the ores by C. violaceum was determined with various experimental protocols such as particle size, pre-grown C. violaceum, pH, and biooxidative treatment. The three types of low grade ores viz., R, S, and H were used. The gold bioleaching efficiencies were recorded as 0%, 50%, and 5% for ores R, S, and H, respectively, when C. violaceum culture was used without any pretreatment (protocol 1). In the experimental protocol involving grinding and pre-grown C. violaceum, leaching efficiencies increased to 60%, 100%, and 40% for ore R, S, and H samples, respectively. Especially, the bioleaching efficiency of ore S enhanced to almost 100% with pre-grown C. violaceum (protocol 2) and that of ore R increased to 53% (i.e., 96% of cyanidable gold) with grinding (protocol 3) due to their mineralogical characteristics of the ores. For refractory gold (i.e., ore R) grinding as pretreatment was needed, and for ore S (almost all of the gold was cyanidable) cyanide production was activated by using pre-grown bacteria. Biooxidation with Acidithiobacillus ferrooxidans and pH adjustment (i.e., 9–11) did not affect the bioleaching efficiencies. The mineralogical cause of gold refractoriness was analyzed by automated SEM that showed most of gold in the ore was entrapped in pyrite and silica. The results indicated that gold bioleaching by C. violaceum from low grade ore can be enhanced by grinding and pre-grown microbe; use of appropriate experimental condition is important according to the mineralogical characteristics.Cyanidation to recover gold from ore or secondary resources has been in use almost universally based on formation of gold-cyanide complex which shows very good water solubility and high chemical stability ( Cyanide producing bacteria such as In this work the feasibility of gold bioleaching by  The ores used in this study were designated as R, S, and H. The gold and silver contents of the ores were measured by fire assay and the copper content by ICP-AES after aqua regia digestion. The mineralogy of the ores was analyzed by XRD and SEM–MLA ( Preliminary experiments demonstrated that the optimal pulp density was 20 Protocol 1: 30 Protocol 2: Protocol 3: The experiment was run under the same condition as in protocol 1, except for the size of the ore (i.e., 180 Protocol 4: The experimental condition was the same as in protocol 2, except for the size of the ore (i.e., 180 Protocol 5: The experimental condition was the same as in protocol 4, except for the pH adjustment (9–11) before adding the ore (<180 Protocol 6: The ore (<180 The growth and cyanide formation of The bioleaching efficiencies of gold from the ores by Based on the mineral liberation analysis (MLA) with FE-SEM, one gold particle in free metallic state (the brightest spots in red circles) was found in ore R and the elemental composition was gold and silver ( In summary, this study evaluated the bioleaching factors of gold from low grade ore by This research was supported by the Basic research Project of the Korea Institute of Geoscience and Mineral Resources (KIGAM) funded by the Ministry of Knowledge Economy of Korea.