Flash heating and weakening could operate during earthquake nucleation and propagation. We performed 27 friction experiments in a compression-torsion apparatus on ring-shaped limestone samples at sub-seismic to seismic slip rates ≤340 mm/s, centimetric displacements and normal stresses of ≤8 MPa. Friction decreases dramatically at slip rates of 50–150 mm/s. Flash weakening was contemporaneous with a peripheral temperature rise of ∼90 °C measured with an infrared camera. The peripheral temperature yields a lower limit to the slipping zone temperature.
                  The decrease in friction may result from weakening of the asperity contacts due to decarbonation of calcite induced by (1) flash heating or (2) mechanically-activated reactions. However, X-Ray powder diffraction and Raman Spectroscopy analyses do not reveal the presence of decarbonation products in the slipping zone. Instead, White Light Interferometry and Field Emission Scanning Electron Microscope observations reveal the presence of a smooth sliding surface made of nanometric-particles. The mechanical data can be fit by the rate- and state-dependent friction model or by a quadratic model (the latter proposed for powder lubrication). We conclude that flash heating and weakening and powder lubrication may operate together to decrease dynamic friction in limestone in experiments and, for the conditions investigated here, in nature.Earthquakes may nucleate and propagate in limestone (CaCO However, the weakening mechanism in these experiments remained unspecified, probably because different processes operate together. Preceding experiments on calcite-rich rocks (Carrara marble, Flash heating ( Since the interaction of the asperities during sliding at a given slip rate where In this study we investigate the frictional properties of limestone by imposing increasing normal stresses and abrupt accelerations on the samples sliding surface. We observe a dramatic decrease in friction for slip rates above 50 mm/s after few millimeters of slip. Microstructural and mineralogical analysis of post-mortem samples and best fit analysis suggests that weakening could be related to flash heating and weakening and powder lubrication, though the physics of the latter mechanism remains poorly understood. The experiments were performed at room temperature and humidity conditions by means of a servo hydraulic axial-torsional testing system (MTS 809) installed at the In the experiments presented here, sliding occurred during rotary shear of an annular surface perpendicular to the rotation axis and parallel to the floor. Experiments were performed on eight limestone samples (∼99% calcite, grain size <5 μm) with 50/60 mm internal/external diameter (samples 003, 005, 011, 013 and 014), and 70/80 mm (samples 004, 006 and 012). The ring-shaped samples were fixed to the upper grip of the apparatus. The ring-shaped sample slides on a cylindrical-shaped sample of 20–25 mm in thickness fixed to the lower grip of the MTS apparatus ( Each sample was slid several times (e.g., 006_03 indicates the third experiment with the sample 006) with the following four-step procedure: (1) application of normal stress (3, 5 and 7.5 or 8 MPa); (2) imposition of a constant slip rate of 50 μm/s for 5–10 mm of slip (low-velocity step). The low-velocity step was necessary to achieve a stable (slip-independent) value for friction; (3) abrupt acceleration (from 10 to 40 m/s The temperature in the slipping zone and in the wall rocks was measured with an infrared camera AGEMA THV 500 placed at about 20 cm distance from the sample (spectral response: 2500–5000 nm, detector: 320 × 240 pixels, temperature resolution: 0.07 °C, maximum frame rate: 50 Hz) ( The main results of 27 experiments performed on eight samples of limestone are reported in  In In We define the drop in friction coefficient as the difference between the stable friction during the low-velocity step and the steady-state friction during the high-velocity step ( The hysteresis loop in friction coefficient reported in The slip rate The slip weakening distance The As a consequence, to be independent from this scale effect, we normalized the slip weakening distance Temperatures were measured using an infrared camera located outside of the slipping zone ( In Using typical parameters for calcite (specific heat at constant pressure We performed microstructural, geochemical and mineralogical investigations of the slipping zone materials and the sliding surface to determine the weakening mechanism operating during the high velocity step. Microstructural investigations were performed with an EDS-equipped FE-SEM and with WLI (see Section White Light Interferometry investigation of the slip surfaces indicates (1) randomly distributed corrugations of the original surface with comparable dimensions to the average particle size of the sandpaper ( X-Ray Powder Diffraction analysis of the gouge recovered after the experiment shows the presence of only calcite: the characteristic peak at about 18° 2Θ of Portlandite (Ca(OH)  Summarizing, the microstructural analysis ( Here we discuss the possible weakening mechanism (flash heating and weakening vs. powder lubrication) triggered in the experiments and whether these weakening mechanisms can be described by an empirical model (rate- and state-dependent friction law, quadratic or flash heating and weakening). At the initiation of the high velocity step we observed an abrupt increase of about 3–4% of the friction coefficient ( Then, the A possible process that triggers flash weakening could be the decarbonation at the asperity contacts which would result in the breakdown of the lattice and formation of pores that lower the shear strength of starting calcite. The bulk temperatures measured with the infrared camera were up to 150 °C, well below the decarbonation temperature for calcite for thermally-activated reactions (700–850 °C, However, mineralogical, geochemical and microstructural observations are at odds with this weakening mechanism and with the estimate of the asperity size (Sections According to Eq. A second limitation for the application of Eq. Given the above limitations and poor knowledge of the An alternative (or concurrent) weakening mechanism could be powder lubrication ( Limestone weakening has a very strong dependence with slip rate and, for An alternative interpretation could be related to the effects of the thermal perturbation induced by frictional sliding. According to Eq. To find suitable models which describe the tribomechanical behaviour of limestone observed during the tests, we fit the mechanical data with three different models: rate-and state-dependent friction, quadratic and flash heating and weakening ( We fit the friction data with ( In this model, the friction coefficient is function of the current sliding velocity Once We fit the friction data with the quadratic function: where We fit the friction data with ( where The goodness of the fit of the three models to the experimental data can be quantified with where We performed 27 high-velocity friction experiments on eight samples of limestone with a compression-torsion apparatus to investigate the evolution of friction at the initiation of seismic slip. After an abrupt increase in slip rate from 0.05 mm/s to 250 mm/s or 340 mm/s, all experiments show a small (3–4%) instantaneous increase in friction followed by a very rapid decrease in friction (up to 60%: flash weakening) once a critical weakening slip rate of about 100 mm/s is overcome. Extrapolation of these experimental observations to natural conditions requires the identification of the weakening mechanism. Experimental observations show that (1) friction drops once a critical weakening slip rate is achieved, (2) We discussed three models to describe the experimental data (rate- and state-dependent friction, quadratic and flash heating and weakening). Rate- and state-dependent friction and quadratic model are more successful in describing the dependence of the friction coefficient with slip and slip rate. But the rate- and state-dependent friction model is not in agreement with the estimated dimensions of the asperities and with the recovery in friction at the end of the experiment, while the quadratic model does not reproduce the initial strengthening and it has been extrapolated to very different deformation conditions from those for which it was originally proposed. We conclude that we found mechanical data consistent with the activation of flash heating and weakening, but microstructural observations (presence of powders in the slipping zone) and model of best fit are consistent with the activation of powder lubrication. As a consequence, we suggest that in these experiments performed on limestone flash heating (maybe during the abrupt acceleration at the initiation of sliding) and powder lubrication (during most of the sliding and the final recovery) were the mechanisms controlling flash weakening. However, at least in the case of powder lubrication, the value of the friction coefficient at higher normal stress (e.g., >50 MPa, or approaching typical deformation conditions for earthquakes) and the process responsible of the strong velocity dependence of the friction coefficient with slip rate, are unknown. Given the above limitations, further investigations (i.e., experiments conducted at higher normal stresses) are required to extrapolate experimental observations to seismic faults. The authors thank the co-Editor of the Special Volume Thomas Mitchell and an anonymous reviewer for their insightful and constructive comments. Fabrizio Nestola and Danilo Pedron are thanked for Raman Spectroscopy analysis; Federico Zorzi for XRD analysis; Luca Peruzzo for SEM analysis in Padua University and Lorenzo Raccagni, Leonardo Tauro, Elena Masiero, Claudio Mazzoli, Sandra Boesso for the technical support. Andrea Cavallo and Piergiorgio Scarlato (INGV, Rome) for FE-SEM analysis. Francois Renard for helpful discussions. GDT was supported by a