Metals are widely used in orthopaedics and recent studies have reported that patients with metal implants have a significant increase of metal levels in serum and synovial fluid. Femoral neck fracture occurred in some patients with metal-on-metal implants for unknown reasons. Recently, bone quality has emerged as an important factor of bone strength and few studies have investigated the effects of metal ions on hydroxyapatite properties. In the present study, we investigated the effects of Co2+, Cr3+ and Ni2+ on hydroxyapatite (HA) growth in vitro, using carboxymethylated poly(2-hydroxyethyl methacrylate) (pHEMA) as a biomaterial for calcification. We have demonstrated that metal ions reduced the quantity of mineral formed at the surface of the polymer and decreased the ratio Ca/P by 1.12-, 1.05- and 1.08-fold for Cr2+, Cr3+ and Ni2+ respectively. Furthermore, the size of calcospherites was significantly increased in the metal-doped HA compared to the controls, indicating a possible effect of metal ions on the crystal lattice. Indeed, the presence of metal ions increased the crystal size as well as the crystallinity of HA and reduce the lattice parameter c of the HA framework. The information obtained from this work suggests that the quality of the mineral around metallic implants could be altered. However, further investigation should be conducted to further elucidate the effects of metal incorporation on bone mineral and the functional consequences.Metals are essential for the survival of animals, plants and micro-organisms The aim of the present study was to investigate the role of cobalt, chromium and nickel ions on the in vitro growth of hydroxyapatite crystals, which represents the mineral component of bones. We employed a polymer poly(2-hydroxyethyl methymethacrylate), modified by carboxymethylation (pHEMA-CM), which can mimic the calcification of woven bone in the absence of cells Commercial 2-hydroxyethyl methacrylate (HEMA) was purchased from Sigma–Aldrich Chemical (Illkirsh, France). Commercial HEMA contains residual methacrylic acid and crosslinkers due to the fabrication process. The polymerization inhibitor 4­methoxyphenol (added by the manufacturer before shipping, at a concentration of 350 The linear polymer was prepared by bulk polymerization. Briefly, the polymerization mixture was composed of HEMA (10 A standard synthetic body fluid (SBF) mimicking lymph fluid was prepared according to Yamada et al. Transfer of the disks into 1 Disks to be examined by SEM were processed as previously described Phase analysis of the synthesized HA or metal-doped HA was conducted primarily using XRD employing a PANalytical X’PERT MRD (PANalytical Ltd, Almelo, The Netherlands) using a Cu The crystallinity noted by Interplanar distances ( Data were expressed as means The disks did not vary in shape or weight under standardized polymerization conditions. They were translucent and their mean weight was 157.5 After incubation in the SBF, a white mineral layer composed of mineralized nodules was clearly seen at the surface of the pHEMA-CM disks by SEM. Mineralized nodules had a round shape (calcospherites); they were made of elementary tablets or plates of HA, packed together as reported previously For quantitative purposes, the line broadening of the (002) reflection was used to evaluate the mean crystallite size. This method has previously been used by Li et al. The cell parameters of the samples are shown in Metals are trace elements indispensable for life. However, their increased concentration can affect the mineral and enzyme status of the body (and consequently poses a threat to human health). The concentration of metals is significantly raised in patients with metal implants. Although it appears clear that metal ions, especially cobalt, chromium and nickel, have a direct effect on bone cells in vitro We also observed a decrease in the ratio Ca/P in the metal-doped HA. This was expected as calcium is progressively substituted by metal ions during the mineralization process and, as such, the Ca/P ratio is decreased. Furthermore, in metal–HA, the Ca/P ratio is closer to the Ca/P ratio usually observed for natural hydroxyapatite than in our control. On the other hand, metal ions significantly increased the calcospherite size, indicating plausible effects on the crystal parameters. Indeed, the XRD results indicated that incorporation of metal ions into the hydroxyapatite crystals narrowed the XRD peak of the (002) reflection, suggesting that the incorporation of metals into the mineral crystal increased the symmetry and thus improved the crystallinity. The ionic radii of Co (0.65 It has been suggested by others that the bone crystal size distribution plays an important role in bone fracture. Ovariectomized mice and osteopontin- and osteonectin-null mice exhibit larger bone crystals and increased brittleness We have shown that metal ions (Cr, Co and Ni) can be incorporated into the hydroxyapatite crystal during mineralization and affect the crystal lattice parameters as well as the size of the crystal. The information obtained from this work would suggest that the quality of the mineral around metallic implants could be altered. However, further investigation should be conducted to further elucidate the effects of metal incorporation on bone mineral and the functional consequences. This work was supported by grants from the Furlong Charitable Research Foundation, Contrat Region Pays de la Loire BIOREGOS2 and INSERM.