In this study, fly ash (FA) based geopolymer (GP) concretes were produced by using a mixture of basaltic pumice (BP) aggregates and a fly ash (Class F) for lightweight concrete production. ANOVA Yates’ test technique was applied to find out the effective curing parameters. BP aggregates were ground four different fractions of particle sizes as −12 + 4 mm, −4+0.425 mm, −0.425 + 0 mm and the one containing the size distribution of Turkish Standard 802. Also, effects of the curing time in the oven were investigated. The uniaxial compressive strength (UCS) (20–55 MPa), the point load strength (4–14 kN), the water absorption (1.05%–17%), the Mohs hardness (5.5–3) and the sonic speed values (4.12–2.72 km/sn) were measured. Stress-strain curves were graphed. The density of the concrete ranged from 1700 kg/m3 to 1792 kg/m3 which confirm the lightweight concretes.The growing demand of portland cement (PC) leads to some problems such as limited reserves of required raw materials, slow manufacturing progress and swelling carbon taxes of the governments together with the global authorities. Also, the energy consumption for the clinker production which is performed at highest temperatures (>1000 °C) is the basic disadvantage of PC together with high carbon emissions [ Conventional concretes have a density of about 2300 kg/m The fly ashes (Class F according to ATSM C 618–95) obtained from Sugözü thermic power plant of Turkey was used as main material for geopolymerization. Because the sizes of basaltic pumice (BP) samples were large, the sample was crushed by using a laboratory type jaw crusher. After sample reduction by quartering, the fly ashes and BP were analysed by Minipal 4 Panalytical X-ray fluorescence (XRF) device ( The ANOVA Yates’ test technique is a systematic statistical method that is used for finding the basic and internal interactions in 2 The FA was directly used in the statistical ANOVA Yates’ experiments. Aggregate addition was performed after the effective curing parameters were appeared. The BP was firstly added to the mortar between 0 and 12 mm sizes according to Turkish Standard 802 ( V L: Length of the specimen (mm) T Hardness values of the specimens were detected by shore scleroscope device in which a diamond-tipped hammer falls under its own weight to the smooth sample surface. The scleroscope were applied to 6 surfaces of the cubic concretes. 10 measurements were taken from the each surface. Then, the arithmetic means were calculated as the shore hardness of the 1 cubic specimen. Shore hardness was converted to Mohs scale of mineral hardness. The load displacements were determined by length changings measured through the equipment attached to the compressive strength device. The strain values (Ɛ) were determined by calculating the rate of change in length under pressure. Young’s modulus was calculated from the inclinations of the linear line of the stress/strain diagrams according to Equation In the experiments, first attempt was to reveal the strength of fly ash-based GP concrete. Yates’ test technique was applied with 2 The coefficient values were calculated by dividing the total effect to the experiment number. The responses (Y) were revealed by using the regression equation. There was 94.39% correlation between the calculated and the observed values ( EDS spectrums have been obtained from FA and GP concretes produced by 5 M Na BP aggregates prepared by Turkish Standard 802 (0–12 mm) were added to the mortar at certain rates. BP ratios were determined by BP/FA weight%. 5 M Na It is obvious that the UCS of the specimens decrease as the pumice rate increases. Also, the densities (for 28 days) are higher compared to the samples prepared by using only FA. The density difference between FA and the BP causes this situation. S: Calculated strength (MPa) M: Maximum strength value (37.1 MPa) t: Time (day) It was observed that the theoretical and the observed strength values confirmed the each other ( The stress and strains diagrams plotted in The water absorption, the sonic speed and the Mohs hardness values are presented in The curing temperature was investigated by prepared %20BP aggregates added mortars. One set of the cubic concretes were left to dry in the room temperature. The other set of the concretes were placed to the oven at 70 °C. The compressive strengths were measured at specific time intervals of the day. The results indicate that the curing temperature has intense effect on the strengths ( GP concretes have important advantages such as less CO This study was supported by