The effect of the halothane gene on cured meat products was investigated using the meat from 60 Landrace×Large White pigs of known halothane genotype (NN=25, Nn=19, nn=16). Results for the two types of fresh sausage manufactured (with and without rusk) indicated that the NN pigs (15.7%) had lower total moisture losses (P<0.05) compared to the nn pigs (18.9%), with Nn being intermediate (17.4%) for the sausage without rusk. Where rusk was added, there were no significant differences between genotypes for moisture losses (NN=12.6%, Nn=13. 0%, nn=14.2%). Taste panel evaluations of the fresh sausages made without rusk indicated no genotypic influence for juiciness, however the sausage made with the rusk was judged the juiciest for the nn genotype, with Nn being intermediate and NN the least juiciest. The smoking and cooking losses during manufacturing of the emulsion product (vienna) indicated that the nn genotype (12.5%) had significantly (P<0.05) higher total losses than the Nn genotype (11. 3%), with NN being intermediate (12.4%).Comminuted meat products, such as fresh sausage, have an established position in the market and considerable innovation has taken place in recent years to enhance and improve such products. Products that are perceived to be of higher quality are those containing more lean meat and less fat. Internationally, legislation exists regulating amongst others, the lean meat content of meat products. Thus as the proportion of lean content increases in meat products, other meat quality aspects such as water holding capacity (WHC) and sensory perceptions become of greater importance. Comminution, apart from reducing the size of the meat pieces, plays an important role in extracting salt-soluble meat proteins, thus assisting in the binding of the product. It also reduces the obtrusiveness of fat and connective tissue commonly found in such products ( It has been indicated that the presence of the halothane gene (n), leads to a decrease in WHC of fresh ( The WHC of the meat used to manufacture sausages has a direct impact on quality because it reduces drip loss from both fresh and frozen sausage. It also reduces cooking loss and retains moisture, thus adding to the ‘juicy' taste of the product. The inclusion of certain WHC enhancing agents (such as phosphates and rusk) can enhance moisture retention in valued added products that are manufactured from PSE meat. The sourcing and testing of the genotypes of the pigs used in this investigation have been discussed in detail in The topside ( The fresh sausages made from the meat originating from the three halothane genotypes were subjected to two treatments (rusk added and no rusk added) to determine if the addition of a moisture retaining agent (rusk) would reduce the moisture loss of low ultimate pH meat, such as that associated with the halothane gene. No phosphates were added to either treatment. Phosphates act primarily as moisture retaining agents and would therefore further confound the results. The genotypes were compared within each treatment to determine the effect of the presence of the gene on WHC. The meat used for the preparation of the fresh sausage consisted of the topside ( For the preparation of the fresh sausage, the meat of each genotype was re-minced using a 5 mm mincing plate. Two 7.5 kg batches of each genotype were prepared, one with 5% rusk added, the other without rusk. No phosphates were included in either of the spice mixes. For each batch, the spice mixes ( The meat (derived from the three genotypes as described above) for the preparation of the viennas was re-minced using a 5 mm mincing plate and placed in a bowl cutter. Only one spice mix ( The packed sausages were kept in cold storage (2°C) for 7 days until commencement of sensory evaluation. The tasting was done over five days with two tastings per day to avoid fatigue of panellists. All the treatments were evaluated during each tasting. To avoid bias, each genotype (within each treatment) was assigned a random assorted three digit number ( On commencement of each tasting the sausages were removed from cold storage, the wrapping removed and the weight recorded to determine cooking loss. The cooked sausages were evaluated for juiciness comparing genotypes within each treatment (5% rusk and no rusk). Five descriptive classes were used (very dry, dry, neither dry nor juicy, juicy, very juicy) and each panellist was required to indicate which word was the most descriptive of each cooked sample. Statistical analysis was performed using PROC GLM ( where The data was analysed in the style of the cheese tasting experiment in The sausage manufactured without rusk had the highest chilling loss for the nn genotype (3.82%), differing significantly ( The lack of statistical differences between genotypes could be due to factors such as moisture losses prior to manufacturing, type of sausage casing, addition of salt, cooking time and severity of the grinding process. Since no fat was added to the sausage mixtures, fat content could not have had a significant effect on the differences in cooking losses. This is supported by results from With In the sausages prepared with no rusk the evidence suggests that the mean juiciness was the same for the three genotypes. In the case of the sausage prepared with rusk there was strong evidence to suggest that Compared to the differences in processing losses for the fresh sausages, the differences in smoking and cooking loss, for viennas, between genotypes were small ( The increased chopping or cutting associated with the manufacturing of emulsion type products diminishes the differences in meat quality, especially with regard to WHC. Comminution plays an important role, apart from reducing the size of the meat pieces, in extracting salt soluble meat proteins and assisting in the binding of the product ( This investigation does suggest possible uses for PSE meat, such as for fresh sausage and emulsion products (viennas). It seems that the processes involved in the manufacturing of these products largely overshadow the effects of PSE meat (drip loss, pale colour) and that the yield losses incurred can be reduced to such an extent that it would not involve increased financial losses or undue reduction in sensory qualities. However, the financial returns on these products are much lower than that obtained from selling whole muscle products. These results should thus be seen to discourage the use of the halothane gene in production systems since the losses involved, both in terms of meat quality and financial returns, do not justify the supposedly higher returns from the increased lean content associated with the halothane gene. The design and implementation of an on-line system that can accurately detect PSE pork carcasses, as well as proper manufacturing practices to utilise PSE meat with the minimum deterioration in product quality (such as emulsion products), should thus become an imperative with the South African meat industry, particularly if it wishes to compete successfully in the international market.