In this paper, we develop a novel 3D computational method that describes the behaviour of rock bolts and rough rock-shotcrete interfaces as support systems. Specifically, a Finite Element model has been formulated and implemented using the user-defined element (UEL) subroutine with ABAQUS. The input parameters of the bolted cohesive model are determined experimentally. Once the location of the bolts is defined, the overall force-displacement performance of the system can be simulated. In addition, the rough interface is modelled as a combination of ‘bond’ and ‘Coulomb-friction’ laws where the cohesive stiffness reduces with degradation. To validate the model, we compared its outputs to the results of direct shear and bolt pull-out tests; a good agreement between the two approaches has been obtained. In addition, a mesh independent result is observed for the overall force-displacement response, which makes our model particularly fast and efficient. Furthermore, we conducted a parametric study by investigating the effects of number of bolts, bolt installation angle and pretension on the overall behaviour.3D domain of the volume Stress tensor; (Pa) Areas of the domain in which external force matrix Internal work as defined in the principle of virtual work; (J) External work as defined in the principle of virtual work; (J) Bolted cohesive element stiffness matrix; (N/m) Pretension and internal point load of the bolt, respectively; (N) Relative separation; (m) Nodal-separation function of the bolted cohesive element; (m) Matrix containing the shape functions; (m Rotation matrix of the cohesive element Jacobian matrix Shape functions that populate the Element stiffness matrix; (N/m) External force matrix acting on the element; (N) Delta Dirac function at point ( Damage variable Overall normal and shear stiffnesses of interface; (N/m) Normal and shear stiffnesses for cohesive component; (N/m) Normal and shear stiffnesses for the friction component; (N/m) Overall interface shear force, cohesive component and friction, respectively; (N) Bolted cohesive element Joint roughness coefficient In rock tunnelling excavation, it is difficult to make the surface completely smooth with drilling and blasting method. The instability of the interface eventually causes the failure of the support system ( The mechanical response of the bolted rock-shotcrete interface to service conditions is complex and is affected by many factors, such as the roughness of rock-shotcrete interface, geological conditions, grout properties, bolt diameter, bolt mechanical properties, bolt installation angle and bolt pretension. These factors have been studied by many scholars ( Ideally, direct experimental tests including shear and pull-out tests are recommended to obtain the overall behaviour of bolted rock-shotcrete interfaces. However, in-depth understanding of the behaviour of such interfaces using analytical and/or experimental models solely is difficult given their complexity. Numerical simulation provides an alternative that proved instrumental to describe multi-physics coupling ( The majority of models available in the literature use the input of stress-displacement or stress-deformation response of the bolt which requires inverse analysis to obtain this relationship. To the authors’ knowledge, there is no formulation that uses cohesive elements to model support systems in underground excavation and that features force-displacement at the bolt level without assumptions on stress distribution. The proposed model directly reflects the support quality and can be easily deployed for engineering applications. This novel formulation, called bolted cohesive element (BCE) model, is to describe bolt reinforced rock-shotcrete interfaces. The presented methodology takes the bolt and rough rock-shotcrete interface as two distinct entities, in which the input parameters can be obtained from the single pull-out and shear tests. The response of the interface is further decomposed into cohesive and Coulomb friction laws. The bolt reinforcement is considered and implemented as a point load, which would not add additional degree of freedoms into the system. The BCE model is calibrated using experimental tests and used in a parametric study to investigate the influence of number of bolts, bolt installation angle and bolt pretension on the overall behaviour of reinforced interfaces. In this numerical implementation, the joint/interface is represented as a cohesive zone, which is inserted into the bulk material. This interface zone has a different behaviour from the bulk materials that surround it. The concept of cohesive zone modelling was introduced by The interface is considered as a crack surface ( The analysed domain The separations along the normal ( The aforementioned expressions are illustrated in the global coordinates, while the constitutive relationships for bolted cohesive element are expressed in local system. The local-global coordinate transformation within the cohesive elements are shown in In a quadrilateral element, the shape functions expressed in the intrinsic coordinate ( The local displacement-separation field As shown in The determinant of the Jacobian matrix is given by: The contribution of the bolted cohesive element to the global stiffness matrix can be obtained using the Galerkin method as: It is noticed that the force resulting from the bolt acts at point Combining Eq. Finally, the Gauss numerical integration method is applied and can be approximated as: Apart from cohesive elements that describe the rock-shotcrete interface, the model contains 3D elements that represent the bulk rock mass. In this simulation, the main idea is to investigate the rock-shotcrete interface stability while the surrounding rock is considered to behave elastically. This simplification is also based on the fact that the strength of the joint/interface is relatively lower than those of the rock mass or the liner. In this section, the performance of the proposed BCE model, implemented using ABAQUS through the user element subroutine UEL, is assessed by comparing its outcomes to experimental results. The rock-shotcrete interface can be debonded by traction and/or shear forces under complex in situ stresses. The overall behaviour of the lined structure is highly affected by the interfacial properties including cohesion, tension, shear stiffness and normal stiffness, which can be determined experimentally.  In order to verify the computational implementation of our BCE model, a simple direct shear test is performed and compared to the laboratory results. The bilinear traction-separation law is adopted for normal traction component in this simulation and would not affect the comparison results with the shear test experiment. For the shear components, we propose a mixed ‘cohesion’ and ‘Coulomb-friction’ model to approximate the non-linear behaviour of rock-shotcrete interfaces. As studied by In friction sliding stage ( Therefore, the friction contribution to the shear component is expressed as: Consequently, the constitutive relationship of the rock-concrete interface is written as: Particularly in this direct shear test simulation, the shear stiffnesses in different directions are equal ( As mentioned before, the measured normal compression and residual stresses are 4 MPa and 3.2 MPa, respectively. The interface friction coefficient of the numerical model is set To test our bolted model, we conducted a single bolt pull-out simulation and compared its results with the experimental data. In the simulation, the constitutive matrix The eight-noded brick elements (C3D8) are used for this simulation, whereas the bolted cohesive elements are inserted through the UEL subroutine. Three sets of simulations are performed with different mesh sizes from very coarse 26 bolted cohesive elements to very fine 442 bolted cohesive elements (see The proposed model has been validated experimentally through direct shear and single bolt pull-out tests. We now add both rough interface and bolt contributions to the overall behaviour of the bolt reinforced system. The geometry and boundary conditions of the model are shown in The effect of mesh size on the results has been investigated. The overall behaviour of the bolt reinforced structure can be highly effected by many factors such as the JRC and the bolt installation. The JRC of interface alters the adhesion strength of shotcrete and can be considered by changing the scalar damage variable ( Usually, more than one bolt are installed in engineering infrastructures to enhance the overall behaviour the support systems. The overall behaviour of the system illustrates that the denser the bolts, the higher shear resistance of the system (see in The bolt installation angle refers to the angle between the bolt orientation and the normal direction of the interface (see in  The pretension load applied to the bolt had a profound influence on the overall shear performance ( The bolt pretension has a positive effect on the shear force. The big variation in force versus displacement curve with large displacement in We developed a novel bolted cohesive element (BCE) model to investigate support systems in underground excavations. A wide range of interfaces with/without the bolts can be modelled using the proposed approach that is implemented using the Fortran user element subroutine UEL of ABAQUS. Experimental tests have been used to validate the model through direct shear and bolt pull-out tests. The model has been used to further investigate the bolt number, bolt installation angle and pretension effects on the overall behaviour. The proposed BCE model uses cohesive element to represent the roughness interface, the interface behaviour is further decomposed into cohesive and Coulomb friction laws. In addition, the reinforcement by bolts is considered and implemented using point loads; this makes the current approach more efficient than adding additional degrees of freedom into the system through three dimensional elements for example, given the small size of the bolts compared to the surrounding rock mass. A good agreement is obtained between the proposed BCE model and the experimental tests. The bolt has a positive effect on the overall behaviour. The shear resistance due to the bolt installation increases significantly. Furthermore, the structural behaviour of the bolted system can be simulated accurately with a fairly coarse mesh, since the contribution of the bolts is defined as force versus relative displacement not the element size, even can yield good results even when the mesh is coarse. A parametric study shows that the overall behaviour is highly related to the bolt installation parameters. The number of bolts and their pretension have a positive effective on the shear resistance of the system. The increased stress is nearly proportional to the number of bolts. The effective stiffness of the bolted system increases with the bolt installation angle. The results of the parametric studies provide fundamental and useful information for investigating the responses of a shotcrete tunnel with bolts installed across the rock-liner interface. In engineering practice, the proposed model can help make a compromise between the cost and the operational efficiency by providing an insight in the behaviour of support systems.  The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. The first author would like to acknowledge the financial support provided by the China Scholarship Council. The authors would like to thank the anonymous reviewers for their considerable effort in improving the paper.