Different solid-state reaction models, by interpretation of the model graphs in terms of goodness of fit to real data points (R-squared), are used to evaluate the reaction mechanism and the kinetics (E, n) for the thermal decomposition of Hekimhan–Deveci siderite ore samples. Isothermal experiments at three different temperatures (T
                     =505 °C, 520 °C, 535 °C) are run for t
                     =15–150 minutes while non-isothermal experiments are conducted at single heating rate (10 °C/min) using thermogravimetric analysis (TGA). Three-dimensional diffusion reaction models have been noted as the solid-state reaction model representing thermal decomposition kinetics of Hekimhan–Deveci siderite. The values of activation energy (E), the optimum kinetics obtained, are E
                     =85.53 kj/mol (Jander three-dimensional diffusion reaction model); E
                     =85.49 kj/mol, (Ginstling–Brounshtein three-dimensional diffusion reaction model).Thermal treatment processes, endothermic in nature, result in thermal decomposition, phase transition, driving-off the volatile fraction depending on the type of ore treated and experimental conditions. Carbonate minerals (CaCO Endothermic and exothermic reactions taking place in thermal decomposition process yield transformations; being paramagnetic at room temperature, siderite is converted to ferromagnetic and ferrimagnetic phases upon controlled heat treatment. Thus concentration by low-intensity magnetic separation is enhanced, eliminating the need of high-intensity magnetic separation, which is comparatively more expensive and complex. Determination of temperature range of operation is critical for achievement of obtaining phases readily concentrated by low-intensity magnetic separation. Gaseous atmosphere, in which thermal decomposition reactions take place, affects the final product characteristics. The decomposition of siderite has been studied in a number of gaseous atmospheres; under the flow of oxygen it is found that, the oxidation is so rapid that the only detectable phase as the end product is hematite, α-Fe The theoretical data on decomposition of siderite points out that, siderite has a characteristic thermal curve with endothermic effect due to dissociation of FeCO It has been reported that particle size of the ore, quantity of sample, and pressure are effective on thermal decomposition, as well ( Specifically the effect of particle size on thermal decomposition has been the subject of the studies of As the chemical composition of the ore has been found effective in analyzing the kinetics of thermal decomposition of siderite, since magnesium (Mg), calcium (Ca), and manganese (Mn) may substitute for iron (Fe) in siderite ore, there are a number of studies conducted to investigate the kinetics; Kubas and Szalkowicz (1971) have calculated the activation energy of decomposition by model-free method. Zakharov and Adonyi (1986) have employed n-order kinetic model to calculate kinetic parameters. Avrami Erofe'ev has been validated as the model interpreting the kinetic behavior of thermal decomposition of siderite ( Samples having the lowest siderite content (72% by weight) were studied in vacuum by Kubas and Szalkowicz, and a value of 115 kJ/mol was noted as the activation energy of thermal decomposition, determination of mechanism of the process was conducted as well in studies of Zakharov and Adonyi, Dhupe and Gokarn, Jagtap et al. Among all, the highest value of activation energy was found in study, carried out under nitrogen flow, of Zakharov and Adony ( The thermal decomposition of mineral siderite (FeCO Owing to the properties of calcined products, such as high pore volume and high surface area, the end products are also used in capture of sulphur dioxide (SO Scarce of high grade iron ore, qualifying as the feed to blast furnace, is the problem of industry in Turkey. The recovery obtained by smelting in blast furnace via which iron is obtained in metal form, is diminished consequently. Fortunately, there are studies conducted with the aim of handling the problem; in a pilot study, siderite ore has been treated in rotary furnace, yielding products high in iron grade ( However, considering that industrial applicability is sought principally, it is essential that the process conditions are improved extensively. Practicality of application, to some extent, is dependent on use of or modification of current technology on economical basis. Therefore, reactions taking place in air atmosphere are of interest, remarking that not only obtaining phases high in iron grade but also responsive to low-intensity magnetic separation is required. As an extension of the investigation of thermal treatment of Hekimhan–Deveci siderites to obtain phases showing high magnetic susceptibility (γ-Fe In isothermal experiments, run-of-mine (r.o.m.) ore sized down to − The results of TGA interpreted by computational methods have been relied upon in estimation of the apparent overall kinetics parameters, analysis for siderite thermal decomposition kinetics has been based solely on TGA results in literature ( However, the fact that conducting the experiments in such a way may not go beyond the simulation of conventional heating, is a matter of question and it is remarked that effect of experimental conditions, which may be well observed in laboratory scale set up, on reactions is important; therefore in present work the objective has been obtaining consistent parameters, putting weight on the surrounding conditions. Malatya (Hekimhan–Deveci) siderite ore was used as the material subjected to heat treatment in the study. The chemical composition of the ore has been determined by X-ray fluorescence (XRF) analysis and the results are as shown on the following table ( Taking account of the fact that achievement of indicated goal is dependent on setting temperature range of operation, thermal analyses have been referenced in order for identification of thermal decomposition profile of the ore. Thermogravimetric analysis (TGA) at temperature range of 25 °C–900 °C, differential thermal analysis (DTA) at temperature range of 25 °C–900 °C were conducted while differential scanning calorimetry analysis (DSC) analysis was conducted at a range of 50 °C–600 °C respectively. Set of heating experiments were carried out on laboratory scale to decide on the range of data collection for isothermal heating runs. The fact that it is almost impossible to rely on significance of time since, at high temperatures, weight loss of samples takes place at higher rate on continuous heating. Therefore the limits of operation range were determined in light of results of thermal analyses and experimental work. Laboratory heating experiments have subsequently followed the TG analysis to get the data with respect isothermal heating, referencing the theoretical data on thermal decomposition of siderite. Noting “time” as the parameter that determines the conversion at any point on isothermal runs, samples, − TG analysis has been the method of acquiring the data of heating profile on basis of increasing temperature against time. The obtained data has been used in analyzing heating characteristics of material on non-isothermal scale. The data of sample mass against temperature recorded by “Perkin Elmer Pyris 1 TGA” instrument has been used in calculation of conversion for non-isothermal runs. The expression for fractional conversion with respect to time in isothermal experiments, and on basis of temperature in non-isothermal experiments is;  particular time (minutes) or particular temperature (˚C) 25˚C Kinetic parameters determined in this study are reaction order and activation energy along with the reaction mechanism. Calculations on isothermal runs are based on Eq.  time (minutes) temperature (Kelvin, K) Expressions for Kinetic parameters determination in non-isothermal runs has been through Eq.  Activation Energy, kJ/mol temperature (Kelvin, K) As defined by Eq. In addition, conventional method of calculation of Rearrangement of the equation in exponentional form yields; The slope of the plot − Results of thermal analyses have given close insight to thermal decomposition profile of ore samples, along with the laboratory experiments. Characteristic TGA curve has indicated that thermal decomposition starts at around In conjunction with thermal analyses, experimental work has justified the temperature range of thermal decomposition, based on time ( Thermal decomposition characteristics of Hekimhan–Deveci siderite ore samples have been verified by differential thermal analysis (DTA) ( Decomposing according to the reaction, Hekimhan–Deveci siderite ore undergoes oxidation reactions commencing at 560 °C up to 650 °C; thereafter there is no significant reaction observed by DTA curve. Endothermic heat flow at 650 °C–750 °C may be described by thermal decomposition of other carbonate minerals present (MnCO Subsequent to decomposition of iron carbonate, oxidation reactions take place in the system, under presence of air; possible set of reactions is as given below, Characterization of phases present, both for untreated samples and end products of heat treatment, have been accomplished through X-ray diffraction (XRD) analysis. Qualitative examination has verified formation of magnetic phases (ferromagnetic or ferrimagnetic); illustration of analyses results has been given for selected temperatures ( What is more magnetic susceptibility analyses proved valid as means of checking achievement of basic goal, that is obtaining phases that would respond to low intensity yielding values of mass magnetic susceptibility of 846⁎10 Kinetic models for solid-state reactions ( The reaction models being in origin sigmoid rate equation (3rd reaction model; In agreement with the outcome of the isothermal runs, adequacy of the diffusion reaction models in representing the data has been confirmed by non-isothermal runs. The best degree of fit value ( By use of Arrhenius equation in evaluating the data for isothermal runs, activation energy ( Examination of results in terms of degree of fit brings about the conclusion that three-dimensional diffusion models are the reaction models representing the thermal decomposition kinetics of Hekimhan–Deveci siderite ore. In contrast to the study ( Type of ore treated reports to be the reason explaining the difference in results; furthermore consistency of diffusion models in describing the kinetics have also been verified by influence of parameters such as chemical composition or temperature range operated. Reaction models determined for the process are; Three-dimensional Diffusion Model (Diffusion Model I): Ginstling–Brounshtein Diffusion Model (Diffusion Model II): Evaluation of model equations via Arrhenius relation gives comparable results for activation energy, indicative of the fact that the reaction is diffusion controlled in set conditions ( Consequently it is seen that not only the results are precise within identical runs, i.e. isothermal or non-isothermal runs, but also consistency is observed among different runs, as expected. Anyhow, under any circumstances, influence of experimental conditions and of the studied range as well as the characteristics of material must be accounted in analyzing the results. Hekimhan–Deveci siderite ore has a characteristic thermal curve, on which intense heat flow to the system, corresponding parts of endothermic reactions, is required in the first place. Exothermic reactions take place following the thermal decomposition, generating heat through the system. Calcination process has been shown to have all effects cited, i.e. thermal decomposition, driving-off volatile material (CO Models of three-dimensional diffusion, Three-dimensional Diffusion Model and Ginstling–Brounshtein Diffusion Model, give identical results by different methods; reliability of findings is thereby verified. On the other hand, it is noteworthy to emphasize that the decomposition of siderite is influenced by conditions of treatment, and also by the substitutions in chemical composition.