A retrospective review of the use of the Dall-Miles plate for periprothetic femoral fractures was performed at our institution. Twenty-seven fractures around a hip replacement were fixed using a Dall-Miles plate within 34 months. The mean age at operation was 74 (33-90) years. Twenty fractures were Vancouver B1, two B2, and five type C. Mean follow-up was 11 (2–41) months. Two fractured plates required revision and two fixations loosened, developing varus malunion. One malunion was related to deep infection. All four events occurred within six months of fixation. Two individuals were deceased within 3 months of surgery. Similar complications were evident in nine series published between 1990 and 2012. Increased incidence of periprosthetic femoral fractures is anticipated in a population with significant co-morbidities. Cortical strut allograft, iliac autograft and orthobiological supplementation remain options where non-union is anticipated.Concerns have been raised regarding the increasing volume of periprosthetic fractures, and the advanced age of the population in whom these occur The Vancouver classification of Duncan and Masri Revision of the prosthesis is indicated if the prosthetic stem is loose, including possibly to a long stem implant. Open reduction and internal fixation remains the treatment of choice for the majority periprosthetic femoral shaft fractures with a stable prosthesis Locking plates have the potential to minimise interruption of periosteal blood supply as plate apposition to the bone is not required. Locking plates demonstrate significantly increased stiffness as a biomechanical construct, however they exhibit catastrophic failure in terms of linear fracture between adjacent screw holes on the proximal cortex in cadaveric models, which is not observed with a cable plate construct This study reviews the incidence of late complications of twenty seven periprosthetic femoral fractures treated with the Dall-Miles plate in our institution, and summarises the published series to date. Periprosthetic femoral fractures treated with the Dall-Miles (Stryker Orthopaedics, Mahwah, NJ, USA) plate in our institution were identified from theatre logs of plate usage. Twenty-seven fractures were identified in twenty-seven individuals over a two year and ten month period, from 1st January 2010 to 31st October 2012. Operative details, comorbidities, follow up and outcomes were obtained from medical notes, a radiology image archiving system, and the regional fractures database. Of twenty-seven fractures, two (cases 24 and 25) were intra-operative ( Twelve individuals were graded as American Society of Anaesthetists (ASA) 3, and two were grade 4. Three individuals regularly smoked tobacco, and four were former smokers. The comorbidities for each patient are listed ( Mean radiographic follow up was eleven months (range 9 weeks -3.4 years). Twenty individuals completed at least three months of radiographic follow-up. One additional individual attended for a clinical check at three months, with radiographic union at 7 weeks. Two individuals did not attend for any follow up, and a further two were deceased by 3 months. The remaining two completed 10 and 9 weeks of radiographic follow-up. Mean age at fracture fixation was 74 (range 33-90) years. The youngest patient had bilateral congenital hip dislocations treated with custom-made arthroplasty nine years earlier, and experienced the unilateral periprosthetic fracture after a simple fall. The next youngest, a forty-eight year old male with considerable cognitive dysfunction and seizures as a result of hypoxic brain injury, experienced a periprosthetic fracture four months after hemiarthroplasty for femoral neck fracture. A male to female ratio of 11:16 was observed, perhaps reflecting the effects of post-menopausal osteoporosis, or longevity. Twice as many fractures occurred in the right femur than the left (18:9). Sixteen fractures were around a primary total hip replacement, eight around a hemiarthroplasty, and three after revision hip surgery. Two patients had a history of developmental dysplasia of the hip. Twenty-one Vancouver B1 fractures, one B2, and five type C fractures were treated using this method. Stem stability was assessed radiographically, with one stem (case 11) appearing loose radiographically but confirmed as stable during surgery. All fractures except one occurred around cemented stems, reflecting the prevalence of the cemented technique of femoral stem implantation in our institution in recent decades. Four of the fractures (cases 22, 24, 26 and 27) demonstrated comminution. In case 24, this occurred intra-operatively. In case 26, a large butterfly fragment was present. The remaining two (cases 22 and 27) were minimally displaced. No complications were attributed specifically to comminution. A lateral sub-vastus approach was used to perform open reduction of the fracture. Clamped, tensioned cables were used to secure plates proximally, and screws used distal to the tip of the stem. In type C fractures, screws were preferred to cables. Four of the plates were 7-hole, twelve were 9-hole and eleven were 11-hole plates. One loose stem was revised in the series (case 8), and a long-stem cemented prosthesis was implanted. Stem revision and plate application was performed as a single stage procedure in this instance. Post-operative mobilisation instructions included at least six weeks of either non- or partial weight bearing. Documentation of compliance with weight bearing instructions was not formally recorded. Electronic searches using Cochrane Library, EMBASE, Medline and PubMed databases were used to identify published articles and studies to investigate the outcomes and complications arising from the use of the Dall-Miles cable and plate fixation system for periprosthetic femur fractures. MeSH terms and keywords included ‘Dall Miles’, ‘Dall-Miles cable and plate fixation system’, ‘bone plates’, ‘fracture fixation’, ‘periprosthetic femur fracture’, ‘periprosthetic femoral fracture’, ‘periprosthetic fractures’, ‘prosthesis failure’ and ‘failure rate’. Inclusion criteria were review articles published in English from 1990 up to and including November 2012. Nine published series  In the series from our institution, two patients were deceased prior to completion of follow-up (7%). One passed away at ten days, and a second at sixty-three days post-operatively. A third individual passed away 2 years and 5 months after surgery. Two patients were admitted to intensive care, and a further two to high dependency during the perioperative period. Median length of stay in the Trauma and Orthopaedic Department was 10 (5-91) days. Four biomechanical complications were noted. Two plates required further revision, one for plate fracture and another for broken distal screws. Two further fractures developed angulation in the post-operative period, resulting in varus malunion. One instance of screw fracture with construct failure occurred in a 77 year old female (Case 6), who presented with sudden onset of pain, but no history of trauma, four months after a Dall-Miles plate was applied for a Vancouver B1 fracture around a primary cemented Exeter arthroplasty. Distal cerclage wires were placed to salvage the fixation, which united without further complication. Osteoarthritis, rheumatoid arthritis and hypothyroidism comorbidities were noted. A second case involved painful loosening of the distal screws of the Dall-Miles plate for a Vancouver B1 fracture after a fall in an 87 year old female (Case 17), with a past medical history including a cardiac pacemaker, colostomy for perforated diverticular disease, and Charnley total hip replacement 13 years previously. Non-operative management resulted in an asymptomatic varus malunion of 15 degrees, and full weight bearing was possible ( One 64 year old female (Case 19) experienced a deep wound infection after fixation of Vancouver B1 fracture with a Dall-Miles plate, which necessitated intensive care. Her comorbidities included angina, hypertension, hypothyroidism, renal transplant, long-term corticosteroid therapy. At five months of follow up the proximal screws of the plate had dislodged, and a varus malunion of 25 degrees had developed. The patient declined further surgery, opting to retain mobility despite presence of infection. The only plate fracture occurred following fixation of an intra-operative Vancouver C fracture sustained during primary cemented Exeter total hip replacement in an 82 year old female (Case 25) with a history of breast and uterine carcinoma, radiation proctitis and hypertension. The Dall-Miles plate was applied during the initial surgery. At three and a half months from surgery the plate fractured without trauma. Revision plating was performed using iliac crest autograft and a second Dall-Miles plate, and the fracture united successfully. A further nine months of follow-up were completed. All failures occurred within the first six months after plating. Cortical strut grafts were not used in any cases. Periprosthetic fractures pose a biological and mechanical challenge to restoration of function. The proximal femur has responded to the insult of past reaming and medullary implantation, and remodelled. A fresh fracture increases the periosteal and endosteal bone metabolism. Periosteal devascularisation from circumferential cables and plate apposition restricts this biological response, in bone with an already occluded medullary canal. Application of relative stability via a cable plate construct may allow some stimulation of callus, but risks mechanical failure from weight bearing, in a population for whom early mobility is highly desirable. Occlusion of the femoral canal with a steel nail or inert silicone plug has been compared to reaming alone and to controls in rat femora without fractures. Cortical blood flow around medullary implants at 12 weeks was approximately double that of the reamed group and control groups Comparison of cadaveric fixations using Dall-Miles cable grip system, AO cable plate, and Zimmer Cable ready systems showed no significant differences between Plates In the case of a loose arthroplasty prosthesis, fractures can occur due to the stress riser effect of the prosthetic tip. Previous screw holes, osteotomies and variations in the femoral stress distribution as a result of developmental dysplasia of the hip predispose to fracture. Vancouver B1 synthetic femur fractures treated with the Ogden-type plate construct (distal bicortical screws with proximal cables and/or unicortical screws) in synthetic femurs with a 5 Femoral shaft stresses are large, and mild residual varus angulation (6-10 degrees) of the femur following fixation has shown a close association with non-union and malunion Biomechanical studies show that the Dall-Miles plate supplemented with allograft has additional stability to fixation with the plate alone The use of cortical strut allografts alone or with a plate has been shown to have similar complication rates to studies where plates are used, with one instance of non-union, four malunions and one deep infection among 40 patients Loose prostheses are usually revised as part of the fracture surgery, however some advocate early fracture fixation alone, with elective stem revision following fracture union The heterogeneity of original prostheses, comorbid conditions, mobility status and fracture classification in this population necessitates individualisation of treatment, but reduces the generalizability of outcomes. Variation in the number and position of cables and screws relative to the differing fractures confounds interpretation of results. The loss to follow-up in this study is partially offset by the high likelihood of any complications returning to the local institution, due to the large geographic catchment area for our institutional Trauma and Orthopaedic unit. Lindahl et al. series of 321 periprosthetic fractures report that 54 (17%) of 71 (22%) reoperations were performed within 12 months Union was achieved in 21 of 25 surviving cases (84%) using the Dall-Miles plate without strut allograft, reducing expense and risks associated with tissue implantation. However, complication rates remain high with periprosthetic Vancouver B1 fracture fixation, and innovations in surgical technique, implants or biological supplementation are necessary to optimise outcomes for this injury. none The authors would like to thank Mr MJ McCormack, Mr H McGee, Mr A Foster, Mr K Lappin, Mr A Ruiz and Mr S Simpson, Consultant Orthopaedic Surgeons in Altnagelvin Area Hospital, for contributing patients to the series. Thanks to Rosina Doherty-Allan, Altnagelvin Area Hospital Library, for assistance with literature review, and to Denise Pattison, Specialist Research Nurse, Altnagelvin Area Hospital, for providing prospectively gathered data from the trauma database.