Hard carbide cermets are prepared by in-situ synthesis and infiltration of metal melts into WC powder compacts. Ni–W and Ni–W–Cr metal melts are in-situ synthesized from thermite reactions and infiltrated into WC powder compacts under high-gravity. During the infiltration, W in the metal melts reacts with WC to form W2C, and more W2C and W are observed at the upper parts of the cermets than the lower parts. The cermets show a maximum hardness of 15.4GPa, which is higher than most commercial cemented carbides, although they are not fully dense and have a porosity of 15–20%.WC-based cermets have good combinations of hardness, strength, wear resistance, thermal shock resistance, and corrosion resistance, and are widely used for metal cutting, mining, oil drilling, and tunneling Besides furnace melting, an alternative way to produce metal melts is from thermite reactions (e.g. Fe In this paper, hard carbide cermets are prepared by in-situ synthesis and infiltration of Ni–W and Ni–W–Cr metal melts into WC powder compacts. A high-gravity field, which has been used in casting of ceramic materials Commercial powders of Al, NiO, WO The graphite crucible was mounted on a steel rotator in a closed reaction chamber. After the chamber was evacuated, the rotator was started and a high-gravity field with an acceleration of 800 The bulk density was calculated from weight and volume using samples with regular shapes. The Vickers hardness was measured by an indentation method with a load of 98  In the sample NiW-1, the nominal composition of the metal phase is (90 In the sample NiW-2, the nominal composition of the metal phase is (80 In the sample NiWCr, the nominal composition of the metal phase is (80 The difference in phase assemblage of the upper and lower parts of the cermets is connected with the temperature change of metal melts. When the metal melt is just produced, it is at a high temperature and has a higher concentration of W. During the infiltration in WC compacts, the temperature of the metal melt gradually decreases because of heat loss. With decreasing temperature, the solubility of W in the metal melt reduces and some W is precipitated. At the same time, W reacts with WC to form W The prepared cermets are not fully dense and contain small pores. As an example, the SEM images of the sample NiW-2 are shown in Although the prepared cermets are not fully dense, they show a high hardness up to 15.4 Hard cermets are prepared by in-situ synthesis and infiltration of metal melts into WC powder compacts. Ni–W and Ni–W–Cr metal melts are in-situ synthesized from thermite reactions and infiltrated into WC powder compacts under high-gravity. During the infiltration, W in the metal melt reacts with WC to form W This work is supported by