There are few studies on the management of open calcaneal fractures. These injuries have been managed by an array of different treatments Our case describes the use of bilateral ilizarov frames for open calcaneal fractures. A 36-year-old female attempted a seventy-five foot suicide jump. She sustained multiple injuries (burst fractures of the lumbar spine, open pelvic fractures and a hip fracture) as well as bilateral open comminuted fractures of the calcaneum ( Application of the Ilizarov frames was delayed until 1 week after the initial injury, due to significant co-morbidity. Similar constructs were used on each side. There was no evidence of infection at the time of application of the Ilizarov frames. Both fractures were classified using the Sanders computed tomography classification as grade four ( Two 140 After the procedure the patient was allowed to fully weight bear. During the early post-operative course she developed an isolated right-sided calcaneal pin site infection which was successfully treated with antibiotics. There was also a degree of skin necrosis but this settled without intervention. Otherwise there were no complications ( The frames were removed at 8 weeks in theatre following radiographic assessment and bilateral below knee walking plasters were applied for a further 6 weeks. X-rays at 14 weeks showed good evidence of healing and satisfactory bony architecture ( At 18 weeks the patient was fully ambulant, with good ankle movements and stiff, though pain-free, subtalar joints. The American Orthopaedic Foot and Ankle Society Scores were 49 bilaterally. Open fractures are demanding orthopaedic emergencies. Berry et al. performed a review of open fractures treated non-operatively or with open reduction and internal fixation. They showed that injuries with plantar wounds and significant comminution had the worst functional result. We have presented a case with bilateral complex open os calcis fractures with plantar wounds. Despite the poor prognostic indicators our case demonstrates that the early aggressive treatment of the soft tissues followed by minimally invasive reduction and stabilisation with an Ilizarov frame is a relatively safe treatment option for open calcaneal fractures.