I recently read, with great interest, a paper from Prof. Rubio's group entitled “Aqueous dispersions of nanobubbles: Generation, properties and features“ [Miner. Eng., 94 (2016) 29–37]. The authors should be congratulated on their detailed research related to nanobubble generation by hydrodynamic cavitation in air-supersaturated systems. To fully appreciate their work some of the results are discussed below ( The most incredible finding from the paper is that the sizes of nanobubbles generated can be even smaller than the critical equilibrium bubble size calculated from the classical nucleation theory (CNT). Based on the theory, for a given gas saturation pressure, there is a corresponding critical bubble diameter, d Since the saturation pressure was 2.5 bar, the calculated d Assume that virtually no pre-existing gas nuclei present in the tested de-ionized water. The water was air saturated for 30 min. at air saturation pressures of 2.5–5 bar. Since there was no turbulence or agitation during air saturation, there should be no any nanobubbles created in water ( Of course, such calculations and assumptions are over-simplified. In addition, there is no quantitative correlation established between dissolved air content and the critical diameter of cavity bubbles generated by hydrodynamic cavitation. It is also possible that the classical nucleation theory based on thermodynamic equilibrium conditions is not applicable to dynamic situations such as hydrodynamic cavitation. On the other hand, the obtained results indeed demonstrated that hydrodynamic cavitation, or dynamic bubble nucleation in air supersaturated systems, could produce nanobubbles with the sizes much smaller than those predicted from the classical nucleation theory under static and equilibrium conditions. The results further support the claims that nanobubble generation by hydrodynamic cavitation could occur at much milder conditions than the homogeneous bubble nucleation and prediction from the established theories ( The second interesting finding from the paper is that increasing air saturation pressure reduced the population of nanobubbles, which seemed to be contrary to conventional wisdom. It is known that a higher air saturation pressure could be used to produce more bubbles (50–300 μm) in dissolved air flotation. Also based on cavitation principle, a higher dissolved air content should intensify cavitation and generate more tiny bubbles, as has been demonstrated ( Increasing saturation pressure would reduce the energy barrier, ΔF, for bubble formation, thereby producing more smaller bubbles. In their experiments, a higher saturation pressure would result in faster water release through the needle valve, producing more cavities, other conditions being the same. More cavities could be survived and stabilized with a higher dissolved air content. Therefore, there should have had more nanobubbles formed at a higher saturation pressure. To reconcile such conflicting observations, it appeared that a higher dissolved air content and the formed more nanobubbles enhanced their coalescence to form more relatively larger microbubbles, thereby leading to a higher air holdup ( To evaluate the nanobubble generation efficiency, a theoretical value of nanobubble population under air saturation conditions can be calculated for comparison. The actual amount of air dissolved in water at 21.1 °C (70 °F) and 2.5 bar at equilibrium is about: V The third interesting finding is that from the attached photos of bubble-particle attachment ( a flotation size bubble generated in a slurry, and then directly attaches to a particle; a tiny bubble generated in a slurry, and then attaches to a particle, followed by a flotation size bubble attaching to the particle-tiny bubble aggregate via coalescing with the tiny bubbles on the particles; tiny bubbles directly nucleated, or “frosted” on a particle, followed by a flotation size bubble attaching to the particle via coalescing tiny bubbles “frosted” on the particle. While the first is the slowest attachment process, nanobubble nucleation on a particle should be faster than a nanobubble generated in a slurry and then attaching to a particle. Besides a longer time for a nanobubble generated in the slurry to contact with a particle, nanobubble ageing would also reduce the nanobubble attaching to the particle and its coalescence with a flotation size bubble. Effect of tiny bubble ageing on interfering bubble-bubble coalescence (or bubble-particle attachment) has been confirmed, with a longer induction time for an aged tiny bubble coalescing with a flotation size bubble, as compared with fresh ones ( It should be emphasized here that generating nanobubbles in mineral/coal flotation by hydrodynamic cavitation is not the final goal but the means to assist flotation size bubbles to attach to hydrophobic particles. One of the advantages of nanobubble generation by hydrodynamic cavitation is in-situ nanobubble nucleation on fine hydrophobic particles, which is a much faster process than a bubble attaching to a solid particle. Although the authors tried to use the photos to address the importance of the presence of nanobubbles in enhancing bubble-solid attachment, it was still difficult to tell the difference, at least not obvious (