The flotation column is a multivariable process whose main control objective is to guarantee the metallurgical yield set for the process operation, expressed by the grade and the recovery of the valuable mineral in the concentrate. From the control technique standview, the three controlled variables, which severely affect the grade and the recovery in the flotation column, are the froth layer height, the air holdup in the collection zone and the bias. Three manipulated variables, namely wash water, air and non-floated fraction flowrates, are selected to keep the three controlled variables in stable operating conditions. A 3×3 transfer function matrix is used for representing the dynamics of this process. By using this transfer function matrix, an analysis technique based on the relative gain array is employed to determine the interaction between the variables and to help in the choice of proper pairing between controlled and manipulated variables. With the help of that analysis, the corresponding PI controllers are designed. In order to validate the proposed control strategies, the controllers are tested in a pilot-scale plant, at first for water–air operation and then for ore operation.The control of multiple-input, multiple-output processes is a complex problem since interactions may occur among controlled and manipulated variables. In general, a change in a specific manipulated variable affects more than one controlled variable. It is known that, because of the process interactions, the selection of the best pairing of controlled and manipulated variables is a determining factor for the success of the process control. Since one of the specific control objectives in the column flotation process is to keep the froth layer height ( Some papers present results of control strategies applied to column flotation process. Since there are different strategies to control specifically the bias and the froth layer height, and assuming that an incorrect pairing of controlled and manipulated variables may result in poor control system performance and reduced stability margins ( In this work, the RGA method has been applied to measure the interaction degree between process variables and to obtain the best pairing of controlled and manipulated variables. In addition, a simplified representation of the process dynamics has been obtained from experimental data. A control strategy was designed to be implemented in a multiloop PI control scheme and tested in a pilot-scale column first for air–water operation, and later for ore operation. Finally, to show the validity of this strategy, some experimental results are presented and discussed. The pilot flotation column used in the experiments performed here is composed of a transparent acrylic tube with The wash water flowrate is measured by means of an electromagnetic flowmeter (FT-03), with integral orifice assembly, and controlled by a pneumatic valve (XC-01). The air flowrate is measured by a mass flowmeter (FT-04), and controlled by a pneumatic valve (XC-02). The pulp feeding is controlled by means of a peristaltic pump with variable speed capability coupled with a frequency inverter. The non-floated flowrate is also controlled by a variable speed peristaltic pump (SC-01) driven by a frequency inverter. The pressure measurements ( The instruments are all connected to a data acquisition system ( From a control technique standpoint, the controlled variables considered in this paper are the froth layer height The froth layer height is inferred from the measured pressures and is given by The air holdup in the recovery zone is calculated as The bias is calculated from the mass balance equation ( The RGA, denoted by The RGA has two important properties ( The dynamic model developed by  These considerations apply to the situation where the manipulated variables are the wash water, the air and the non-floated fraction flowrates. In reality, the actual manipulated variables are the control signals sent, respectively, to the peristaltic pump for the non-floated ( Several experiments were performed aimed at determining the transfer functions between the flowrates and control signals. From the analysis of the corresponding data, the functions that, in steady state, best describe the relationship between each pair are ( By analysing since the value of the element the other elements of the negative values of the elements the value of the elements The RGA is also useful for defining the best pairing between the manipulated and the controlled variables. The original recommendation for controller pairing is to pair the controlled and manipulated variables so that the corresponding relative gains are positive and as close as possible to one ( to control the froth layer height by manipulating to control the air holdup in the collection zone by manipulating to control the bias by manipulating As previously stated, the analysis of the RGA for the steady-state condition shows that the interactions among the control loops are not strong. Therefore, it is possible to design a multiloop control strategy considering that the process is decoupled, and to treat each loop as if they were a single input, single output (SISO) system. The implementation of this multiloop control strategy requires, firstly, the determination of the transfer functions by representing the flotation process as a decoupled model and, secondly, the decision on the type of controllers to be used and on the performance specifications of the closed-loop system. An efficient and simple control system for a decoupled flotation process is illustrated in The model developed so far is not suitable for process control purposes, as the inputs are not the actual control signals that are sent to the actuators. However, for those purposes, a simple decoupled model of a flotation column can be derived, in which the froth layer height and the air holdup in the collection zone are represented as first-order transfer functions plus time delays, and the bias only as a gain. Such a model is possible, provided the following assumptions are valid: the models are appropriate for low frequencies, since the RGA analysis is valid under steady-state conditions; the feed flowrate is constant allowing the bias to be represented as changes in the air flowrate are slow; in this case, the non-minimum phase characteristic which dominates the response of the froth layer height (reported in a given change in one of the control signals the variations of the input flowrates are constrained to the range: This range guarantees that the column is never empty, and that the froth layer is always present ( The continuous representation in the Laplace domain that best describes the input/output decoupling relationships can then be written as The gains are determined by taking into account the input (manipulated variable) and output (controlled variable) average values measured in periods of time immediately prior to the step change and after the process reaches the steady-state condition. The time constants and the time delays are determined by using the integrals of the input Several experiments have been performed to estimate the parameters Considering the range of variation of the estimated parameters, the best model for the air holdup in the collection zone is   The development of a first-order model for the froth layer height is particularly difficult. Firstly, because the limits imposed by Due to the difficulties just mentioned, only a few experiments were performed to estimate the parameters concerning the froth layer height model. From other experiments, including those in which the limits imposed by The bias steady-state value in a water–air system is given by Considering the results of the RGA analysis, a simple and effective strategy for controlling the froth layer height and the air holdup in the collection zone is to design two decoupled feedback PI controllers The PI parameters for the Since the transfer functions for the air holdup in the collection zone ( The time constant for the closed-loop air holdup in the collection zone was constrained by the limit imposed to the manipulated variable. As already mentioned, changes in the air flowrate are intentionally limited to small values (as the effect of the non-minimum phase on the froth layer height caused by these changes was not considered in the control strategy). In view of these constraints, the closed loop time constant was determined as The software implementation of the PI controllers was based on the algorithm and practical considerations proposed by The designed PI controllers ( The control strategy was based on both a model and a set of experiments in which the column has been fed with a water solution of a frother (Flotanol D14B, an etherpolyalkylethyleneglycol). The feed flowrate was The experiment for ore operation followed the same pattern adopted for water–air operation. Therefore, the column was firstly adjusted to operate in a stable condition and, then, the set points of the controlled variables were changed. The main objective of this experiment was to verify if a controller design for water–air operation is also useful for ore operation. Preliminary closed-loop experiments showed that the froth layer height response did not respond as specified by the time constant parameter,  In the experimental run shown in At time The signal Finally, The performance of the closed-loop response can also be analysed by comparing the actual measured values of the controlled variables to the simulated response for which the parameters were specified for the closed-loop behaviour. This can be seen in To evaluate the controller performance two metrics were used: the standard deviation  The results, shown in Comparing the control for the froth layer height in the time window between Though the models and the controllers were developed for water–air operation, a test in which the pilot plant was fed with ore was made. The goal of this test is to check the behaviour of the controlled variables and to verify the changes in the parameters of the derived model and of the designed controllers. The composition of the sample was 95% Mineral A and 5% Mineral B; the solids feed rate was The set points for ore operation were initially chosen to be The validity of the control strategy can be verified in The bias values were not indicated in the experiment shown in The experimental run is shown in  Taking into account the data of the whole experiment, the values for the froth layer height ( During the experiment shown in The first sample was collected at around time In order to directly control the grade and the recovery, it is necessary that measurements of these quantities be available. However, on-line measurements of the grade and the recovery do not present the required accuracy to directly control them. Furthermore, the number of manipulated variables would be extremely high compared to the two degrees of freedom associated with the controlled variables ( The control strategy designed for operation in a water–air system proved to be useful for ore operation, stabilizing the froth layer height and the holdup in the collection zone. Therefore, this strategy can be used in a cascade control where a supervisory system defines the set points for these two controlled variables. To improve the grade and recovery performances, appropriate changes in the reagent dosage, or in the mean value of the wash water flowrate, for example, can be established by a supervisory system without destabilizing the process controlled by the two decoupled PI. The modelling and design methodology used in this work proved to be an excellent tool for developing a control strategy for the column flotation process. The degree of interaction between controlled and manipulated variables was assessed through the RGA method, which in turn demonstrated that there is a low degree of interaction between control loops in the range of values tested for the process variables. That method also showed that the best way for controlling the column flotation process is pairing the froth layer height and the signal sent to the wash water valve; the air holdup in the collection zone and the signal sent to the air valve; and, finally, the bias and the signal sent to the peristaltic pump for the non-floated. The knowledge of the degree of interaction among the control loops allowed the development of a decoupling multiloop control system, in which each loop was individually designed using PI controllers. The validity of the methodology used was checked through experimental results. For both water–air and ore operation cases, the dynamic behaviour of the flotation column under control met the most important features for a closed-loop system. Therefore, the use of water–air operation for modelling the flotation process and for designing the controllers resulted in good controllers also for ore operation. The authors acknowledge the technical support provided by