In this paper, a comprehensive model is derived to analyze the dynamic behavior of a multi-cable double drum winding mining hoister with flexible guides by using Hamilton principle. Each cable which consists of an inclined section and a varying length vertical section is modeled as an axially moving string with coupled transverse-longitudinal nonlinear vibration. The coupling between different cables is described through the dynamic and kinematic equations of the conveyance. The time-varying equal moment of inertia of drums is obtained by considering the varying mass of cables winding on drums. The model of flexible guides which was always approximated as a spring-damping system is modeled as a tensioned string with fixed ends in this paper. The dynamic characteristics of flexible guides are considered in the interaction between the conveyance and the flexible guides via calculating the lateral displacement of the conveyance corner and reaction forces from flexible guides. The dynamic behavior of the multi-cable double drum winding hoister with unbalance factors, the conveyance eccentricity and the drum radius inconformity, are analyzed by simulation. Some design principles are proposed to restrict the inconformity of dynamic tension between cables.Longitudinal elastic displacement of the Transverse elastic displacement of the Longitudinal elastic displacement of the Transverse elastic displacement of the Radius of the drums. Radius of the head sheaves. Inertia moment of the drum. Inertia moment of the conveyance. Time-varying equal inertia moment of the drums. Target hoisting velocity. Target hoisting acceleration. Longitudinal velocity of the conveyance centroid. Transverse velocity of the conveyance centroid. Angle of the conveyance. Cross-sectional area. Young's modulus. Static tension in the catenary section of the Static tension in the vertical section of the Dynamic tension in the catenary section of the Dynamic tension in the vertical section of the Gravity force of the conveyance. Initial length of the vertical cable. Longitudinal acceleration of the conveyance centroid. Transverse acceleration of the conveyance centroid. Time-varying length of the vertical section in the Length of the catenary section in the Length of the flexible guides. Equal load of the ith cable. Eccentricity from the mass center of the conveyance. Distance between the Counterforce from the left flexible guide. Counterforce from the right flexible guide. Transverse damping coefficient of the catenary rope. Longitudinal damping coefficient of the catenary rope. Transverse damping coefficient of the vertical rope. Longitudinal damping coefficient of the vertical rope. Damping coefficient between the cable and the head sheave. Length of the sticking zone at the head sheave. Angle between the catenary rope and horizontal plane. Pretension of the flexible guide. Young's modulus of the flexible guide. Cross-sectional area of the flexible guide. Position of the conveyance centroid on the flexible guide. Transverse elastic displacement of the left flexible guide at Transverse elastic displacement of the right flexible guide at With the increasing focus on exploitation of deep mineral resources, stable design and operation reliability of hoisters for long distance transport have received increasing attention. The hoisters are used to transport mineral resources in deep mines to the surface platform. To improve the efficiency, the hoisters for long distance transport would work in high-speed and heavy-load conditions There are not many researches focusing on dynamic modeling of mining winding hoisters. Mathematically, the dynamic model of the hoister is similar with winding elevators. A transverse vibration model of an elevator with arbitrarily varying length was proposed in The literatures on the dynamic modeling of the multi-cable double drum winding hoisters are scarce. Recently, a model of double drum winding mine hoister was proposed by Kaczmarczyk and Ostachowicz In addition, dynamic interactions between the conveyance and the flexible guides plays an important role in deep mine exploitation. Counterforce of flexible guides would affect the stability of the conveyance moving at high speed considerably. The elastic support of flexible guides was always approximate as a spring-damping system in the previous researches. Garkusha and Dvornikov In this paper, the dynamic model of a multi-cable double drum winding hoister with flexible guides is derived via Hamilton principle, considering the coupling between different cables through the dynamic and kinematic equations of the conveyance. Each cable is built as a transverse-longitudinal vibration axially moving string which consists of an inclined section and a time-varying length vertical section. The two sections are coupled at head sheave and the friction between cables and head sheave are considered as well. Considering the mass of cables winding on drums would vary in a wide range for the long-distance hoister, the equal time-varying inertia moment of the drums is obtained. In addition, the model of flexible guides is built as a tensioned string and the dynamic characteristics of flexible guides are considered in the interaction between the flexible guides and the conveyance. In this hoister system, four groups of nonlinear partial differential equations (PDEs) govern the coupled longitudinal and transverse vibration of two cables with two sections. The infinite dimensional distributed-parameter system is discretized by the Finite Difference Method. The effects of the conveyance eccentricity and the radius inconformity between drums on the dynamic behavior of a multi-cable double drum winding mining hoister with flexible guides are investigated under the high-speed, heavy-load conditions. Several design principles have been proposed to restrict the inconformity of dynamic tension between different cables. Comprehensive modeling and dynamic behavior analysis of the multi-cable double drum winding hoister system are significant to the exploitation of deep mineral resources. To our knowledge, the researches on comprehensive modeling of the multi-cable double drum winding hoisters, including the coupling between cables, time-varying inertia moment of drums and dynamic characteristics of the flexible guides have not been performed. The main contributions of this article are summarized as follows: The dynamic model of the multi-cable winding mining hoister with double drums is built. Coupling between different cables is described through the dynamic and kinematic equations of the conveyance. The time-varying equal inertia moment of drums is included in this model via considering the varying mass of cables winding on the drums. The flexible guide which was always approximate as a spring-damping system is modeled as a tensioned string with fixed ends in this paper. Dynamic characteristics of flexible guides are considered in the mathematical description of the interaction behavior between the conveyance and the flexible guides. Some design principles to restrict the inconformity of dynamic tension between different cables of the multi-cable double drum winding mining hoister are proposed. The rest of this paper is organized as follows. In A typical multi-cable winding hoister with double drums is showed in Cables connect with a conveyance which contacts with two tensioned flexible guides, showed in where The dynamic responses of hoisting cables are usually classified as lateral and longitudinal vibrations in the catenary and the vertical ropes The relationship of the conveyance position The position and velocities of the mass center of the conveyance can be expressed as The longitudinal velocities of ends of cables are approximated as the sum of hoisting and vibration velocities The geometric non-linear characteristics are considered for the tension-strain relation in the string by adopting the von Karman strain theory The dynamic tension in cables is expressed as spatially varying tension The weight component parallel to the catenary section is considered. The static tension The equal load According to the Hamilton's principle Using the Buckingham pi theorem Eqs. The system boundary conditions at drums and head sheaves are obtained as Eq.  For the more accurate modeling of the drums, According to Coulomb's Law According to Eqs. Signed The fixed ends can be represented as The mathematical model of the multi-cable winding hoister with double drums is an infinite dimensional distributed-parameter system. There are not accurate analytic solutions. In this paper, the approximate solution of the govern equations of the multi-cable winding hoister with double drums can be obtained by using the Finite Difference Method The lengths of vertical rope The derivatives of The differential of where The The longitudinal and transverse elastic displacements of the catenary and vertical ropes at the initial moment ( By using the Taylor's series, the Substituting the expressions (41–45) into the dynamic model (24) and (25), the discrete model of catenary ropes can be expressed as The current longitudinal and transverse dimensionless elastic displacements The fixed domain variables Spatial variables of the flexible guide are discretized as The position point The mathematical model is used to predict and analyze the dynamic behavior of a multi-cable double drum winding hoister under the ultra-deep, high-speed, heavy-load conditions. Typical parameters of the multi-cable winding double drum hoister for long distance transport used in simulation are showed in The initial transverse displacements of cables are defined as zeros. The longitudinal elastic displacements of the catenary and vertical ropes are defined as Eqs. In this section, the dynamic behaviors of the hoister in the ascending cycle are showed, because vibration energy of cables would increase in the upward movement The conveyance eccentricity and drum radius inconformity are applied into the hoister as the unbalance factors. The vibration response and dynamic tension in cables would be observed. In the practical mine engineering, the conveyance eccentricity appears frequently in the process of loading. It is an important factor to the instabilities of the hoister system, especially for the multi-cable winding hoisters used in long distance transport. The dynamic responses of the hoister with 0.05 It can be observed from According to It is showed in A principle can be obtained from Inconformity radius of driving drums is a common phenomenon in winding hoisters due to the errors of mechanical process. It would result to the enlargement of tension inconformity between cables. The dynamic responses of the hoister under 0.05mm drum radius inconformity are showed in According to According to From In this paper, the model of a multi-cable winding hoister with double drums has been built via Hamilton principle, which is a strong coupled, time varying, nonlinear distributed-parameter system. Each cable which consists of the catenary and vertical ropes is modeled as the axially moving string with the coupled transverse-longitudinal nonlinear vibration. The catenary and vertical ropes are represented as the constant-length inclined string and the varying-length vertical string respectively and they are coupled at the head sheave. The friction between the cable and the sheave is also considered at the head sheave. Coupling between different cables are described through the dynamic and kinematic equations of the conveyance. The time-varying equal inertia moment of winding drums is obtained by considering varying mass of the cables winding on the drums. In addition, the dynamic model of the flexible guide which was always approximated as a spring-damping system is built as a tensioned string with two fixed ends in this paper. The dynamic characteristics of interaction between the flexible guides and the conveyance are considered in the modeling through calculating the lateral displacement of the conveyance corner and the reactions forces from flexible guides. The Finite Difference Method is adopted to discretize this infinite dimensional distributed-parameter model and the approximate solution is obtained. The conveyance eccentricity and drum radius inconformity are applied into the model of the hoister as the unbalance factors in simulation. The coupled transverse-longitudinal vibration and the dynamic tension of cables in the multi-cable winding hoister are analyzed under the long-distance, high-speed, heave-load condition. Some dynamic behavior of vibration and tension in cables are observed. The maximum amplitude of the longitudinal vibration is larger than that of the transverse vibration at the midpoint of the vertical rope. Adversely, the maximum amplitude of longitudinal vibration is smaller than that of transverse vibration at the midpoint of the catenary rope. In the case of the drum radius inconformity, the inconformity of dynamic tension increases gradually in the upward movement. In both cases of the conveyance eccentricity and the drum radius inconformity, the inconformity of dynamic tension between cables will rise substantially in later of the upward movement. Some principles on the inconformity of dynamic tension between different cables have been proposed. For a similar size multi-cable winding hoister in the mining engineering, the conveyance eccentricity and the drum radius inconformity should be restricted in less 0.013 The authors gratefully acknowledge the fund support from the