Nickel, cobalt and iron were extracted from Caldag lateritic nickel ore under atmospheric pressure acidic leaching conditions. The following variables were examined to understand their effects on extraction: sulphuric acid concentration, liquid-to-solid ratio, leaching temperature, leaching time, and particle size. After 6h of leaching, 91.9% Ni, 93.5% Co and 80.5% Fe were obtained under the following conditions: 2M H2SO4, 90°C, liquid-to-solid ratio=10/1(mL/g), stirring speed=500rpm, and laterite particles <0.053mm. The results indicated that there is no benefit gained in the leaching of nickel by grinding finer than 0.150mm under the conditions explored, whereas the greatest cobalt extraction was achieved with the use of the finest particles. XRD and SEM–EDX results verified that nickel was associated with asbolane, goethite/hematite and clay-like mineral phases. In addition, kinetic analyses of the nickel extraction revealed an activation energy of 51.6kJ/mol.Nickel is a strategic metal of vital importance in modern industrial and metallurgical applications. Nickel naturally occurs in two forms, sulphides and laterites. The depletion of high-grade nickel sulphide ores, high cost of fuels and implementation dictate the future production of nickel from lateritic nickel ores. Lateritic nickel ore deposits are surficial, weathered rinds formed on ultramafic rocks. Land-based nickel resources of approximately 1% have been discovered to contain roughly 130 million tons of nickel. About 60% is in laterites and 40% is in sulphide deposits. Manganese crusts and nodules on the ocean floor also contain considerable resources of nickel ( Recently, several new technologies with different advantages have been developed for the dissolution of nickel and cobalt bearing ores, including sulphation atmospheric leaching (SAL), enhanced pressure acid leaching (EPAL), starved acid leaching technology (SALT), hydrochloric acid leaching, bioleaching of oxide ores and the direct nickel process (DNi) ( Atmospheric pressure acid leaching is one of the three common hydrometallurgical processes used to extract nickel and cobalt from lateritic nickel ores on industrial scales. High pressure acid leaching (HPAL) and heap leaching (HL) processes offer some advantages in terms of the leaching processes, but they also have several disadvantages, such as large capital expenditure for the construction of the leaching equipment, excess free sulphuric acid required, maintenance of the bed permeability under acidic leaching conditions, control of the acid consumption, inventory and cycle time management, and water management ( During atmospheric pressure acid leaching, metals are typically extracted from lateritic nickel ores through solubilisation by mineral acids to partially or completely extract the nickel, cobalt, iron and other soluble metals. This process is carried out at just below 100 The main task of this study was to investigate the extraction of nickel, cobalt and iron from Caldag lateritic nickel ore using sulphuric acid under atmospheric conditions to understand the effect of sulphuric acid concentration, liquid-to-solid ratio, leaching temperature, leaching time, and particle size. The lateritic nickel ore used through this study was provided by the Caldag pilot plant in Turkey. The particle size of the ore sample was first reduced to − Prior to experimentation, the specific gravity of a ground ore samples were measured with a Quantachrome multipycnometer (Quantachrome Instruments, Florida, USA) using helium gas. The specific surface areas were determined using the Blaine test method. The chemical compositions of the different size fractions of lateritic nickel ore were analyzed on a Philips PW-2404 X-ray fluorescence spectrometer (XRF). The wt.% of nickel, cobalt and iron were determined on a Thermo Scientific 3300 atomic absorption spectrophotometer (AAS) after digestion of the lateritic nickel ores in hot aqua regia (3:1, HCl:HNO The leaching tests were performed in a 250 In the leaching tests, 95–97 The specific gravity, surface area and porosity results of the samples were given in The effect of the liquid-to-solid ratio on the nickel, cobalt and iron extractions was evaluated at 10/1, 10/2 and 10/3 (v/w) at 90 A series of leaching experiments was conducted with different sulphuric acid concentrations at 90 The leaching curves of nickel, cobalt and iron at different temperatures are shown in The effect of particle size on extraction was studied at 90 The reaction between a fluid and a solid can be written as A(aq) The fraction of metal reactant (X) was calculated using Eq. Temperature significantly affected the apparent rate constant in Eq. Nickel, cobalt and iron were extracted from Caldag lateritic nickel ores with excellent extractions under atmospheric pressure acidic leaching conditions. The effects of four experimental variables were evaluated. After leaching experiments, the maximum extraction in this study was achieved under the following conditions: 2 This work was supported by the