Mine fires are a major problem in global coal mining industry and most of them are caused by spontaneous combustion that needs proper attention in strategic planning. The operational management must pay attention to an inbuilt system management for timely detection at the initial stage prior to devastating effect. To assess the spontaneous combustion liability of coal, intrinsic properties and susceptibility indices play a vital role. Forty-nine in-situ coal samples were collected from different coalfields of India. Experimentation of the samples was carried out for proximate, ultimate, and petrographic analysis; crossing point temperature; flammability temperature; Olpinski index; wet oxidation potential analysis; and differential thermal analysis to ascertain the proneness of coal to spontaneous combustion. From the statistical analysis of the samples, it was established that the parameters of the ultimate analysis show significant correlation with Olpinski index as compared to other susceptibility indices and, hence, it can be used as a reliable index to assess the susceptibility of Indian coals to spontaneous combustion.Fire due to spontaneous combustion is a perennial danger in global coal mining industry. It may be exogenous or endogenous in origin. Mine fires in Indian coalfields, whether surface or underground, are caused by spontaneous combustion (endogenous fires) of coal, and extend from seam to seam. Several methods have been devised by academicians, scientists, researchers, etc., across the globe to assess the liability of coal to spontaneous combustion. Coal reacts with oxygen in the air, and an exothermic reaction occurs, even in ambient conditions. The heat of the reaction accumulates, and the reaction becomes progressively faster and thermal runaway may take place to the point of ignition Pattanaik et al. Sample collection sites were selected with practically no dirt bands in order to maintain uniformity, covering more or less the same area. The channel sampling method was used to collect forty-nine non-coking and coking in-situ coal samples from various sites covering major coalfields of India viz., Western Coalfields Limited (WCL), Mahanadi Coalfields Limited (MCL), South Eastern Coalfields Limited (SECL), Singareni Collieries Company Limited (SCCL), North Eastern Coalfields Limited (NEC), Northern Coalfields Limited (NCL), Indian Iron and Steel Company (IISCO), Bharat Coking Coal Limited (BCCL), and Tata Iron and Steel Company Limited (TISCO) as per Indian Standard IS: 436(Part-I/Section I)–1964 To assess the liability of coals to spontaneous combustion, it is important to investigate the intrinsic properties by proximate analysis, ultimate analysis, and petrographic analysis as well as to determine susceptibility indices viz.: Crossing point temperature (CPT), Olpinski index (Sza), wet oxidation potential analysis, flammability temperature (FT), and differential thermal analysis (DTA). Proximate analysis involves the determination of parameters namely, moisture (M), volatile matter (VM), ash (A), and fixed carbon (FC) for the collected coal samples following Indian Standard IS: 1350 (Part-I) – 1984 An elemental composition such as carbon, hydrogen, sulphur, and oxygen for the collected coals were determined using CHNS elemental analyzer following the standard procedure Coal is a rock composed of number of distinct organic entities called macerals and lesser known amounts of an inorganic substance called as minerals. Each maceral has a different set of property, and it influences the behavior of coal. The macerals such as vitrinite (V), liptinite (L), inertinite (I), and visible mineral matter can be identified using a Leitz Orthoplan-Pol Microscope. Petrographic analyses of coal samples were carried as per the procedure laid down by the International Committee on Coal and Organic Petrography The Crossing point temperature is lowest temperature at which the coal temperature coincides with that of the furnace/bath ( Coal oxidation leading to an immediate formation of surface oxides, followed by the formation of colloidal humic acids and finally to small aromatic and aliphatic acids in an alkaline medium is a stepwise process. It has been found that alkaline permanganate oxidation of different coals produces carbonic, acetic, oxalic, and many benzene carboxylic acids It is a quick method of categorization using wet oxidation apparatus ( Liquid quinoline was heated in an electric oven to boil gently at a temperature of 230 The ignition temperature of a coal decreases with increasing oxidation of coal and the difference between the ignition temperature of coal before and after oxidation can be used as a measure of the susceptibility of the coal to spontaneous combustion. The flammability temperature is the minimum temperature at which the coal begins to ignite The differential thermal analysis is a useful tool to measure qualitative and quantitative heat changes of any physico-chemical transitions About 0.6 The results of the investigated intrinsic properties viz., parameters of proximate analysis, elements of ultimate analysis, and the macerals of petrographic analysis are summarized in The results of the petrographic analysis are summarized in In the ultimate analysis, coals containing higher oxygen are more prone to spontaneous combustion Multivariate analysis has been carried out on the combined parameters of the proximate analysis (M, VM, and Ash) on air dried basis, ultimate analysis (C, H, and O) on dry ash free basis, and the macerals of petrographic analysis (V, L, and I) on air dried basis with the investigated susceptibility indices. From the results shown in Statistical analysis shows that CPT, FT, Δ The following findings are drawn from the present investigations: Multivariate statistical analysis reveals that CPT and ultimate analysis show significant correlation coefficient (0.99), less standard error (0.13), and less variance (0.01) and can be used to predict the spontaneity of coal to auto-oxidation. Further it can be inferred that Olpinski index with proximate and ultimate analysis show significant correlation coefficient (0.95 and 0.96) and can also be used as one of the alternative approaches for prediction. There was no significant correlation between macerals and any of the susceptibility indices due to high standard error. Olpinski index is much quicker and provides better results as compared to CPT and can be used for categorization of coals. An increase of moisture and VM content enhance the liability of coal to spontaneous combustion. Vitrinite reflectance, Ro(max) values were higher for coking coal samples (higher rank) and ranged between 1.1% and 1.23%; whereas, it varied between 0.4% and 0.75% for non-coking coals (lower rank) in the investigated coal samples. Hence, Ro(max) can also be used as a rank indicator for the coal samples. From the statistical analysis, it could be also inferred that the susceptibility of Indian coals to spontaneous combustion decreases with the increase of ultimate carbon and hydrogen and increases with high oxygen content in coals. The flammability temperature, Wet oxidation potential, and DTA studies used to assess the spontaneous combustibility character indicated that there is no significant correlation with the intrinsic properties. The laboratory study reveals that all the coking coals (IISCO-1, IISCO-2, BCCL-1, and TISCO-1) are poorly susceptible to spontaneous combustion. The collected coals are categorized into three categories based on fire risk rating of CPT and Olpinski index (