It is a challenge to achieve fast altitude control for hypersonic flight due to the inherently insufficient sensitivity of air density to the near-space altitudes. A dominant open-loop feedforward term and a minor altitude error correction term are combined together to obtain the elevation angle command in this paper. A cascade control strategy is used to calculate the elevation command while ensuring the attitude stability. Moreover, an extended state observer is employed to achieve precise and robust attitude control simultaneously, and a stability margin tester is used to tune the controller explicitly. Extensive simulations are conducted to validate the effectiveness, robustness and measurement noise sensitivity of the proposed method.In the past two decades, hypersonic vehicles have attracted worldwide attention in aerospace industry ( No matter which optimization approach is employed, the resulted trajectory is usually expressed as a function of altitude. There are two typical kinds of altitude commands from the trajectory optimization. The first kind of altitude command is to make the hypersonic vehicle fly to a cruising altitude from a specific initial altitude as soon as possible subject to multiple process constraints, such as acceleration and angle of attack. The conventional steady-state cruise is the simplest paradigm in the sense of optimality; and this two-degree-of-freedom (2-DOF) trajectory in terms of altitude and velocity results in a realizable guidance law at the loss of a certain range. This scenario is usually encountered in the boost phase to meet the scramjet transition requirement ( There are many research results on the altitude control for hypersonic vehicles and they could be divided into three categories, i.e. cascade control, direct altitude control, and full-state feedback control. The cascade control philosophy is generally used in practice, wherein the inner loop copes with the short-period rotational variables (the angular variables) and the outer loop deals with the long-period translational variable. In this scheme, the error of the long-period variable is served as the command of the short-period variable in the inner loop. In the literature, the most popularly used approaches for the cascade framework are dynamic inversion ( In this paper, a comprehensive fast altitude tracking philosophy is proposed for hypersonic vehicles. At first, the altitude kinematic equations in terms of flight range are derived in order to design the altitude command. Then, a theoretical elevation angle command is obtained using these equations without triggering any mathematical singularity and importing any uncertainties, and can be served as a feedforward term. Then a practical elevation angle command is obtained by adding a tiny altitude error feedback term. To realize precise altitude tracking, a cascade control structure is employed, and it includes a PI elevation angle control and a disturbance observer based pitch control. Here, a linear extended state observer (LESO) based active disturbance rejection control (ADRC) is utilized to attenuate the adverse effects of aerodynamic uncertainties and avoid complicated modeling process. To facilitate the tuning of attitude controller, the stability margin tester is used to determine the control parameters graphically. The effectiveness of the proposed method is verified through extensive numerical simulations. The remaining parts of the paper are organized as follows. In Section In this study, a hypersonic vehicle model is used for designing the guidance and control law of the cruising phase. For the sake of brevity, the rotational model of the Earth is ignored without affecting the essence of the problem because it can only affect flight range rather than the altitude and the attitude. Moreover, the effect from the rotational angular rate of the Earth is less than several orders of magnitude than that of aerodynamic forces and thus the effects of the Earth rotation can be ignored when we merely investigate the flight control problem. The dynamic model can be described as Here, the well-known winged-cone hypersonic model is employed with slight modifications ( The elevator dynamics can be depicted as For simplicity, we assume that In this paper, two kinds of altitude commands are to be tracked. One is a periodic command  The frequently used constant altitude command is the ascent trajectory in the boost phase. Due to the characteristics of aerodynamics and thrust data in this paper, only the descent trajectory is implemented due to space limitations. The proposed philosophy can still be applied to the ascent trajectory in the boost phase with minor modifications. In general, the guidance law provides a command for the flight control. Hence, the regulated variable should be determined carefully to obtain a feasible solution. Here, ‘feasible’ implies that the guidance command should make the control design readily achieve certain tracking accuracy. In fact, the altitude command is robust against various uncertainties. However, the direct control lag of the hypersonic flight altitude is quite significant ( Although it is effective and fast, the feedforward strategy cannot guarantee long-term accuracy due to various uncertainties and control errors. For example, the spherical and rotational factors of the Earth as well as aerodynamic coefficients are major sources of uncertainties. They can cause slow drift of the altitude For the step altitude command of In Although the response of In this section, we attempt to utilize an extended state observer to design the attitude controller, which should achieve good control performance and strong robustness to multiple uncertainties simultaneously. Then, the stability margin tester is employed to tune the controller explicitly. The aerodynamic uncertainties are the most crucial factors that should be considered in the attitude controller design. Furthermore, the thrust may be in a bang–bang or on–off mode to improve the fuel efficiency during periodic cruise: the power is switched off during the descent phase and the power is switched on during the ascent phase. In this process, the impulsive perturbation from the power switch is unavoidable and the attitude controller should be especially robust against this kind of perturbation besides the aerodynamic uncertainties. Note that the fuel optimization strategy is beyond the scope of this paper.  Because the elevator dynamics Consider the dynamic equation of the pitch angular rate In summary, the pitch attitude control law is The ESO based controller is active disturbance rejection control (ADRC) (  In the above pitch attitude control design, the static gain, An explicit tuning rule is necessary if a control algorithm could be accepted by practitioners ( In Conventionally the linearized small-perturbation model around a trimming point can be obtained as ( Combining There are four tunable parameters in the pitch attitude controller:   In the tuning process, a linearized dynamic plant is needed to calculate the stability margins. This is only a guideline for tuning rather than a necessary step in the controller design. As already mentioned, the linear attitude controller can be obtained directly from the nonlinear dynamics. In this section, some simulations are carried out to validate the efficiency of the proposed method. The simulation is conducted using C language. The Euler integration is employed to obtain the states of the flight vehicle with an integral step of 1 ms. The control sampling interval is specified as 5 ms, which is a default value in aerospace industry. At first, we establish a standard altitude command to serve as the benchmark to evaluate the proposed guidance and control method. The benchmark should include two kinds of altitude commands, periodic and steady-state modes. For the sake of brevity, we can combine the periodic cycle To tune the attitude controller, the aerodynamics is linearized at the cruising state of   According to   Here, the uncertainties are considered to evaluate the robustness of the proposed method. For the sake of brevity, we only take the most important factors into account, i.e., the uncertainties in the aerodynamic coefficients. In reality, there are two categories of aerodynamic uncertainties: one is the aerodynamic force, such as   As mentioned in Introduction, there are three types of altitude control methods for hypersonic vehicles, and the direct altitude control category has the relatively high tracking precision. Most sliding mode control schemes fall into this category (    Due to the combined linear controllers in the cascade control and the approximate linear property of the hypersonic vehicle with a small angle of attack constraint, the entire closed-loop control can be simplified to be a linear system. The frequency domain analysis can explicitly extract essential properties of a linear plant, so the altitude response in the frequency domain is plotted to investigate the crucial parameters of the controller in this subsection. The proposed cascade control comprises three control loops, i.e. the altitude loop, the elevation angle loop, and the pitch angle loop. The diagram can be depicted in  Secondly, the importance of the feedforward term is to be evaluated. By setting This paper presented a practical and efficient guidance and control scheme for hypersonic vehicles to track fast time-varying altitude commands. The feedforward and feedback strategies were combined to obtain an elevation angle command in a unified manner. Here, the feedforward term plays a crucial role while the feedback term is the supplementary one. Then a cascade control philosophy was employed to realize this command by using an extended state observer to deal with multiple uncertainties. Explicit tuning method was also provided. Finally, extensive simulation results validated the effectiveness and robustness of the proposed method. The proposed guidance and control law could provide guidelines for practitioners. In the future, we will combine the proposed method with receding horizon strategy to avoid possible actuator saturations by optimally regulating the frequency,  Research supported in part by the The detailed aerodynamic coefficients are as following. It should be noted that