This paper describes an investigation of the kinetics of loading of gold(I), silver(I), and nickel(II) cyanide complexes onto two novel anion exchange resins with high selectivity for the linear dicyanoaurate(I) and dicyanoargentate(I) complexes. The kinetic data fit well to a shrinking core theoretical model, and indicate that in all three complexes, the loading is controlled by the rate of diffusion of the ions penetrating the reacted layer. Diffusion coefficients were determined and those of Au(I) and Ag(I) cyano complexes are similar to one another but much higher (30 to 60 times) those of the Ni(II) cyano complex on these two resins.Cyanidation of gold and silver ores has remained the dominant hydrometallurgical technology over the last century for economic recovery of these precious metals Zinc cementation of precious metals from cyanide leachates via the Merrill–Crowe process has largely been replaced (in the last 25 years) by carbon-in-pulp (CIP) or carbon-in-leach (CIL) concentration processes coupled with electrolytic recovery of the precious metals Despite this success, carbon's lack of selectivity has triggered comparisons of CIP with resins-in-pulp (RIP) over the last 15 years Over 20 sterically hindered gold and silver cyanide selective quaternary ammonium functionalized anion exchange resins have been synthesised and characterised at the Central Queensland University (CQU) All acids and complexes used were of A.R. quality. The atomic absorption spectroscopic analyses were performed with either a Varian AA1475 or a Varian SpectrAA-300 spectrometer. Details of syntheses of the two novel resins used in this study (and numerous other CQU resins) will be reported elsewhere A shallow bed micro scale procedure similar to that of Riveros and Cooper Solutions were passed through the resin beds at 200 mL/h, as follows: Au: 1000 mg/L Au as K[Au(CN) Ag: 814 mg/L Ag as K[Ag(CN) Ni: 300 mg/L Ni as Na Flow times of 5, 10, 20, etc., to 60 min were run on each column for each metal cyanide solution. The resins from each time period were filtered off, washed copiously with water and methanol and air-dried, then dried in a vacuum oven overnight at 50°C. Each resin was completely digested in acid for quantitative metal ion analysis, a typical procedure for which follows: 0.10 g of loaded resin was charred in 10 mL of conc. sulphuric acid with heating in a fume cupboard. The temperature was then lowered below 100°C and 10 mL of conc. nitric acid added and the mixture reheated until digestion was complete. It was again cooled below 100°C and 10 mL of conc. hydrochloric acid added and the solution further heated to solubilise the gold. The solution was then cooled and diluted appropriately in a volumetric flask and the solution analysed for metal ions by atomic absorption spectroscopy. The method used to determine the mass transfer coefficient is similar to that used in In each case, 0.50 mmol/L of M Ion exchange processes can be separated into two broad classes. The first contains the fast, reversible electrostatic exchange processes involving simple cations or anions, which occur uniformly between the ions in solution and the opposite ions of the porous solid phase. The second category includes those ion exchange processes, which are accompanied by fast chemical reactions, such as the abstraction of the metal cyano complexes, where the interacting ions progress in shells into the resin matrix. A sharp moving boundary between the reacted outer shell and the shrinking unreacted inner core can be observed during the ion exchange process. The likelihood of such a process occurring in spherical resin beads was proposed by Helfferich A summary of this model as developed by these workers and modified by Riveros and Cooper Consider a spherical anion exchange resin bead of radius It was also assumed by Bischoff Equating The fractional conversion,   The shrinking core model and variations thereof have been widely used in the literature to describe the kinetics of reactions accompanying fluid–solid interactions, some examples of which involving resins or polymers are given in From earlier work using two- and three-element systems on NOTREN and TEA-BE resins, it was noticed that the gold complex loaded faster than the silver which in turn loaded much faster than the nickel complex. We propose that the small sizes of the gold and silver cyano complexes allow faster diffusion than is possible for the larger nickel cyano complex. With the aim of investigating these points further, the extraction of the three metal cyano complexes from single-element solutions was studied using the shallow bed technique on a micro scale The fractional approach to equilibrium of the gold and silver cyano complexes is more rapid than for the nickel cyano complex despite the higher ionic charge on the latter. The nickel cyano complex has a reaction stoichiometry of two, while the precious metal cyano complexes have values of one. The parabolic kinetics for the loading of the metal cyano complexes on the resin is consistent with those evidenced in other trials (temperature, ionic strength, etc.). They strongly suggest a particle diffusion-controlled extraction, since the concentration of the metal cyano complexes in the external solution remained constant throughout the trial.  The magnitude of the Mass transfer coefficients ( The relationship between the resin loading (mmol/g) and contact time is linear as shown in The linearity suggests a regime of film diffusion control since the Nernst diffusion layer and the external solution concentration are constant. The shrinking core model also predicts that in the case of film diffusion control, the fractional approach to equilibrium It is seen from the intercept on the After studying the selectivity of several commercial weak and strong base anion exchange resins for [Au(CN) Hiskey and Ette The gold complex advances into the resin when an aurocyanide complex ion collides with a bridged gold atom already bound to the resin. Thus, the gold advances into the resin matrix by the collision and formation of (R–NC–Au–CN) bridges. This conclusion is consistent with the observed experimental data above, with the known lability of dicyanoaurate(I) The initial extraction rates of these cyano complexes on the two CQU resins is controlled by liquid film diffusion. Gold and silver are extracted at considerably higher rates than nickel because of higher diffusivities in the liquid film. As the reacted layer increased in thickness, the extraction is controlled by particle diffusion in the resin matrix. The differences in resin diffusivities of these complexes were confirmed by fitting single element kinetic data to a shrinking core model. The diffusion coefficients of Au(I) and Ag(I) cyano complexes are significantly higher than those of Ni(II) on these two resins. The selectivity of these resins for the precious metal cyano complexes is thought to be predominantly caused by the sterically hindered nature of the quaternary ammonium cationic sites. The authors are grateful for a Central Queensland University research grant, and one of us (G.W.D.), for an Australian postgraduate award. They wish to gratefully acknowledge the generosity of Prof. J. Brent Hiskey of the University of Arizona for allowing use of