The effect of fillers on morphology and wear characteristics are studied in butadiene rubber (PBR)/high styrene rubber (HSR)/natural rubber (NR) blends with different types of carbon black. SAF N110 with SRF N774 type of carbon black shows a significant effect on curing studies and mechanical properties by reacting at the interface between PBR, HSR and NR matrix. Blends containing the same carbon blacks show high abrasion resistant properties against Du-Pont abrader, DIN abrader and different mining rock surfaces and also is found to be the toughest rubber against all types of rock.Tyres used in mining vehicles are very costly and need regular maintenance, as it is impossible to accept its replacement expense within very short term. The rugged working condition in mines reduces the life span of tyres on account of cuts, contamination, abrasion, wear, speed fluctuations, etc. There are several types of damage occurs in the dump-truck tyre such as tread detachment, sidewall cuts, impact ruptures and bead damage The wear of rubber is a complex phenomenon and dependent on a combination of processes such as mechanical, mechano-chemical and thermo-chemical. Schallamach Polymer blends are being used extensively in numerous applications; this statement is also true with rubber blends, especially in tyre manufacture. Apart from blends of common rubbers, specialty rubber is also being utilized, depending on service demands and components of the tyre The effort towards improving the efficiency of such transportation system is essential for reducing the running costs and cutting down the end cost figures by using the PBR, HSR and NR rubber blends. In this study, the cure characteristics, morphological and mechanical properties of carbon black filled blends of NR, high styrene rubber (HSR) and poly butadiene rubber (PBR) with nanosilica are investigated. Also, these rubber compounds are examined in a specially fabricated experimental set-up for evaluating their wear resistance properties when abraded against various rock types. The parameters such as influence of composition of rubber vulcanizates on wear characteristics and the mechanism of wear of these compounds against different rocks are reported. A literature search shows a lack of studies about PBR, HSR with NR blends alone. With this work, we pretend to partially fill this gap. In this study Buna CB 60 is a solution of high-cis polybutadiene polymer, lithium grade, coupled to a star shaped macro structure, not oil extended is used. It has Mooney Viscosity of 60ME, cis 1, 4 content is 38%, vinyl content is 11%, and density is approx 0.91 Ultrasil-VN3 is a premium grades of spray dried precipitated silica powder of very high purity, is mainly used in tyres is purchased from Degussa, India and has the specific surface area (BET) of 180 Zinc oxide, stearic acid, N-cyclohexyl-2-benzothiazyl sulfonamide (CBS) and N-isopropyl-N-phenyl-p-phenylenediamine (IPPD) acts as anti oxidant and anti ozonant is supplied by Bayer (India) Ltd. Carbon black is supplied by Birla Carbon. Standard rubber grade process oil (Elasto 710) and paraffinic wax is purchased from the Apar Industries, India and local market, respectively. The compounding formulation for the PBR, HSR and NR blends with its various ingredients are mixed in a two roll mill at a friction ratio of 1:2 following standard mixing sequence followed by ASTM D 3182-07. Compounding formulations based on changing of the poly butadiene rubber (PBR), high styrene rubber (HSR), and natural rubber (NR) contents are shown in The cure characteristics of the rubber compound are studied with the help of a Monsanto Oscillating Disc Rheometer (ODR-100 The cross-link density is determined by immersing a small amount (known mass) of sample in 100 Fourier Transform Infrared Spectroscopy (FTIR) is performed using a NEXUS 870 FTIR (Thermo Nicolet) instrument in dry air at room temperature. Spectra are taken in the range of 4000–500 Vulcanized slabs are prepared by compression molding, and the dumb-bell shaped specimens are punched out from a molded sheet by using ASTM Die C. The tests are done by means of a universal tensile testing machine (Hounsfield H10KS) under ambient condition (25 Nine samples are tested for each set of conditions, at the same elongation rate. The values of the tensile strength, modulus at 100% elongation, 300% elongation and elongation at break are averaged. The relative error was below 5%. The hardness is measured by Shore A hardness tester followed by ASTM D2240-05. DSC measurements are carried out using a Perkin–Elmer PYRIS Diamond DSC instrument. The samples (⩽10 TGA studies are carried out Shimadzu-DT-40 instrument in presence of air at a rate of 10 The tensile fracture surface of the samples are studied in a scanning electron microscope (JSM-5800 of JEOL Co.; Acceleration voltage: 20 DIN abrasion test is done by the DIN abrasion tester for determining the abrasion resistance of compounds of vulcanized rubber followed by ASTM D5963-96. Du-Pont abrasion test is done by the Du-Pont Craydon type abrasion tester for determining the abrasion resistance of vulcanized rubbers followed by ASTM D394. Heat build up study is carried out using Goodrich Flexometer for the compounds followed by ASTM D623. The test pieces are prepared in cylindrical shape having diameter of 17.8 The indigenous experimental set-up is specially fabricated in our lab and the full arrangements of the experimental set-up, preparation of rubber specimen and rock samples are already discussed in our earlier literature Total weight of 450 The optimum cure time for NPSU-1 and NPSU-4 rubber sample is higher than other rubber vulcanizates due to the mixing of SAF N110 and SRF N774 carbon black with PBR, HSR and NR of the three types of blend system is shown in Maximum torque can be considered as a measure of stock modulus Faster cure rate index is depicted in The IR Spectra of the different samples are shown in Another important observation is that unlike Padella et al. Tensile strength, modulus, elongation at break, tear strength for all the compounds are shown in The tear strength for all the samples is moderate, but it varies with varying the matrix ratio. But, tear strength is increased for the sample containing 15 While for other blend types, mainly use of ISAF type of carbon black, the tensile and tear strength is decreased, may be due to the effect of carbon black which suppresses the PBR and HSR effect in the system and the filler is uniformly dispersed in the natural rubber matrix that can be attributed to the aggregation of PBR and HSR The modulus of all the NR vulcanizates are increased with increasing concentration of HSR. This is may be for one or two possible reasons: the restriction of molecular chain mobility, and an increase in the cross-link density. Elongations at break values are higher for the blends enriched with HSR and PBR, because carbon black plays a vital role with HSR and PBR. The hardness value of the vulcanizates indicates the same trend as the modulus values. The mechanical property of rubber vulcanizates markedly depends on the number of conjugate double bonds and it is found for the sample ‘NPSU-1’, and ‘NPSU-4’. These observations suggest that more NR react with the carbon–carbon double bonds of SAF N110 and SRF N774 and slower the reversion reaction rate and hence increases the mechanical properties of the vulcanizates. The hardness of ‘NPSU-1’ and ‘NPPV-4’ rubber sample is obtained higher than other blends by the influence of SAF type of carbon black, whose results are shown in To study the thermal response of the blends, differential scanning calorimetry has been performed. The DSC curves of all rubber vulcanizates are shown in In High temperature TGA (50–650 It has been observed that the onset degradation temperature is almost same for all the samples. The onset degradation temperature thereby probably decreases in the case of NPSU-5, due to a decrease in cross-link density. Cross linking increases the rigidity of the system, which in turn increases the thermal stability The tensile fracture samples are scanned after gold coating, and are represented in Some samples like ‘NPSU-1’, ‘NPSU-4’, ‘NPSU-5’ and ‘NPSU-6’ show rupture type of failure in SEM study. More serious effects of hysteresis arise from chemical changes to the rubber structure at higher sustained temperatures; these effects include the rubber cross-linking system, and thermal degradation leading to explosive rupture (blowout). This phenomenon is studied by Gent and Hindi  The mass loss of rubber against Du-Pont abrader is given in From both DIN and Du-Pont abrasion studies, the compounds ‘NPSU-1’, ‘NPSU-4’ and ‘NPSU-5’ have produced lesser volume loss. From these studies, a balancing correlation has obtained for the same compounds under standard abraders. Based on DIN abrader and Du-Pont abrader test results,  The values of heat buildup for the compounds, those are having good abrasion resistant properties against DIN and Du-Pont abrader, are shown in Since the low thermal conductivity of rubbers can result in a very high temperature at the interface, it is important to investigate the effects of frictional heating on the sliding friction of rubbers  The temperature generation during friction in rubber compound ‘NPSU-1’ is slightly lower, which may be attributed to the presence of SRF N774 type of carbon black. The highest temperature is observed when rubbers are abraded against coal surfaces, whereas the lowest temperature could be noticed for shale. For other rocks the temperature generation is found to be in the moderate range. Preparation of abrasion resistant tyre tread rubber with the help of an open two-roll-mixing mill represents a novel method for making valuated rubber products. The NR with addition of PBR and HSR obtained from this process has very good abrasion resistant properties which can be withstand the rugged working condition of dump-truck tyre. The optimum cure time is higher for the sample containing SAF N110 and SRF N774 carbon black. Faster cure rate index is observed for the compounds containing ISAF N231 type carbon black. Tensile strength increases with carbon black SAF N110, may be due to the outstanding reactivity of the nano size carbon black acting as filler, increases the properties of the samples. DSC study reveals that The authors are deeply grateful to Coal India Limited, Kolkata and I-Cube Centre, Gyeongsang National University for their kind assistance. Also, special thanks to the members of this research and key laboratory of Materials Science Centre and Central Research Facility at IIT, Kharagpur, India.