Can the slowdown in total factor productivity (TFP) that we have experienced since the mid-seventies be ascribed to the increasing importance of services, or do we instead observe an improvement of productivity in the service sectors by way of learning-by-doing or specialization? We feel that such questions are best answered within a general equilibrium analysis of the whole economy, i.e. a structural view of the whole economy. We maximize the level of domestic consumption subject to commodity balances and endowment constraints. The Lagrange multipliers associated with the endowment constraints measure the marginal productivities of labor and capital. We declare these shadow prices to be the factor productivities. The main empirical contribution of this paper is a reexamination of the services paradox. In Canada, the sluggish productivity in services is limited to finance, insurance and real estate, and to business and personal services. Any attempt to resolve the services paradox may focus on these two sectors. Transportation, trade, and to a lesser extent communication are progressive sectors.Services have long ago relegated manufacturing to second rank in the importance of an economy's total activity. It is often argued that services suffer from the Baumol disease. More and more resources are devoted to services, where productivity gains are limited. The whole economy thus drifts to a lower productivity performance, unless the growth of services is offset by input savings in manufacturing. The fundamentals are the usual ones — endowments, technology, and preferences. Endowments are represented by a labor force and stocks of capital. Technology is given by the combined inputs and outputs of the sectors of the economy. Preferences are reflected by the pattern of domestic final demand. All the information can be extracted from input and output tables in real terms, that is constant prices. The productivities are determined as follows. We maximize the level of domestic consumption subject to commodity balances and endowment constraints. Now, as is known from the theory of mathematical programming, the Lagrange multipliers associated with the endowment constraints measure the marginal productivities of labor and capital — the consumption increments per units of additional labor or capital. In economics, these Lagrange multipliers are shadow prices that would reign under idealized conditions of perfect competition. We declare these shadow prices to be the factor productivities. The paper is organized as follows. Factor productivities and TFP are defined by means of a linear program in the next section. In We find the economy's frontier by maximization of the level of domestic final demand, which excludes trade by definition. Exports and imports are endogenous, controlled by the balance of payments. We make no distinction between competitive and non-competitive imports (the latter are indicated by zeros in the make table). Domestic final demand comprises consumption and investment. Investment is merely a means to advance consumption, albeit in the future. We include it in the objective function to account for future consumption. In fact, Productivity growth will be defined as the measure of the shift of the frontier. Suppose an economy with only two commodities. Instead of comparing observations of the economy in subsequent periods (represented by the dots in The frontier of the economy in a particular year is determined by the resolution of a linear program. The primal program reads The linear program determines the activity levels of the various sectors of the economy ( The program thus activates to a certain extent the various sectors of the economy, thereby producing a certain amount of all commodities, which is given by the observed sectoral production vectors blown up by the respective optimal activity levels ( It should be noted that we do not set up the problem in terms of input–output coefficients, because of rectangular input–output tables, but in terms of given sectoral production and total demand structures. If we had a square input–output matrix, we could write the first commodity balance constraint, the first constraint of the primal, as [ Productivities are not measured using market prices, but are determined by the dual program, which, as is well-known, solves for the Lagrange multipliers of the primal program. The latter measure the marginal products of the objective value with respect to the constraining entities, unlike observed factor rewards with all their distortions. The dual program reads, The endogenous variables in the dual program are shadow prices — We now introduce the concept of productivity growth. Since labor productivity is the Lagrange multiplier or shadow price associated with the labor constraint, TFP-growth=( Replacement of (f, l) by (λf, λl) in the primal program with λ>0 yields solution (s, γ/λ, g). The value of the objective function is not affected. By the main theorem of linear programming, rK+wn+εD is not either. In fact, the productivities are unaffected, as is, by extension, TFP-growth. The replacement does affect the commodity prices, as to preserve the identity between national product and national income, which we present next. This straightforward definition of TFP-growth is now related to the commonly used Solow residual (SR). By the main theorem of linear programming, substituting the price normalization equation, we obtain the macro-economic identity of national product and income (apart from the net exports on either side): By total differentiation: To establish the link with the Solow residual (SR), focus on the numerator, substituting the assumed binding labor and balance of payment constraints: Differentiating products, rearranging terms, and using the second dual constraint and the definition of Now normalize again, dividing by  The TFP measure used in In discrete time, the differentials are approximated using the identity By Domar's aggregation we can decompose the aggregate Solow residual into sectoral and group-sectoral Solow residuals. Let Notice that if In continuous time this is exact. In discrete time one must involve full employment of labor at the frontier point. Otherwise a slack change term emerges that cannot be allocated to the sectors. With capital there is no such complication, since we assume it is sector specific. We use the input–output tables of the Canadian economy from 1962 to 1991 at the medium level of disaggregation, which has 50 industries and 94 commodities. The constant price input–output tables have been obtained from Statistics Canada in 1961 prices from 1962 to 1971, in 1971 prices from 1971 to 1981, in 1981 prices from 1981 to 1986, and in 1986 prices from 1986 to 1991. All tables have been converted to 1986 prices using the chain rule. For reasons of confidentiality, the tables contain missing cells, which we have filled using the following procedure. The vertical and horizontal sums in the make and use tables are compared with the reported line and column totals, which do contain the missing values. We select the rows and columns where the two figures differ by more than 5% from the reported totals, or where the difference exceeds $250 million. We then fill holes or adjust cells on a case by case basis filling in priority the intersections of the selected rows and columns, using the information on the input or output structure from other years, and making sure the new computed totals do not exceed the reported ones. The gross capital stock, hours worked and labor earnings data are from the KLEMS dataset of Statistics Canada, described in The sectoral capacity utilization rates have been provided by the National Wealth and Capital Stock Division of Statistics Canada. They have been constructed using the Hodrick–Preston filter. For agriculture and fishing, we use the utilization rate for food. For all the missing service sectors, that is other than construction, pipeline transportation, and power and gas distribution, we use the rate for total non-farm goods (excluding energy) producing industries, the most encompassing capacity utilization rate available. The capacity constraints on construction has been lifted as it can be supplemented by US capacity, as suggested on the Service Sector Productivity and the Productivity Paradox pre-conference. The international commodity prices are approximated by the US prices, given that 70% of Canada's trade is with the United States. We have used the US producer prices from the US Bureau of Labor Statistics, Office of Employment Projection. They are made relative prices using final demand shares to define the price level. The 169 commodity classification has been bridged to Statistics Canada's 94 commodity classification. To convert US prices to Canadian equivalents, we have used, whenever available, unit value ratios, (UVRs, which are industry specific) computed and kindly provided to us by Commodities 13, 44, 70, 71, 72, 79, 81, 82, 88, 91 and 92 are considered as non-tradeable, for which no trade shows up in the input–output tables for most of the sample period. For computational reasons and similar output composition, we have aggregated the nontradeable commodities 70–72 (residential, non-residential and repair construction). Due to the absence of labor,capital stock and intermediate inputs for industry 39 (government royalties on natural resources), it has been aggregated with industry 5 (crude petroleum and natural gas). In the end, we are thus left with 49 industries and 92 commodities, which are listed in Perhaps it is most illuminating to discuss the temporally aggregated results first. In From its definition, TFP-growth can also be decomposed into its constituent marginal productivity growth rates. We then get a second accounting identity. The numbers, at the bottom of The primary sector very much determines the aggregate evolution in Canadian productivity. It was mostly struck by the slowdown in the 1970s, but also led to the recovery in the 1980s. Manufacturing and construction are average sectors, following the economy-wide Solow residual. Of the remaining service sectors the first three are surprisingly healthy. Transportation, trade, and to a lesser extent communication, all perform above the economy-wide average. Last and least, FIRE and B&P services drag the economy.  We have checked the sensitivity of our results to the use of net instead of gross capital stocks. The solutions to the linear programs are unaffected, so are the optimal shadow wage rates. The only difference is in the shadow prices of capital, which adjust to the new capital stock measures so as to yield zero profit conditions. It is like a scaling problem. All that matters in our model for the expansion to the efficiency frontier are the rates of capacity utilization. The choice of measurement for the capital stocks would only matter if capital from various sectors was substitutable. TFP-growth rates differ because the marginal productivities of capital differ. But both qualitatively and quantitatively, the results are rather similar. Annual TFP growth was positive on average over the 1962–1974 period. It dropped quite sharply during the 1974–1981 interval and recovered, but not to the levels of the golden sixties, after 1982. This finding confirms conventional wisdom. Our productivity figures show greater fluctuations than what is usually reported, because they are extracted endogenously from a linear program with corner solutions. Of course, our methodology differs from conventional productivity analysis in one major respect. We compute in some sense social productivities, i.e. marginal valuations of inputs in terms of attainable total domestic consumption and not in terms of attainable individual sectoral production. We take the whole economy into account globally, with its interdependencies and mutual constraints, to derive the efficient production frontier and define productivity growth as the outward shift of that efficiency frontier rather than changes in observed input–output ratios. Our model offers some explanation to productivity growth. Some inputs can earn high returns if they are in short supply. TFP-growth is nothing but a reflection of the evolution of marginal valuations of primary factor inputs. The modeling of existing constraints is very crucial in our approach. Another key role in our analysis is played by the levels of capacity utilization. Their construction is still controversial. No estimates are available for services. Proper measures of output and capacity utilization for services are problematic, but we urge Statistics Canada to devote resources to construct such measures. Our analysis would also be enriched if we could have data on sectoral use and total availability of labor disaggregated by level of qualification and of sectoral utilization and availability of capital disaggregated by type of capital. It would allow us to get a more precise picture of scarcities in the Canadian economy. By construction, the vintage structure of capital does not matter. To relax this assumption, we would need to make investment endogenous and switch to a dynamic model, which would lead to We must also admit that our assessment of productivity growth in services might be biased because of improper price measurements. New products and services or improved quality of existing ones are seldom measured in national accounts statistics. This problem is especially acute in services where output and prices are harder to measure than for manufacturing goods. The bias may show up in various places in the productivity formulas (see Despite these words of caution about the interpretation of our results, our analysis reveals some interesting insights into the productivity of Canadian services. The main empirical contribution of this paper is a qualification of sluggish service productivities and the consequent services paradox. In Canada poor productivity in the services is limited to finance, insurance and real estate, and business and personal services. Any attempt to resolve the services paradox may focus on those two sectors. Transportation, trade, and to a lesser extent communication are progressive service sectors. We thank Nathalie Viennot and Sofiane Ghali for their dedicated research assistance and Rene Durand, Jean-Pierre Maynard, Ronald Rioux and Bart van Ark for their precious cooperation in constructing the data. We are grateful to Carl Sonnen and other participants of the Service Sector Productivity and the Productivity Paradox conference, Ottawa, April 1997, for their helpful comments. We are also grateful to Michael Landesmann and other participants of the Technical Change, Growth and International Trade conference, Eindhoven, October 1999, for their helpful comments. We acknowledge the financial support of the Social Sciences and Humanities Research Council of Canada, CentER, the Netherlands Foundation for the Advancement of Research (NWO), and the Association for Canadian Studies in the Netherlands.