In this study, flotation behaviour and electrokinetic properties of huntite were determined in the presence of anionic collectors such as potassium oleate, and Flotinor FS-2. The effects of common ions that are expected in flotation pulps such as Mg2+ and Ca2+ were studied. The influences of pH and modifying reagents like sodium silicate (Na2SiO3·5H2O) and carboxymethyl cellulose (CMC) on surface properties of huntite were also examined. Electrokinetic measurements showed that isoelectric point (i.e.p.) of huntite was around 8.0. Surface charge of huntite becomes positive in the presence of 10−2 M of MgCl2 and CaCl2 at all pH values. According to micro-flotation test results, potassium oleate is more efficient compared with Flotinor FS-2. Mg2+ and Ca2+ ions have detrimental effect on the floatability of huntite. Na2SiO3 was seen to have no significant effect on the floatability of huntite. Flotation experiments with CMC indicated that it acts as a depressant on huntite.Flotation properties of huntite mineral used in the flame-retardant industry have not been investigated so far. Although most carbonate minerals exhibit similar crystal and chemical structures, flotation method has been conveniently used in the separation of carbonates yet modifying reagents have an important role in the selective separation. Flotation properties of major carbonates except huntite have been well studied An unusual carbonate mineral huntite (Mg Depending on its physical and chemical properties, huntite is used in paper coating and emulsion paint, as flame retardant, in reinforcement and rheological control in rubber products, mastic and sealants, resistive polymers. The most important use of huntite is in flame retardant industry. Flame retardants are incorporated into a material in order to slowdown the rate of fire development. They can only have an effect at the early stages of a fire and act by limiting one or more of the essential requirements for a fire such as heat, fuel and oxygen. Flame retardants have gained more importance as an ingredient in materials used in our daily life including thermoplastics, housings and enclosures for television sets, electronics equipment, computers and office machinery Usage of huntite, as a mineral-based flame retardant, has many advantages. Its fire retardant performance is clearly superior to other flame retardants such as aluminium and magnesium hydroxides; the same applies to viscosity and product performance. Huntite has much lower prices, 300–1000 Euro/t, and it has significantly higher thermal stability compared to aluminium hydroxide Huntite is an effective flame retardant mineral when used with hydromagnesite. When heated huntite and hydromagnesite undergo a series of decomposition reactions, evolving CO Huntite used in flame-retardant industry should contain 37–39% MgO, 7–9% CaO, max. 0.5% SiO Since huntite is a metastable carbonate mineral, it is rarely found stable like magnesite and dolomite in the nature. Because huntite is a transition mineral between magnesite and dolomite, it is found together with magnesite, dolomite and hydromagnesite. Separation of huntite that is finely distributed in other stable carbonates is an important issue. Flotation, which is an enrichment technique used for fine particles, is conspicuous to separate huntite from other carbonates. The aim of this study is, therefore, to put forward the flotation properties of huntite for a subsequent separation process. The huntite sample used in the experiments was collected from a deposit nearby the Egirdir Lake in southwest of Turkey and it was ground below 0.2 mm in a ceramic ball mill. XRD investigations showed that purity of the huntite sample was 95%. The results of chemical and XRD analyses of the test sample are given in Microscopic investigations showed that huntite was the major mineral in the sample with magnesite as the secondary formation. Serpentine, talc, dolomite and clay minerals were the minor minerals. The liberation size of huntite particles was seen to be below 20 μm. Huntite particles were observed to be in spherical and ellipsoidal shapes. The particle size distribution of the sample ground below 200 μm was determined using a Coulter Multisizer AccuComp 1.19 particle size analyser. The results are presented in Since huntite is a flame retardant material, its behaviour during fire is important; therefore, differential thermal analysis and thermal gravimetric analysis were performed on the huntite sample. DTA and TGA curves are given in According to Experimental studies were performed to determine the flotation behaviour of huntite. Hallimond tube flotation cell of 170 ml in volume was used to investigate the effects of collector type, collector dosage, pH and modifying reagents on the flotation. One gram of sample was conditioned in 170 ml of solution containing desired amount of collector for 5 min then it was floated for 2 min using nitrogen gas flowing at a rate of 70 cm Electrokinetic measurements were conducted by a Zeta Meter 3.0 type device equipped with a microprocessor unit to directly calculate the zeta potential; 0.2 g of huntite sample was conditioned in 50 ml of solution for 10 min. In these tests, the influence of monovalent (Na The electrokinetic measurements of huntite mineral were performed against pH in the presence of 10 As inferred from the previous studies, Mg In the micro-flotation tests, the effects of collector type, collector amount, pH, concentrations of MgCl The effect of collector concentration ranging between 25 and 1000 mg/l was investigated employing KOl and Flotinor FS-2. Results are shown in As it is seen from The effect of pH was tested using 200 mg/l KOl and 600 mg/l Flotinor FS-2 constant concentrations and the results are shown in The influence of solution pH on surface charge of magnesite was investigated by some researchers The effect of Mg ions on the flotation of huntite was tested varying MgCl It is shown from In order to see the effect of Ca ions on the floatability of huntite, experiments were carried out at CaCl Experimental findings show that the effect of CaCl Sodium silicate is usually used as a depressant for the flotation of carbonate minerals such as calcite and dolomite. Since huntite is a carbonate mineral, the effect of sodium silicate on its flotation was worth testing. Sodium silicate dosages of 1×10 Silicate ions are negatively charged, therefore, in neutral pH values, [SiO(OH) CMC is the Na salt of carboxymethyl cellulose. In alkaline solutions, the organic chain of CMC is completely ionised and thus attracted by positively charged surfaces making surfaces more negatively charged It is proposed that the adsorption of CMC reduces available sites for collector adsorption onto magnesite through [Mg  The electrokinetic measurements of huntite mineral were performed against pH in the presence of various NaCl concentrations. According to test results, isoelectric point of huntite was found to be around 8.0. Indifferent electrolytes are not expected to change the isoelectric point (i.e.p.); however, as concentration increases the change in the magnitude of the zeta potential is attributed to the compression of the electrical double layer. Zeta potential tests performed with various concentrations of MgCl Experimental findings show that the effect of CaCl The depression effect of Na Carboxymethyl cellulose (CMC) has a significant effect on the floatability of huntite in the presence of KOl decreasing the floatability from 80% to about 25%. In the light of the test results obtained in this investigation, flotation separation of huntite from its associated mineral magnesite could be achieved by depressing huntite rather than floating it.