A rotary kiln (Φ1.5 m × 15 m) was designed to verify feasibility of the reduction technology of a low grade iron ore with low temperature via ore-coal composites. One of the troublesome problems was the sticking of kiln burden during the reduction process. Reduction behavior and sticking mechanism of composite pellets in the rotary kiln were investigated in this paper. Technology of X-ray diffraction (XRD) and scanning electron microscope-energy dispersive spectroscopy (SEM-EDS) were applied to reveal the sticking mechanism. Products with metallization degree of 84.83% were obtained after reduced in the rotary kiln. Reduction of Fe2O3 to FeO and reduction of FeO to Fe were mainly occurred at location of 9 m–13.5 m and 5.5 m–11.5 m in the rotary kiln, respectively. Pellets or pellets powders were bonded by low melting point substances formed in coal ash: hedenbergite and fayalite. These low melting point substances were mainly generated from coal ash and formed at location of 5.5 m–11.5 m in the rotary kiln. Hedenbergite occurred firstly, followed by bonding of pellets or pellet powders and formation of fayalite. Melt of fayalite intensified agglomerating behavior.Beneficiation of low grade hematite ore resource (with high SiO Sticking of iron ore pellets happened frequently during reduction process. When reduced by CO, formation of fibrous metallic iron and fresh metallic iron with high activities might be the reason for the sticking of iron ore pellets during reduction process. While sticking extent decreased with addition of H In this paper, commercial experiment of iron ore-coal composites reduction in a rotary kiln (Φ1.5 m × 15 m) was conducted to utilize a typical low iron grade but high SiO The iron ore with a low iron grade but high SiO Coal ash was mainly composed of 24.52 wt% Fe Both the raw ore and coal were crushed (PE60 × 100 mm crusher, Zhengzhou YiJu Poly Machinery Equipment Co., Ltd., Henan, China) to -1 mm and then milled (ZQM-150 × 50mm ball milling, Zhengzhou YiJu Poly Machinery Equipment Co., Ltd., Henan, China) into powders for the pelletizing procedure. Iron ore-coal composite pellets were made for the rotary kiln reduction purpose. Mixtures of raw iron ore, coal, NaCl (used as additive) [ Reduced pellets discharged from the rotary kiln head were selected to analysis reduction result. Besides, to investigate the reduction process of composite pellets in the rotary kiln, rotary kiln was stopped at normal operation conditions without discharging materials. And then, plenty of N Among products discharged from the rotary kiln head, agglomerations consist of pellets or pellet powders and other materials were found. Therefore, several agglomerations discharged at the same time with normal reduced pellets were collected to research the formation mechanism. X-ray source X-ray diffraction (XRD, D/max 2550PC, Rigaku Co., Ltd., Tokyo, Japan), was used for mineral phase identification by configurations of the step of 0.02° at 10° min Chemical composition and XRD analysis of reduced pellets are shown in The metallic iron and FeO grade variation of composite pellets along the kiln body were analyzed by chemical method and result is shown in Reduction of Fe Reduction behavior of iron oxide in composite pellets can be concluded as following: reduction of Fe Method of coal based direct reduction followed by magnetic separation has been found to be an effective way to recover iron from this iron ore resources and has been actively researched [ Two different types of agglomerations were selected, shown as Microstructures of these two types of agglomerations were analyzed by SEM as shown in It can be observed in Bonding materials and pellets were separated carefully for the analysis purpose. Chemical composition and XRD analysis of two different types of bonding materials and pellets are shown as It can be observed in Bonding materials in type I and typeIIwere mainly composed of metallic iron, SiO Bonding materials of the two type agglomerations were analyzed by energy diffraction spectrometer (EDS) and results are shown as The white particles are high purity metallic iron and could be recovered through magnetic separation. It can be observed that part of metallic iron particles were grown into strip shape (especially in Formation reactions of fayalite, anorthite, and hedenbergite are as following: Chemical analysis of iron ore indicates that the content of CaO was only 1.57 wt%, while the content of CaO in coal ash was 13.08 wt%. XRD analysis of bonded pellets ( The phase diagram of SiO The deep blue isotherm line is at 1100 °C. Area of hedenbergite and fayalite with the melting temperature below 1100 °C was observed. It has been reported that the iron-rich phases, wustite and fayalite, for instance, play a key role in the initial sintering of the coal ash at around 1100 °C during the coal combustion process [ The standard Gibbs free energy ( where R is the ideal gas constant (8.3144 J/mol·K), T is the temperature in kelvin (K), and K Standard Gibbs free energies of formation of anorthite and hedenbergite are lower than that of fayalite, which means that Hedenbergite was formed ahead of fayalite ( Pervious researches reported that iron-ore pellet powder and coal ash which was generated by coal combustion were the raw materials in ring formation process [  A rotary kiln (Φ1.5 m × 15 m) was designed to verify feasibility of the reduction technology of a low iron ore with low temperature via ore-coal composites. Products with degree of metallization of 84.83% were obtained. Reduction of Fe Pellets or pellets powders were bonded by bonding materials which consist of low melting point substances formed in coal ash: hedenbergite and fayalite. These low melting point substances were mainly formed at 5.5 m–11.5 m in the rotary kiln. Hedenbergite was occurred firstly and melt into liquid phase round 1100 °C. Pellets or pellet powders were adhered to the liquid phase and large amount of fayalite were formed. Melt of fayalite promoted the agglomerating process. Authors would like to express appreciation to