Open pit mine design optimization under uncertainty is one of the most critical and challenging tasks in the mine planning process. This paper describes the implementation of a minimum cut network flow algorithm for the optimal production phase and ultimate pit limit design under commodity price or market uncertainty. A new smoothing splines algorithm with sequential Gaussian simulation generates multiple commodity price scenarios, and a computationally efficient stochastic framework accommodates the joint representation and processing of the mining block economic values that result from these commodity price scenarios. A case study at an existing iron mining operation demonstrates the performance of the proposed method, and a comparison with conventional deterministic approach shows a higher cumulative metal production coupled with a 48% increase in the net present value (NPV) of the operation.The definition of an optimal production-phase design and ultimate pit limit is critical initial activity for long-term production planning of the open pit mining operations. The qualitative (metal content or grade) and quantitative (tonnes of material) information describing the thousands of mining blocks in an ore body model, along with relevant economic parameters (commodity/metal price, operating costs, etc.) are the basic inputs for long-term pit production planning ( In general practice, referred to herein as the conventional approach, a graph theory based Lerchs–Grossman (LG) algorithm solves the ultimate pit limit problem ( With the development of stochastic modelling and optimization in mine planning, it has been established that ignoring inherent economic or geological uncertainties may lead to unrealistic assessments and decisions ( The majority of the stochastic optimization approaches discussed so far consider the geological uncertainty, but consider the price or value of the commodity to be constant over the life of the mine. Given the impact of the economic downturns on mining operations, this constant commodity value assumption becomes unrealistic ( As distinct from previous studies, in this paper, we propose new smoothing splines and geostatistical sequential simulation based procedure for forecasting the commodity price scenarios, implement a minimum cut algorithm for production-phase and ultimate pit limit design under commodity price uncertainty, and share an application of these procedures to an iron mining operation. More specifically, in the following sections, we discuss: (i) a mathematical formulation for production-phase and ultimate pit limit design in a stochastic framework; (ii) a procedure to generate commodity price scenarios using smoothing splines and geostatistical simulation; (iii) the structure of the graph in a stochastic framework, (iv) a parameterization based strategy to solve the graph in the proposed stochastic framework; and (v) an implementation of the proposed methods in an existing iron mining operation. The mathematical formulation Similarly, objective (1) maximizes the economic value (profit) of the mining operation subject to the mining block precedence (2) and production capacity (3) constraints. An elimination of the production capacity constraints (3) defines the stochastic framework for the ultimate pit limit problem. The economic value Previously, a number of commodity price simulation models have been developed. In this paper, we are considering the commodity price as time series data and proposed a hybrid algorithm using smoothing spline algorithm and sequential Gaussian simulation. In smoothing spline algorithm, the curve estimator is a natural cubic spline ( For forecasting the commodity price Let If A price trend model using the smoothing splines algorithm ( Here, fitting a smoothing spline is a two steps process. In the first step, the function Similarly, the residual values The Sequential Gaussian simulation model ( The experimental variogram is calculated from the Gaussian transformed residual data values, and then the theoretical variogram function from the experimental variogram. The structural correlation between price residuals in the time series is determined by fitting a model to the data, which is then used to simulate future price residuals. The simple Kriging mean and variance of the Gaussian probability distribution in each time step were calculated using transformed data and the fitted variogram model. A random value drawn from the Gaussian probability distribution is represented as simulated residual value at each time step. Thus, by implementing steps (i) to (vii), one can generate a number of different simulated residual values A spherical model is the theoretical semi-variogram function that fits the experimental data, and its formulation is presented as Read Estimate smoothing spline Calculate residuals Initialize  Estimate  Simulate Simulate End End Stop. The production-phase design formulation Knowing that a mining block The commodity price simulation model generates multiple simulated price values over a number of time periods, and if The stochastic framework for production-phase design in In this paper, as a strategy to solve the stochastic framework for production-phase design, we employ the parameterization approach because of its acceptance in the mining industry and suitability to application of the minimum cut algorithm. If While, It is worth considering that commercially available mining software ( Define a variable Initialize Set Increment Solve for Update Go to step 5. End. An application of the proposed method is presented using data from an iron ore mining operation in south-eastern India. The deposit underlies highly undulating ground contours and maintains a pit slope angle at 45° along all azimuths. The deposit encompasses seven different lithologies, namely steel grey hematite (SGH), blue hematite (BH), laminated hematite (LH), laterite (L), blue dust (BD), shale (SHL), and banded hematite quartzite (BHQ). Most of the high grade iron ore exists in SGH, BH and LH members. This study utilizes the data from 77 boreholes located in a gridded pattern with a variable spacing from 200 to 250 meters and average depth of approximately 100 meter with core samples composited at 5 meter length, the ordinary Kriging method estimates the grade of iron ore. Similarly, at an estimated block size of 50 The sequential Gaussian simulation algorithm is used to generate the iron price simulations. A paired-sample  A grid is defined for estimating the monthly iron price over 10 years, i.e., from 2012 to 2021. Procedurally, the trend values are estimated using the smoothing splines model for all gridded points, and a simulation is performed using a Gaussian distribution for 100 realizations of the residual values at each grid point. The validation of the simulation results is achieved through analysis of the experimental variograms of iron price and the simulated price data (trend added with residuals). Using multiple simulated realizations of the iron price and other economic parameters, together with the estimated iron grade of a mining block, An implementation of the proposed parameterization algorithm discussed in   A comparison between the conventional (deterministic) and stochastic approaches for production-phase and ultimate pit limit design is presented. The stochastic framework incorporates multiple simulated realizations of the iron price, whilst the conventional framework takes a single iron price value as an input. The single iron price for a conventional approach is calculated by averaging the stochastically-derived simulated price realizations. For a valid comparison based on iron price uncertainty, all other inputs to This paper presented an uncertainty-based production-phase design and ultimate pit limit method that implements maximum flow algorithm. As distinct from a single constant metal price value over the life of an operation, as used in conventional pit optimization, multiple price scenarios, applicable to different production periods, were integrated into the stochastic framework. The proposed method shows that integrating commodity price uncertainty within the context of a minimum cut network flow model is relatively simple to both develop and solve. This work also contributes a method for generating the simulated realizations of iron price values. This was achieved by estimating the trend using a smoothing splines model and simulating the residual values using a sequential Gaussian simulation algorithm. The computational efficiency of the proposed method encourages the incorporation of commodity price uncertainties into the optimization process for large scale operations. An application of this innovative approach at an iron ore mining operation generated consistently- sized phases within the ultimate pit limit, a 6 percent larger pit, and critically, a 48 percent higher net present value as compared to the conventional methods for production-phase and ultimate pit limit design. The authors would like to acknowledge the valuable comments of the reviewers.