A combined process has been developed for recovering cobalt and regenerating cathode material from leach liquor of spent LiCoO2 batteries. Cobalt of 98% can be selectively separated from leach liquor using ammonium oxalate of 1.15 (mole ratio) at pH of 2.0, 55 °C, and 40 min. Kinetics analysis indicates that precipitation of cobalt is controlled by a combination of surface chemical reaction and diffusion. The Ea
                      value of precipitation is 19.68 kJ/mol obtained from the second-order model of (1 − a)−1 = k′t + c. Based on the TG/DSC curves of oxidation of cobalt oxalate, it is found that formation of Co3O4 oxidized from cobalt oxalate is in according with the model of randomly nucleating followed by nucleus growth. The Ea
                      value is 84.93 kJ/mol that is provided by the suitable model of g(α) = [−ln(1 − α)]1/3. Then, lithium is recovered from the filtrate as Li2CO3 with the purity of 99.5% by precipitation method. Finally, new cathode material with a good electrochemical performance is regenerated using obtained Co3O4 and lithium carbonate through solid phase method.Great amounts of lithium ion batteries (LIBs) have been manufactured to meet the global demand for power source required for consumer electronics devices, electric vehicles and other applications owing to their high cell voltage, high-energy density, low self-discharge and small size ( Generally, the types of LIBs used in the market include LiCoO Generally, the recycling technologies of spent LiCoO Aside from leaching process, recovery of the metals from leaching solution is also an important step for a hydrometallurgy method ( To find alternative to H All the reagents (glucose, malic acid, ammonium oxalate, sodium carbonate, etc.) used in this study were all analytically reagent and all the solutions were prepared with deionized water. The spent LIBs (battery type BL-5CA of Nokia mobile phone) used here were collected from the local mobile phone recycling market. The spent LIBs were completely discharged and manually dismantled to separate the cathode, anode, plastic and steel cases. Then, the cathode was cut into small parts and leached with 5 wt% NaOH solution at room temperature. After dissolving completely Al-foil, the cathode material was collected as powder by filtration and subsequently calcined at air atmosphere with 650 °C for 4 h in a muffle furnace to burn off the organics. And harmful gases were managed by an exhaust gas recovery unit during calcination process. The content of Co and Li in the obtained spent cathode material sample were 6.97% and 59.87%. The crystalline phase of LiCoO Cobalt was selectively precipitated from the above cobalt-enriched leach liquor. The cobalt-enriched leach liquor (10 ml) was added into a 50 ml beaker and precipitated with a predetermined dosage of ammonium oxalate at different time and temperature. The molar ratio of ammonium oxalate to cobalt was varied from 1.0 to 1.25. After precipitation, the precipitation products of cobalt were filtered, washed with deionized water and dried at 50 °C for 24 h. The concentration of residual cobalt and lithium in the filtrate was confirmed by atomic adsorption spectrophotometer (AAS). To avoid random errors, three parallel experiments were conducted during the whole precipitation experiments and the mean values were taken as the final results. The precipitation efficiency of cobalt was calculated as follows: A simultaneous thermo-gravimetric and differential scanning calorimetry (TG/DSC) analyses instrument (Netzsch STA 449C, Germany) operated in air atmosphere (N Lithium carbonate was prepared by precipitation method. Before precipitation of lithium, the impurity in the filtrate was deeply removed by precipitation using 3 mol/L NaOH at pH = 14. The pure lithium filtrate was obtained and adjusted to the concentration of 2 mol/L through evaporation. Then, Na To regenerate LiCoO The content of cobalt and lithium in powder sample, leaching solution and the filtrate of precipitation were analyzed using atomic adsorption spectrophotometer (AAS, Thermo iCE 3000, USA). The pH values of the solutions were measured with a pH/mV meter (PHS-3C, Leici, China). For the XRD analysis, the sample was finely powdered and characterized by an X-ray diffraction (XRD, Rigaku, Japan) with Cu Ka radiation (1.5418 Å) at a voltage of 40 kV, 150 mA with the data collecting between the 2 theta ranges of 10–90° with speed of 5°/min. The appearances and particle size of powder were analyzed by scanning electron microscope (SEM, TESCAN VEGA3, CZE) at an accelerating voltage of 10 kV with different magnification. For electrochemical properties evaluating, charge-discharge tests were carried out with a LAND-CT2001A test system at 25 °C with voltage ranging from 2.8 V to 4.2 V. Precipitation of cobalt from the cobalt-enriched leach liquor was carried out with ammonium oxalate at different pH and temperatures. The effect of pH values (0–5) on precipitation of cobalt was studied at 25 °C for 40min using molar ratio of 1.05. As shown in The effect of temperature (25–75°C) on precipitation of cobalt was studied at pH of 2.0 with molar ratio of 1.05 for 40 min. As shown in To investigate the effect of time on the precipitation of cobalt, the experiments were carried out at pH of 2.0 and 55 °C with molar ratio of 1.05. The effect of mole ratio of ammonium oxalate to cobalt (1.0–1.25) on precipitation of cobalt were studied at pH of 2.0 and 55 °C for 40 min. As shown in To determine the most probable mechanisms of precipitation of cobalt from leach liquor, kinetics analysis was carried out at various temperature and pH of 2.0 with molar ratio of 1.05 ( Since the precipitation was controlled strictly under the same conditions, Based on the data of Eq. Based on To validate the above experiment data, the precipitation experiment was carry out at pH of 2.0, 55 °C, 40 min, and 1.15 M ratio of oxalate and cobalt. The results obtained are presented in The TG/DSC curves ( To determine the probable mechanisms of formation of Co Therefore, Eq. Based on heating rates Based on Eq. Therefore, the kinetics reaction model with good correlation coefficient of the fitting straight line obtained by plotting According to references, about 40 kinetics models have been reported and can be classified as five major types: Diffusion, Reaction-order, Nucleation, Geometrical contraction and Power function ( To further determine a clear oxidation mechanism of cobalt oxalate, the model-free method was carried out at different heating rates of 5, 10, 20, 30 and 40 k/min with corresponding exothermic peak temperature of 276.0, 291.5, 307.5, 313.7 and 341.3 °C ( Based on the above thermodynamic and kinetics analysis, the oxidation experiment was carry out at 400 °C with air atmosphere for 6 h. As shown in The recovery of lithium was produced by adding excess amount of Na Since lithium carbonate is slightly soluble in water and the solubility decreases with the increase in temperature, the white precipitate was obtained at pH 14 and separated by filtration with washing by boiling ultrapure water. The XRD pattern of white precipitated powder is shown in Based on TG/DSC analysis ( From The discharge curve of regenerated LiCoO In this study, a process has been developed for recovering cobalt and regenerating cathode from leach liquor of spent LiCoO This research was financially supported by the Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at 