The thermal behavior of mechanochemically activated sphalerite during aging was investigated by calorimetry. The results indicate that mechanochemically activated sphalerite releases the stored energy which may origin from a series of complex transformations. The amount of energy released increases with the grinding time but remains almost constant after grinding for 1h. It is independent of the grinding atmosphere and is related to the ball-mill medium. The XRD results illustrate a difference of the microstructure between activated and non-activated sphalerite. The microstructure of the activated sphalerite remains the same when it is heated in a calorimeter for the measurement of the heat released. The particle size analyses show that the particle size of the activated sphalerite increases when it is heated in the calorimeter. Therefore, it can be concluded that the released energy is probably caused by the decrease of the specific surface energy.The mechanical action on solid substances generates a series of complex transformations, breaking the order of the crystalline structure, producing cracks and new surfaces, therefore, changing its physical and chemical properties, such as increasing the specific surface energy and elastic strain energy The most commonly used methods to study mechanical activation are IR and XRD techniques which normally allow the identification of the products Sphalerite, as an important part of sulfidic ores, belongs to the group of substances exhibiting great sensitivity to mechanical stress Natural pure hand-sorted sphalerite ore was purchased from a domestic mine, and its chemical compositions are summarized in The calorimetric measurement was performed in a HT-1000 heat conduction calorimeter (SETARAM, France). The detailed description of the calorimeter was given in our earlier publications The calorimeter’s temperature was maintained at 323.35 The structural disorder of mechanochemically activated sphalerite was characterized by X-ray diffraction analysis on a diffractometer (Rigaku, Japan) using Cu Kα radiation ( The average particle size was measured using Mastersizer 2000 Laser Diffraction Particle Size Analyzer (Malvern, GB), and distilled water was used as a dispersing agent. The effect of the grinding time on energy released for the activated sphalerite was investigated. The results, which is shown in Sphalerite is a non-conductive solid and superficial oxidation reactions will be strongly limited in the absence of surface activation The energy released for the mechanochemically activated sphalerite under different grinding media is shown in The XRD results in  The energy of the mechanochemically activated sphalerite released increases with the grinding time. The grinding atmosphere does not effect, obviously, the energy release from the activated sphalerite. The energy released comes from the decrease in the specific surface energy. The work has been supported by the Key Project 59934080 of the National Natural Science Foundation of PR China (No. 59934080) and the Doctorate Program Fund of National Ministry of Education in PR China (No. 2000053321).