An empirical study was performed on a gravitational air classifier that is used in a Swedish quarry. The classifier works in two steps and is used to classify a VSI-crushed 0–2mm fraction into three different products for use in the concrete and asphalt industry. The study was performed using the statistical method of design of experiments (DOE), with which the influence of three different variable control parameters was investigated. The influence of these parameters on the separation cut size and air flow into the machine has thus been obtained. The results show that different parameters as well as control strategies should be applied depending on the quality and capacity requirements of the final products.Due to both environmental reasons and the decreasing availability of natural sand in Sweden, the demand for high-quality manufactured sand for the concrete and asphalt industry has increased over the last several years. However, in order for the quarry industry to be able to deliver the demanded product, a new classification process is needed for the size range from 63 to 1000 Classification processes are used within both the mineral and the ballast industries to produce a variety of different products. The quality of these products is linked to the classification efficiency of the process. Specifically, a poor classification efficiency, for the mineral industry, results in certain minerals being lost as waste; meanwhile, for the ballast industry, the finished product will not have the desired particle size distribution. In Sweden, a dry classification process is preferred not only due to the climate but also for reasons such as the reduced need for drying the finished product. To manufacture sand for the concrete industry, the classification process should classify the 0–2 Air classifiers use air as classification media to separate particles after size, form and density. The separation is controlled by balancing the forces that the particles experience in the air flow. Gravitational classifiers have a separation point at the particle size where the drag force is larger than the gravitational force. Centrifugal classifiers separate particles by balancing the centrifugal force and the drag force which a particle experiences in an air vortex. The particle path of coarse particles will depend mainly on the centrifugal force meanwhile fines will have a particle path that depends on the drag force ( Gravitational air classifiers have been investigated by both  The investigated air classifier system in question consists of two stages, and each stage uses different principles for air classification. Stage 1 is a gravitational–inertial classifier as defined by The two stages of the classifier are connected, and the air flow in both stages is created by the same fan, which regulates the air flow through the system. The system works in such a way that the feed enters the gravitational–inertial classifier; see point 1 in The air–particle mixture leaves the gravitational–inertial classifier at point 7 in The classification process described above is controlled by the three valves that control the air inlets into the machine. These valves are the primary and the secondary air inlets for the gravitational–inertial classifier, stage 1, and the secondary air inlet for the centrifugal classifier, stage 2. The interaction between these parameters controls the quality and the yield of the final products. Thus, the aim of this work is to gain an understanding of this interaction and to present a method that describes how to control the classifier depending on the quality requirements. Faced with a similar problem within the field of flotation, The experiment conducted on the classification system was performed using a full factorial design. A total of three factors and two levels were used to determine the relationship between the physical parameters and the responding product quality. To perform the full factorial design, eight different test setups were required. The factors used in the experiment consist of the three valves, which control the air flow as previously described in Section  The classification tests were conducted in random order, according to the design presented in The air flows past the valves were measured using flow metres during the performed tests. The goal of taking these measurements was to investigate the relationship between cut size and air flow speed. The obtained data should, however, also allow for future validations of theoretical work. The results are divided into two subsections describing the influence of control parameters on the finished products. The results for product 1, i.e., the coarse product produced in stage 1, are discussed in Section  By using the previously described factorial design, the differences in classification efficiency and cut size can be linked to control parameters, which is carried out using the design matrix in The analysis was performed using the statistical software JMP version 8.0. The normal plot for the 1000 The fact that SA1 affects all of the studied sizes is not surprising because it controls the recirculation of material towards the separation zone. In other words, it limits the effects from turbulence and particle-to-particle interactions. However, it is surprising that the effects from SA2 would be so low because a closure of SA2 causes an increase in air flow through SA1 and PA1. The only way that the air flow into stage 1 can be increased is if the flow out of stage 1 into stage 2 is increased. This requires a higher air flow through the separation zone, which in theory would mean that larger particles would pass into stage 2. The reason for the lack of influence of SA2 might be that the increase in velocity through the valves in stage 1 due to closing SA2 is much smaller than the impacts from PA1 and SA1. The small difference in velocity through the separation zone produced by closing SA2 is simply not large enough to appear in the estimated effects ( The composition of product 2 depends on the classification efficiency of stage 2 and what is separated from the feed in stage 1 to create product 1. It was not possible to measure the feed into stage 2, so it was not possible to compare the test samples with the feed. The comparison performed was, therefore, not conducted against the feed. Research on concrete, e.g., studies by The estimated effects show that the main influence on the amount of particles below 63 To investigate the influence of the separation efficiency in stage 1 on the particle size distribution of product 2, particles below 125 As the factorial designs for both products show a great dependency of the secondary air inlet for stage 1 (SA1), an additional study was conducted on product 1. A simple series of tests were performed in which only SA1 was changed while the primary air inlet for stage 1 and the secondary air inlet for stage 2 were held open. Three stages were tested for SA1: closed (SA1 0%), half open (SA1 50%) and completely open (SA1 100%). The results from these tests can be seen in To find the influence of the studied parameters on the classification efficiency mass balance studies were conducted. The installation of the air classifier (see The results from the full factorial design study showed that the secondary air inlet for stage 1 heavily influenced both the particle size distribution for stage 1 and 2. It was also shown that the primary air inlet for stage 1 affected the amount of large particles in the coarse product. The decision was thus taken to investigate how those parameters affected the classification efficiency. Three different settings was tested, see The classification efficiency was calculated according to (  The classification efficiency dependent on the state of the primary air inlet can be seen in The classification system investigated in this work has the ability to separate fine particles from the feed. By using the available valves, it is possible to create vastly different particles size distributions for a given product. As the system produces three products, it is possible to produce a particular particle size distribution through the use of a good process control and a mixture of the three independent products. This factorial design experiment has shown that the primary air inlet for stage 1 (PA1) affects the amount of larger particles in product 1. As changing PA1 do not affect the classification efficiency of the finer particles in stage 1, PA1 can thus used to vary the amount of large particles in product 1 without affecting the removal of fines. The particle size distribution for the first and the second products are dependent on the secondary air inlet for stage 1 (SA1). Its influence on product 2 is indirect and depends on the classification efficiency in stage 1. SA1 affects the separation efficiency of stage 1 by recirculating fine particles towards the separation zone. Because SA1 has such a large effect on the particle size distribution curves, it is the most important parameter to be considered when controlling the process. The secondary air inlet in stage 2 controls the amount of fines in product 2 by recirculating particles towards the separation zone. Thus, the classification efficiency in both stages is dependent on the influence of the recirculation of particles towards the separation zone. This conclusion indicates that a good air classifier should be able to adjust recirculation to improve the classification process. The authors wish to thank the Development Fund of the Swedish Construction Industry (SBUF) and the Swedish national research programme MinBaS (Minerals, Ballast, and dimensional Stone) for their financial support of this work. The authors also wish to thank the personnel at the NCC Roads crushing plant in Stenungsund for the use of their equipment and the supply of materials during the course of these experiments. This work has been carried out within the Sustainable Production Initiative and the Production Area of Advance at Chalmers. Their support is gratefully acknowledged.