This study investigates the effect of Zr and C co-addition on the spark plasma sintered ZrB2-5 vol% Zr/graphite composites. Spark plasma sintering method was applied to consolidate and reinforce the composites by in-situ synthesis of ZrC through a chemical reaction between metallic Zr and graphite precursors. The effect of sintering temperature on the phase arrangement of the obtained composites was investigated by employing microstructural characterization techniques, mechanical properties measurements, and thermodynamic calculations. Results showed that the formation of ZrC cannot occur directly, while the in-situ reinforcement can be achieved indirectly if favorable thermodynamic and kinetic conditions provided. The sample sintered at 1700 °C showed a considerable amount of in-situ formed ZrC. However, in samples sintered at 1750 °C and 1800 °C, a diversity of phases was observed, mainly including ZrO2 polymorphs. It was also indicated that although higher sintering temperatures may improve hardness and densification of the composites, but may also cause poor fracture toughness. Consequently, the effect of sintering temperature on the phase arrangement and consequent characteristics of the prepared composites were fully addressed.Increasing the applied temperature during preparation of many components has been approved to be a critical parameter to achieve highly efficient products [ It is worth mentioning that most UHTCs are very expensive due to their rare containing ingredient and complicated manufacturing routes [ Several successful attempts have been reported by numerous informative articles for increasing the fracture toughness and sinterability of ZrB Despite the aforementioned achievements, the satisfactory densification of ZrB Alternatively, the combination of the aforementioned techniques with modern and fast sintering methods may produce UHTCs with improved properties [ This study suggests a potential pathway to utilize the advantages of metallic additives accompanied by minimizing their destructive side effects. The procedure is designated to exploit reactive SPS including simultaneous application of metallic zirconium and graphite flakes, which are well-established to promote densification and sintering of ZrB The raw materials including ZrB The obtained powder mixtures were loaded into a graphite die, internally covered by a 100 μm graphite foil, and placed in SPS chamber vacuumed to 5 Pa pressure. SPS process was carried out under the applied pressure of 40 MPa for 7 min (SPS Machine: Nanozint 10i, Khala poushan Felez Co, Iran). Applying the heating rate of 150 °C/min, three samples were sintered at 1700, 1750, and 1800 °C and labeled as ZG70, ZG75, and ZG80, respectively. The obtained samples were de-graphitized via a diamond grinding wheel, and further polished to 2500 grit by SiC sandpapers. The polished samples were studied for hardness and indentation fracture toughness measurements, as well as microstructural investigations. The fracture surface of the samples was also prepared to investigate the fractographical characteristics of the composites. The relative densities (RDs) of the composite samples were calculated based on the Archimedes' principle, using the previously reported media, equipment, and instructions [ Microstructural and fractographical characterizations were performed via a field emission scanning electron microscope (FESEM, Tescan, Mira 3 Czech Republic). The instrument was equipped with an energy-dispersive X-ray spectroscopy detector (EDS, DXPeX10 P Digital X-Ray Processor), which was used for compositional and elemental analysis of the samples. The morphology, chemical composition, and phase analysis of the prepared powder mixtures are presented in The RDs of the sintered composites and fraction of open porosities (OPs) of each sample are presented in However, FESEM micrographs (  Surprisingly, the peaks of remaining graphite in the ZG75 composite disappeared in ZG80 without any detectable carbon-containing phase. Alternatively, it appears that the consumption of graphite simultaneously occurred by the replacement of tetragonal-ZrO Metallic zirconium can directly react with the elemental carbon (graphite) through the following reaction: Although Eq. However, O In addition to Eqs. The variations of ΔG vs. temperature for the mentioned possible reactions in the composite systems of the current study are presented in The chemical reaction of Eq. As the temperature rises, complete oxidation of metallic Zr particles accompanied by excessive ZrO Increasing the sintering temperature, as can be seen in When the sintering temperature rises to 1800 °C (ZG80), based on GFE calculations ( As can be seen in the XRD pattern ( As it has been extensively studied and reported, ZrO Indeed, the mentioned phase arrangements affect the mechanical behavior of the sintered samples. The oxidation of metallic Zr leads to ZrO Whereas the ZG70 sample shows the lowest hardness compared to the other composites of this study, it presents the best IFT outcome. Such behavior can be attributed to the role of in-situ formed ZrC in activating the toughening mechanism, majorly crack deflection. There are also some evidences on the positive role of the residual porosities of ZG70, which can promote the toughening through crack blunting mechanism (Crack stop). As discussed above, although the highly stressed microstructure of the ZrO Near fully-dense ZrB Microstructural investigations accompanied with thermodynamic calculations were carried out to clarify the synthesis mechanism of different phases in the final products. Hardness and indentation fracture toughness tests were also used to understand the effect of phase arrangement on the mechanical behavior of the obtained composites. Results indicated that the composite sintered at 1700 °C consists of ZrB ZrO The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. The authors would like to appreciate Dr. Zohre Ahmadi (Materials and energy research center, Alborz, Iran) for her assistance in experiments, and Dr. Elham Ahounbar and Mr. Faramarz Kazemi (Amirkabir University of Technology, Tehran, Iran) for their help in thermodynamic calculations. We are also thankful of Ms. Zahra Rafaei (MSc) for her insightful helps in grammatical corrections of the text.