The influence of initial antimony concentration, cathode current density, concentrations of Na2S and NaOH, gas sparging and electrolyte temperature on average cell voltage, specific energy and current efficiency of antimony deposition has been studied. The experiments were conducted in a nondiaphragm electrolytic cell. The anode and cathode were made in such a way that the anode current density was ten times higher than the cathode current density so that a vigorous production of oxygen is promoted at the anode with lesser amounts of polysulphide; and concurrently decreasing the propensity of producing hydrogen at the cathode. Increasing the initial concentration of antimony from 25g/L to 45g/L increased the current efficiency by 18%. The average cell voltage decreased from 2.78V to 2.21V when the electrolyte temperature was raised from 45°C to 90°C. The results showed that increasing the sulphide concentration from 0.77M to 1.92M decreased the current efficiency by 13% due to the formation of polysulphide and thiosulphate ions which have negative effect on the current efficiency. Sparging of the electrolyte promotes a smooth and adherent antimony deposit; and the purity of deposited antimony was raised from 99.2% to 99.6%. The specific energy consumed per kilogram of deposited antimony decreased by 74% when the cathode current density was decreased from 250 to 50A/m2. Based on sulphate formation, anodic current efficiencies of 85% and 90% were obtained at sodium hydroxide concentrations of 8.75M and 10M, respectively. The preferred crystallographic orientations of the antimony deposit obtained at 2.5M NaOH concentration are in the order (012) (202) (110) (104), but the order becomes (012) (110) (104) (202) when NaOH concentration is increased further. The order of crystal orientations for antimony electrodeposition at 50A/m2 cathodic current density is (012) (110) (104) (202), which does not change with increasing cathode current density but the peaks at (110) (104) (202) crystal planes become more broadened and suppressed as current density increased.Antimony is a silvery, white, brittle and shiny metal that exhibits poor conductivity of heat and electricity. At room temperature, antimony does not change in air; and it is not tarnished in humid air or pure water. Antimony metal is extensively used globally to harden and increase the mechanical strength of lead which is used in wet-cell batteries. Apart from its use as alloying element, antimony compounds are used as a flame retardant in fabrics and plastics; decolorizing and refining agent in glass; opacifier and emulsifier for enamel; and pigments in paints and ceramics ( Antimony had been recovered as a metal through electrolysis of alkaline sulphide solution at the Sunshine plant, Idaho, USA, while at the Equity Silver plant, antimony was produced solely as sodium hydroxyl antimonate (NaSb(OH) Besides, Similarly, In this study, the optimization of electrolysis parameters for antimony electrodeposition at the cathode from model alkaline sulphide solutions is reported. The anode and cathode were made in such a way that the anode current density was ten times higher than the cathode current density so that a vigorous production of oxygen is promoted at the anode with lesser amounts of polysulphide; and concurrently decreasing the propensity of producing hydrogen at the cathode. The influence of the parameters including the initial antimony concentration, cathode current density, concentration of Na During the electrolytic recovery of antimony from alkaline sulphide solutions in a nondiaphragm cell, several electrochemical reactions do occur, some of which affect the process adversely depending on the prevailing electrowinning conditions. The possible chemical reaction processes that do occur at the cathode during antimony electrodeposition are given in the following sections ( Usually, the dominating negatively charged antimony complex ions in the leaching solution are SbS All the reduction reactions of the oxidized sulphur species at the cathode as given in Eqs. The hydrogen evolution potential is more negative than the deposition potential of antimony. However, this process will occur at the cathode if the concentration of antimony is too low in the solution. In practice, this reaction is reported to occur when the antimony concentration is less than 20 Reactions However, the oxidized sulphur species will interact with the electrolyte components (Eqs. On the other hand, if the reaction given in Eq. Consequently, the overall process reaction will be according to Eq. The electrolyte was prepared by dissolving analytical grade antimony sulphide (Sb The preferred electrolyte temperature was maintained by circulating a cell jacket with constant temperature water. Each experiment was run for 9 The deposited antimony at specified time intervals was thoroughly washed, dried and weighed. Electrodeposited antimony was analyzed by inductively coupled plasma so as to determine the purity of the deposited antimony and also calculate the current efficiency of the process. The current efficiency (η, %) was estimated from the obtained data using Faraday's law of electrolysis (Eq. However, the specific energy consumption (E mass of antimony deposited at time, t (g) number of electron transferred/molecule Faraday constant, 96 485 C deposition time (second) total current (A) antimony atomic weight, 121.76 average cell voltage, volts The influence of change in initial antimony concentration on current efficiency was investigated at Na When the initial antimony concentration was decreased to 25  It is reported that gas sparging is an effective method for enhancing mass transfer in the electrowinning process. The diffusion layer thickness decreases considerably in consequence of the turbulent conditions generated by the sparging (  In addition, due to the current concentration and more abundant availability of antimony ions at the edges of the cathode, the antimony deposit at the edges became progressively powdery and dendritic growth was more pronounced at the edges of the cathode as the cathodic current density was increased beyond 150  The effect of sodium sulphide concentration on the current efficiency was studied by using the baseline conditions highlighted in  In nondiaphragm electrodeposition of antimony from alkaline sulphide electrolyte, it is favorable to use high concentration of NaOH, since this will suppress the discharging of sulphide ions at the anode and consequently prevent the formation of sulphur species which can reduce the current efficiency of the process. A number of tests were performed to investigate the influence of increasing concentration of NaOH on antimony electrolysis from alkaline sulphide solution. NaOH concentration was varied from 2.5  The temperature of the electrolyte has a significant influence on the current efficiency of the electrolytic process. The antimony deposits obtained under varying current density and NaOH concentration are examined by X-ray diffraction method to determine the order of preferred crystal orientations. The results are given in Moreover, from Antimony electrodeposition from model alkaline sulphide electrolytes has been carried out in a nondiaphragm electrolytic cell. The influence of initial antimony concentration, cathode current density, concentrations of Na The authors would like to appreciate the following organizations: