The friction and wear characteristics of (V,Ti)N coatings deposited by cathodic arc ion plating (CAIP) have been studied by using a Schwingungs Reibung und Verschleiss (SRV) tester with reciprocating motion against a SAE 52100 steel ball from room temperature to 300 °C. The (V,Ti)N coatings exhibit a friction coefficient of 0.57–1.28 under unlubricated condition and of 0.18–0.19 under boundary-lubricated condition, depending on wear parameters used. The effects of load, frequency and temperature on the friction and wear of the (V,Ti)N coatings have been discussed. The worn surfaces and wear debris generated under different wear conditions are examined by means of scanning electron microscopy and Raman spectroscopy to identify the tribochemical reaction and phase structures generated during the wear process. Metastable FeO-type and stable Fe2O3-type iron-based oxides are formed on worn surfaces under both boundary-lubricated and unlubricated conditions as well as some (V,Ti,Fe)2O5 and rutile TiO2 oxides. The dissolved oxygen in the lubricant plays a very important role in oxidational wear of (V,Ti)N coatings under boundary-lubricated conditions.The coatings of transition-metal nitrides have been widely used in industrial applications ranging from wear-protection films on machining tools or parts to optical films for decorative purposes and for diffusion barriers in integrated circuits The friction and wear of TiAlCrN coatings were reported for possible machining applications In this paper, the friction and wear of cathodic arc ion-plated (V,Ti)N coatings in sliding against a SAE 52100 steel ball have been investigated under both boundary-lubricated and unlubricated conditions. A detailed analysis on worn surfaces and wear debris is presented to provide information on tribo-oxidation of (V,Ti)N coatings under different wear conditions. Cathodic arc ion plating (CAIP) is an efficient and commonly used process suitable for industrial applications due to its high ionization ratio and deposition rate, which allows the deposition of various functional coatings, such as titanium and chromium nitrides of excellent physical, chemical and mechanical properties. In this paper, the deposition of (V,Ti)N coatings was performed with a Kobe-CAIP050 coating system (at Teikoku Piston Ring of Japan) from a titanium target and a vanadium target alternatively in a mixed Ar/N The worn surfaces and wear debris sticking on wear scars have been analyzed using laser Raman spectroscopy (Renishaw 2000 system) shortly after wear tests to give information on chemical and structural modifications (transfer film and debris) caused during wear test. The Raman spectra were recorded with XY spectrometer equipped with a liquid-nitrogen-cooled CCD camera as a detector. Wear products were excited by the 514.5-nm line of an argon ion laser. A low laser power of 25 mW was used to generate spectra taken from the debris in the as-formed state in order to avoid possible laser-induced damage of the surface, while higher laser powers of up to 100 mW were employed to study the thermal stability of wear debris. The laser beam was focused through a 50× objective of an optical microscope to a spot size of 2 μm on the samples. The wear tests have been conducted by using a standard SRV (Schwingungs Reibung und Verschleiss [SRV], Optimol Instruments Prueftechnik, Germany) tester with reciprocating motion against a 10-mm SAE 52100 steel ball. The detailed description of SRV wear tester is available from our published paper     Worn surfaces of selected (V,Ti)N coatings under boundary-lubricated condition are observed by SEM. Before SEM observations, the worn surfaces have been carefully cleaned to eliminate the oil lubricant with benzene and acetone in an ultrasonic bath.     The wear process of the (V,Ti)N coatings against a SAE 52100 steel ball under both boundary-lubricated and unlubricated condition in air appears to be oxidational wear. The wear debris consists mainly of iron-based oxide particles transferred from the coupled ball and then oxidized on the wear track of the (V,Ti)N coating, although some (V,Ti,Fe) There are many factors including atmosphere, temperature and load that affect the formation and nature of oxides at the tribo-contact areas. Although the friction coefficient of the (V,Ti)N coating under boundary-lubricated condition is much lower than that under unlubricated condition, the dissolved oxygen in the oil lubricant plays a very important role in the oxidational wear of the (V,Ti)N coating. Oxides are formed by the tribo-chemical reaction between the asperities and the dissolved oxygen, while the extent of oxidation depends upon the oxygen concentration in the lubricant, temperature developed at the asperities, the duration of contact and the oxidation ability of the iron and the (V,Ti)N coating. The amount of oxide debris generated under boundary-lubricated condition is much less than that generated under unlubricated condition. It should be noted that, at 50 °C, 20 N load and 50 Hz frequency, the wear volume and wear rate of the (V,Ti)N coating under boundary-lubricated condition is larger than those obtained under unlubricated condition. This is probably due to the build-up of iron oxides sticking on the worn surfaces under unlubricated condition. However, the situation becomes reversed under lubricated condition with the increase of temperature to above 100 °C. Under unlubricated wear condition, a large number of loosely compacted oxide particles are produced on the worn surfaces at room temperature, 100 and 200 °C. The oxide debris is produced by the wear process involving the formation, fracture and comminution of iron oxide, and reoxidation of transferred iron debris particles. At low temperatures, the wear process is governed more by the removal rate of the iron oxide debris than by the formation rate of the iron oxide. Low temperatures favor detachment and breakup of the oxide during sliding. In such a condition, it is difficult to develop a continuous iron oxide film covering a large area of the sliding surface. However, at 300 °C, the worn surface of the (V,Ti)N coating seems much smoother at low magnification. The retention and compaction of oxide particles on the wear track are facilitated, leading to development of an adherent oxide film. An increase in adhesion at the oxide/(V,Ti)N interface or in cohesion within the oxide is beneficial to the formation of oxide film. In addition, the transferred layer is also observed on the coupled ball at 300 °C. Debris flakes sticking on the steel ball also increase the effective area of contact. In addition to changing the contact area, the iron oxide transfer layer also alter the chemistry of the sliding contact. The tribo-contact area is no longer between steel ball and (V,Ti)N surface and becomes iron oxide sliding against iron oxide film. The change in tribo-contact area and tribo-reactions plays a significant role in determining wear behavior at 300 °C. The iron oxide layer consisting of compacted debris is able to deform plastically to produce a relatively smooth appearance. The wear volume and wear rate of (V,Ti)N coating depends not only the friction coefficient, but also the thickness and removal rate of the build-up of iron oxide layer on the worn surface.  A (V,Ti)N coating exhibits a friction coefficient in sliding combat against a SAE 52100 steel ball of 0.57–1.28 under unlubricated condition and of 0.18–0.19 under boundary-lubricated condition, depending on the wear parameters. Under unlubricated condition, the friction coefficient of (V,Ti)N coating gradually decreases with load at room temperature. The wear volume and wear rate of the coupled ball are distinctly larger than those of the (V,Ti)N coatings under both boundary-lubricated and unlubricated conditions. The wear rate of the (V,Ti)N coating under boundary-lubricated condition is between 9.01×10 The wear process of (V,Ti)N coating against steel ball under both boundary-lubricated and unlubricated condition in air is dominated by the oxidational wear. The dissolved oxygen in the lubricant plays a very important role in the oxidational wear of (V,Ti)N coating under boundary-lubricated condition. The iron-based oxides of FeO-type and Fe The authors would like to thank the Teikoku Piston-Ring, Ms. K. Saito and Mr. K. Kanamori for their kind help in specimen preparation, SEM observations and boundary-lubricated wear tests.