Spondyloarthritis (SpA) is a relatively common chronic inflammatory joint disorder, with a prevalence of about 0.2–0.5% worldwide. The primary target of the pathological process is the enthesis, where tendons and ligaments attach to underlying bone. These insertion sites are hotspots of bone formation (enthesophytes), which can lead to ankylosis. Unfortunately, the mechanisms causing the onset and progression of entheseal ossification remain largely unknown. Sphingosine 1-phosphate (S1P), a lipid generated after sphingosine phosphorylation by sphingosine kinases 1 and 2 (SK1/2), plays important roles in cell proliferation, differentiation and survival. S1P regulates fundamental biological processes such as cell cycle, inflammatory response or bone homeostasis. Indeed, S1P has been involved in some of most-spread skeletal diseases such as rheumatoid arthritis or osteoarthritis. On the other hand, the implication of S1P in SpA has not been explored yet. In the present work, we observed by ELISA that S1P content was significantly increased in the serum of SpA patients (6.1±4.2μM, n=21) compared to healthy donors (1.6±0.9μM, n=12). In vitro, gene expression of SK1 and SK2 as well as their activity were increased during differentiation of primary murine chondrocytes and osteoblasts into mineralizing cells. In addition, mRNA of the S1P-specific transporter Spns2 and S1P secretion were augmented. Using the pharmacological drugs SKi (SK pan-inhibitor), PF-543 (SK1 specific inhibitor) or K-145 (SK2 specific inhibitor), we showed that the inhibition of SK1 and/or SK2 decreased matrix mineralization, alkaline phosphatase activity and the mRNA expression of Runx2 and Bglap in chondrocytes and osteoblasts. To our knowledge, this is the first study indicating that S1P levels are significantly increased in serum from SpA patients. Moreover, we showed in vitro that SK activity was involved in the mineralization capacity of osteoblasts and chondrocytes. S1P metabolic pathway may represent an ingenious therapeutic target for SpA in the future.Spondyloarthritis (SpA) are common rheumatic diseases, with a prevalence of about 0.2–0.5% in North America Sphingosine 1-phosphate (S1P) is a lipid belonging to the sphingolipids (SL) class group. SL have been historically considered as structural molecules without any biological activity, but nowadays they are considered as “bioactive lipids” implicated in different pathologies such as cancer, obesity, diabetes or cardiovascular diseases S1P is a master regulator of bone homeostasis performing important roles in osteoblasts, osteoclasts and osteocytes Although S1P metabolic pathway has been reported to be involved in skeletal diseases such as rheumatoid arthritis (RA) and osteoarthritis (OA) Culture medium, serum, antibiotics, 3-(4,5-dimethylthiazol-2-yl-)2,5-diphenyltetrazolium bromide (MTT), Alizarin red, Serum samples were obtained from 12 healthy donors, 37 patients with RA and 21 patients with SpA ( Blood samples were centrifuged at 1800 Primary osteoblasts, chondrocytes and tenocytes were isolated from newborn (4–6 S1P content in serum of healthy donors, SpA and RA patients, and in conditioned medium from cultured cells was determined by competitive ELISA analysis from Tebu-bio (Le Perray En Yvelines, France). Cell viability was determined by MTT assay as described before The protocols for the determination of SK1 and SK2 enzymatic activity have been described in detail previously AP activity was determined using RNA extraction, reverse transcription and real-time PCR (hybridization at 60 For the analysis of human serum samples, data from RA and SpA patients were compared to healthy donors by the use of unpaired S1P concentration was assessed by ELISA in serum of 21 SpA patients, and compared to healthy donors and RA patients ( Twelve SpA patients (57.1%) had an elevated C-reactive protein (CRP) level (> Twelve SpA patients (57.1%) had an elevated C-reactive protein (CRP) level (> SpA is characterized by ectopic ossification of the enthesis, but the respective role of each entheseal cell type in the process of mineralization is still unclear. Here, the mineralization capacity of cells from tendon, cartilage and bone was tested. Primary mouse osteoblasts, chondrocytes and tenocytes were used as cell culture models. All cells were grown in osteogenic medium supplemented with ascorbic acid (50 SpA is characterized by ectopic ossification of the enthesis, but the respective role of each entheseal cell type in the process of mineralization is still unclear. Here, the mineralization capacity of cells from tendon, cartilage and bone was tested. Primary mouse osteoblasts, chondrocytes and tenocytes were used as cell culture models. All cells were grown in osteogenic medium supplemented with ascorbic acid (50 The regulation of SKs was assessed in the course of differentiation into mineralizing cells. Both To study the involvement of SKs in mineralizing cell differentiation, various pharmacological inhibitors at different concentrations were added to the culture medium. SKi was used as a pan-inhibitor (1, 2.5 or 5 For the following experiments, we investigated the involvement of SKs in mineralizing cell differentiation process. The pharmacological inhibitors were added throughout the culture period. We analyzed extracellular matrix mineralization by Alizarin red staining and AP activity at day 10 and day 17 of cell differentiation ( We examined the evolution of S1P extracellular signaling during osteoblast and chondrocyte differentiation in mineralizing cells. S1P relative secretion was increased during the onset of cell differentiation ( In the present article, we observed that S1P levels were significantly increased in serum from SpA patients (6.10 We suggest that S1P abnormal levels may be linked with inflammation processes occurring in diseased joints. In our case, S1P serum concentration weakly correlated with CRP levels in patients with active SpA. However, S1P levels in SpA patients under anti-TNF-α treatment were nearly similar as in patients without biotherapy. Actually, S1P metabolic pathway has been demonstrated to play a particularly important role in the transduction of inflammatory signaling. S1P addition can also produce activation of COX-2 and secretion of PGE2 Inflammation courses are very different between RA, OA and SpA. In the context of OA, inflammatory mediators released by cartilage, bone and synovium create a low-grade inflammation Specific inhibition or silencing of SK1 in the murine CIA model resulted in a reduction in incidence and disease activity. Articular inflammation was decreased and joint destruction was significantly inhibited One of the major and most specific events in SpA progression is the bone formation in enthesis, the attachment zone of tendons to bone through a fibrocartilage segment. Because of the results obtained from SpA patients, we decided to study the progression of S1P metabolism during mineralization in primary murine osteoblasts, chondrocytes and tenocytes and the possible implication of S1P metabolism in the regulation of the process. First, we characterized mineralization in presence of ascorbic acid and β-glycerophosphate by analyzing calcium deposition in bone matrix, AP specific activity. One of the major and most specific events in SpA progression is the bone formation in enthesis, the attachment zone of tendons to bone through a fibrocartilage segment. Because of the results obtained from SpA patients, we decided to study the progression of S1P metabolism during mineralization in primary murine osteoblasts, chondrocytes and tenocytes and the possible implication of S1P metabolism in the regulation of the process. First, we characterized mineralization in presence of ascorbic acid and β-glycerophosphate by analyzing calcium deposition in bone matrix, AP specific activity. We observed SK1 and SK2 gene expression and activity constantly increased during mineralization process in osteoblasts. In chondrocytes, SK1 and SK2 gene expression stabilized, and SK1 and SK2 activity decreased after 10 By using specific pharmacological inhibitors in these cell models, we further demonstrated that SK1 and SK2 activity certainly participate to favor mineralizing activity. Indeed, the suppression of SK1 and SK2 activity significantly decreased calcium deposition in extracellular matrix and AP activity and S1P acts through a mechanism “inside-out”, either intracellularly or extracellularly after release through five different protein G-coupled receptors. Interestingly, we observed that S1P-specific transporter ( Overall, our study showed that S1P was strongly increased in the serum of SpA patients and demonstrated the implication of the two SK isoforms in mineralization of chondrocyte and osteoblast cultures. To our knowledge, this is the first study indicating that S1P is most likely implicated in SpA, and may promote the ossification The following are the supplementary data related to this article. Supplementary data to this article can be found online at CB planned the experimental design, conducted experiments, and wrote the manuscript. AEJ, AB and SM conducted This work was supported by grant from “