Preparation of lithium carbonate from spodumene concentrate was carried out by a sodium carbonate autoclave process. The effects of different operation conditions including liquid-to-solid ratio, Na/Li ratio, agitation speed, reaction temperature and reaction time on the lithium carbonate conversion efficiencies were initially investigated. The results show that the conversion efficiency is not less than 94% under the optimal conditions. The purity of the obtained lithium carbonate can reaches up to 99.6%, which is higher than that obtained by sulfuric acid method.As the lightest metal, lithium is now widely used in battery, alloy, and nuclear power fields. Although this metal element occurs in a wide variety of minerals and ores, there are only a relatively few ores that are sufficiently available and contain a sufficient amount of lithium to make them attractive as a commercially practicable source of lithium. Among these commercially practicable sources of lithium, spodumene is the mineral that attracts the most interest and various processes for recovering the lithium values from spodumene ore have been proposed. In a number of these processes, only two processes have been practiced: sintering method and sulfuric acid process ( In order to overcome these drawbacks, an autoclave method for production of lithium carbonate from spodumene has been suggested as the alternative ( The slurry was then leached with carbon dioxide and the resulting bicarbonate solution was heated to derive lithium carbonate ( Although the sodium carbonate autoclave method was proposed as an alternative method for production of lithium carbonate from spodumene many years ago, few detail investigation and evaluation on this method were reported. In this paper, a sodium carbonate autoclave process for production of lithium carbonate from spodumene is proposed and the results of investigation on this process are presented. The main objective is to determinate the optimal conditions to prepare high purity lithium carbonate from spodumene concentrate. The spodumene concentrate used in this experiment was collected from a company in Jiangsu Province, China. Elemental analysis results of the spodumene concentrate is presented in α-spodumene is a monoclinic aluminium silicate, which has compact structure and hardly reacts with acid or base except hydrofluoric acid. So it is difficult to extract lithium from α-spodumene. As a result, the α-spodumene must be roasted and converted to its beta form before autoclaving carbonation. The effects of roasting conditions on the conversion ratio have been investigated in our previous work [ The autoclave was charged with Na The reacted slurry was then put into a 2 The lithium bicarbonate rich filtrate was heated to 90 In order to obtain the optimal conditions for preparation of lithium carbonate from spodumene, the effects of different variables on the lithium carbonate conversion efficiencies were evaluated. The main variables studied were ratio of liquid to solid, ratio of lithium to sodium, agitation, temperature and time of reaction. The results obtained are summarized as the follows. The effect of liquid-to-solid ratio on the lithium carbonate conversion efficiency was studied in the range from 2 to 5 (milliliter of solution per gram of solid), maintaining the sodium-to-lithium ratio at 1.5, stirring speed at 350 In order to evaluate the experimental error, each experiment was replicated for five times. The average conversion efficiency and standard deviation was calculated and the results are presented in As can be seen in However, a further increase in the ratio from 4 to 5 does not lead to a substantial increase in the efficiency. Consequently, according to these data, the autoclave process should be carried out at the liquid-to-solid ratio of 4. According to the reaction (1), the sodium carbonate consumption must affect the lithium carbonate conversion. The effect of sodium-to-lithium (Na/Li) ratio on the conversion efficiency was preliminarily evaluated in the range from 0.8 to 1.6, maintaining the liquid-to-solid ratio at 4, stirring speed at 350 As can be seen in The effect of stirring speed on the lithium carbonate conversion efficiency was studied in experiments conducted at 230 This increase in conversion efficiency can be attributed to two factors. First, it is postulated that higher stirring speed makes the spodumene particles ground by the stainless steel ball in the reactor much more effectively, which strips the lithium carbonate layer covering the spodumene particles and thus strengthen the mass diffusion process in the particles (internal diffusion). In addition, it is obvious that high speed can lead to suspension of the solid particles in the sodium carbonate solution and thus improve the diffusion across the hydrodynamic boundary layer around the spodumene particles ( To study the effect of reaction temperature on the lithium carbonate conversion efficiency, the experiments were conducted in the range of 150 to 250  The effect of reaction time on the lithium carbonate conversion efficiency was investigated in the range from 10 to 120 The results are presented in The lithium bicarbonate rich filtrate prepared under above optimal conditions was used for preparation of lithium carbonate. It was heated at 90 Due to the high liquid-to-solid ratio, the results show that the recovery of lithium carbonate is just about 70%. In order to calculate the purity of lithium carbonate, the contents of the alkaline metal and alkaline earth metal in Table 3 is converted to contents of corresponding carbonate, and the contents of Si, Al and P is converted to contents of SiO To verify whether the lithium extraction proceeded according to reaction (1), the residue obtained after autoclave process and carbonation reaction was characterized by XRD. As can be seen in An autoclave process for preparation of lithium carbonate from spodumene was proposed and the autoclave process conditions were initially optimized. The results show that the lithium carbonate conversion efficiency is not less than 94% under the obtained optimal conditions. The purity of the obtained lithium carbonate reaches up to 99.6%. This is higher than that obtained by sulfuric acid process, which can be mainly attribute to the fact that the lithium carbonate does not content any sulfate.