Emulsion-type products are made by finely chopping meat to form a stable mixture that will trap and hold fat and moisture and form the characteristic texture of an emulsified product when cooked. The stable meat mixture is formed by extracting salt-soluble proteins from the meat ingredients by using either a bowl chopper or a combination of a mixer and an emulsifier. The mixing action of both the mixer and the bowl chopper creates a more even distribution of the functional non-meat ingredients (see There is a synergistic effect of the combination of salt and phosphates on protein extraction and water-holding capacity of the meat mixture. The pyrophosphate form of the alkaline phosphates commonly used in producing emulsions has been shown to reverse the formation of actomyosin, returning actin and myosin to their separate pre-rigor forms. Myosin is the most functional of the muscle proteins in terms of ease of extraction in a salt solution and the binding ability of the mixture when cooked. The meat ingredients are also commonly preblended to maximize the functional properties of the added salt and water. Coarse-minced pieces of 0.5 inch (1.5 cm or larger) meat trimmings are mixed with salt and water and held at refrigerated temperatures for up to 72 h. This holding period allows time for the salt and water to migrate into the meat trimmings to enhance the protein extraction and the water-holding capacity of the meat. This process is most effective on the lean portion of the mixture, since the protein content is much higher in the lean portion. However, it is known that salt stabilizes the fat cells against melting during the cooking process. For emulsified or finely chopped emulsions or batters, it has been shown that phosphates are not needed if the preblending procedure is used. Air incorporated into the finely chopped batter is undesirable, both from the standpoint of binding ability of the protein and the visual appearance of the final product. Vacuum chopping, mixing and emulsification are important factors in removing this air. The extracted protein, also known as the protein exudate, serves as the protein glue to bind the protein fibres together into a viscous matrix, which traps or holds the fat particles and water in the product when the product is cooked. Ice is often added during the chopping process to keep the meat mixture cold during the time when the chopping and mixing would normally cause a temperature increase in the mixture. By keeping the mixture cold longer, the chopping and mixing times are maximized, thus maximizing the extraction of the salt-soluble proteins. The water that results from the melting ice further dissolves the added salt to form a salt solution that aids the extraction of the salt-soluble proteins. If the mixture becomes too warm, the fat in the mixture may become soft and melt, forming unsightly fat pockets on the surface of the products that become apparent during the cooking process. The two basic processes for forming a finely chopped mixture are mixing–emulsifying and chopping. The more traditional process of chopping involves the use of a bowl chopper ( The mixer–emulsifier process involves two steps, a mixing step and an emulsifying step ( In the true sense of the word emulsion, a meat emulsion is considered to be a misnomer. True food emulsions involve an emulsifying agent, a protein, which binds to both the fat and water to prevent the fat from separating from the water (effectively allowing the fat to be dissolved and distributed in the water). In its role as an emulsifying agent, the hydrophobic end of the protein binds to the fat and the hydrophilic end of the protein binds to the water. In the case of the meat mixture, there are so many other factors affecting the stability of the matrix, such as muscle fibres, connective tissue, etc., that the true emulsion theory is not likely to have a large impact on this product. The final, finely chopped or emulsified, mixture is better described as a batter than an emulsion; however, the word emulsion continues to be most commonly used. Whether mixing or chopping, the lean meat should be combined first with the salt and part of the water ( In the case of a chopped emulsion, the final chopping temperature, prior to stuffing would be determined by the dominant type of fat in the meat ingredients used ( When using a mixer–emulsifier combination, preblended lean and fat meat mixtures are combined in a mixer, to which the spices, binders, cooked rework, etc., are added ( After chopping or emulsification, the mixture is stuffed into a casing to give it its distinctive shape and appearance and is then cooked, either in an oven or in water. Cooked sausages that are cooked in an oven are typically smoked, using either natural or liquid smoke. Most cooked sausage products are fully cooked and referred to as ready-to-eat (RTE) products. The emulsion production system just described is based on the use of meat proteins as a base material. Some cooked sausage products, such as spreadable liver sausage or paté, are made without using the binding ability of raw meat proteins. The non-binding materials in these products are essentially trapped in the cooked meat mixture. This lack of bind allows the product to be spreadable. There is also a sliceable version of liver sausage, which does depend upon the bind of meat proteins as discussed previously. Emulsions can also be made using pork rind. Rind emulsions are made by first cooking the pork rind in water. The cooked rinds are then finely chopped, and sodium caseinate or soy isolate are added to stabilize the collagen and fat in the chopped rinds. This product is then chilled and added as a fat-replacement ingredient in emulsified products. Fat pre-emulsions are made to stabilize fat against the stress of cooking the sausage, thereby preventing the fat from rendering out of the product during cooking. Sodium caseinate and soy isolate can be used to bind fat during the chopping and cooking processes, which results in an emulsion that is stable during further cooking. Emulsion formation is based on the successful use of meat and non-meat ingredients, stuffing these into casings, and cooking the resultant sausages. Emulsion failures most often result in fat separation from the meat to the surface of the product, just under the casing. Emulsion stability is typically as good as the weakest link in the whole process. Most commonly, emulsion failures are due to the inability of the lean meat ingredients to emulsify or trap the fat sufficiently to prevent fat separation. This could be due to insufficient levels of salt or phosphates, too much fat or water being added to the formula, or chopping or mixing to a too high or too low temperature prior to stuffing and cooking. Also, emulsion failure, often referred to as ‘fatting out’, may be due to damaged protein, resulting from using improperly frozen trimmings, or trimmings that are too old and partially spoiled. Abusing an emulsion by pumping it or holding an emulsion too long between emulsification and cooking may also cause an emulsion breakdown. Emulsion failures may also occur with properly made emulsions that are either improperly stuffed into the casings or cooked too rapidly or at too high relative humidity in the oven. Examples of emulsified sausages include: frankfurters, wieners, hot dogs, bologna, white hots (cooked bratwurst), bockwurst, knockwurst, Braunschweiger or liver sausage. Most of the following emulsified products are also discussed in The traditional bockwurst contains veal and pork, milk, eggs, chives and parsley and is seasoned similarly to frankfurters, stuffed into 1 in (25 mm) diameter casings and cooked in water. Originally bockwurst was sold as a fresh (raw) product, but is now most often sold as a cooked product, because of its highly perishable nature. Bologna, which originated from Bologna, Italy, is made much like frankfurters and wieners. Bologna is most often stuffed in larger-diameter (4–5 in/10–13 cm diameter) casings, sold in chubs or sliced for use as cold sandwich meat. It is also available as ring bologna, in which beef rounds are used for the casing and stuffed as 1 lb (454 g) loops. Bologna could be made with a coarse-ground texture, but most commonly is a finely chopped product. Bolognas often have a similar flavour to hot dogs, but bologna often contains more garlic to enhance the flavour, since bologna is most often eaten cold. Mustard is heavily used in most bolognas. Large-diameter bologna is not typically smoked. These are short, small diameter, finely chopped frankfurters, typically used as appetizers. Currently, cocktail franks are often produced by a coextrusion process, which does not require the use of a casing. This product is believed to originate from Frankfurt, Germany in 1487. The frankfurter name is often used interchangeably with frank, wiener and hot dog. Frankfurters are typically 3/4 to 1 in (20–25 mm) in diameter and are linked in 5 in (12.5 cm) lengths. Frankfurters are prepared using either a natural casing or a cellulose casing. Hot dogs are typically smoked. The cellulose casing is removed before packaging of this product, which results in what is called a skinless product. Skinless frankfurters make up over 95% of this product category. Frankfurters are most commonly sold in the fine-chopped, emulsified form, but may be made as a coarse-ground product. Frankfurters are most often sold in packages of 10 per pound (454 g). The flavour of frankfurters is often due to black pepper, nutmeg, and possibly coriander. Garlic and onion may also be use in frankfurters. Mustard is heavily used in most hot dogs. Other spices may be used for a particular regional flavour. They are secondary flavours and are not identifiable as individual spices by most people. Since they are normally eaten hot, frankfurters would not be as heavily spiced as bologna, which is most often eaten cold. Officially, hot dogs are wieners or frankfurters, which are sold and eaten in a bun. Hot dogs were first seen in the late 1800s, at baseball games in the Unites States, at which vendors decided to use bread, instead of the gloves that had been used previously, to hold the hot sausages while eating. Frankfurters were often called ‘dachshund’ or ‘little dog’ sausages by German vendors. While not all agree on the origin of the name ‘hot dog’, one version is that a New York Journal sports cartoonist, Tad Dorgan, was not sure how to spell ‘dachshund’ in a cartoon he was drawing, so he simply wrote ‘hot dog’! Knockwurst sausages are similar to frankfurters. They are made with a fine-chopped texture, except that they are made using 1 Liver sausage is typically made from finely chopped or coarse-minced pork trimmings, livers and bacon trimmings and cooked in moisture-impermeable casings in water. Liver sausage may be cured or uncured. Onion, nutmeg and smoked bacon are typical flavours found in liver sausages. Non-fat dry milk is used to improve the harsh flavour of liver. If cooked meats are used instead of raw ingredients, a spreadable product (see paté) is produced. Paté is made from fresh livers and cooked meat and cooked in a moisture-impermeable casing. This product lacks the bind of liver sausages made from raw meat ingredients and is therefore a spreadable product. Vienna sausages are short, small-diameter frankfurters, often cut (open ends) from long lengths of stuffed casings, and sold in cans or glass jars. Wieners originated from Vienna, Austria. The wiener is essentially the same as a frankfurter, with the exception that originally it was made primarily from veal, rather than from pork and beef. Currently, there is very little difference between a wiener and a frankfurter, and the names are often used interchangeably. 