The quest for a circular economy has directed attention towards processing of end-of-life products and industrial streams to recover the valuable fractions these contain. Fluorescent lamp waste is acknowledged to be an important source of yttrium and europium, two of the rare earth elements presently regarded as having critical supply risk. In this study, a commercial extractant for solvent extraction separations of REEs, Cyanex 572, was successfully applied to separate yttrium and europium from solutions obtained during processing of fluorescent lamp waste streams. Yttrium was selectively separated from europium at pHeq
                     =0, followed by further recovery of europium at pHeq
                     =1. Better extraction efficiencies of REEs were achieved using aliphatic diluents e.g. kerosene in comparison to aromatic diluents or long chain alcohols. Increases in temperature in the range 25–65°C led to decreases in the separation factors between yttrium and europium. Stripping with hydrochloric acid solutions at concentrations higher than 3M led to complete recovery of extracted yttrium and europium. Precipitation of these elements from their respective stripping products with oxalic acid, followed by calcination of the precipitate, led to yttrium and europium oxides of 99.82% and 91.60% purity, respectively. A flowsheet that encompass the main steps for fluorescent lamp waste processing is also presented.The rare earth elements (REEs) group has received considerable attention in recent years. The use of REEs in future sustainable applications, from efficient lighting to green energy sources e.g. wind turbines, has increased the worldwide demand for these elements ( Modern fluorescent lamps, known as tri-band lamps, use a mix of REEs-based phosphors to generate white light ( Up to six different REEs can be found in such lamps: cerium, europium, gadolinium, lanthanum, terbium and yttrium. Europium and yttrium are the REEs present in largest amounts in fluorescent lamps due to the prevalence of the red phosphor (europium-doped yttrium oxide), as well as the relatively high REEs content in this type of phosphor when compared to blue and green phosphors. Crushing of end-of-life lamps, followed by mechanical separation of macro-fractions (aluminium end caps, glass, electronics etc.) is often used to facilitate the collection of phosphors fractions ( The processing of discarded REEs-containing streams has strong roots in the aforementioned traditional hydrometallurgical mining technologies. Commercial extractants have been successfully applied in separating REEs from end-of-life products, including fluorescent lamps. However, separation is often directed towards a group recovery of all REEs found in products and not an individual separation. In this publication the individual separation of yttrium and europium using Cyanex 572, a commercial extractant for solvent extraction separations of REEs, is addressed. This effort is connected to the processing of fluorescent lamp waste for the recovery of these two critical elements. The investigated feed, a mixed yttrium/europium strip product, originates from a solvent extraction process for a group recovery of REEs from lamp waste. This paper addresses aspects related to the separation chemistry of REEs from real waste feeds; and also the preparation of solid REE oxides as final products. A flowsheet comprising all the steps needed to obtain yttrium oxide and europium oxide from fluorescent lamp waste fractions is discussed. Fluorescent lamp waste is presently viewed as an important source of yttrium and europium ( Solvent extraction separation of REEs was investigated using a wide range of extractants. Bis(2,4,4-trimethylpentyl)phosphinic acid (Cyanex 272) and sec-nonylphenoxy acetic acid ( Extractants such as TBP ( Solvent extraction is no doubt more effective and faster than fractional crystallization and the fractional precipitation methods previously applied for individual separation of REEs. EHEHPA is currently the extractant of choice for industrial separations of individual REEs, having reasonably high separation factors between adjacent elements ( Cyanex 572 is a phosphorus-based chelating extractant aimed at the separation of individual REEs. Although its exact composition has not been disclosed, it is mentioned to be a mixture of phosphinic and phosphonic acids. Eq. The importance of this work relates to the use of real REE-containing process streams and a newer commercially-available extractant, which was not thoroughly investigated before for urban mining applications. At the moment of writing only a handful of publications exist on the extraction of REEs with Cyanex 572, none related to processing of fluorescent lamp waste. Separation of heavy REEs from ion-adsorbed deposits was also tested with Cyanex 572 ( Another study published in Russian ( The aqueous solutions investigated throughout the experiments were stripping products originating from hydrometallurgical processing of fluorescent lamp waste. These contained approx. 1 The organic solvents (extractants and diluents) were used as supplied by the manufacturers, without additional purification or saponification: Cyanex 572 (Cytec); Solvent 70 (Statoil); toluene, nitrobenzene and terbutylbenzene (Sigma Aldrich); and Isopar L, Escaid 120 and Solvesso 150 (Exxon Mobil). The concentrations of the organic phases used were calculated based on the information given in the product sheet (a 33% vol. solution equates to 1 The solvent extraction/stripping experiments were carried out in closed glass vials. Phase contact was facilitated using a thermostatic shaking machine set to 1500 vibrations per minute (vpm). Centrifuging of the vials (3000 The extraction efficiency dependency on phase contact time was studied by contacting partially neutralized aqueous feed (pH Several aqueous phases of different starting pH (pH The influence of the ligand concentration on the extraction of yttrium and europium was studied by contacting the feed (pH The extraction efficiency of Cyanex 572 in three types of diluents (aliphatic, aromatic and a long chain aliphatic alcohol) was investigated. The characteristics of each of the tested diluents are given in The extraction efficiency dependency on temperature was investigated by contacting 1 Stripping of 1 The separation of yttrium from europium was carried out on a larger scale, starting with 1 After the extraction of yttrium, 100 The organic phases loaded with yttrium and europium were stripped in one stage with 3 Precipitation of REEs from the strip products was carried out with oxalic acid dihydrate (≥ For comparison reasons, a precipitation of europium was also carried out after the complete extraction of yttrium, thus skipping the second pH adjustment step and the second extraction step with Cyanex 572. The extraction behaviour of europium and yttrium over 30 The stripping behaviour of the two REEs over 30 To verify how effectively yttrium can be separated from europium, several aqueous phases with different pH values were used in the extraction with 1 The results show a good separation of yttrium from europium for this system at pH Phase disengagement was noticed to be fast for all samples tested (under 15 The mechanism for extraction of REE ions by Cyanex 572, according to the manufacturer, is presented in For Eq. The distribution ratio of a REE is written according to Eq. By inserting Eq. Thus, by plotting the decimal logarithm of the distribution ratios of REEs vs. the ratio between the concentration of protons and extractant at equilibrium, the result will be a linear plot in which the slope should be equal to 3 (the number of extractant molecules involved in the extraction of one REE ion). The plots for the yttrium and europium in the studied system are shown in Yttrium showed a good correlation with the theoretical model, the slope in this case being 2.98 A faster increase in distribution ratios of europium with increasing Cyanex 572 concentration point towards the use of less concentrated organic phases if yttrium is to be separated with very high purity. The types of diluents and the diluent effect of solvent extraction were described by the collapsing of the cavity containing the complex in the aqueous phase, followed by the transfer from the aqueous phase; and breaking the bonds between the water molecules that solvate the complex, followed by creation of a cavity in the organic phase and dissolving of the complex. The nature of the diluent influences the attractive energies between the extracted species and the organic phase, and also the energy that is needed for cavity formation. Non-polar diluents e.g. aliphatic hydrocarbons have a small cost for cavity formation. The energy needed to create a cavity in non-polar solvents is lower due to weaker interactions between neighbouring solvent molecules. In polar diluents, due to existing interactions between neighbouring molecules, e.g. hydrogen bonds in aliphatic alcohols such as 1-octanol, the energy cost for cavity formation is higher, resulting in decreased extraction. As a consequence, the largest distribution ratios of yttrium were achieved using aliphatic diluents, with very little performance differences between TPH, isopar L and Escaid 120 ( Increases in the distribution ratios of yttrium and europium were noticed with increases in temperature in the range 25–65 The stripping of REEs from the organic phase occurs according to Eqs. Water was ineffective at reclaiming the REEs extracted, stripping in one stage < Yttrium was separated from the initial feed with 1 Stripping of yttrium was done with 3 The aqueous phase resulting after the extraction of yttrium contains the bulk of europium, as well as traces of gadolinium, terbium, cerium, lanthanum and yttrium. Sodium is also present in this solution as a result of the pH adjustment steps needed to separate yttrium. Direct treatment with oxalic acid can be used to precipitate europium, but this has the disadvantage of sodium co-precipitation and lower product purity ( To further improve the purity of europium oxide, extraction of europium can be further carried out at higher pH, as shown in The major impurity in the europium oxides obtained via these two methods was gadolinium, which was present in slightly higher amounts in the feed used in this particular experiment (approx. 90 Based on the observations in this study, a flowsheet for the separation of yttrium and europium from fluorescent lamp waste and production of oxides is presented in Cyanex 572 was studied for the separation of yttrium and europium. The study presented here has significant applications in the recovery of REEs from fluorescent lamp waste – one of the streams containing high amounts of these two REEs. Separation of these two ions can be achieved by controlling the equilibrium pH during extraction. Yttrium can be separated from europium at pH Project 2014-03460 (Chalmers