Eregˇli Iron and Steel Works (Erdemir) began its activities on May 15, 1965 with an annual production capacity of 450,000tons and has made important contributions to the Turkish economy ever since. Today, with a total amount of crude steel production exceeding three million tons, it is the largest integrated iron and steel factory and the sole producer of flat steel in the country. Erdemir produces hot and cold rolled coils, zinc, tin, and chromium plated steel.
                  There are two blast furnaces in Erdemir. The blast furnace No. 1, Ayşe, started operations in 1965. Having been modernized three times in the years 1971, 1977, and 1986, it has been re-lined (the renewal of refractory bricks) in the year 1998. The diameter of its reservoir is 8.99m with a working volume of 1505.0m3. The daily production capacity is 3000tons amounting to 1,065,000tons annually tons.
                  The blast furnace No. 2, Zübeyde, started its operations in 1978. It has been modernized twice in the years 1987 and 1995 and has been re-lined in October 2000. It is of top pressure type and has oxygen injection. The diameter of its reservoir is 9.70m with the working volume being 1707.7m3. The daily production capacity is 4000tons with the annual being 1,420,000tons.
                  The iron production process consumes 50% of the total energy and comprises a significant portion of total costs in the integrated steel works. Iron (Fe) production is made by the reduction of hematite (Fe2O3) and magnetite (Fe3O4) with coke in the blast furnace. This can be analyzed as two separate areas, namely the furnace and stoves. The necessary carbon and high temperature required by the reduction process makes the furnaces an energy balance center.
                  In this study, the limits of the Blast Furnace No. 1 in Erdemir have been chosen as the control volume in which the stoves have not been included. By the identification of the energy sources that move in and out of the control volume, the energy output sources have been fractioned and categorized. For the implementation of the method, also known as the balance analysis has been chosen and the model presented in the “Japanese Steel Making Handbook” has been taken as a reference.The air collected from the atmosphere is heated to an approximate temperature of 1200 The amount of energy consumed throughout this whole process is quite significant. In integrated steel plants, the blast furnaces are those facilities in which iron ore is transformed to hot metal (pig iron). Apart from the production of pig iron, by-products such as slag, blast furnace gas, chimney dust, cleaning sludge are also produced in the blast furnaces. An example analysis of pig iron that is produced in the blast furnaces is as follows: All elements (the portions that do not dissolve in pig iron) in materials other than iron (Fe) that are charged into the blast furnaces and oxides form the slag. Slag can be classified into two different forms, namely granule slag or particle slag; depending on the method it is attained. While granule slag is used as a raw material for cement, particle slag is used as filling matter. Depending on the quality of the raw materials used and the operational circumstances, 200–300 The reduction of the raw materials and the separation of iron from oxides within the blast furnaces are enabled with the use of CO gas. Various gases that are formed following the reactions of reduction and separation react with the material at various levels of the furnaces. Those gases that are not used after the reactions leave the furnaces. While leaving the furnaces, small particulate matter (dust) also leave the furnaces. After these materials are separated from the gas, the remaining matter is named as blast furnace gas and is used as fuel in various areas of the plants. The features of the blast furnace gas are given as follows: The blast furnace gas carries particulates out of the furnace. This dust is separated, and compiled in a dust holder and named chimney dust. It is used in the sinter plant as a raw material for sinter. The chimney dust analysis that is compiled is as follows: Materials that are the source for iron such as ore, pellet and sinter along with materials that form slag such as quartz, dolomite, limestone, olivine and coke that is the source for heat are charged into the furnaces from the top. Sources of heat such as coal, tar fuel oil and natural gas are injected from the bottom. From those materials that are charged into the furnace from the top, only coke reaches the bottom in solid and incandescent state while other material has undergone various stages reach the bottom in liquid state. The hot air is produced by blowers and heated to temperatures of 1000–1250 The hot gas (2000–2250 The blast furnaces take their place as facilities that have a 45–50% share in the overall energy consumption of an integrated steel plant. At the same time, the blast furnaces are the core of the facilities within integrated plants in which production and costs actualize (see The amount of energy consumed for producing 1 The establishment of the balance of inputs/outputs within the Blast Furnace Balance Analysis can be explained by different theories that display similarities. The most valid of these is based on the philosophy to form the equality between the input and output energy within a control volume that is indicated by the boundaries of the process. In the selection of the model applied by the Erdemir blast furnaces the models indicated by Binran The model indicates all energy inputs and outputs in 18 items. The energy necessary for the reduction process of the iron is calculated as the difference between the energy input and the energy output. The monthly averages maintained throughout the calculations have been chosen as arithmetic averages whereby the effects of parameters of those problematic days in production having an effect on all data of a given month have been prevented. Within the time period in which data have been collected for the blast furnaces, July 2004 has been observed to be the time in which both blast furnaces had the most stable operating conditions and hence the values have been taken as a point of origin accordingly ( On the other hand, the specific values that have been used for the calculations from the same source are presented in Operation data between 1st and 31st of July, 2004 has been collected, and average values have been taken for the balance analysis in order to minimize the effects of daily operations. Collected operation data is given in              De-oxidation heat of Iron (reduction of Fe            Blast furnaces are the fundamental components of the steel production processes. Apart from being an intense energy consumer and being the main reason of production costs, blast furnaces are substantial green house gas producers due to the contents of their main sources of energy. Balance analysis for energy efficiency has been applied at the blast furnace No. 1. The items within the input/output balance were specifically accurately. In addition to this, the effective use of energy will ensure that the costs of integrated plants at source will be monitored at the point of origin and by reducing the use of fossil fuels the green house gas emissions will also be reduced. Balance analysis at the blast furnace has been applied to this project and the parameters used in the model were based on the Japanese Steel Making Handbook. As a result of the study, it has been illustrated that the required energy for reduction of iron takes the highest portion (36.74%) of the total heat input. If the uses of other output energies in the processes are considered, it is evident that 2.43% of the energy within the sensible heat of the slag, 2.22% energy within the sensible heat of blast furnace gas and 2.00% energy used for drying the moisture within the combustion heat can theoretically be recovered. The authors acknowledge the help provided by G. Burak Karakaya, Kerem Dogˇan, Kenan Kes and Gürcan Yüksel.