This work extends prior analysis and methodology for extracting yield strength, σ
                     ys, Young’s modulus, E, strain hardening exponent, n, and hardness, 
                        
                           
                              
                                 p
                              
                              
                                 ¯
                              
                           
                        
                     , from instrumented indentation experiments. The paper is predicated on comprehensive dimensional analysis and extensive finite element simulations of Vickers and Berkovich indentation. This work reveals that when instrumented indentation experiments are analyzed on the basis of accurate dimensionless functions, a maximum of two different sets of σ
                     ys, E, n, and 
                        
                           
                              
                                 p
                              
                              
                                 ¯
                              
                           
                        
                      can be rigorously inferred from a single applied load (P)–penetration depth (h
                     s) curve. The present methodology predicts these two sets of properties, indicating that it may be possible to obtain unique mechanical properties only in solids where n
                     ∼0.2. The intrinsic duality of mechanical property extractions from instrumented indentation experiments is related to the lack of measurement of the amount of pile-up or sinking-in, which cannot be fully compensated through further analysis of the P–h
                     s curve. Along these lines, qualitative observations on whether bulging or pincushion effects occur around the imprint are found to be sufficient to establish which of the two potential sets of inferred properties corresponds to the indented material.Microindentation experiments have long been employed in probing the mechanical response of small volumes of material The main objective of this work is to devise a methodology which rigorously tackles the aforementioned issue of the uniqueness of mechanical property extractions. The paper builds upon prior work on dimensional analysis of sharp indentation experiments (e.g. Projected hardness Since Directing attention to Finally, total work The finite element simulations were performed with the commercial code ABAQUS The distance between the indenter’s tip and the contact boundary was always 50 times smaller than the total mesh length Large strains and rotations were accounted for in the simulations. Frictionless contact conditions were assumed in all simulations which were also performed using a full integration scheme The indented solids were taken to follow the Solids whose mechanical properties ranged the majority of the combinations of Based upon dimensional analysis and finite element simulations, a general framework for prescribing the dependencies between contact variables and uniaxial mechanical properties is summarized in the following discussion (see, for instance, Plots of best fit functions to the finite element simulations of Berkovich indentation are given in The Π theorem in dimensional analysis yields the Φ Attention is now given to parametric combinations between dimensionless functions. Such combinations are obtained, for instance, introducing the dependency of functions Further dimensionless functions can be found either through a combination of Linear elastic analysis of the unloading stage of an indentation experiment with a rigid tip Following the early work by Tabor Using the above definition of characteristic strain, we may strictly write In the context of instrumented indentation experiments, Dao et al. In accordance with the work by Dao et al. Substitution of Finally, without recourse to dimensional analysis, relationships between various sets of parameters can also be found based exclusively on finite element simulations. One shall bear in mind that while such approximative correlations may appear to include all dependencies on mechanical properties, this assertion may not be strictly true. For instance, the existence of function Ξ Following Sections Attention is first given to a certain Π function, where strain hardening parameter Representations of Π The aforementioned procedure utilizes all fundamental relationships between mutually independent indentation variables from the We take For fixed Finally, note that the current analysis allows one to elucidate the reason why the methodology proposed by Dao et al. An assumption in the procedure given in Section A straightforward way to gain generality and precision in current methodology is to substitute Deformation levels Vickers and Berkovich indentation experiments in a selected number of solids whose mechanical properties correspond to nickel-, aluminum-, and titanium-based alloys, brass, carbon steels, and stainless steels were considered to illustrate the degree of accuracy of present methodology, For the sake of comparison, As indicated in Section Since the Finally, an interesting finding from this work is that since bulging and pincushion effects indicate the development of pile-up or sinking-in, direct assessments of imprint’s shape allows one to identify the actual set of properties of the indented material Instrumented indentation experiments were performed in the 2098-T8 aluminum alloy whose uniaxial mechanical properties are given in The results of six consecutive experiments, corrected for machine and indenter’s tip compliances The value of Sets I and II of mechanical properties obtained with the methodology in As noted in The following are the central conclusions of this investigation. A maximum of two sets of mechanical properties can be strictly obtained from a single A qualitative knowledge on the development of pile-up or sinking-in at the contact periphery is deemed necessary to discern which of the two potential sets of inferred properties pertains to the indented material. This knowledge can be readily gained through inspection of the residual imprints, as it suffices to establish if their sides appear to bulge out (pile-up) or if pincushion effects (sinking-in) dominate, Inferred mechanical properties are considerably sensitive to experimental scatter in measured The concept of the characteristic strain and stress, which bears the dependency of hardness The authors thank Dr. M. Mata for providing finite element simulations for the conical indenter, as well as Mr. S. Dossin and Mr. J. Ocenasek for critically reviewing the manuscript. OC wishes to thank Generalitat de Catalunya for supporting his work. JA thanks funding provided by the Spanish Ministry of Education and Science through grants MAT 2002-00368 and PETRI grant PTR1995-0763-OP-02-01. In this appendix, explicit best fit functions are given for dimensionless functions Φ Operating with First, dividing Notice that from Eqs.