The acidified ferric chloride leaching of an artificial matte was carried out to investigate the extraction behaviour of copper, nickel, and cobalt. The composition of the synthetically prepared Cu–Ni–Co–Fe matte was: 24.95% Cu, 35.05% Ni, 4.05% Co, 11.45% Fe, and 24.5% S. The major mineral phases of the matte were: CuFeS2, CuS2, (FeNi)9S8, (FeNi)S2, Ni9S8, Ni3S2, (CoFeNi)9S8 and Co metal. The effects of time (0–7h), temperature (30–90°C), FeCl3 (0.5–2.0M) and HCl (0.1–0.5M) concentrations were studied with and without the presence of an organic solvent (CCl4). The Cu extraction was fast compared to Ni and Co and reached equilibrium within 3h in FeCl3 medium. The extraction of all the three metals increased with increase of temperature. The effect was found to be the maximum for Co, followed by Ni and Cu. Under optimum conditions (1.5M FeCl3, 0.3M HCl, 90°C and 7h), 99.5% Cu, 93.2% Ni and 85.2% Co was extracted to the solution. When carbon tetrachloride was added to the reaction medium, the extraction of metals increased due to the solubilisation of elemental sulphur coated around the sulphide mineral particles. From the XRD study the undissolved Ni phase was found to be (FeNi)9S8 and undissolved Co phase was cobalt metal.Copper, nickel, and cobalt are generally produced from high-grade sulphide/oxide ores or concentrates by the pyro-metallurgical smelting reduction and refining process or pyro-hydrometallurgical route. As the reserves of high-grade sulphides diminish, low-grade ores need to be processed. For many years these ores were not utilized due to non-availability of cost effective process. The development of acid leaching (LX)–solvent extraction (SX)–electrowining (EX) process during 1970s led to the successful treatment of low-grade ores or concentrates/wastes etc., commercially. Presently, about 30% of the total Cu is produced from low-grade ores using copper selective oxime based reagents by the hydrometallurgical LX–SX–EX process The research team at KIGAM has selected the pyro-metallurgical reduction roasting and smelting—sulphidation route to produce Cu, Ni, Co, and Fe rich matte (mixture of molten metallic sulphides) from Pacific Ocean nodules Chloride systems in hydrometallurgy have been used for the treatment and recovery of precious metals for a number of years. In the last few years, the application of chloride hydrometallurgy for the processing of non-ferrous metals in large scale mineral processing has been considered seriously Initially, chloride-based processes found little application because of the highly corrosive nature of the solutions, but these problems have been largely overcome with the advent of modern materials of construction such as fiber-reinforced plastic, polypropylene, butyl rubber and titanium. The leaching of metal sulphide minerals in chloride media is a subject of considerable interest and has been studied by many researchers In this field, most of the published work concerns the dissolution of copper and zinc sulphides from low-grade ore/or concentrate. It has been found, that the morphology of complex sulphide ores are different in nature and must be studied in order to optimize a proper extraction method. To the best of our knowledge there is no reported literature on dissolution of matte to recover three metals (Cu, Ni and Co) using FeCl The present work concerned with acidic ferric chloride leaching of a synthetically prepared Cu–Ni–Co–Fe matte. The effects of time, temperature, ferric chloride concentration and HCl concentration on the extraction of these metals have been studied. The effect of CCl Synthetic Cu–Ni–Co–Fe matte having similar composition as is expected to be obtained by reduction smelting of Pacific Ocean nodules followed by sulphidisation of the alloy was prepared by melting the pure metals in required proportions in an induction furnace. A graphite crucible was used for this purpose. Appropriate amount of metals placed in the crucible was heated to about 1500 The leaching experiments were performed in a glass reactor of 250 The chemical analysis of the synthetically prepared Cu–Ni–Co–Fe matte showed 24.95% Cu, 35.05% Ni, 4.05% Co, 11.45% Fe, and 24.5% S. It is well known that metal oxides dissolve rapidly in acids compared to sulphides. To enhance the sulphide dissolution the presence of an oxidant is required. Ferric ion is one such oxidising agent, used successfully for the dissolution of mineral sulphides. The solution must be acidic since ferric hydroxide starts to precipitate at about pH 3. The leaching of complex Cu–Ni–Co–Fe matte in presence of FeCl Using four different concentrations of FeCl Whereas, the rate of extraction of Ni and Co was quite different compared to the extraction rate of Cu. For both of these metals, initial rate was quite slow and reached equilibrium at a longer time compared to Cu. Using 1.5 The FeCl Several researchers have reported the positive effect of temperature on metal dissolution in a FeCl The solubility of sulphur in carbon tetrachloride at different temperatures is shown in The samples before and after leaching were subjected to XRD and SEM analysis to see the phase changes and morphological observations. In the present paper, the dissolution of a complex Cu–Ni–Co–Fe matte in acidic ferric chloride medium has been studied. It was found that, for all the three metals, the reaction rate increased with increase in ferric chloride concentration and reaction temperature. Copper extraction was independent of acidity, where as Ni and Co extraction was influenced by acidity. The Cu extraction was fast compared to Ni and Co and reached equilibrium within 3 DM thanks the Korea Institute of Geoscience and Mineral Resources (KIGAM), Daejeon, for the award of Post Doctoral Fellowship, and BRR express sincere thanks to Dr. J.S. Yadav, Director, Indian Institute of Chemical Technology (IICT), Hyderabad, India for permission on deputation and to the Korean Federation of Science and Technology Societies (KOFST), Seoul, Korea for the award of Brain pool program.