The feasibility to recover the gold present in alluvial material, by means of a chlorination process, using chlorine as a reactive agent, has been studied. The influence of temperature and reaction time was studied through changes in the reactant solid. The techniques used to characterize the mineral samples and the reaction residues were stereomicroscopy, X-ray diffraction, X-ray fluorescence and scanning electronic microscopy. Results indicate that gold extraction is favored by increasing, both, the temperature and the reaction time. The best recovery values were of 98.23% at 873K and 3600s and of 98.73% at 873K and 5400s, with very low attack of the matrix containing the metal. The powder of pure gold was not chlorinated at this temperature level.Over the last years, gold recovery has been the central issue in a wide range of studies as a consequence of its high demand and value. These circumstances make the treatment of low-grade raw materials or refractory materials an interesting area of research. The most frequently used method for gold recovery is the cyanidation processes. Although this processes is profitable, it has environmentally-related disadvantages. Pyrometallurgical processes, and especially selective chlorination processes, have proved to be more efficient and cheaper for the extraction and refined of metals, such as Ti, Zr, Nb, Ta, Mo, etc., generating a growing interest in the application of these procedures ( One of the most widely used chlorinating agents for gold recovery is calcium chloride. The non-ferrous and precious metals react with chlorine to form the corresponding chlorides, which are volatile at the temperature required for the process (1273–1473  The objective of this research was, on one hand, to study gold extraction from an alluvial material, through a pyrometallurgical process, using chlorine gas as a reactant, and, on the other hand, to characterize the initial material and chlorination residues, using X-ray fluorescence (XRF), X-ray diffraction (XRD) and scanning electronic microscopy (SEM) techniques. The reactants used were the following: alluvial material from Arroyo Cañada Honda in the Province of San Luis (Argentina); gold, in powder, 99.99%, Sigma–Aldrich; chlorine, 99%, Indupa; nitrogen, 99.9%, La Oxígena. All gases were dried in suitable traps before entering the reaction zone. A diagram of the experimental device used in chlorination is shown in The treatment and physicochemical characterization of the original material and chlorination residues was performed with the following equipment: Knelson centrifugal concentrator of high gravity at laboratory scale; Franz isodynamic magnetic concentrator Birmingham; ring mills Fritsch, model Pulverisette; stereomicroscope Leitz, equipped with an ultraviolet lamp Mineralight, model UVSL-58; X-ray difractometer Rigaku, model D-MAX IIIC, operated at 30 The material used in this work was extracted following the criteria established for simple collection for the type of ore used. The original sample ( The system was operated as follows: approximately 0.5 A practical way to express the results obtained in all the assays is as a function of the percentual extraction, Chlorination of the sample Results are shown in The direct chlorination of a pure gold was also studied up to a temperature of 1223 The fact that gold chlorination is reached at lower temperatures might be explained by the formation of binary gold chloride in the vapor phase, which might be extracted from the reaction zone ( The results of this study allow to conclude that it is possible to recover gold from alluvial materials by an alternative process such as chlorination, preventing environmental pollution problems generated by gold extraction and concentration by other conventional methods. Extractions of gold close to 99% were achieved, at a temperature of 873 The characterization of the alluvial material and the chlorination residues can be performed using physical–chemical techniques available in any research laboratory. The characterization of residues corroborated that the matrix undergoes little attack, which means an important saving in chlorine reagent and a simplification of gold separation and purification. The chlorination equipment used in the laboratory has a simple design and permits a safer use of chlorine gas.