In the present work, the hot deformation behavior of four TWIP steels is studied by conducting compression tests at the strain rates in the range 0.01–5/s and temperatures in the range 950–1100 °C using a Gleeble thermomechanical simulator. The four steels differed with respect to their chemical compositions. They were non-microalloyed, Nb-microalloyed, V-microalloyed and high-Al V-microalloyed. The microstructural evolutions are studied by a scanning electron microscope (SEM) equipped with electron backscattered diffraction (EBSD) detector. Also, the hot deformation behavior of the steels are modeled using the dislocation density based Bergstrom and the diffusional transformation based Kolmogorov-Johnson-Mehl-Avrami models. The peak stresses of the high-Al V-microalloyed variant occurred at higher strains than in the V-microalloyed variant. The microstructure of the Nb-microalloyed variant showed that dynamic recovery was more active than dynamic recrystallization (DRX) when the steel was deformed at lower temperatures, i.e. lower than 1000 °C. Bergstrom modeling showed that as the Zener–Hollomon parameter (Z) increases, the hardening parameter for the V-microalloyed steel increases at a clearly higher rate than the others. Finally, it was seen that increased strain rate leads to decreased Avrami exponents (nA) for the Nb-microalloyed and the high-Al V-microalloyed variants suggesting the occurrence of dynamic recrystallization (DRX) with nucleation on grain and twin boundaries.Material constant (/s) Material constant (Pa) Material constant (Pa) Magnitude of Burgers’ vector (m) Material constant Dislocation strengthening constant Strain rate sensitivity Strain rate sensitivity Stress exponent Avrami's exponent Hot working activation energy (J/mol) Universal gas constant (J/mol k) Deformation temperature (K) Hardening parameter (/m Recrystallized volume fraction Stress multiplier True strain Strain rate (/s) Shear Modulus of elasticity (Pa) Instantaneous dislocation density (/m Peak dislocation density (/m Flow stress (Pa) Lattice friction stress (Pa) Peak flow stress (Pa) Steady state flow stress (Pa) Recovery parameter High manganese steels showing the twinning induced plasticity (TWIP) effect have become the focus of many researchers over the past decade because of their unique combination of strength and ductility. The attractive combination of ductility and strain hardening characteristics gives TWIP steels excellent potential for lightweight engineering. It is reasonable to assume that TWIP steels present a wide array of solutions for direct and indirect lightweight design focusing on crash-relevant and thus safety critical parts Recent developments with high-Mn TWIP steels concern the addition of microalloying elements or nano-structuring of austenite to improve the otherwise modest yield strength Also, Yuan and Huang The most commonly employed technique for obtaining nano/ultrafine-grained TWIP steels is recrystallization after heavy cold deformation e.g. On the other hand, hot deformation processes are widely used to refine the grain structure of metallic materials. In this regard, several studies have considered the hot deformation behavior of high Mn steels In the present work, the influence of micro-alloying elements (Nb, V) and the combined effect of V-Al alloying on the high temperature behavior of a 20Mn-0.6C TWIP steel is investigated for the strain rate range 0.01–5/s and the temperature range 950–1100 °C. The well-known hot deformation parameters (peak stresses and activation energies) are determined for the studied steels. Also, the hot flow stresses are modeled using 1) the dislocation density based Bergstrom's equation and 2) the Kolmogorov-Johnson-Mehl-Avrami model for diffusional transformation, i.e. recrystallization. Furthermore, the microstructural evolutions of the experimental steels are studied using SEM-EBSD. The experimental microalloyed high-Mn TWIP steels investigated in the present work were supplied by ThyssenKrupp Steel Europe AG (TKSE), Germany. The experimental steels were cast and hot rolled to plates of 12 mm thick at a pilot plant of TKSE. The chemical compositions of the four studied steels are given in Bars of 12 × 12 mm The hot deformation characteristics of the investigated TWIP steels were tested using a Gleeble 1500 thermomechanical simulator (Model: Dynamic System Inc., Poestenkill, NY) Isothermal constant true strain rate compression tests were conducted over the temperature range of 950–1100 °C and the strain rate range of 0.01–5 s  The deformation mechanisms occurring during the hot deformation straining were studied by using a field-emission gun scanning electron microscope equipped with an EBSD unit to examine the fine details of the hot deformed structures. The microstructural observations of the studied TWIP steels revealed fully austenitic structure after solution treatment at 1250 °C. However, the grain size varied according to the presence of the microalloying elements V or Nb. Two examples of grain structure are shown in Typical true stress – true strain curves obtained under various hot deformation conditions are presented in Regarding steels TKSE 16 and TKSE 18, both steels have the same microalloying contents (0.3 wt% V- free Nb), therefore, the difference in the hot deformation behavior is attributed to the Al content. At a strain rate of 0.01 s Regarding to Steel TKSE 12 and TKSE 18, both steels have different microalloying elements and different Al content, At 1000 °C, the peak stress (108 MPa) of steel TKSE 12 is attained at a relatively low strain ( In order to analyze the flow stress behavior, the temperature and strain rate dependences of the peak stress are plotted in Considering the hot deformation as a thermally activated process, the hyperbolic sine variant of Eq. By substituting the obtained * For steel TKSE 4 (Reference) * For TKSE 12 steel, * For steel TKSE 16 * For TKSE 18 steel, The experimental peak stresses and those predicted using the constitutive Eqs. For simplified representation, the peak stress and/or the steady state flow stress can also be directly described as power-law functions of Z The relationship between The functions between steady flow stress and the Zener-Hollomon parameter of the studied steels can be expressed as the following: For steel TKSE 4 For steel TKSE 12 For steel TKSE 16 For TKSE 18 steel,  To analyze the effect of hot deformation on the microstructural features, EBSD has been employed to study the deformed specimens. However, at a higher strain rate (5 s After the hot deformation at 1100 °C/5 s The microstructure of TKSE 18 hot deformed at 1050 °C/1 s However, the hot deformed microstructure of TKSE 4 (low Al content of 1.5 wt% – free of microalloyed elements) at the same previous conditions 1050 °C/1 s The high temperature flow stresses of the studied steels were modeled using two well-known models, i.e. Bergstrom's model and Kolmogorov-Johnson-Mehl-Avrami's model. The former was utilized to model the behavior of the steels up to the peak stress, while the latter was used for modeling the flow stresses after the initiation of dynamic recrystallization. Based on Bergstrom's model The values of U and Ω were obtained such that Eq. All the flow curves which were obtained for the four studied steels at different strain rates and temperatures were successfully modeled through the above-mentioned procedure. Some representative curves are presented in The values of hardening parameter (U), softening parameter (Ω), peak dislocation density ( The model parameter values for the investigated steels were determined at different Z values. In each case, a suitable trend line was fitted to the acquired data. For instance, the hardening and softening parameters obtained for TKSE 18 and the resultant trend lines (with their corresponding equations) are shown in The acquired model parameters for the investigated steels are compared in Comparison of At low Z, all the four steels showed Avrami exponent (n The hot deformation behavior of four TWIP steels, i.e. the reference non-microalloyed (TKSE 4), Nb-microalloyed (TKSE 12), V-microalloyed (TKSE 16) and high Al V-microalloyed (TKSE 18) was studied at the strain rates 0.01–5 /s and temperatures 950–1100 °C. The following main conclusion can be drawn: TKSE 18 with a high Al content (5 wt%) had a slightly higher flow resistance than TKSE 16 and TKSE 12 with relatively lower Al contents (1.5 wt%), esp. at the highest temperature of 1100 °C. This can be attributed to the high strengthening effect of Al in austenite at high temperatures. Peak stresses of TKSE 18 occurred at higher strains compared to TKSE 16 suggesting that Al alloying in high-Mn TWIP steels delays the onset of DRX. For TKSE 12, the microstructure showed that dynamic recovery was more active as a softening mechanism than dynamic recrystallization, when the steel was deformed at 950 °C. At this temperature, the precipitation of NbC is enhanced. At higher temperatures, dynamic recrystallization was the main softening regardless of the strain rate. The microstructure of TKSE 18 deformed at high strain rate of 1 s The hot deformed microstructure of TKSE 4 at the same previous condition showed a similar behavior as that of TKSE 18. This indicates the small effect of Al on the rate of DRX in the present steels, even though different peak strains were observed. In some of the tests where dynamic recovery was dominant until the end of deformation, the corresponding flow curve could be modeled only using the Bergstrom equation. But when dynamic recrystallization was initiated, a combination of Bergstrom and Avrami models successfully predicted the flow curves. For a wide range of the Zener-Hollomon (Z) parameter, the highest and lowest hardening parameters (U) were those of TKSE 4 and TKSE 18, respectively. Also, the highest softening parameter (Ω) was observed for TKSE 18. The same trend was also observed for the peak stresses. As Z increased, the hardening parameter for TKSE 16 increased at a definitely higher rate (a higher exponent for the Z parameter) compared to TKSE 4 leading to higher hardening efficiency at higher Z for TKSE 16. Thus, V appears to be the most effective micro-alloying element at higher Z values. Regarding TKSE 16 (V-steel), as Z increased, the dislocation generation acceleration was the highest, but the dislocation annihilation deceleration was the lowest leading to a slightly higher rate of increase of peak dislocation density with Z for this steel. In TKSE 18, the influence of high Al content on increasing the softening parameter overcame the effect of V on increasing the hardening parameter. As the strain rate increased from 0.01 to 0.1/s, the Avrami exponent (n The majority of this work was performed within the project number