An experimental centrifugal filtration technique is developed for the measurement of diluted bitumen volume extracted from oil sand mineral particles. Liquid volume is obtained from measured evolution of light transmission profiles during centrifugation. Tests are performed on different oil sands ores and solvent to bitumen ratio (S/B) of 3.0. The highest liquid volume extracted is obtained for the high-grade oil sand ore. Experimental data are fitted with a model for liquid flow through a porous medium with variable saturation to obtain the liquid retention curve and the hydraulic conductivity functions for different oil sands ores. These functions are used in a model to predict the liquid extraction efficiency in a large scale continuous filtering centrifuge for the separation of oil sands mineral particles from solvent diluted bitumen.gravitational acceleration (m/s pressure head (m) height of the porous cake (m) hydraulic conductivity (m/s) saturated hydraulic conductivity (m/s) pore connectivity parameter assumed to be 0.5 granular material mass flow rate (kg/s) empirical parameter related to the non-uniformity of the pore size distribution radial position and spherical coordinate along the conical basket (m) inner radius of the conical basket (m) outer radius of the conical basket (m) radial position of the filter paper for batch filtration (m) radial coordinate in the conical basket (m) effective liquid content defined in Eq. (5) time (s) slip velocity of the cake along the screen in a conical filtering centrifuge (m/s) coordinate along the cake thickness (m) height coordinate along the thickness of the cake in a conical filtering centrifuge (m) empirical parameter related to the mean pore size of the porous cake friction angle between the cake of granular material and the screen surface cake volumetric liquid content. It is the volume fraction of liquid in the porous cake cake volumetric liquid content at saturation, equivalent to cake porosity residual volumetric liquid content rotation speed (1/s) internal friction angle of the cake of granular material basket cone angle density of the mineral particles (kg/m The Clark hot water extraction process is currently used to extract bitumen from mined oil sand ore. This technology is associated with high energy requirement, water consumption, and generation of tailings ponds. Solvent extraction offers an alternative process for bitumen recovery. In this process, oil sand is mixed with solvent to dissolve bitumen. Solvent-diluted bitumen is then recovered as a supernatant above the settled oil sand mineral particles. A significant challenge to the solvent extraction process consists of reducing the bitumen and solvent loss to the extracted mineral tailings given the capillary and adsorptive forces that bind the liquid phase to the mineral particles (  The problem of liquid extraction by centrifugation from a bed of mineral particles is similar to centrifugal desaturation of soil samples commonly used in soil physics. Conical filtering centrifuges are used in a variety of applications in the chemical industry for the continuous separation of solid particles from a liquid phase ( In this work, a new experimental technique is developed for determination of the liquid retention curve and the hydraulic conductivity function. These functions are used in the estimation of the performance of continuous filtering centrifuges for the separation of solvent diluted bitumen from oil sands mineral particles. The experimental technique is based on the use of the LUMiFuge® (LUM GmbH) analytical photo-centrifuge for the direct measurement of extracted filtrate level during centrifugation. The LUMiFuge® analytical centrifuge was previously used by Custom-made glass tubes are developed for the extraction of solvent-diluted bitumen from a saturated cake of oil sand mineral particles. Three different oil sand ores are analyzed for a solvent-to-bitumen ratio (S/B) of 3.0. Test repeatability is assessed by analyzing results for different tubes. Experimental data on extracted liquid volumes were fitted with modeling results to estimate the liquid retention curves and the hydraulic conductivity functions. These functions were then used to predict the performance of continuous solvent-diluted bitumen extraction in conical filtering centrifuges. Results from Dean-Stark analysis ( Although toluene would likely not be used as solvent in a commercial non-aqueous extraction process because of its toxicity, flammability, high boiling point and cost related to solvent recovery and safety processes to control potential hazards ( The oil sand ores were mixed with toluene in 120-mL jars at S/B = 3.0. The mixtures were then left in a mechanical shaker for 1 h. Supernatant-diluted bitumen was collected and centrifuged for 20 min at 4000 Experiments were performed using custom-made glass tubes presented schematically in The LUMiFuge® analytical centrifuge (model LUMiFuge 112) was used in this work to measure the evolution of the liquid volume extracted from oil sands mineral particles. The basic principle of the measurement technique is presented in Light transmission through solvent-diluted-bitumen is near 0% but increases significantly to a value of approximately 50–70% at the air/liquid interface (liquid level) in the tube. The evolution with time of the radial position of the liquid level is obtained by selecting a threshold value for light transmission and tracking the evolution with time of the radial position of the intersection between the threshold value and the light transmission profile (   Radial positions of the liquid level can be converted to filtrate liquid volumes after calibration of the liquid level radial positions against known liquid volumes in the glass tubes. An example of the calibration curves for tube 1 at light transmission threshold values of 12.3, 14.8, and 21.1% are presented in  At t = 0, the pores of the cake are saturated with liquid throughout the height of the cake: The hydraulic resistance of the filter paper is assumed negligible. At the bottom of the cake, Liquid flux at the top of the cake, Details of the solution method of Eq. The hydraulic properties of the porous cake with variable diluted bitumen saturation are assumed to be described by the following Van Genuchten-Mualem equations ( A schematic of a conical filtering centrifuge is presented in Eq. At the bottom of the cake, At the top of cake, At the centrifuge inlet, the pores in the cake are completely saturated: If The hydraulic conductivity function The evolution with time of extracted liquid volumes in tubes 1, 3, 5, and 7 are presented in The liquid retention curves presented in In order to assess the feasibility of applying the technology used for the continuous separation of sucrose crystal particles from molasses, to the large-scale separation of oil sand mineral particles from solvent-diluted bitumen, the operation of a conical filtering centrifuge is modeled using properties of oil sands and solvent diluted bitumen. Hydraulic parameters of solvent-diluted bitumen in oil sand minerals, presented in  An experimental technique for the determination of hydraulic properties of liquid in a porous cake of mineral particles was developed in this work. The technique is based on the use of the LUMiFuge® analytical centrifuge with custom-made glass tubes and a filter paper separating the filtrate from the porous sample. Measured evolution of light transmission profiles during centrifugation was used to monitor extracted filtrate volume. The experimental technique was applied to porous cake samples of oil sand mineral particles saturated with solvent-diluted bitumen. Different oil sand ores were investigated for solvent to bitumen ratio of, S/B = 3.0. Experimental volume data were fitted with modeling results to obtain the hydraulic parameters characterizing the liquid retention curve and the hydraulic conductivity function. Higher extracted liquid volumes and saturated hydraulic conductivities were obtained for the high grade oil sand ore. Extracted liquid volumes also depend on cake sample homogeneity and preparation before the tests. The new experimental technique presented in this work together with modeling can be used for the design of continuous filtering centrifuges in different industrial applications including the extraction of viscous molasses from sucrose crystal particles in the food industry. The hydraulic conductivity function and the liquid retention curve function obtained by fitting model prediction to experimental data of batch centrifugation are used in a model for continuous filtering centrifuges to predict liquid extraction efficiency. Thus, by varying the centrifuge geometry (cone angle, inlet and outlet radii) and operating conditions (slurry feed rate, rotation speed), the model for continuous filtration can be used to obtain optimal parameters for the design of filtering centrifuges in industrial applications. The authors would like to acknowledge support from the