In patients with fractures of the zygomatic complex, computed tomography (CT) often identifies extensive defects in the orbital floor. Some surgeons recommend routine exploration and repair of these defects during repair of the zygoma, while others advocate a more selective approach, but there is a paucity of evidence either way. We report a retrospective case series of 50 patients who had open reduction and internal fixation of zygomatic fractures by a single surgeon in the maxillofacial department at the John Radcliffe Hospital, Oxford, between 2011and 2014. The orbit was repaired only in those with severe diplopia, or restriction or malpositioning of the globe. Patients were evaluated by age, sex, aetiology, preoperative findings including diplopia and ocular malpositioning, fracture pattern, and morbidity. A total of 14 had preoperative ophthalmic signs. In five these were minimal so treatment was conservative. Nine (eight with diplopia and one with a malpositioned globe) had exploration and seven of them had the orbit repaired at the same time as the zygoma. This was not possible in the remaining two because of the complexity of the defect. There were no postoperative ophthalmic signs in the 41 who did not have orbit explored, or in the seven who had it repaired, and residual signs resolved after planned secondary reconstruction in the remaining two. We recommend that the orbit is explored only in patients with severe diplopia, or restriction or malpositioning of the globe.The zygomaticomaxillary complex is crucial to the integrity of the orbit, as it forms most of its lateral wall and floor. In patients affected by maxillofacial trauma, computed tomography (CT) can clearly show extensive defects in the orbital wall, which can vary from a simple linear line in non-displaced fractures to complete disruption of one or more of the walls with prolapse of soft tissue. Some surgeons recommend routine exploration of the internal orbit and repair of the orbital floor during repair of the zygoma, At the Department of Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery at the John Radcliffe Hospital, Oxford, we have established a simple protocol based on preoperative clinical findings to decide whether orbital reconstruction with repair of the zygomaticomaxillary complex is necessary ( We retrospectively studied a case series of 50 patients who had open reduction and internal fixation of fractures of the zygomaticomaxillary complex between 2011 and 2014. Consecutive patients whose notes could be found, who had attended follow up, and had been operated on by a single surgeon, were included. According to the local protocol, only patients with severe diplopia, or restriction or malpositioning of the globe had orbital exploration and repair. Patients were evaluated by age, sex, aetiology, clinical findings including diplopia and ocular malpositioning, fracture pattern, and morbidity. Of the 50 patients, 43 were men and 7 were women, mean (range) age 34.0 (13-66) years (SD 12.6). A total of 14 patients had preoperative ophthalmic signs. These were minimal in five so treatment was conservative. The other nine (eight with diplopia and one with a malpositioned globe) had orbital exploration, and seven of them had repair with titanium mesh or PDS sheet ( Fractures of the zygomaticomaxillary complex can considerably alter the structure, function, and aesthetic appearance of the facial skeleton, including the globe. Fractures of the orbital walls may result in restriction of the extraocular muscles, paraesthesia of the infraorbital nerve, hypoglobus, enophthalmos, and diplopia, all of which are apparent on clinical examination. The debate surrounding intraoperative exploration of the orbit is long-standing. Even when clinical signs are present it is advisable to wait for at least seven days, as some may be caused by intraorbital swelling and may settle spontaneously. CT clearly shows the extent of fractures of the orbital floor and zygomaticomaxillary complex and in many cases has superseded the use of occipitomental radiographs ( In certain areas of practice, CT findings alone, such as a 2 Currently, we know of no evidence that routine exploration of the orbital floor improves postoperative outcomes or reduces complications. Exploration does, however, increase operating time and costs, and probably increases complications (extrusion of implants, infection). On the basis of our findings, we think that selected patients only should have orbital exploration, and this should depend on the severity of the preoperative signs, and on the intraoperative findings. Diplopia and restricted ocular motility are not uncommon in the early period after fracture of the zygoma and they often resolve when the swelling subsides. Displacement of the fracture, which may also cause malpositioning of the globe, will improve after repositioning of the zygomaticomaxillary complex. Based on our experience of clinical signs that resolved spontaneously before operation, we are now less inclined to rely on early clinical signs, and rely instead on intraoperative assessment of the position and movement of the orbit to decide whether exploration and repair are needed when the zygomaticomaxillary complex is repaired ( We have no conflicts of interest. Not applicable.