In this study, the effect of ultrasound (US) on the quartz-amine flotation system was investigated in detail by considering various surface chemistry techniques. The effect of ultrasound on particle size, shape factor, and surface roughness were characterized by using Brunauer-Emmett-Teller (BET) surface area measurements and scanning electron microscopy (SEM) analyses. The contact angle and bubble-particle attachment time, as well as adsorption density measurements was carried out to evaluate the effect of ultrasound on quartz surface wetting ability. In addition, atomic force microscopy (AFM) analyses were conducted, and finally micro-flotation studies were performed. As a result, it was found that the micro-flotation recovery at 2 × 10−5 M dodecyl amine hydrochloride (DAH) concentration increased from 45.45% to 63.64% with 30 W ultrasonic application at conditioning step. However, the micro-flotation recovery decreased to 37.50% when the ultrasonic power increased to 150 W. The results showed some effect of ultrasound on particle size, particle shape, and surface roughness in some extent. The increase in the contact angle and the decrease in the bubble-particle attachment time were observed. A slightly high adsorption density was measured. All these show a positive effect of ultrasound on quartz flotation with amine as a collector.Ultrasound is a sound wave above the human perception frequency limits, and propagates in a medium by wave series consisted of loosening and compressing phases. When a sufficient negative pressure is created in a loosening phase, cavitation bubbles occur. The size of the nascent cavitation bubbles is around 100 µm, and they are grown during several wave circles to a resonant size by taking gases and/or vapors inside. When a bubble grows too much, it cannot adsorb energy any more. Moreover, the surrounding liquid penetrates into the bubble, and the bubble collapses during the compression phase Compressed gases and vapors in a collapsing bubble generate heat, which is much faster than heat transportation during cavitation. Therefore, temperature of the vicinity of the collapsed bubble significantly increases up to 5000 °C; however it lasts only for a short time If a cavitation bubble collapses in a homogenous liquid, the bubble remains spherical during the collapsing due to the symmetrical pressure distribution around the bubble. On the other hand, the existence of a solid near a collapsing cavitation bubble changes the pressure distribution around the bubble, and therefore, the bubble collapses asymmetrically which causes a liquid jet (micro-jet) with 400–500 km/h velocity towards the solid To benefit these extreme features of acoustic cavitation, ultrasound has been used for improving the flotation recovery by various researchers In this context, this study was aimed to investigate the effect of ultrasound on quartz-amine flotation by considering characterization and surface chemistry aspects of minerals and bubbles in the presence of ultrasound. Within this scope, first, particle size and shape factor, surface roughness, Brunauer-Emmett-Teller ( In the experimental studies, three different quartz samples were used according to their suitability for the experimental conditions. The first and main sample of the study was analytical grade quartz at 1.2 × 0.6 mm particle size (Carl Roth, Germany). The chemical analyses of the sample showed that the sample contained ∼98% SiO This sample was first ground using a close circuit automatic agate mortar, and wet sieved to obtain the required particle size fractions (−500, 212 × 150, 150 × 75, and −38 µm) for each experiment. The fractions were then cleaned with analytical grade 2.5% H The ground and cleaned analytical grade quartz was used for the micro-flotation tests, particle size and shape, surface roughness, The second sample used in the study was a quartz mineral sample with ∼10 cm feret’s diameter, which was used for the contact angle measurements after cutting and polishing. The flat surfaced samples were cleaned with acetone, ethanol, DI water, and finally by a plasma cleaner. The third sample was a flat surfaced glass material for laboratory use (Baxter Scientific, USA). These SiO Moreover, analytical grade (99% of CH The effect of ultrasound on the floatability of quartz was investigated via micro-flotation studies. The micro-flotation tests were carried out by a glass micro-flotation cell (30 × 210 mm) with 200 mL volume and a frit with 10–16 µm pore size. First, 2 g of 212 × 150 µm quartz samples were conditioned at various concentrations of Within the scope of this study, conditioning of quartz in In the concept of the particle size analyses, the particle size of the quartz samples under 500 µm was measured using CILAS 1090 laser particle size analyzer in liquid mode. Furthermore, to determine the shape properties of quartz samples, particle shape analyses of the 150 × 75 µm quartz samples were performed using microscope photographs with “×3” magnification. The shape factors (roundness, flatness, elongation ratio, and relative width) were calculated by Leica QWin image analyzing software using the equations previously given by several researchers The surface roughness of the 150 × 75 µm quartz samples was measured using Zeiss Axio CSM 700 optical profilometer. The surface area of the samples was determined by multipoint  The contact angle of the quartz surface was measured with a goniometer (Ramé-hart, USA) by “captive bubble” method using flat surfaced quartz samples. First, a rectangular glass container was filled with DI water or Although the contact angle has an important role on hydrophobicity, it is not adequate for explaining the bubble-particle attachment in flotation, alone. Because, while contact angle is a static measurement method, mineral particles and bubbles are always in motion and contact for a limited time during a flotation process. In some cases, the flotation recovery can increase while the contact angle of the particles is constant. Therefore, the attachment possibility in a limited time has to be determined. For this purpose, bubble-particle attachment time measurement devices are used In our study, the bubble-particle attachment time was measured using MCT-100 electronic bubble-particle attachment time device. The bubble-particle attachment time experiments were carried out in 5 mL suspension with quartz samples at 150 × 75 µm particle size and with a bubble at 3 mm diameter, approximately. The attachment time adjusted via electronic control unit between 1 and 200 ms. The possible bubble-particle attachments were observed through a lens at the bubble surface for a particular contact time. The experiments were repeated 20 times at different positions on the particle bed. The tests resulted with “attachment” and “no attachment” were recorded to calculate the attachment percentage for a particular contact time. The attachment time was determined by the contact time at which 50% of the observations results in attachment To determine the adsorption density of Various concentration of To observe the effect of the ultrasound on the material surface in nanometer scale the topographical map of the flat surfaced glass particles was obtained using an The overall experimental flowsheet of this study is shown in Long chain alkyl amines, especially dodecylamine, are widely used in quartz flotation as a collector The micro-flotation recoveries at different  In our case, it is thought that the negative effect on flotation is dependent upon the chaotic medium in the conditioning medium created by high-power ultrasound. Ultrasound creates too many turbulent acoustic flows and micro-jets in a liquid media. The increase in the number and magnitude of these factors might create a chaotic medium in conditioning which had a detrimental effect on the adsorption of collector molecules on mineral surfaces. Therefore, it is important to note that the application time and power of ultrasound have a crucial effect on the flotation. Gungoren et al. The micro-flotation results clearly showed that the flotation recovery significantly increased with ultrasound during the conditioning. In order to understand the ultrasonic effect on the flotation of quartz, the following sections ultrasonic effect on the particle size, particle shape, surface morphology, and amine adsorption at the quartz surface will be discussed. Particle size has a significant importance in flotation. Coarse particles of different minerals is more sensitive to the chemical medium, in comparison with finer particles. On the other hand, finer particles consume more collector due to their large surface areas  The results from the conditioning with ultrasound showed the effect on particle size, surface roughness, and particle shape in some extent. As mentioned in the introduction section, near a solid surface cavity collapses asymmetrically, and create high-speed microjets of liquid. The impact of microjets on solid surface could be very strong. It is reasonably expected such effect due to ultrasonic effect. The contact angle of quartz can be either zero or greater than zero depending on the water adsorption on its surface. Zero contact angle occurs when the surface of quartz is totally hydroxylated The flat quartz surface was very hydrophilic with absence of In flotation process, when a particle encounters a bubble, the process of film thinning and liquid drainage occurs before attachment is happened. The shape, sharpness, and pointedness of the particles have an important role on the rate of film thinning and rupture, and hence the overall flotation rate. It is also known from literature that the particles with sharper edges and rougher surfaces attached easily to the bubbles than smooth ones because of the increasing in the rate of film thinning and the rupture Slightly increased adsorption density of The two-dimensional The effect of ultrasound on the quartz flotation was studied. The results indicated that during the conditioning with ultrasound the quartz flotation recovery increased significantly. A decreased quartz flotation recovery was obtained at a higher ultrasonic power. The higher ultrasonic power may interrupt the adsorption between amine molecules and surface, which is due to the physical bonds. An increased contact angle and shorter bubble-particle attachment time were observed with ultrasonic treatment. The results show some effect of ultrasonic treatment on the particle size and surface roughness in some extent. These effects may facilitate the bubble-particle attachment. The cavitation bubbles may benefit the amine adsorption and amine molecular organization as evidence by adsorption density and This study was supported by the Research Fund of