The effect of substituting Sr for Ba on the magneto-transport and magnetic properties of (La1/3Sm2/3)0.67Ba0.33MnO3 system, has been investigated. The samples, (La1/3Sm2/3)0.67Ba0.33−x
                     Sr
                        x
                     MnO3 (x
                     =0.0, 0.1, 0.2 and 0.33), synthesized by citrate gel route, crystallize in an orthorhombic structure (space group Pnma, no. 62). The unit cell volume decreases while the metal-insulator transition temperature (T
                     MI) increases with increasing Sr content. The localization of charge carriers occurs at low temperatures and becomes more pronounced with decreasing Sr content which leads to an enhancement of resistivity. This could be understood by the variation of MnOMn bond-distance and angle. Reappearance of semiconducting behavior (dρ/dT
                     <0) is observed only in samples with x
                     =0 and x
                     =0.1 below certain temperature (T
                     <
                     T
                     MI). These samples exhibit thermal irreversibility behavior for a field-cooled (FC) and zero-field-cooled (ZFC) magnetization data in a magnetic field of 100Oe. This is ascribed to the competition between the superexchange and double exchange interactions. The change in physical properties has been correlated to chemical parameters such as ionic radii, tolerance factor, electronegativity and variation in MnOMn angle.The manganites have generated great deal of interest because of its rich phase diagram and technological importance In the present study, we have undertaken a study on the series (La The polycrystalline (La  The structural parameters of all the samples were refined by the Rietveld method using the computer code FULLPROF The normalized resistivity ( The electronegativity of Ba (0.89) is smaller than that of Sr (0.95). The ionic characteristic of the A The Mn The Mn The  The variation of magnetization with temperature in both the zero field cooled (ZFC) and field cooled (FC) conditions for the series (La The We conclude that the frustration due to the competing FM and AFM causes the phase separation in these systems. The frustration is more pronounced in Ba-rich samples which are reflected from transport as well magnetic studies. Hence, the tendency of phase separation increases with increasing Ba-content. The overall magnetic behavior may be explained by de Gennes  The effect of Sr substitution on the transport and magnetic properties of (La The author SA and DB are thankful to the Department of Science and Technology, India for financial support.