In this work we present a new experimental technique alternative to Acoustic Emissions, which makes use of sound signal sensing, to complement the assessment of the mechanical behaviour of sand grains. A post-processing protocol is also proposed. By using this technique in combination with microscopy during in-situ compression tests, it was possible to capture complementary features in the complex mechanical behaviour of granular materials. In addition to that, dominant acoustic frequencies in the sound emitted by sand grains during failure were captured. The method has been applied to study the effects of chemical composition, morphology and grain sizes on the failure mechanics of three types of single sand grains. The advantages of this approach over other traditional techniques to capture failure events during cracking of granular materials have also been clearly demonstrated.sound measurement Acoustic emissions non-destructive techniques linear voltage displacement transducer signal-to-noise ratio duration of the burst event amplitude of the signal threshold lower bound of the signal upper bound of the signal energy spectral density energy of the signal per unit frequency displacement at failure of the single grain force at failure of the single grain elastic energy released during fracture of a single grain Sand grain fracture has been identified as one of the main mechanisms governing the mechanical response of granular media ( Conventional destructive methods, based on static and dynamic compression of single sand particles, are generally adopted to measure either fracture strength and energy ( More information on the micro-phenomena happening during grain fracturing can be obtained by employing non-destructive 3D imaging techniques such as microscopy, X-ray or neutron tomography imaging ( Imaging techniques have been widely adopted for visual post-mortem inspection and characterisation of samples ( Another existing non-intrusive experimental technique, based on the qualitative and quantitative evaluation of the sounds emitted AE has been successfully applied to investigate the fracture mechanics of rocks ( Nevertheless, the AE technique presents some drawbacks when used to study single grain fracture mechanisms. Firstly, the smallest commercially available probe is generally much bigger than the size of a single sand grain. This implies that the sensor needs to be mounted on the testing machine with obvious problems in case of miniaturised in-situ devices (i.e. the probe cannot fit into the testing apparatus). Furthermore, the measured signal is averaged depending on the size of the sensor. This could lead to a loss of accuracy when it comes to studying the fracture at grain level. In order to address some of the aforementioned issues and since part of the AE events frequency spectrum falls in the audible range, the present study proposes a new technique, herein defined as Sound Measurement (SM), which adopts airborne sensors (i.e. microphones) to capture the events generated exclusively by grain fracture. In a continuous material, the stress applied to a single grain, results in strain energy that is accumulated inside the grain until fracture occurs. In granular materials, such as an array of sand grains, the stress applied is redistributed among the grains via their points of contact. In this case the stress wave propagates through force chains. Therefore, some of the grains will be under stress, some others will not. No sound is produced until micro-phenomena such as stick-slip, rotation or fracture occurs (this is true for both AE and SM). It is worth remembering that the sound is nothing but compressive stress waves propagating through the air. These waves are generated by the micro-vibrations generated during the aforementioned phenomena (in a similar way when sound is produced by drum being hit) and can be captured by a microphone. The vibrations emitted during the compression of sand fall within the audible range and motivated the development of the technique presented. The SM technique is, firstly, defined and, then, calibrated against in-situ observations of the fracture of single sand grains and of arrangements of grains. Moreover, this work provides a combined audio-visual analysis of the failure of sand grains, showing the effects of chemical composition, morphology, and grain sizes on it. Sound Measurement, with underlying physical principles that come from the acoustics, has been thought to be an alternative non-destructive technique (NDT) that can be used to study granular materials. It relies on the ability to record sound originated during fracture, which travels through the air as compressive waves. The main difference between SM and AE is the frequency range of the signals in which they work. While AE provides a very wide range of frequencies (1 kHz-1 MHz), SM works within the audible spectrum (20 Hz–20 kHz). To compensate this, SM requires a simpler setup with less costly sensors (microphones) and a much easier installation since they do not need to be coupled with the surface of the body under examination. Three types of sand were tested to show the effect of grain shape, size and material on the failure mechanics: Crystalline Silica Ottawa sand with round grain shape, Crystalline Silica Q-Rok sand with polyhedral grain shapes, and amorphous volcanic ashes. Ottawa and Q-Rok sand were obtained from US Silica, Berkeley Springs, West Virginia. The volcanic sand was collected during the paroxysm of December 2014 from the South East Flank of Mount Etna. The composition of Q-Rok and Ottawa sand is mainly quartz (99.7%). Ottawa sand is naturally occurring sand, whilst Q-Rok sand is obtained by crushing. Etnean Volcanic ash is mainly composed of two minerals: cristobalite and anorthite. These ashes are characterised by the presence of abundant vesicles inducing an inherent porosity and a vitreous phase formed as a result of the very rapid cooling lava undergoes after the eruption.  In order to investigate the effects of morphology and chemical composition, the size of the grains to be tested was controlled by passing the sand through sieves with different mesh size. Therefore, for the 3 types of sand, grains with average diameter comprised between 0.425 and 0.5 mm were selected. Ottawa grains with diameters smaller than 0.425 mm (Ottawa_small) were adopted to evaluate the size effect. In-situ observations of the fracture dynamics of single grains and of arrangements of sand grains were carried out in combination with sound measurements. For this, the experimental setup shown in A stainless steel container, with a thick transparent glass cover ( During the tests, each particle and assembly of particles were placed between two flat stainless steel platens (labelled A and B and shown in Images and videos (with an acquisition frame rate of 15 fps) were taken using an Alicona Infinite Focus 3D profilometer with a 5X magnification lens. The sound was recorded using the desktop microphone Plantronics Audio 300 placed close to the container and plugged directly into the audio input port of a desktop computer. The sound signal was then acquired with the software Audacity version 2.1.2 at a rate of 96 kHz. As the acquisition was performed through the PC audio card, with its internal pre-amplification, no physical units could be assigned to the signal. However, this does not affect the qualitative analysis that is presented in this paper. In order to perform a quantitative analysis, which is not within the scope of this study, a pre-calibration method should be used (e.g. the pencil lead break, ball impact ( Audio and video were recorded concurrently during testing in order to produce real-time measurements, which were then compared in the post-processing phase. The audio recordings were de-noised using the built-in functionality of the acquisition software Audacity, which is based on the so-called “spectral noising gating” technique ( This section aims at introducing the relevant frequency and time parameters and the post-processing procedure to be used for the analysis of the raw data collected during the experiments. The SM analysis is based on the estimation of several characteristic parameters that help the researcher to infer mechanical features and properties of a medium during the application of an external load. The parameters herein defined were similar to those used in Acoustic Emissions analysis. The post-processing was carried out by employing the Signal Analysis toolbox of Matlab (2015b). Once the waveform of the signal was de-noised, the failure events needed to be identified. An amplitude threshold was set equal to 10% of the maximum amplitude of the signal to separate acoustic events from background noise. This threshold value was selected based on trial and error and statistical evidence. The visual evidence (shown in Section In the time domain, each event was characterised by:   Both parameters are shown in    A frequency analysis was conducted on the recorded sound signals by analysing their power spectral density. In Acoustic Emission theory, the spectrum of a signal is believed to be strictly correlated to events happening during the fracturing process of a body. Additionally, it is less affected by testing conditions when compared against time domain characteristics. The signals are converted from time domain to frequency domain by applying FFT methods. In order to discretize between the characteristic frequencies of relevant events from the spurious ones, due to background noise coming from the loading device (in-situ compression stage), the Frequency-time distribution was computed ( The results are based on the analysis of five different sets of tests aimed at understanding the effects of grain size, shape and chemical composition on the single grain fracture. On average, five tests per configuration were carried out, showing good reproducibility. In this Section, only an example data set is shown. The force and the SM events will be reported in the time domain to directly contrast certain features of the load history curve with the detected SM events. This section summarises forces and displacements at failure measured, for all types of sand, during the in-situ compression tests on single grains. The results are shown in form of box and whisker plots, with median values marked by a red line.  The effect of grain shape, shown in Finally, the Volcanic sand exhibits much lower values of force at failure than all the other types of sand. This is thought to be a direct consequence of chemical composition and porous microstructure of the Volcanic sand grains (Section For a more comprehensive understanding of the single grain fracture, However, in case of brittle failure, the knowledge of displacement ( With the displacement similar for all types of sand, as previously stated, Two representative tests were carried out to show the ability of the proposed method to capture all cracking events taking place during uniaxial compression of single Ottawa sand grains. Three measurement methods were employed and compared to identify the fracture of grains: (i) SM, (ii) visual inspection through microscopy, and (iii) drops in the force-time curves. In the first test, an almost spherical Ottawa particle ( A second test was conducted on an Ottawa sand grain of equal size but characterised by lower roundness ( These results unequivocally proved the correspondence between sound measurements and fracture of the grain, and showed the ability of the proposed method to capture even those events hardly recognisable from the force-time curves. Information about the fracture events can also be obtained in both time and frequency domains. The signals were post-processed by adopting the procedure presented in Section A time-domain analysis was carried out for Test 1 (presented in Section Here, the amplitude was normalised against the maximum amplitude measured during the test.  The acoustic emissions, applied to granular materials, are notoriously sensible to both sliding between particles, and crushing ( The in-situ test reported below allowed us to prove the insensibility of SM to rotation and sliding of the grains. Again, force-time curve, sound measurements and microscopy images were compared to identify the cracking events. The heart-shaped Ottawa sand grain ( The sound measurement technique could also be used to study the effect of cyclic loading on granular materials. This technique, being highly sensible to grain crushing could be used, for example, to improve the understanding of the influence of grain fracture on the Felicity and Kaiser effects ( In AE theory, the study of the frequency domain – in particular of the dominant frequency of a phenomenon – is often used for source mode identification (AE were simultaneously affected by crushing and sliding of the grains) since it is less dependent upon testing conditions ( Moreover, since we showed that SM signals were exclusively due to grains fracture, the analysis of the frequency domain was used to determine the influence of grain size, material and shape on the single grain fracture. In particular, information on the effect of grain shape was collected by comparing the dominant frequencies of Ottawa and Q-Rok sand grains. An example of uniaxial compression of Q-Rok sand grain is shown in The effect of chemical composition, together with shape, was studied by comparing the dominant frequencies across the different types of sand. The signals measured during the tests were post-processed by adopting the procedure presented in Section The effect of the grain shape can be clearly seen by comparing Ottawa (quasi-spherical) and Q-Rok (polyhedral) sand in The effect of chemical composition, evaluated by comparing Volcanic sand with the other two types of quartz sand in Finally, the effect of grain size is shown in No direct comparison can be done with other results available in literature because of the different frequency response of the acoustic devices used in the present work (as explained in Section The applicability of SM to large-scale problems required its calibration using granular assemblies with a low number of grains. An in-situ uniaxial compression test on an assembly containing 11 grains of comparable size (diameter of Once again, even in the case of assemblies, the images and the drops in the force-time curve ( The only two events detected in this example by SM involve simultaneous fractures of multiple grains ( This work presented a Sound Measurement technique, based on the use of airborne acoustic sensors, to monitor the process of fragmentation of single sand grains and grain assemblies. A post-processing analysis in the time and frequency domain was also proposed. The sound measurements were validated against microscopy images captured during in-situ compression tests and compared against the force-time curves. Moreover, this technique could be applied to study the influence of grain fracture on Felicity and Kaiser effects on granular materials under cyclic loading. The authors are currently exploring the potentiality of the technique by studying the crack initiation and propagation in continuous materials such as concrete, metals, ceramic, and composite materials in industrial applications. Based on the results presented in this study, it can be concluded that: Differently from AE, SM was not sensible to rotations and sliding of the grains. This entailed that all sounds recorded were unequivocally associated with grain failure. Consequently, such method could be applied to isolate the distinct effect of fracture on the behaviour of granular materials. The technique was also successfully applied to detect grain failure in granular assemblies. However, the images confirmed the existence of the masking effect, also present in AE analysis, with multiple concurrent grains fracturing at the same time, which invalidated the unequivocal relationship between the number of SM events and the number of failed grains. The analysis of the dominant frequencies for the three different types of sand and different grain sizes demonstrated the influence of granulometry, chemical composition and grain shape on the fracture mechanics of single sand grains. Future work, based on the adoption of SM on a larger domain should focus on the effect of the moisture content on the mechanics of fracture and on the influence of grains fracture on the rate sensitivity of granular media. The authors gratefully acknowledge the support of the The following is the Supplementary data to this article: Supplementary data to this article can be found online at