Solvent extraction with amines has been evaluated as a possible method to purify and concentrate gold from thiocyanate solutions. No significant difference was observed in gold extraction with commercially available tertiary amines (Alamine 336, Alamine 308, and Alamine 304–1). The effects of Alamine 336 and thiocyanate concentrations were examined for gold extraction. Gold extraction isotherms were established at different thiocyanate concentrations. The extraction and stripping of gold showed satisfactory results at an organic/aqueous (O/A) ratio of 1:5 for extraction (~100%) and 5:1 for stripping (~92%), in the presence of decanol. Possible solvent extraction reactions and stripping reactions with thiourea are discussed in order to better understand the system chemistry. Sodium hydroxide/thiocyanate, ammonium hydroxide, and acidic thiourea were examined for the stripping of gold from the loaded organic phase. Acidic thiourea gave the best results (with complete stripping of gold) under the conditions studied.Much has been written over the past years on the recovery of gold from thiourea ( Recovery of gold from thiocyanate solutions by activated carbon adsorption ( Gold forms anionic complexes in thiocyanate solutions ( Three tertiary amines; i.e. Alamine 336 (trialkyl (C8–C10) amine), Alamine 308 (triiso-octyl amine), and Alamine 304–1 (tridodecyl amine), were obtained from Cognis Company and used as received. Decanol (Cognis Company) was added to improve the solubility of gold and ferric species in the organic phase and to mitigate the viscosity of the organic phase when loaded with ferric ion in some experiments. Hexane (Sigma-Aldrich Company) was employed as received for the dilution. Sulfuric acid and sodium hydroxide (both AR, Mallinckrodt) were used to adjust pH. Ammonium hydroxide and thiourea (both AR, Mallinckrodt) were used for gold stripping. In all experiments, DI water was used to prepare the aqueous solutions. For the purpose of comparing three amine extractants, experiments were performed in separatory funnels at a volumetric phase ratio of 1 (organic/aqueous: O/A) with a shaker (MAX For the initial scoping experiments, pH was not controlled and thus the initial and final pHs were not the same. Comparison of the three tertiary amines was made with respect to their extraction of gold and thiocyanate as shown in  The effect of ionic strength on gold extraction was studied by using aqueous solutions of varying Na The effect of Alamine 336 concentration on gold extraction was more thoroughly examined as shown in As presented in However, at low Alamine 336 concentrations it can be seen that at equal molar Alamine 336 and gold concentrations the effect becomes significant, i.e. increasing the thiocyanate concentration results in decreasing gold extraction, as illustrated in Extraction isotherms for gold were determined at various thiocyanate concentrations from 0.02 to 0.1 Stripping of gold from Alamine 336 was performed with sodium hydroxide/thiocyanate, ammonium hydroxide, and acidic thiourea. The selection of these reagents was based on the depression of gold extraction seen previously in alkaline solution or the conversion of the gold thiocyanate anion to the gold-bearing thiourea cation that would not be extracted with the amine. Theoretically, if a neutrally charged ligand has a stronger comlexing tendency with an aurous ion than thiocyanate, then it can be used as a stripping agent as the ligand can transform the anionic aurous thiocyanate complex to a cationic complex. The stability constants for the formation of different gold complexes, which is the basis for the selection of stripping agents, will be discussed in the following sections. The complexation reaction between the aurous ions (Reaction ( Nevertheless, stripping may be possible with sodium hydroxide solution because Alamine is a weak base. In this regard, sodium hydroxide/thiocyanate solutions were employed to strip gold from an organic phase (Alamine 336 0.1 Thiocyanate concentration in the aqueous phase was 0.2 Aurous ions form Au(NH And, NH The efficiency of ammonium hydroxide for gold stripping is presented in The complexation between the aurous ions and thiourea occurs according to Reaction ( Also, SC(NH The efficiency of acidic thiourea solution for gold stripping at pH 1.8 was examined. The organic phase was composed of Au 10 It is expected that the stripping of gold with thiourea occurs according to Reaction ( The results reveal that complete gold stripping is achieved under the conditions studied. It can be concluded that thiourea has a high efficiency as a gold stripping reagent. In addition to the high stripping efficiency, thiourea is compatible with the acidic thiocyanate leaching system, leading to low reagent consumption and operating costs. It has been noted from the results already presented that selective gold recovery from thiocyanate solutions can be achieved by solvent extraction with tertiary amine (Alamine 336) under appropriate chemistry control — relatively low SCN concentration (0.02 However, extraction and stripping were studied at low O/A phase ratios, such as 1 or 2. In industrial practice, the gold concentration in pregnant leach solutions would be expected to be in a range from 1 to 3 For this reason, extraction and stripping have been studied at high phase ratios in extraction (O/A of 1:5) and in stripping (O/A of 5:1). The efficiency of these conditions and the influence of system variables (thiocyanate, amine and decanol concentrations) on the gold recovery and the stripping rate were examined. Experiments were performed to establish the effect of decanol on the stripping of gold. It was found that decanol was needed to have adequate phase separation when ferric ion was present in the leach solution. The effect of ferric ion on solvent extraction will be discussed in more detail in part (V) of this research. The experimental effect of decanol on gold extraction at higher phase ratios is shown in According to the results presented in The kinetics of gold extraction was studied for a period of 40 According to the results, at low Alamine 336 concentration (0.01 The rate of stripping of gold from a loaded organic phase was determined at O/A of 5:1.  The effects of SCN and Alamine 336 concentrations on gold extraction and thiourea concentration on gold stripping were examined. Additionally, two stages of stripping were used to determine the overall gold recoveries by Alamine 336 extraction and thiourea stripping. The results are shown in The first two experiments show that a high recovery of gold is achieved under low amine (0.01–0.02 It can be seen from the last two experiments that higher SCN (0.05 In summary, low SCN (0.02 Solvent extraction of gold was examined with selected tertiary amine extractants (Alamine 336, Alamine 308, and Alamine 304–1). It was found that these amines have similar properties for extraction of gold. Therefore, Alamine 336 was selected for the extraction of the anionic gold complex (Au(SCN) The kinetics of gold extraction were found to be fast and the phases were easily separated. The loading capacity for gold was found to be high. Gold extraction of about 98% was achieved at a molar ratio of Alamine 336/gold above 10, where extraction was independent of Alamine 336 concentration. At lower molar ratios, the extraction was found to be dependent on Alamine 336 concentration. When the Alamine 336 concentration was 0.05 Ammonium hydroxide was found to be more efficient than sodium hydroxide for gold stripping in alkaline solution, but the reagent consumption was high. It was shown that most effective stripping was achieved with thiourea at high phase ratios (O/A of 1:5 in extraction and 5:1 in stripping). However, it is expected that high phase ratios would need more vigorous agitation and longer reaction times to achieve satisfactory gold recoveries in extraction and stripping operations. Effective stripping of gold (about 100%) was achieved using an acidic thiourea solution to stabilize gold as a cation and allow its release from the amine extractant. The authors would like to thank