The development of naturally fractured gas reservoirs often requires the deployment of rigorous techniques for production data analysis incorporating dual-porosity gas behavior. It has been a prominent problem to linearize and analytically solve the governing equations for dual-porosity gas systems. This study applies a pseudo-pressure-based interporosity flow equation to derive a density-based rate-transient analysis method to accurately predict the gas production rate and estimate the amount of original gas in place (
                        
                           
                              
                                 G
                              
                              
                                 i
                              
                           
                        
                     ) for the systems. The methodology also predicts the gas production rate by transforming the response of its liquid counterpart via a decoupling of the pressure-dependent effects using dimensionless depletion-driven parameters.
                  For the first time, the density-based flowing material balance method is derived for the dual-porosity gas reservoir. More than that, an innovative fracture productivity equation that was missing for the dual-porosity system is derived as well. This study provided detailed derivations for the model and relationship used in past density-based dual-porosity rate-transient analysis. The dual-porosity productivity equation and the relationship between average matrix pseudopressure and average fracture pseudopressure are rigorously derived. The rescaling relationship between the dual-porosity liquid solution and the dual-porosity gas solution is also demonstrated in detail. An appropriate interporosity flow equation for gas is used. Based on that, the results show that the density-based approach is able to successfully capture the dual-porosity behavior of gas for constant bottomhole pressure condition.Naturally fractured reservoirs are heterogeneous in nature. Many of them comprise discrete volumes of matrix rock separated by fractures. The fractures disrupt the matrix blocks and form continuous networks. Fractures are highly permeable and occupy a small percentage of total reservoir volume. The matrices, on the other hand, are of low permeability and have a large storage capacity. Because of high fracture permeability, most of the fluid flow within a reservoir occurs in the fracture network, while the majority of the fluid is stored in the reservoir's matrix. Studies of naturally fractured reservoirs have been conducted for decades. This research has proven increasingly important because of the ballooning production from unconventional reservoirs. On the gas side, efforts have been made to linearize these governing equations using concepts of pseudo-pressure and pseudo-time. However, for gas dual-porosity systems, fluids in the two overlapping continua may be found at different pressures at any given location, leading to markedly different gas properties. Resulting flow equations thus become difficult to linearize and solve analytically. As a result, traditional production decline analysis using pseudo-functions has yet to be proven fully successful.    In this study, we presented a theoretical basis for using the density-based method in naturally fractured reservoirs and show that behavior of constant-bottomhole-pressure dual-porosity systems is able to be captured by this extended approach at the late stages. This work provides a theoretical background for The interporosity flow equation employed in Owing to pressure-dependent nature of compressibility and viscosity for gas, gas flow from the matrix gridlock behaves differently than the liquid flow. Thus, it is inadequate to use the interporosity flow equation for gas. Instead, The use of an appropriate gas interporosity flow equation is necessary to provide a better description of the gas flow between the matrix blocks and the fracture system. Following In the case of liquid, Equation Substituting Equation The deliverability test plays an important role in determining production capacity of a given reservoir. The deliverability equation for conventional single-porosity reservoirs has been well established. With proper manipulation of the interporosity flow equation, we are able to derive the interporosity flow equation for a dual-porosity system, which is then able to be utilized for the deliverability test. Given a circular reservoir, the diffusivity equation in the fracture system can be written in Equation Assuming Darcy flow in the fracture system, we substitute Darcy's law and Timing both sides of Equation For boundary-dominated flow (BDF), following Equation 3.11 in Substituting Equation Following Equation Equation Substituting Equation Then we can write Equation In the long-term, the average matrix pressure corresponding to Equation  Substituting Equation Define For long-term behavior, the fracture pressure's fraction in the average reservoir pressure is minimal considering that the matrix stores the majority of remaining gas. Deriving representation of Substituting Equation Take the notation: Substituting Equation Finishing the integration in Equation Taking the exponentials of both sides and transforming the resulting equations gives: Substituting Equation Introduce definitions of Substituting Equation Equation A comparison between Equation Moreover, with We subsequently develop an exponential liquid rate equation for a dual-porosity system in a manner similar to its gas counterpart's derivation, giving: Comparing Equation Two proposed The line curves in Note that the previous rescaling is from the single-porosity liquid solution for the gas rate. Now we apply the rescaling approach from the dual-porosity liquid rate solution using Equation Following Zhang and Ayala (2013), we develop a rate-transient analysis in a dual-porosity gas system. This method is applicable for variable pressure drawdown/variable rate production because of the applicability of gas deliverability equation for such scenarios. Substituting Equation Consider two correlations: Substituting Equation Denote: Equation To use Equation First of all, we plot For the second step, using the Thirdly, we calculate the difference between the two Equation Knowing horizontal-axis coordinate Calculate corresponding Calculate Obtaining Calculate Calculate Calculate time using Equation Repeat steps 1 to 8. We suggest a sensitivity analysis on the effect of This rate-transient-analysis technique can be extended to cases where well is put at production at variable bottomhole pressure/rate. The modification and validation have been discussed in Production data from the three scenarios are utilized to validate the proposed rate-transient analysis for predicting Negligible differences between derived Production data from a well completed in naturally fractured Austin Chalk ( The reservoir and fluid properties are listed in The bottomhole pressure is assumed 100 psia, a low value, since the well is kept being pumped off. In our field case study, the GOR is assumed 10 scf/STB to satisfy our single-phase assumption in the theoretical development. The oil compressibility is assumed For a liquid reservoir, gas straight-line analysis equation is rewritten in Equation Plotting The slope of the fitted straight-line is This study demonstrates that reserve and long-term production performance in dual-porosity gas reservoirs can be successfully captured using a density-based approach as long as boundary-dominated flow prevails. The gas productivity equation was rigorously derived for dual-porosity systems. Assumptions, development of diffusivity equations, and proof of the An in-house simulator for dual-porosity gas systems using the derived interporosity flow equation for gas was used to validate the proposed Moreover, a rate-transient analysis method was proposed using a density-based approach to predict The authors would like to thank members of the  radius of spherical matrix, area,  oil formation volume factor, RB/STB compressibility, fracture compressibility plus liquid compressibility, Dietz's reservoir shape factor, dimensionless original gas in place, cumulative gas production, thickness, permeability, rescaling component for dual-porosity system, dimensionless pseudo-pressure, average pseudo-pressure in a reservoir, molecular weight of gas, original oil in place, pressure, dimensionless flow rate, dimensionless initial decline rate for density-based model under full potential drawdown, initial oil decline rate for density-based model under full potential drawdown, radius, L, ft external Radius, L, ft wellbore radius, L, ft wellbore-to-initial density ratio, dimensionless molar gas constant, skin factor or Laplace variable, dimensionless specific gravity, dimensionless time, t, days temperature, T,  fluid flow rate in porous media, reservoir volume, compressibility factor, dimensionless  shape factor, 1/ time-averaged time-averaged time-averaged time-averaged time-averaged Euler's constant, 0.5772156649  viscosity-compressibility dimensionless ratio, dimensionless space-averaged viscosity-compressibility ratio for single-porosity system, dimensionless space-averaged viscosity-compressibility ratio for dual-porosity system, dimensionless average viscosity-compressibility ratio between average matrix pressure and bottom-hole pressure, dimensionless viscosity-compressibility ratio for matrix fluid, dimensionless viscosity, M/L-t, cp Interporosity flow coefficient, dimensionless density of fluids, M/ porosity, dimensionless storativity ratio, dimensionless  average value in the matrix dimensionless fracture gas initial liquid matrix matrix standard condition wellbore condition  gas liquid in dual-porosity system liquid in single-porosity system average Starting from the diffusivity equation of gas flow in matrix blocks gives: Substituting Darcy's law into Equation Assuming incompressible matrix rock, multiplying both sides by Substituting Dividing both sides of Equation Take spherical matrix shape with radius Substituting We take spherical matrix shape with radius Solving Equation Long-term approximation truncates to the first term of the infinite series, giving:  Taking the derivative of Equation Writing Substituting Equation  Application of definition of For reservoirs including formation compressibility and connate water, the interporosity flow equation, Equation Writing Equation Integrating with respect to volume and dividing reservoir volume on both sides of Equation Equation The difference between volumetric averaged density and average density from material balance is negligible for a wide range of cases. Thus, substituting Equation Moving terms in Equation Take the notation: Substituting Equation For dual-porosity systems with formation compressibility and connate water, Equation