Many industrial processes require on-line measurement of particle size and particle size distribution for process monitoring and control. The available techniques for reliable on-line measurement are, however, limited. In this paper, based on the captured surface images of randomly disarranged ore particles, the image uniformity was characterized. Particle size distribution was then investigated by applying a neural network-based modeling with the obtained image uniformity. The proposed soft sensor provides an improved prediction model and can be used for real time measurement of particle size distribution in the industrial operations.Particle size and particle size distribution are important variables in many industrial sectors, especially in mining and mineral processes In the mining and mineral industry, the commercial software package, WipFrag©, developed for on-line measurement of particle size distribution with proper calibration Application of image analysis to improve particle size measurement has been explored widely Soft sensor approaches have been widely adopted for variables that are hard to measure, in which variables of interest are calculated indirectly based on easily measured information using proper models In this paper, the uniformity of the ore particles is calculated based on the captured surface images. WipFrag© is used to provide an initial estimate of particle size distribution. The estimate using WipFrag© and the calculated uniformity are applied to the neural network to build a model. The additional information used in the proposed method provides a potential of improvement in estimating particle size distribution. Neural network was trained using the Levenberg–Marquardt (LM) algorithm. The resulting neural network models can serve as a soft sensor for ore particle size. The resulting soft sensor provides a valuable tool for improved process modeling, diagnosis and control in the mining and mineral industry. Mixtures of ore particles with various sizes and a camera system were used in the experiments. The camera was loaded with 12.1  A schematic of soft sensor development and utilization is illustrated in In the proposed soft sensor, WipFrag© was to provide an initial estimate of particle size distribution. For calibration of particle size distribution, WipFrag© uses the Rosin–Rammler equation to fit the measurement The actual data from fragmentation are to fit with the Rosin–Rammler equation, and the obtained curves are calibrated using calibration factors. The parameters, In this work, the standard calibration factors, provided and defined by WipFrag©, were employed. The relationship between the calibration factors and adjustment factors is given in For image analysis, pictures taken in the experiments were reduced to 1600 Define R as the ratio of the number of values smaller than the threshold value in each section (  A typical neural network consists of three layers: input, output, and hidden layers, and is composed of simple processing units called neurons, interconnections, and weights that are assigned to the interconnections between the neurons In this paper, neural network models were obtained based on the calculated uniformity described in the previous subsection. The neural network structure of 1-4-4-1 (1 input layer, 2 hidden layers, and 1 output layer) was adopted for a Single-Input–Single-Output (SISO) system. A tangent hyperbolic function serves as the transfer function in each node of hidden layers, and the LM algorithm is applied for training the network. The gradient and Hessian matrix can be written as Combining the gradient and the Gauss–Newton method, an updating weight can be computed from In this study, a calculated uniformity was used as input, a particle size as output in network training. Three sets of data, each containing classes A, B, and C, were used to test the neural network modeling results. The schematic of a typical neural network structure is illustrated in Results from WipFrag© were used as an initial estimate of particle size and particle size distribution. The relationship between particle size distribution and the calculated uniformity was evaluated. The passing percentage profiles were approximated using a third order polynomial in the following form: The R-squared value was used to evaluate the fitness of the model. It represents the ratio of output variance explained by the predicted model over the total output variance. The calculated coefficients and R-squared values of the polynomial regression are summarized in The neural network modeling results are illustrated in   From The model error was studied to examine the results of the proposed neural network modeling for particle size. Consider a model in the following form In this paper, a neural network based soft sensor using image analysis was proposed. Based on the captured surface images of particles, the uniformity was characterized and the neural network models for particle sizes were generated using the uniformity and an initial estimate of particle size from commercially available software (WipFrag©). A nonlinear model was built to predict the particle sizes of disarranged ore based on the uniformity information. The neural network was trained using the LM algorithm. Results show that the proposed methodology using images can provide reliable particle size calculation, and could be used for on-line measurement of particle size. The proposed methodology for particle size modeling, and the resulting neural network-based soft sensor using particle images, can be, therefore, applied to mineral processing operations for analysis, monitoring and control. As part of future works, the proposed soft sensor can be further improved from developing new sensors and camera system that can cover all regions of ore particles, fast algorithm for image conversion, recovering the loss information in image conversion, boundary enhancement for edge detection, luminance and contrast enhancement. In this paper, a limited amount of laboratory data was available to test the proposed method. Research work that uses a large amount of industrial data is important and should be investigated in the future work. The authors gratefully acknowledge the financial support provided by