Hollow silica microspheres were synthesized by non-polymeric sol–gel/emulsion technique using tetra ethyl orthosilicate (TEOS) as a source of silica. A sol mixture of TEOS, water, ethanol and acid was emulsified in a solution of light paraffin oil and surfactant (Span-80). Calcined spheres were density fractionated between density ranges: <1.0, 1.0–1.594, 1.594–1.74 and >1.74gcm−3. The samples were characterized by optical and scanning electron microscopy with energy dispersive X-ray analysis, Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy and laser diffraction size analyzer. Spheres of densities lower than 1.74gcm−3 were found to be hollow as observed from scanning electron microscopy (SEM) images and their yield was maximized to ∼100% by using a specific TEOS volume ratio with respect to volumes of surfactant and oil. Decreasing the calcination temperature from 700 to 500°C enhances the yield of hollow spheres emphasizing importance of slower diffusion kinetics at lower calcination temperature. Outer diameters of spheres were between 5 and 60μm with mean diameter expectedly increasing with increase in TEOS sol volume and with decrease in sphere density. It is proposed that silica shells form via hydrolysis and polycondensation at oil–water/ethanol interface in the water-in-oil emulsion, which subsequently form hollow spheres on removal of water–ethanol during calcination.In the past decade, there have been many reports on the formation of hollow spherical materials Over the years, a variety of processing methods have been developed to produce hollow spheres: the sol–gel/emulsion method Sol–gel/emulsion approach is well suited to control shape, density, amount, and surface properties of hollow spheres. In addition, it is a very simple and economical method. Emulsions being heterogeneous systems consist of at least two immiscible phases, and are prepared by dispersing one liquid into another in the form of droplets in the presence of surface active materials such as surfactants or polymers. Although emulsions are thermodynamically unstable, a metastable state can be maintained for a long enough period for their utilization in various industrial applications, e.g. food products, pharmaceutical industry, and cosmetic products. Though in most of these applications, commonly used form of emulsion is oil in water (O/W), studies suggest that water in oil emulsions (W/O) can also be stabilized and are especially useful in synthesis of hollow particles Submicrometer and micrometer size hollow spheres have been produced using emulsion polymerization or interfacial polymerization methods. For example, Okubo et al. Besides there are no reports of systematic density fractionation studies, in order to separate hollow spheres and to quantify their yield. This is a crucial quantitative measure, required for developing any further filtration, drug delivery or catalytic application of these materials. Almost all previous studies report only (SEM) images or BET measurements to confirm the hollowness, which is only a qualitative measure. In this paper, we report the results on synthesis of hollow silica spheres by a sol–gel/emulsion technique without the use of polymers, using a sol containing tetra ethyl orthoslicate (TEOS) as a source of silica, Span-80 or Sorbitan Monooleate as nonionic surfactant and light paraffin oil as a medium. Microspheres obtained after calcination were subjected to density fractionation to determine the yield of hollow spheres. The hollowness of the spheres was also examined using scanning electron microscopy (SEM). We changed the volume of TEOS sol keeping the volumes of Span-80 and paraffin oil fixed, in order to maximize the yield of hollow spheres. Our experiments used component molar ratio TEOS:EtOH:H The materials used in the synthesis were tetraethyl orthosilicate as a source of silica, distilled water, nitric acid, ethanol, Span-80 (Sorbitan Monooleate, C The experiments were performed at various volume ratios of sol:Span-80:paraffin oil, namely 0.67:1:3.87, 1:1:3.87, 1.25:1:3.87, 1.5:1:3.87, 1.75:1:3.87. Thus, volume of TEOS in the sol was varied while keeping the volumes of Span-80 and paraffin oil constant. The synthesis procedure is divided into three stages as explained below. Initially, TEOS was dissolved into ethanol, followed by addition of distilled water and nitric acid, for inducing acid-catalyzed hydrolysis by the acid. The molar composition of TEOS, water and ethanol was maintained at 1:4:3 in all experiments and nitric acid was added drop wise for maintaining pH less than 2. Subsequently the mixture was stirred using a magnetic stirrer at a rate of 1200 The solution formed in stage I was poured in to a Teflon beaker containing a mixture of light paraffin oil and Span-80. This mixture was stirred at a rate of 600 Spherical particles obtained in stage II were further calcined at higher temperatures (500 or 700 After calcination, samples were density fractionated using liquids of different densities or their mixture. The liquid used were distilled water (density: 1 Synthesized powders were characterized using optical microscopy (Carl Zeiss Axioskop 2 MAT) and scanning electron microscope or SEM (FEI Quanta 200) with energy dispersive X-ray analysis (EDAX) to investigate the morphological characteristics, size analysis and elemental analysis of the particles, respectively. Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy (FTIR) using Bruker Vertex 70 spectrometer was conducted to identify the various chemical groups in calcined samples. Laser diffraction size analyzer (Malvern Mastersizer 2000) was used to obtain size distribution of the synthesized particles.   It can also be noticed that no material of density greater than 1.74 We thus studied the effect of change in the calcination temperature on the yield of spheres of densities below 1.00 Large increase in the net yield of spheres of densities lower than 1.74  The chemical composition of the spheres was found by energy dispersive X-ray analysis in SEM and results suggested presence of only Si and O, corroborating the FTIR observations that the phase of the particle is silica.  Coupled with density fractionation results, it can safely be deduced that the particles of densities lower than 1.74 Optical and SEM images suggested that the sizes of spheres vary significantly in the density fractionated samples. The sizes varied between ∼10 and ∼50 Since the number of spheres in SEM and optical images is rather small, size analysis was also performed using laser diffraction size analyzer on the spheres of densities less than 1.0 The results, as shown in We also found that for the spheres synthesized at a given volume ratio, the mean sphere size is higher (∼13.7 Now the mechanism of formation of hollow spheres in the present study is discussed qualitatively by means of a schematic model as shown in In the synthesis of silica using tetra ethyl orthosilicate as precursor, the first step is hydrolysis of TEOS. It is followed by slower polycondensation reactions where water and alcohol are condensed out from the hydrolyzed product molecules of silicic acid. Thus, condensation cannot start until hydrolysis has proceeded to some extent and then the two steps occur simultaneously TEOS has four non-polar alkyl chains and hence will preferably orient itself towards the outer periphery of the emulsion drop, Hollow silica microspheres were successfully prepared using non-polymeric sol–gel/emulsion technique employing tetra ethyl orthoslicate as source of silica. TEOS sol volume was varied to investigate its effect on the yield of hollow spheres. The spheres were made of pure silica as evident from FTIR spectroscopy and EDAX analyses. The spheres were calcined at 700 It was found that lowering the calcination temperature from 700 to 500 Authors acknowledge Mr. K.S. Tripathi for his help with the experiments and Advanced Center of Materials Science, IIT Kanpur for the utilization of characterization facilities.