Firefighters would greatly benefit from a technology based on predictive fire simulations, able to assist their decision making process. For those simulations to be useful, they need a certain degree of precision and resolution that can only be provided by CFD type fire models. But CFD simulations typically take large periods of time to complete, and their results would thus not be available in time to be of use during an emergency. Due to the high complexity of fire spread dynamics that arises from the interaction between solid and gas phase and the corresponding physical-chemical processes (e.g. pyrolysis), the spread of the fire cannot be predicted from first principles in real-time using contemporary computers, and has to be given as parameters to the model. Data can be incorporated into the model to characterise the fire, but only a limited range of measurements are recorded in current buildings. While it might be possible that buildings of the future incorporate a higher density of sensors than contemporary buildings, it is likely that emergency response systems will have access only to conventional data such as smoke detectors and sprinkler activation time for the foreseeable future. In this study the use of conventional detection and suppression devices for the estimation of fire characteristics by means of an inverse modelling framework is explored. Additionally to the growth rate of the fire, the location of the fire origin is successfully estimated. Inverse CFD modelling and tangent linearisation is used to assimilate the data. The nature of the incoming data is consistent with current detection and suppression devices, in such that only a time of activation is recorded and fed into the model. It is shown that the growth rate of the fire and the location of its origin can be correctly and efficiently estimated using sprinkler and smoke detector activation time only. It is further shown that the estimated spread rate is not sensitive to fire origin location.While computational fluid dynamics (CFD) simulations of fire scenarios are commonly used in the design of buildings, less attention has been given to the use of CFD simulations as an operational tool for the Fire Services. As a consequence, firefighters face uncertain conditions when entering a building to attack a fire, and have to make decisions based solely on their experience. They would greatly benefit from a technology based on predictive fire simulations, able to assist their decision making process The forecast of the state of a dynamic system is based on the premise that the mathematical equations that adequately describe the system contain a set of parameters that do not change over a certain period of time. If those parameters are not previously known, they must be estimated from data collected during an event in order to “calibrate” the model. Once the model is calibrated, forecasts can be made as long as the parameters remain constant. If they change, e.g. due to an external event, a new set of parameters must be estimated before an updated forecast can be made. Several studies have been conducted to estimate fire characteristics (parameters of fire models), feeding fire models with data from measurements taken during the fire. Early studies on this topic use two-zone fire models to prove the concept of data driven fire modelling When using a CFD type fire model, a relatively high density of temperature sensors is reported necessary to obtain useful results In this study the use of conventional detection and suppression devices for the estimation of fire characteristics by means of an inverse modelling framework is explored. For this, smoke detectors and sprinkler heads are considered. The methodology proposed by Jahn The growth rate of the fire is estimated together with the location of the fire origin, thus giving a more complete characterisation of the fire, that can be used to produce meaningful forecasts. Enclosure fire dynamics can be modelled with varying levels of detail. Approaches range from algebraic relationships between geometric characteristics of the compartment, temperature and HRR (e.g. Alpert's correlations for ceiling jet temperature A useful forecast of fire development must, by definition, deliver the evolution of the size of the fire in time. This means that the heat release rate (HRR) cannot be an input parameter of the model, indeed it is the main output of the modelling effort. CFD type fire models have shown to be in good agreement with measurements when the HRR is well characterised (e.g. It has been shown experimentally that the growth of a compartment fire can be characterised, in many circumstances, by a single parameter The most common detection and automatic suppression devices are smoke detectors and sprinkler heads, respectively. For both types of devices, an activation time can be recorded if the systems are integrated into an adequate panel. While the activation times of sprinkler links can in principle be obtained from pressure drops (recorded as power peaks in the pump), it is not generally possible to associate the activation to a specific sprinkler head location, unless flow meters are installed locally at each sprinkler head. Smoke detector activation times on the other hand can naturally be identified for each detector individually, which makes smoke detectors especially suited for data collection in the event of a fire. Sprinkler links are characterised by their response time, which depends on their response time index (RTI) and characteristics of the gas flow, as indicated by Eq. Smoke detectors activate when the smoke mass fraction inside the detection chamber exceeds a certain level. The characteristics of a given smoke detector are lumped in the parameter Activation of sprinkler links and smoke detectors is modelled in FDSv6 following Eqs. The parameters that define the forecast model are estimated by assimilating data into the CFD fire model, following the methodology proposed by Jahn Given a CFD model that adequately describes the physics that govern (gas phase) fire dynamics, and assuming that Eq. The inverse problem that has to be solved in order to estimate The main goal of the present study is to evaluate the possibility of using only commonly available measurements as data to be assimilated into the CFD fire model. Building regulations in most countries stipulate the installation of smoke detectors in public buildings (e.g. NFPA The methodology was tested using a virtual scenario consisting of an open plan office of 20×20 The virtual data for smoke detector and sprinkler link activation was generated using FDSv6 with a 10 As a first test case a single parameter, the spread rate of the fire, was estimated. All other parameters were assumed known. A 20 While this test case might seem trivial at first sight, as a single parameter is estimated assimilating data produced with the same forward model, it is actually a quite challenging scenario in terms of fluid dynamics (the core in the centre ‘splits’ the flow). The spread rate of the fire is estimated assimilating only five data points (four smoke detector activation times, and one sprinkler link activation time) into the model. This is considerably less compared to the required temperature sensor density reported by Jahn et al. One possible explanation for the good performance is that momentary discrepancies between simulation output and sensor measurements are filtered out by the time-integrated nature of activation times. In real forecast scenarios the fire origin will not be known beforehand. For a meaningful forecast to be made, it is thus necessary to also estimate the fire origin location. Even first guesses with fairly remote locations consistently converge towards the true fire origin location. Only one test case (test case ‘No 4’) converged towards a different fire location, although in the same sector of the office plan. Interestingly enough, the estimated spread rate converged to the true value. The precision with which the fire origin can be estimated strongly depends on the numerical grid used for the simulations. Although both parameters are in principle continuous, in practice the fire origin lies at the centre of a grid cell. Thus the parameters It should be relatively easy to obtain an early estimate of the fire location by simply using the location of the first smoke detector to activate. Since the estimated spread rate seems not to be greatly affected by the fire location, the problem could then be reverted to a single parameter estimation, assuming the fire location to be known.  In 2000 the National Institute for Standards and Technology (NIST) conducted a series of real scale fire tests with the objective of analysing and assessing different smoke detection devices (informally known as the Dunes 2000 tests) The layout of the test facility of Dunes 2000 Test 5 is shown in The HRR of Dunes 2000 Test 5 is not explicitly specified in The inverse modelling methodology expressed in Eq. Combining Eqs. The general agreement between recorded and simulated smoke detector activation times indicates that FDSv6 correctly reproduces the true flow patterns that resulted in the Dunes 2000 Test 5. Although the quasi one-dimensional geometry of the test scenario (all rooms are aligned) is expected to produce a relatively simple flow pattern, this is a considerable achievement from the point of view of CFD, especially given the large grid size (20 Ultimately, a forecast is by definition only useful (or indeed worthy of being called a forecast) if it can be delivered before the events happen, i.e. if its lead time is positive. The relatively large grid size used in the simulations resulted in a short assimilation period, although a positive lead time could not yet be obtained (five assimilation iterations took approximately 5 Large grid sizes come, however, at a price. Numerical errors due to approximation of the underlying partial differential equations could become prohibitively large. But even if those errors were still negligible, modelling errors due to geometric restrictions would arise. A decision regarding the modelled door height, for example, would have to be made. If the true door height is, say, 2.2 The large grid size is also a source of a different kind of error regarding smoke detector activation times. The node value of the computed quantities is lower compared to simulations with small grid cells, as it corresponds to an average over a larger volume. This is especially important if a strong stratification occurs (which tends to be the case in fire scenarios). The cell averaged smoke density could thus be significantly lower than the true local value, leading to longer activation times. A consequence of this could be a larger estimated spread rate (in order to compensate the longer activation times). Another aspect that influences the lead time is the distance between the fire origin and the smoke detectors. The longer it takes for the fire to be detected, the longer are the simulations that need to be run in the inverse modelling approach, and the shorter is consequently the potential lead time. A forecasting methodology based on Spread rates of a growing fire could be satisfactorily estimated in both scenarios, assimilating only five data points into the forward model. This is considerably less than data densities required in previous publications (e.g. The comparison to experimental data showed that FDSv6 is, in fact, capable of correctly reproducing flow patterns, and that the smoke detector and sprinkler link algorithms implemented in FDSv6 provide a robust tool in terms of the assimilation of smoke detector activation times. As the location of fire origin is not previously known, multiple parameters ( Lead times are not yet positive for real-scale (multi-room) fire scenarios. While it is in principle possible to use even larger grid sizes in order to speed up computations, it is doubtful whether local measurements of temperature or smoke density could still be satisfactorily compared to simulated values. More research is needed in order to identify strategies that could significantly shorten computation times so that positive lead times can be obtained. The support for Wolfram Jahn from the Chilean Commission for Scientific and Technological Research (CONICYT) through the