One characteristic of electro-flotation is the presence of micro bubbles that are well known for improving the flotation performance of fine particles. An electro-flotation method was studied with fine scheelite and fluorite particles sized into three different fractions. Experiments were performed in a modified Hallimond tube. We investigated the effects of gas holdup, particle size, and different mesh electrode apertures on mineral recovery. Flotation results show that two size fractions show increased flotation recovery as the gas holdup increases. For the sized scheelite and fluorite, the flotation effect is diverse for different sizes of the cathode aperture. Pictures of the bubbles taken by a high speed CCD were used to determine the hydrogen bubble size distribution generated as a function of collector, current density, and electrode size. The diameters of the hydrogen bubbles ranged from 12 to 117μm in alkaline conditions.Froth flotation, one of the outstanding achievements in technology in the 20th century, has made a great contribution to the vast expansion of the raw material industry and achieved a significant successes in terms of recovering valuable minerals from the most complex ores. However, this technology suitable for mineral particles in a narrow size range: outside this range flotation efficiency decreases substantially Scheelite is one of the most important tungsten-bearing minerals. Tungsten in the pure metal state and in alloys is widely applied in modern technology. Scheelite is often found with other calcium-containing minerals such as fluorite, calcite, and apatite. It is difficult to separate these minerals because of their similar surface properties. Furthermore, ore resources have become lower grade, and contain more fines, due to previous large-scale exploitation Particles finer than approximately 10 In this method, hydrogen bubbles are formed at the cathode while oxygen bubbles are formed at the anode. Bubbles generated by this method are much smaller and more uniform and range from 22 to 50 The aim of this study was to observe differences in flotation behavior of fine minerals containing calcium using electro-flotation and to get a more comprehensive understanding of the interaction of fine particles and bubbles. Bubble images captured under different conditions using a high speed CCD are used to validate and discuss the proposed mechanism. Pure scheelite and fluorite were obtained from the provinces of Qinghai and Hunan in China. Pure mineral samples were hand-picked and dry-ground in a porcelain mill with an agate ball. Test samples sized from 38 to 74 Flotation tests were performed in a modified Hallimond tube (see Sodium oleate (purity >95%) was chosen as the collector. The reagent solution was prepared in a sodium electrolyte solution at a concentration of 1%. Using H Three current intensities, 50, 100, and 150 In each test 1.0 Slurry gas holdup refers to the volume percentage of gas within the flotation tube. The increased level in the flotation tube was used to determine gas holdup. After adding 10 A high speed CCD camera with a magnification of 10-fold and a 1/1000 Stainless steel nets having one of three different apertures were used as the cathode. A plot of the slurry gas holdup versus current intensity is shown in  Flotation tests on scheelite having three different size fractions was performed using sodium oleate as a collector. The cathode was a 74 Note that scheelite recovery increases at higher sodium oleate concentrations. The 10–38 The electro-flotation of three types of scheelite having different size fractions was investigated by adjusting the current passed through four different mesh cathodes, namely 38, 50, 74, and 150 The flotation recovery of scheelite increases as the gas holdup increases. A cathode aperture of 38 When the cathode aperture was 50 When the cathode aperture was 74 Compared to the other three apertures the recovery of the 38–74 A collector concentration of 5.0 It is apparent that for the different cathode apertures the flotation recovery of fluorite increases as the gas holdup increases. A cathode aperture of 38 These results show that flotation of scheelite and fluorite depends upon the size of the cathode aperture. A cathode aperture of 38 When the cathode aperture was 150 For the 0–10 The bubble images shown in It can be seen in Gas holdup in the slurry increases at higher currents. It can be seen that the bubble volume for a 50 Bubble images were captured with cathode apertures of 38 and 150 Yoon has proposed the concept of collection probability during his study of adhesion between bubbles and particles Then: Yoon and Luttrell pointed out that the probability of collision ( Note that small particles have a lower probability of colliding with the bubbles. They are, then, more difficult to catch in a cell, especially by larger bubbles. When the bubble diameter is constant the collision probability, Yoon and Luttrell applied a streamline function to calculate the sliding time of a mineral particle on the surface of a bubble. They showed that the probability of adhesion can be determined from the induction time or predicted using various surface chemistry parameters that determine the surface forces of particles and bubbles  The effect of particle and bubble sizes on particle collection probability may be found from Eqs. (3) and (5), which are put into Eq. (2). A formula relating The first order flotation rate constant, It can be seen that The bubble images captured by high speed CCD show that the size of the hydrogen bubbles generated in electro-flotation is much smaller than those generated in conventional flotation. The biggest bubble is about 115  Gas holdup increases in the flotation tube as the current increases. This is true for different cathode apertures. Scheelite and fluorite of different size fractions show increasing flotation recovery as the slurry gas holdup increases. The different sizes of scheelite and fluorite show diverse flotation performance depending on the different sizes of the cathode aperture. The highest recovery of 0–10 The images captured by the high speed CCD were analyzed to find the electrolytic bubble size distribution. The distribution becomes more uniform in the presence of the collector, sodium oleate. Increased current causes the bubble density to increase while, at the same time, the average bubble size decreases. When the cathode aperture is 38 or 150 Hydrogen bubble flotation has the potential to provide selective separation of fine minerals. This largely is the result of the collision efficiency between the fine particles and the bubbles. The authors gratefully acknowledge the