A complete description of the project and the Special Issues Humusica is reported in Zanella A. and Ascher-Junell J., 2018. Editorial. App. Soil Ecol., Vol. 122, Part 1: 1-9. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.apsoil.2017.11.029.  Humusica 3 corresponds to a supplementary collection of specific information. It includes 68 short reviews, case studies, research articles, examples of field/laboratory tools and of soil management practices. The overall goal is to further point out the crucial role of soil biodiversity in sustaining the functionality of natural or anthropogenic ecosystems. The authors of the articles are professors, researchers or students working on soil-related topics, and colleagues contacted in occasion of congresses or workshops or even authors of articles or books related to topsoil functioning and litter biodegradation. The target of these contributions is to furnish supplemental information involving a large number of scientific fields related to the soil considered as a mankind resource. Two main topics remained uncovered (scheduled contributions were never provided): soil erosion, only touched in some articles and soil education at elementary school level (examples of soil-based education, for teachers). Generally, authors were asked for a paper at half way between poster and short review: “ Scientifically, the articles complete and support the information reported in Humusica 1 and 2; they consist in practical material for field or laboratory investigations; they illustrate examples of humipedon classification; they open new horizons of research and try to promote a sustainable use of the soil. The articles are summarized and grouped in five main topics:  We suggest to: a) scroll through the titles of the articles and select the one you are most interested in; b) open the article and search for the main information as in a scientific poster presentation; c) eventually, pass through the whole scientific paper; d) select another paper or search for basic information and field practice in Humusica 1 or 2 articles. SUMMARY  Balestrini R. and Lumini E. Focus on mycorrhizal symbioses Bernier N. Hotspots of biodiversity in the underground: A matter of humus form? Cakir M. and Makineci E. Community Structure and seasonal variations of soil microarthropods during environmental changes Centenaro G., Hudek C., Zanella A., Crivellaro A. Root-soil physical and biotic interactions with a focus on tree root systems: a review Geisen S. and Bonkowski M. Methodological advances to study the diversity of soil protists and their functioning in soil food webs Hardersen S. and Zapponi L. Wood degradation and the role of saproxylic insects for lignoforms Mathieu J., Caro G., Dupont L. Methods for studying earthworm dispersal Salmon S. Relationships between humus forms, soil invertebrate communities and mineralization processes. Changes in humus forms, soil invertebrate communities and soil functioning with forest dynamics Schimmer C. and van Deventer P.W. Baseline status of microbial activity of gold tailings facilities in South Africa. Yin X., Ma C., He H., Wang Z., Li X., Fu G., Liu J., Zheng, Y. Distribution and diversity patterns of soil fauna in different salinization habitats of Songnen Grasslands, China  Andreetta A., Cecchini G., Carnicelli S. Forest humus forms in Italy: A research approach Aubert M. and Bureau F. Forest humus forms as a playground for studying aboveground-belowground relationships: Part 1, Theoretical backgrounds Aubert M., Trap J., Chauvat M., Hedde M., Bureau F. Blouin M. Chemical communication: an evidence for co-evolution between plants and soil organisms Burrow C. Influence of connectivity & topsoil management practices of a constructed technosol on pedofauna colonization: A field study. Chertov O. and Nadporozhskaya M. Development and application of Humus form concept for soil classification, mapping and dynamic modelling in Russia Delaporte A., Zanella A., Vincent G., Bugeat M., Damesin C., Bazot S. Structural and functional differences in the belowground compartment of healthy and declining beech trees Freppaz M., Pintaldi E., Magnani A., Viglietti D., Williams M.W. Topsoil and Snow: a continuum system Habashi H., and Waez-Mousavi S.M. Single-tree selection system effects on forest soil macrofauna biodiversity in mixed oriental beech stands Kõlli R. Dynamics of annual falling debris decomposition and forest floor accumulation Kõlli R., Köster T. Interrelationships of humus cover (pro humus forms) with soil cover and plant cover: Humus Korkina I.N. and Vorobeichik E.L. Humus index as an indicator of the topsoil response to the impacts of industrial pollution Lata J.-C., Dusza Y., Abbadie L., Barot S., Carmignac D., Gendreau E., Kraepiel Y., Mériguet J., Motard E., Raynaud X. Role of substrate properties in the provision of multifunctional green roof ecosystem services Paoletti M.G., Furlan C. Nutrient contents assessment in a cloud forest terrestrial isopod (Ischioscia variegata), using a non-destructive method, X-Ray Fluorescence. Higher P and Ca in the Isopods collected in the canopy. Pintaldi E., D’Amico M.E., Stanchi S., Catoni M., Freppaz M., Bonifacio E. Humus forms affect soil susceptibility to erosion in the Western Italian Alps Wang X. Varying pyrolysis temperature impacts application effects of biochar on soil labile organic carbon and humic fractions  Berg B. Decomposing litter; Limit values; Humus accumulation, locally and regionally Characteristics of soil organic matter of edifisols – An example of techno humus system Markiewicz M., Hulisz P., Charzyński P., Piernik A. Drosos M., Nebbioso A., Piccolo A. Humeomics: A key to unravel the humusic pentagram Nardi S., Pizzeghello D., Ertani A. Hormone-like activity of the soil organic matter Garcia-Mina J.M. Hypothetical framework integrating the main mechanisms involved in the promoting action of rhizospheric humic substances on plant root- and shoot-growth Kõlli R. and Tamm I. Nitrogen and ash elements content in sub-horizons of forest floor Kwiatkowska-Malina J. Functions of organic matter in polluted soils: the effect of organic amendments on phytoavailability of heavy metals Santoiemma G. Recent methodologies for studying the soil organic matter Vittori Antisari L., Carbone S., Bosi S., Gatti A., Dinelli G. Engineered nanoparticles effects in soil-plant system: basil (Ocimum basilicum L.) study case Zanella A. Humans, humus and universe  Bonifacio E., D’Amico M., Catoni M., Stanchi S. Humus forms in the Ligurian Alps (North-Western Italy) Brun J.J. Humus forms pathways in low-elevation cold scree slopes: Tangel or Mor? Chersich S.L. Humogenesis and pedogenesis: humus forms and soils under a spruce forest Cocco S., Cardelli V., Bigaran F., Massaccesi L., Agnelli A., Weindorf D.C., Ping C.-L., Michaelson G.J., Corti G. Latitudinal transect relationship between soil organic horizons and permafrost depth in Alaska Costantini E.A.C. Paleosols and pedostratigraphy De Nicola Pilar M.C., Testi A., Zanella A., Pignatti S. Factors influence on humus forming in Castelporziano Reserve, Mediterranean forest ecosystem Badia-Villas D. and Girona-García A. Soil humus changes with elevation in Scots pine stands of the Moncayo Massif (NE Spain) Kolb E. and Kohlpaintner M. Tangel humus forms − genesis and co-evolution with vegetation Kõlli R. and Rannik K. Matching Estonian humus cover types' (pro humus forms') and soils' classifications Tatti D., Fatton V., Sartori L., Gobat J.M., Le Bayon R.C. What does ‘lignoform’ really mean? Terrigeol A., Indorf M.F., Jouhanique T., Tanguy F., Hoareau D., Rahimian V., Agésilas-Lequeux K., Baues R., Noualhguet M., Cheraiet A., Miedziejewski A., Bazot S., Lata J.C., Mathieu J., Hannot C., Dreuillaux J.M., Zanella A. Study of Soil–Vegetation Relationships on the Butte Montceau in Fontainebleau, France Vacca A., Serra G., Scalenghe R. Vegetation, soils, and humus forms of Sardinian holm oak forests and approximated cross-harmonization of vegetation types, WRB Waez-Mousavi S.M. Humus systems in the Caspian Hyrcanian temperate forests Wright V.P. An early Carboniferous humus from South Wales preserved by marine hydromorphic entombment Zaiets O. and Poch R.M. Use of micromorphology for humus characterisation and classification in some Mediterranean calcareous soils Zanella A. Have you never seen an infrared humus/human profile?  Concheri G., Tiozzo S., Stevanato P., Squartini A. The nutrient-primed incremented substrate degradation proinciple. A novel method and an automated tool to assess and correct agricultural soil deficiences to optimize its fertility and crop productivity Ferrarini A., Bini C., Amaducci S. Soil and ecosystem services: Current knowledge and evidences from Italian case studies Fusaro S., Squartini A., Paoletti M.G. Functional biodiversity, environmental sustainability and crop nutritional properties: A case study of horticultural crops in north-eastern Italy Gobbi V., Nicoletto C., Zanin G., Sambo P. Specific humus systems from mushrooms culture Gomiero T. Food quality assessment in organic vs. conventional agricultural produce: Findings and issues Gomiero T. Large-scale biofuels production: a possible threat to soil conservation and environmental services Kõlli R. Influence of land use change on fabric of humus cover (pro humus form) Menta C., Conti F.D., Pinto S. Microarthropods biodiversity in natural, seminatural and cultivated soils - QBS-ar approach Pergola M., Persiani A., Palese A.M., Di Meo V., Pastore V., D’Adamo C., Celano G. Composting: the way for a sustainable agriculture Gavinelli F., Barcaro T., Csuzdi C., Blakemore R.J., Fernandez Marchan D., De Sosa I., et al. Importance of large, deep-burrowing and anecic earthworms in forested and cultivated areas (vineyards) of northeastern Italy Pelosi C. and Römbke J. Enchytraeids – Land use and management Cillis D., Pezzuolo A., Marinello F., Sartori L. Field-scale electrical resistivity profiling mapping for delineating soil condition in a nitrate vulnerable area Polverigiani S., Franzina M., Neri D. Effect of soil condition on apple root development and plant resilience in intensive orchards Saccon P. Water for agriculture, irrigation management Squartini A. Cheap and portable lab-free respiration assay Stellin F., Gavinelli F., Stevanato P., Concheri G., Squartini A., Paoletti M.G. Effects of different concentrations of glyphosate (Roundup 360®) on earthworms (Octodrilus complanatus, Lumbricus terrestris and Aporrectodea caliginosa) in vineyards in the North-East of Italy.