As is well known to mineral processing scientists and engineers, fine and ultrafine particles are difficult to float mainly due to the low bubble-particle collision efficiencies. Though many efforts have been made to improve flotation performance of fine and ultrafine particles, there is still much more to be done. In this paper, the effects of nano-microbubbles (nanobubbles and microbubbles) on the flotation of fine (−38+14.36μm) and ultrafine (−14.36+5μm) chalcopyrite particles were investigated in a laboratory scale Denver flotation cell. Nano-microbubbles were generated using a specially-designed nano-microbubble generator based on the cavitation phenomenon in Venturi tubes. In order to better understand the mechanisms of nano-microbubble enhanced froth flotation of fine and ultrafine chalcopyrite particles, the nano-microbubble size distribution, stability and the effect of frother concentration on nanobubble size were also studied by a laser diffraction method. Comparative flotation tests were performed in the presence and absence of nano-microbubbles to evaluate their impact on the fine and ultrafine chalcopyrite particle flotation recovery. According to the results, the mean size of nano-microbubbles increased over time, and decreased with increase of frother concentration. The laboratory-scale flotation test results indicated that flotation recovery of chalcopyrite fine and ultrafine particles increased by approximately 16–21% in the presence of nano-microbubbles, depending on operating conditions of the process. The presence of nano-microbubbles increased the recovery of ultrafine particles (−14.36+5μm) more than that of fine particles (−38+14.36μm). Another major advantage is that the use of nano-microbubbles reduced the collector and frother consumptions by up to 75% and 50%, respectively.Froth flotation process separates solid particles based on the differences in physical and surface chemistry properties. It is the most efficient and cost effective for particles within a narrow size range, nominally from 10 to 100 In this study, nano-microbubbles were employed to increase the flotation recovery of fine and ultrafine chalcopyrite particles. A two-step attachment model is suggested in this method: first, the nano-microbubbles were selectively attached to the surface of hydrophobized particles. No attempt was made in this step to float the particles (no flotation). At the second step, the conventional-sized bubbles (0.6–2 Froth flotation of the fine and ultrafine mineral particles has been considered as one of the major technical challenges in the field of mineral processing. The fundamental reason for low flotation rate of the fine particles is primarily due to their low collision efficiency with the conventional flotation bubbles of a given size and velocity There are lots of experimental evidences, indicating that bubble-particle collision efficiency and flotation rate increases with decrease of bubble size Former studies have shown that flotation recovery of coal and phosphate particles outside the optimum size range and/or of poor floatability can be enhanced by nanobubbles In this paper, the fast and reliable technique of laser diffraction was used to measure the size distribution of nano-microbubbles. This method is classified as non-destructive and non-intrusive, and relies on the fact that laser diffraction angle is inversely proportional to particle or bubble size The objective of this study was to develop an innovative cavitation nano-microbubble flotation process for enhanced recovery of fine and ultrafine chalcopyrite particles. This study was first aimed to determine the size distribution and evaluating the stability of the generated nano-microbubbles. The accurate and reliable technique of laser diffraction was used in the first step. The second purpose of the study was assessing the role of nano-microbubbles on recovery of chalcopyrite in presence of conventional sized bubbles. In this context, comparative flotation experiments were conducted in the absence and presence of nano-microbubbles. A high purity chalcopyrite sample (purity over 96%) taken from Mazraeh copper mine in Iran was used for flotation tests. The particle size distribution of the chalcopyrite sample was measured by a cyclosizer instrument (Weir Warman Ltd., model M12, UK). Potassium Amyl Xanthate (KAX) from Cheminova was used as the collector, and Methyl Isobutyl Carbinol (MIBC, MW  The zeta-potential of nano-microbubbles in solution (frother and water) was measured as a function of time at pH A Du Nouy Ring Tensiometer (Lauda model TD1-C, Germany) was used to measure the surface tension of aqueous solutions with different frother concentration at 22 Flotation tests were conducted in a 1.5 After preparing the pulp by collector, a certain volume of prepared frother was added to flotation cell at pH 10 from frother preparation tank (tank 1 in Flotation started 30      The increase of frother concentration in flotation slurry decreased the size of nano-microbubbles ( Another factor not mentioned by previous researchers is that if nano-microbubbles are frosted on mineral particles, their apparent size increases, particularly for particles less than 10  The above-mentioned results indicate that the use of nano-microbubbles could reduce collector consumption and expand the range of floatable particle size. This can be related to the increase in the contact angle and the contact area between a bubble and a particle in the presence of nano-microbubbles. The role of the collector is to increase the particle hydrophobicity, thereby accelerating the liquid film drainage and particle-bubble attachment. The increase in the contact angle also increases the attachment force of particles to bubbles, leading to decreased probability of particle detachment from the bubble  According to the Moreover, as shown in  At the cumulative flotation time of 0.5  Recovery of chalcopyrite in both fractions was higher in the presence of nano-microbubbles than in the absence of them. In addition, it is obvious from The effect of nano-microbubbles on the flotation recovery of fine and ultrafine chalcopyrite particles was investigated in this paper. The size distribution of nano-microbubbles was measured by a Laser Particle Size Analyzer (LPSA). The application of nano-microbubble in fine (−38 The authors wish to acknowledge the