In this paper, the efficiency of photoelectro-Fenton (PEF) combined with photocatalytic process was studied for decolorization of C.I. Acid Yellow 36 (AY36) as a model textile dye. The investigated photocatalyst was TiO2 nanoparticles (Degussa P25) immobilized on glass plates. The efficiency of three cathode materials (i.e. bare graphite, activated carbon immobilized onto graphite surface (AC/graphite) and carbon nanotubes immobilized onto graphite surface (CNT/graphite)) was investigated for H2O2 electrogeneration and dye removal. The CNT/graphite electrode fed with air had the best efficiency for H2O2 production and decolorization of AY36 solution. A comparison of electro-Fenton (EF), UV/TiO2, PEF, photolysis and PEF/TiO2 processes for dye removal was performed. Results showed that decolorization followed the decreasing order: PEF/TiO2
                     >PEF>EF>UV/TiO2
                     >photolysis. Central composite design (CCD) was employed to model and optimize the decolorization of dye solution using combined process. The variables for CCD optimization were initial concentration of Fe (III) and dye, reaction time and applied current. Analysis of variance (ANOVA) showed high coefficient of determination value (R
                     2
                     =0.9867 and adjusted-R
                     2
                     =0.9751). The degradation pathway of AY36 was proposed based on the identified compounds by GC–Mass technique. The unit energy demand (UED) and operating cost for photoelectrocatalytic process was evaluated.Dyeing and finishing of textile goods is a major environmental concern, because of the introduction of large quantities of color, chemical oxygen demand, non-biodegradable organics and other hazardous chemicals into the process effluents. In recent years, various technologies have been developed for environmental pollutants removal Electrochemistry offers new ways for organic waste treatment. The advanced electrochemical oxidation processes (AEOPs) such as anodic oxidation The electro-Fenton (EF) process is based on the in situ electrogeneration of Hydrogen peroxide (H On the one hand, the electro-generated Fe The hydroxyl radicals produced through Eq. Oxidation power of the electro-Fenton process is mainly related to cathode material used in the electrolysis Although it has long been known that carbon electrodes produce H Gas diffusion electrodes (GDEs) possess a thin and porous structure that percolates the injected gas across its pores to contact the solution at the carbon surface. These electrodes have a large number of active surface sites leading to a very fast O Novel electrode materials have recently been proposed as suitable and even more efficient for electrochemical generation of H Since Fe Reaction On the other hand, heterogeneous photocatalysis via combination of TiO Because of high price of pure oxygen, to increase the competitiveness of the electrochemical wastewater treatment, it is interesting to evaluate electro-Fenton process performance with air. The primary objective of the present study is to compare the efficiency of AY36 removal as a model dye in the PEF process using three electrodes (i.e. bare graphite, activated carbon immobilized onto graphite surface (AC/graphite) and carbon nanotubes immobilized onto graphite surface (CNT/graphite)) fed with air. On the other hand, one of the new approaches in developing an efficient AOP method is to use photoelectro-Fenton combined with heterogeneous photocatalysis (UV/TiO Since the conventional method of optimization, “one factor at a time” approach is time consuming, laborious and incomplete, response surface methodology (RSM) using central composite design (CCD) was applied to model the decolorization process, to identify possible interactions and to determine the optimum operational conditions. RSM is an excellent tool for optimization of analytical methods Graphite plates were purchased from Shanghai Co. (Jiangsu, China). Multi walled CNT was purchased from Cheap Tubes Inc. (USA). Its specific surface area, outer diameters and inside diameters were 233 The experiments were performed using a DC power supply (Micro, PW-4053S, Iran). The solution pH was measured with a Metrohm 654 pH-meter (Switzerland). In all experiments, air was injected to the solution by an air pump (SB-2800, China). The removal of color was followed by using UV–Vis spectrophotometer (Light wave S2000, England) in the range of 200–800 The surface morphology of fabricated electrodes was analyzed by atomic force microscope (AFM) of DME Dualscope/Rasterscope SPM (Denmark). Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) was carried out on a Cambridge SEM Model 360 (California, USA) device after gold-plating of the samples. The surface area was calculated according to the Brunauer–Emmett–Teller (BET) model In order to identify the AY36 aromatic degradation products, GC–Mass analyses were performed. For GC–Mass analysis, an Agilent 6890 gas chromatograph with a 30 Immobilization of AC and CNTs on the graphite was explained previously TiO The treatment of AY36 was conducted at room temperature (equal to 25 The concentration of the dye in each degraded sample was determined with a UV–Vis spectrophotometer at The performance of the electro-Fenton system in the degradation of organic pollutants is related to the amount of hydroxyl radical produced at the medium. This is affected by the amount of H It can be seen from As it can be seen in In order to investigate the efficiency of prepared cathodes in the AY36 removal, several experiments were performed using these electrodes by PEF process. Decolorization efficiency was examined by treating a dye solution containing 20 According to these results, it can be concluded that CNT/graphite is a favorable cathode material for the PEF process. Hence, we used CNT/graphite as the cathode material in the following experiments. A comparison of photolysis, EF, UV/TiO In this study, RSM was used for the experimental design and optimization of the process with minimum runs of experiment. This could remove the time consuming phase which could not be achieved using conventional method (one-factor-at-a-time approach). Besides, the CCD is well suited for fitting a quadratic surface, which usually works well for the process optimization The second-order model used to fit the responses to the independent variables is shown in Eq. CCD was employed to study the interactions between the significant factors and also to determine their optimal levels. The design matrix of tested variables and the experimental results are represented in  Coefficient of determination ( A plot of the normal probability of the residuals is shown in Three-dimensional surface and contour plots are graphical representation of regression equation for the optimization of reaction conditions and are the most useful approach in revealing the conditions of the reaction system. The results of the relation between four independent variables and dependent variable (response) are shown in  In A key factor in the EF process is the concentration of Fe To evaluate the effect of initial Fe The optimization of PEF/TiO Degradation products formed during the PEF/TiO Based on the identification results, a tentative reaction pathway is proposed, as schematically depicted in There are a number of important factors in selecting a waste-treatment technology, inducing economics, economy of scale, regulations, effluent quality goals, operation (maintenance, control, safety) and robustness (flexibility to change/upsets). Although all these factors are important, economics is often paramount. Electrical energy consumption is very important economical parameter in electeochemical processes. UED is the unit energy demand spent to reduce each m On the other hand, electrical energy consumption is very important economical parameter in PEF/TiO In the first step of this study, the electrogeneration of hydrogen peroxide was compared using three cathode materials (i.e. bare graphite, activated carbon immobilized onto graphite surface (AC/graphite) and carbon nanotubes immobilized onto graphite surface (CNT/graphite)) fed with air. The amount of electrogenerated H The authors thank the