The upshot of the presence of selenium in the electrolytic solution as an impurity over a concentration range of 0 to 1000mgdm−3 during the electrodeposition of copper from sulfate solutions has been investigated in the present study. Higher concentrations of selenium (>50mgdm−3) in the copper sulfate solutions significantly reduce the current efficiency and quality of the copper electrodeposits and increase the energy consumption of the electrodeposition process. Cyclic voltammetric studies revealed that selenium, when present in the solution, affects the deposition and dissolution behavior of the cathodic copper significantly. The presence of selenium in the electrolytic bath polarizes the cathode and decreases the cathodic and anodic currents considerably. In the presence of higher concentrations of selenium (~1000mgdm−3), the co-reduction of selenium was observed. The order of relative diffraction intensity was changed from (111)>(200)>(220) to (111)>(220)>(200) without affecting the preferred plane of crystal growth of copper (111). However, distinguished peaks of selenium were observed for the deposits obtained at an individual impurity concentration of 1000mgdm−3 in the solution in support of the observation made during polarization studies. Scanning electron micrographs revealed that the presence of selenium in the acidic copper sulfate bath develops a non-uniform and porous structure with indistinct grain boundaries instead of a compact and smooth deposit as obtained from pure solutions. At higher selenium concentrations, the copper deposits are induced with cracks and ultimately give rise to powdery deposits. The effect of selenium is worse when copper electrodeposition is carried out at 60°C.Copper is an essential service material and is environmentally friendly. The increased demand on the production of copper is due to the rapid growth in the sectors like infrastructure, construction, electrification, information, telecommunication, etc. The world's copper production has increased significantly over the years. This has caused severe depletion of the primary copper ore reserves. Thus, to meet the future worldwide growing demand of copper, there is no other option left than conserving the metal by maximum the recycling of secondaries and wastes in addition to the available primary resources of copper ( Anode slime is one of the important secondary resources of copper, which is obtained as a by-product during electrolytic refining of copper due to the settling of more noble metals such as gold, silver, tellurium, selenium, etc., present in the impure copper anode at the bottom of the cell ( Several researchers have studied the effects of various metal impurities such as iron, manganese, cobalt, etc., on the electrodeposition of copper from sulfate solutions ( Keeping this in view, an attempt has been made in the present study to investigate the effects of selenium on the cathodic current efficiency, energy consumption, polarization behavior of the cathode, crystal orientations, deposit surface morphology and purity of the deposits during the electrodeposition of copper from sulfate baths. All the electrodeposition experiments were carried out in an electrolytic cell made of glass containing aqueous solution of copper sulfate (Cu, 40 Before conducting electrodeposition and polarization studies, the surface of the cathodes was polished with 400 and 1200 grade silicon carbide paper and then rinsed with 1 The cathodic current efficiency (CE) and the energy consumption (EC) during the electrolysis of copper were calculated as per the following equations: where current efficiency (%) experimental weight gain by the cathode (g) theoretical weight gain to be expected if there is no side reaction (g). where energy consumption (kWh/kg) cell voltage (V) current supplied to the cathode (A) time (h) experimental weight gain by the cathode (g) Sections of the deposits were dissolved in nitric acid and aliquots were analyzed by atomic absorption spectrophotometer (AAS) to find out the extent of selenium contamination in the copper deposits. Polarization studies were carried out in a three-electrode glass cell using Metrohm potentiostat/galvanostat model 128A. A platinum sheet was used as the working electrode, and a platinum wire was used as the counter electrode. Standard calomel electrode (SCE) was used as the reference electrode, and the potentials have been reported as such. Voltammetric scans were performed in the potential range of 0.5 to − The crystal orientations have been detected from the X-ray diffractograms generated from an X-ray diffractometer (PAN ANALYTICAL PW 1830) using Cu-K The variations in current efficiency (CE) and energy consumption (EC) for copper electrodeposition with the increase in the concentration of selenium in the electrolytic solution are shown in To understand the behavior of selenium on the electrodeposition behavior of copper from acidic sulfate solutions, cyclic voltammetric studies were carried out. The polarization behavior of the cathode during the electroreduction of copper from sulfate solutions in the absence and presence of selenium is shown in the corresponding current–voltage profiles ( The cathodic peak C1 is followed by a sharp anodic peak (A1) at 0.14 It is quite interesting to note that when 100 In the present study, apart from copper ion reduction (Eq. When the concentration of selenium in the bath was increased to 1 Thus, a fresh solution of 1 In the present study, the significance of the effect of selenium was also reflected in the X-ray diffractogram where peaks due to selenium were observed when the concentration of selenium in the electrolytic bath was very high (~ The comparison of the X-ray diffraction patterns of the deposits obtained at various concentrations of selenium in the copper sulfate bath are shown in The changes in the copper deposits occurring in the presence and absence of selenium were also confirmed with the help of morphological studies. To understand the effect of selenium on copper electrodeposition at microscopic level, scanning of the surfaces of the deposits was carried out using field emission scanning electron microscopy. The SE micrographs shown in  The presence of selenium affects the current efficiency and energy consumption adversely during the electrodeposition of copper from sulfate solutions. When present in the electrolytic bath, selenium polarizes the cathode and results in the electroreduction of copper at more negative potentials with reduced cathodic currents. Although in the presence of 1000 The presence of selenium decreased the size of the particles and resulted in non-uniform deposits with poor grain boundaries. At higher selenium concentrations in the baths, the copper deposits are induced with cracks and ultimately gave rise to powdery deposits. This could be ascribed to the simultaneous reduction of copper and selenium species forming CuSe/Cu The presence of selenium is more detrimental to copper electrodeposition when run at higher temperature (60 The authors are thankful to Professor B. K. Mishra, Director, CSIR-IMMT for his support and encouragement to publish this work. One of the authors, AB, wishes to thank the Ministry of Earth Sciences for providing financial assistance for this work.