This cadaveric study assessed factors that could lead to nonunions in subtalar joint arthrodesis. The purpose of this study was to assist surgeons in achieving sufficient joint preparation in hopes to achieve more frequent arthrodesis of the subtalar joint. We evaluated the influence of experience in regard to cartilage preparation of the joint. We also assessed which quadrants of the subtalar joint were more likely to have unprepared cartilage. The subtalar joints in 17 cadaveric limbs were prepared by 17 participants with differing levels of experience. After the cartilage was denuded, the percentage of unprepared cartilage in each subtalar joint was calculated. The medial quadrants were more likely to have unprepared surfaces. There was also a learning curve present with subtalar joint preparation, as seen by the significantly larger percentage of unprepared cartilage in cadavers prepared by first year residents.Subtalar joint arthrodesis is a common foot and ankle procedure with numerous indications for both pain and deformity correction. Several indications include surgical treatment of primary arthritis, posttraumatic arthritis, and rearfoot deformity correction. A few causes of the deformity can include posterior tibial tendon dysfunction or peroneal tendon dysfunction, which may lead to hindfoot/ankle instability and pain ( Outcomes and union rates after subtalar joint arthrodesis have been discussed in the literature. Numerous studies have assessed potential causes for subtalar nonunions. Factors thought to influence union rates include smoking, hardware choice, nutrition, metabolic conditions, and patient compliance with non-weightbearing restrictions ( Easley et al ( Studies seem to indicate that hardware choice does not necessarily lead to different rates of nonunion. DeCarbo et al ( There has been no study to date showing decreased nonunions with increased experience, as shown with calcaneal fracture open reduction and internal fixation, which showed better clinical results with increased years in practice ( The primary aim of this study was to analyze whether experience plays a role in adequacy of joint preparation in the subtalar joint. The secondary aim of this study was to analyze whether inadequate joint preparation occurred in consistent areas of the subtalar joint when the participants performed a subtalar joint arthrodesis from a sinus tarsi approach. We hypothesized that there would be a significant difference in joint preparation of the subtalar joint comparing the controls, third year residents, second year residents, and first year residents. We also hypothesized that there would be inadequate joint preparation of the medial portions of the joint compared with the joint preparation of the lateral portions of the joint due to lateral incision and exposure. We undertook a cadaveric study of 17 specimens to compare joint preparation between different groups of participants with differing levels of experience, and also compared percentage of unprepared cartilage in each quadrant of the subtalar joint. Participants in the study were recruited in June 2018 at the conclusion of first, second, and third years of residency. A total of 17 participants received predissected limbs provided by a grant from Medartis (Basel, Switzerland). Five of the participants were first year residents , 5 were second year residents, 5 third year residents (29.41% each), and 2 were controls (attending physicians) (11.77%). The first year residents had performed a minimum of 350 procedures, second year residents had performed a minimum of 900 procedures, and third year residents had performed a minimum of 1300 procedures. The level of experience was determined by seniority in residency, since residents at the end of their third year would have more surgical experience than residents at the end of their second year, and residents at the end of their second year would have more surgical experience than residents at the end of their first year. An incision was placed from the distal fibula over the anterior process of the calcaneus toward the base of the fourth tarsometatarsal joint ( After the participants denuded the cartilage, the cadavers were analyzed by the chief resident (who was not one of the 17 participants). The chief resident was blinded from the participants and did not know which limb belonged to which participant. The subtalar joint was disarticulated, and total surface area of the joint was measured and recorded. Posterior facet of subtalar joint surface area was calculated by multiplying the subtalar joint length by the width and then multiplying this total by 2. Next, the joint was split into quadrants and labeled anterolateral, anteromedial, posterolateral, and posteromedial for the talus and for the calcaneus. The surface area of each quadrant was calculated by dividing the total surface area of the subtalar joint by 8 (since there were 4 quadrants on the talus and 4 quadrants on the calcaneus). The remaining cartilage in each of the quadrants was measured and recorded by the chief resident. The percentage of nonprepared calcaneus and talus was calculated from the measurements. Statistical analysis was performed using STATA version 13.1. A Kolmogorov-Smirnov test was used to assess divergence from normal distribution. The Kolmogorov-Smirnov test statistic (D) was 0.21697, and the Analysis of variance (ANOVA) was used to determine statistical differences in cartilage denuded between the anterolateral, anteromedial, posterolateral, and posteromedial quadrants of the talus, calcaneus, or entire subtalar joint between each class of residents and the control. Post hoc pairwise comparison was performed when there was a significant difference between quadrants of the talus. Statistical significance was defined as ANOVA was used to determine statistical differences in cartilage denuded between the anterolateral, anteromedial, posterolateral, and posteromedial quadrants of the talus or calcaneus. Post hoc pairwise comparison was performed when there was a significant difference between quadrants of the talus. Statistical significance was defined as  ANOVA    ANOVA was performed to assess the cartilage denuded for each quadrant of the calcaneus ( ANOVA was performed assess the cartilage denuded for each quadrant of the talus ( No published research has not assessed nonunion rates related to lack of preparation of the subtalar joint in arthrodesis procedures by either quadrant or experience. Previous studies have evaluated the influence of hardware ( This study was performed to see whether joint preparation was affected by level of training and whether particular areas of the joint were more likely to be unprepared. The results showed that there was a significant learning curve after the first year of residency, as seen in the significantly different levels of cartilage preparation in the entire subtalar joint, anteromedial calcaneus, posteromedial calcaneus, posteromedial talus, and anteromedial talus. Thus, surgeon experience could be a contributing factor for subtalar joint nonunions. Sanders et al ( The results also showed that cartilage was not denuded equally in the subtalar joint. The anteromedial quadrant of the talus was significantly more likely to have unprepared cartilage compared with the other quadrants of the talus. The posteromedial and anteromedial quadrants of the calcaneus were also significantly more likely to have unprepared cartilage compared with the other quadrants of the calcaneus. These data could be helpful for surgeons when preparing the subtalar joint for arthrodesis, because they indicate that surgeons should be more vigilant when preparing the medial portion of the subtalar joint. Preparation of the medial joint would be more difficult compared with preparation of the lateral joint since, there is more exposure laterally due to incision placement. Lack of visualization of the medial subtalar joint could explain lack of preparation of that portion of the joint. Since specific quadrants were more likely to have unprepared cartilage and thus possibly contribute to nonunion, it would be interesting to use CT scans to assess fusion in patients that had subtalar joint arthrodesis. It is possible that patients who have partial union have union only across the lateral portions of the joint. Interestingly, studies of arthroscopic subtalar joint arthrodesis show fusion rates between 95% and 97% ( Although cadaveric studies have shown a risk to sural nerve injury through the posterior portal ( Limitations of this study include difficulty in accounting for accurate surface area of the talus and calcaneus, since concavity could not be incorporated in any measurements. Accurate measurements would require calculating curvatures, leading to a high margin for error. Another limitation was that table height during joint preparation could not be adjusted, which put taller participants at a disadvantage compared with shorter participants. The participants were also not able to simulate a hip bump (which makes visualizing the joint easier intra-operatively). Additionally, all participants did not receive the same subtalar joint in regard to previous arthritis, joint shape, joint topography, and joint surface area. For example, 1 cadaver had gouty crystals in the subtalar joint. Overall, bone quality variation can influence ability to delaminate cartilage as well. Finally, this study does not directly assess surgeon aptitude, since experience is only 1 part of aptitude. In conclusion, we found that a significant learning curve was present for subtalar joint fusions. We also found that surgeons should take more time to prepare the medial portions of the subtalar joint during subtalar arthrodesis, since this was the location that was significantly more likely to have unprepared subtalar joint. In the future, it would be interesting to assess fusion rates confirmed by CT scan to verify accuracy of previously cited fusion rates. It would also be interesting to evaluate fusion rates across the lateral portion of the subtalar joint compared with fusion rates across the medial portion of the subtalar joint with CT scans, and to see whether there are increased fusion rates with increased years in practice. Finally, it would be interesting to retest residents at the end of each year of residency to calculate whether there is a significant change in ability to denude cartilage with experience. Jason St. John, DPM, assisted with edits.