One of the trickiest problems for the additive manufacturing industry is the manufacture of hardmetal tools, inserts and wear parts of all shapes, sizes and degrees of intricacy. The case for AM-HM is almost self-evident. Hardmetal objects are difficult and expensive to manufacture but often replaced when only a tiny fraction has been worn away. Much could be saved in weight and material costs, if the least stressed volumes could be replaced by closed voids or if more shaping could take place before sintering. However, unlike most other AM materials, like metals and biological constituents, hardmetals are a combination of a very hard high melting-point ceramic (generally WC) and a tough metal binder (usually Co) with comparatively low melting (and boiling) points. When processed by conventional liquid-phase PM sintering, a small part of the WC dissolves in the metal binder as the temperature is raised, forming a eutectic. As the temperature is lowered, carbide is reprecipitated, the compact contracts and virtually all porosity is eliminated. None of this works with regular 3D printing. In simple terms, if we apply high-speed laser melting to the metallic binder, there’s insufficient time for liquid-phase sintering. Raise the temperature to melt the hard component and much or all of the binder metal will evaporate. These and allied problems have been attacked by numerous researchers. In this feature we discuss the current state of art, as disclosed at a special session of the EPMA’s recent Bilbao Congress. The four papers presented orally at that session are reviewed here in order of presentation. Andrew Klein ( The established BJ3DP (Binder Jet 3D Printing} process utilizes droplets of a secondary organic binder to selectively bond the particles in a layer of powder. A CAD file is used to control the deposition of this binder on the powder particles. The final step in the process is reached by repeating the deposition of organic binder on multiple layers of powders. In its own way it simulates conventional powder metallurgy and is therefore unlike other additive manufacturing technologies like selective laser melting, direct metal laser sintering and electron beam melting, BJ3DP takes place at low temperatures and 3D printing does not involve melting of metal or ceramic powders. The ability of the BJ3DP process to build parts at lower temperatures, without the requirement of melting or fusing the powder particle is claimed to make it ideal for manufacturing parts from high melting-temperature materials, including ceramics, and particulate composites consisting of two or more materials with substantial differences in melting points. Earlier studies had focused on the effects of process parameters like binder saturation, powder layer thickness and printing speed on the quality of printed products. Binder saturation and powder layer thickness were critical in determining the strength and dimensional accuracy of the printed part. For any powder layer thickness, binder saturation had a linear relationship to green strength and inverse relation to dimensional accuracy. Parts printed at higher binder saturation showed better strength but poorer dimensional accuracy. For a fixed binder saturation, the parts printed at high powder layer thickness showed lower strength but improved surface quality. Results highlighted the need to identify optimal binder saturation levels and powder layer thickness. It was further suggested that powders of finer grain size promoted superior green strength and dimensional accuracy, the latter also decreasing with increase in printing speed. These investigations provided guidance on the selection of powder and process parameters to provide good dimensional accuracy and strength. However, understanding of the dimensional accuracy/capability of the BJ3DP process was still lacking. Sintered WC/Co hardmetal is the most widely used material for manufacturing wear parts, cutting tools, dies and the like. The high melting temperature of WC and the very large difference in melting temperatures of WC and Co make it difficult to process by selective laser melting. The BJ3DP process circumvents such issues and has shown potential for manufacturing cemented carbide parts with good mechanical properties. The reported research provided a statistical analysis of capability and repeatability of the BJ3DP process in printing cemented carbide parts of various sizes and shapes. It was hoped that the results would assist in identifying potential items to be manufactured by the BJ3DP process and in developing dimensional specifications. WC/12Co (AM WC701) of 25 µm average particle size manufactured by Global Tungsten and Powders Corp, was used as the starting powder in the present study. Dimensions and pictures of the samples printed are shown in The samples were designed to investigate the effects of aspect ratio and size of a prismatic part on the accuracy of the printed sample. Sample 1 was a 10 mm cube, sample 2 a square rod with 10 × 10 mm cross-section and 60 mm length, and sample 3 a 60 × 60 mm plate with a thickness of 10 mm.  The results did, however, show an increase in average thickness with increase in sample size. Thus, the average thickness for sample 1 was 10.01 mm, increasing to 10.09 mm and 10.28 mm respectively for the larger samples 2 and 3. The design thickness of all samples was 10 mm. Measurements of changes in length and width confirmed that variation in the thickness dimension was greater, especially with larger size samples. The coefficient of variation (CV) was said to be a good indicator of the variation in dimensions, calculated as:  The deviations were further analysed to understand the effect of part size on the BJ3DP process. The deviation in measurement of length dimension for samples 1 and 2 is shown in Samples 1 and 2 were printed with the same intended width and thickness dimensions of 10 mm. The intended length of the sample 1 was 10 mm and sample 2 was 60 mm. The plot in Similar plots were made of other lengths and widths. In each of those included in the paper, the deviation values were greater with the smaller dimensions but the scatter in values was smaller. Analysis of the average, deviation and CV values of the dimensions were claimed to confirm good repeatability and consistency of BJ3DP process in printing a large quantity of parts on a production scale. However, BJ3DP is only one stage in a relatively complex production sequence. To qualify for industrial acceptance the sequence would need to be completed by organic binder removal, presintering if necessary, then final sintering. At that stage the sintered parts would be tested and examined for surface finish, shrinkage, porosity, warpage, hardness, toughness and other properties, and the variability of these in three dimensions would be evaluated. Then the optimisation of starting materials would be looked at, including amounts and grain sizes of WC, Co and other inputs, composition and quantity of organic binder, milling methods and various other parameters. Some of these might be read across from previous experience, but by no means all. Industrial companies are looking for more than a process that works. They want one that is developed and optimized. What they don’t want is to purchase or install a new process, then find a competitor has something similar but better optimized, more economical and with greater service life and versatility. This research is a useful contribution but is just one piece in a much larger jigsaw puzzle. I look forward to seeing more pieces added in future published research from this source. Emma Molobi ( A well-known disadvantage of conventional sintering of simple WC/Co is long production time, where sintering cycles can take up to 20 h. Grain coarsening due to solution reprecipitation of WC crystals also occurs which then has a negative impact on the mechanical properties of the component. In addition, the dissolution of WC leads to the formation of intermediate phases and formation of the brittle eta (η) phase due to the deficiency of carbon. These disadvantages are overcome in regular industrial production by incorporating grain-growth inhibitors such as chromium or vanadium which, in best practice, save money as well as solving grain-growth and non-stoichiometric compositional problems. I was personally developing such alloys and techniques in the 1950s and they have been commonplace in the hardmetals industry for many years. However, the author of this paper suggests that the main or even only reason to employ an additive manufacturing process such as Laser Engineered Net Shaping (LENS) is to overcome these now-historic difficulties. Luckily there are other and more cogent incentives, one of which could be the opportunity to use cheaper and less toxic Fe rather than Co as metallic binder. The LENS technology is an extension of rapid prototyping whereby direct manufacturing of metallic parts can be carried out. The conventional AM operation starts from a computer aided design (CAD) model, which is then divided into thin orthogonal layers in the Two feedstock powders were used during the LENS deposition process. The first was a spherical WC with a particle size of −90/+45 µm (Zhuzhou Jiangwe Boda Hardfacing Materials). The second was a gas-atomized Fe-alloy powder with a particle size of −125/+53 µm (Sandvik Osprey). The powders were blended in a rotary mill for 4 hours at a speed of 69 rev/min. Mixture composition comprised 90% WC and 10% Fe-alloy. The paper included no further details of the Fe alloy. An Optomec LENS 850-R system with a 1 kW IPG fibreglass laser was used to deposit 90WC/10Fe-alloy thin-wall samples on to grit-blasted mild steel substrates. During deposition the powders were delivered into the laser beam path by an argon gas stream. The layout of the LENS apparatus is shown in Particle size distribution of feedstock and blended powders was measured with a Malvern Mastersizer. Vernier calipers measured the height of deposited single wall samples at five different positions. Phase analysis was by X-ray diffraction. Surface roughness was checked with a Surtronic S128 Duo Surface Roughness Tester and samples were polished for optical and electron microscopy.  The heat generated by an increase in laser power resulted in more powder melting in the molten pool, leading to an increase in sample build height.  Increasing laser power resulted in decreasing hardness as shown in  WC/10 wt% Fe-alloy samples were deposited using the LENS process. The effect of process parameters laser power, powder feed rate and traverse speed were investigated. Increase in laser power increased sample build height, because the greater heat input caused more powder to be introduced into the molten pool. Increased laser power also decreased the average hardness of deposited samples as well as surface roughness. At high heat input, slow cooling rates resulted in grain coarsening of the binder and dissolution of the WC grains into mixed phases and hence a reduction in hardness. Increasing powder feed rate increased sample build height but also porosity. An increase in traverse speed resulted in a decrease in the sample build height. The author explained that work was still in progress on this project. Considered as simple ‘proof-of-concept’, the reported investigation was an excellent piece of research in a comparatively new but important materials field. However, as implied by the speaker, much remains to be done, particularly in optimizing input raw materials for industrial production. Such materials may well be more expensive than those employed in this study, but their use could be justified by improved properties, longer service life and greater reliability. I look forward to future contributions on this process. Walter Lengauer ( Continuing our theme, Walter Lengauer offered yet another route to the additive manufacturing of hardmetals. This was extrusion-based fused-filament printing, a low-cost and very popular AM technique. For more than twenty years feedstocks containing metal and various types of ceramic powders had been developed and a number of research papers published. Contrasting with the metal and ceramic powders studied previously, hardmetal and cermet formulations were mixtures of many different powders of grain sizes often smaller than 1 µm. For 3D manufacturing of hardmetal and cermet bodies extrusion-based techniques had a number of advantages over other AM fabrication routes: There was practically no raw material loss with extrusion-based methods, a benefit in view of the expensive hardmetal and cermet powder mixtures. Hardmetal and cermet powder mixtures contained many different constituents such as hard-phase (WC, Ti(C,N), VC, Cr In general, hardmetal and cermets must possess uniform microstructure. Because of the presence of volatile Co, an SDS method (shaping – debinding – sintering) was a first choice. The whole part was sintered without local overheating or unequal temperature distribution, which would result in binder loss and inhomogeneities in composition and grain size. Extrusion-based AM techniques were considered to be the best-suited for combinations of printing materials’. Lengauer’s team had studied two extrusion-based methods, fused-filament fabrication (FFF), for which a feedstock filament was fed into a 3D printer, and composite-extrusion modeling (CEM)’ which could use MIM feedstock without the need to prepare a filament. In both techniques the feedstock is fused and free-form printed through a nozzle. This was thought to be the first academic study of FFF and CEM printing of hardmetals and cermets. For feedstock preparation, two powder batches, one WC/10Co hardmetal and one alloy cermet (Ti(C,N), WC, (Ta,Nb)C, Cr Feedstocks were compounded in a Brabender Plasti-Corder PL 2000 kneader with counter rotating rollers at a rotational speed of 60 rev/min. Kneader temperature was 200 °C and kneading time 50 min. After compounding, the feedstocks were ground in a Retsch SM200 cutting mill. Filaments were prepared using a Göttfert Rheograph 2002 high-pressure capillary rheometer, using a 30 mm long round capillary of 1.75 mm diameter. Extrusion temperature was 200 °C and the piston speed 1 mm/s. Apparent shear rate was 215/s. A Teflon conveyor belt at the die exit pulled the filament as it was extruded. Printing trials were carried out on a Wanhao Duplicator i3V2 FFF with a nozzle diameter of 0.6 mm. A schematic of the FFF technique is shown in Another series of samples was fabricated by CEM-printing green bodies from a hardmetal granulate used for MIM (PolyMIM, Germany). An ExAM 255 printer with an extruder heated to 190 °C was used. A schematic of this method is shown in The FFF-printed hardmetal and cermet parts were debound in cyclohexane at 60 °C for 48 h. All parts were dried at 70 °C in a vacuum oven. CEM-printed green hardmetal bodies from PolyMIM feedstock were water debound by use of a mixture of H All parts were thermally debound and presintered in a tube furnace under flowing H A constant geometry of the filament is important for its continuous transportation in an FFF machine. Because of this, the diameter and ovality of the filament were monitored during production. Ovality distribution was more or less constant within ±0.030 mm, which is sufficiently low to consider the filament to be round. In all printed parts the first layer had good contact with the printing bed ( Printed (green) and sintered FFF- and CEM-printed parts simulating typical indexable inserts are compared in   For all parts shrinkage in the   The 3D printing process can be exploited in all kinds of ways, to produce parts of expensive materials with open or closed voids to save both weight and cost. 3D printing techniques cover the potential of fabricating geometrical details which are not accessible by other techniques. Such versatility could be especially important in to the future of hardmetals, where modifications to shapes and profiles after sintering are both difficult and expensive. For this research the author chose to follow his theme of indexable inserts for metalcutting applications, demonstrating that hollow parts could be fabricated to save material consumption or incorporate cooling channels. In my opinion, cutting inserts that need to resist heat should be made from tough and hard heat-resisting alloy carbides, with no need for coolant channels. I can’t think of any occasion when I’d recommend simple WC/Co for a commercial cutting insert, with or without performance-enhancing coating. Nevertheless, the chosen application is good as an illustration of AM techniques. At the present stage of technology, printer nozzles were said to have a diameter of about 0.3–0.6 mm. This was too large for very fine structures and reliefs. One solution was post-processing of the green printed parts. This was easy as these parts contained about 50 vol% organic material and hence simple grinding, blasting and mechanical machining were possible and inexpensive. Other methods included laser surface treatment or gas-phase treatment with solvents to smooth the surface. In this work Lengauer and his team had investigated a simple imprinting for surface engineering. Even very fine structures persist through the whole preparation process and were present in the sintered part. Such an imprinting, together with other techniques mentioned above, could circumvent a lack of accuracy in extrusion-based printed bodies. The surface showed no cavities from the misalignment of deposited lines in the In his summing-up, Lengauer emphasized that this study, the first on extrusion-based 3D printing of hardmetal and cermet parts by CEM (composite-extrusion modeling) and FFF (fused filament fabrication), had proven these printing techniques to be well suited for SDS (shaping/debinding/sintering) part fabrication. Further development of this technology would introduce hardmetal and cermet parts with complex geometries and new properties not accessible by other techniques. Christian Berger ( Perhaps an omen for commercial success is that EPMA’s Bilbao Congress organisers chose FFF-fused filament fabrication – to fill two of the four ‘oral presentation’ slots in the important Like the previous presenters in this session, Berger found it necessary to introduce 3D printing to hardmetals enthusiasts and hardmetals to additive manufacturers, for until comparatively recently their paths have seldom come close to crossing distance. Luckily this digression is unnecessary for the knowledgeable readers of As we learnt from the previous presentation, Fused Filament Fabrication was one of the most promising AM techniques currently under development. In contrast to other AM technologies so far studied for the fabrication of hardmetal parts (like binder jetting and selective laser melting). FFF was not directly powder-based but a suspension- or feedstock-based technique. Originally developed for 3D printing of polymers, it had also been used for 3D printing of metal or ceramic parts. Here FFF was based on particle-filled thermoplastic filaments, which were melted in a heated nozzle and deposited below to generate complex green parts. After printing, the green parts were debound and sintered to produce fully dense parts. So far, only limited work had been done in the field of FFF of hardmetals, cermets and superhard composites. Coincidentally complementary to the preceding paper by Walter Lengauer, this study looked at the influence of hardmetal composition on WC grain size and metallic binder content on the processability of filament production. In addition, it investigated printing behavior as well as the microstructure of printed and sintered parts. Two different WC/Co based hardmetal grades, varying in WC grain size and metallic binder, were prepared. The starting powders and prepared compositions are described in Filaments with a solid content between 38 and 45 vol% were prepared using a Brabender Plastograph torque rheometer, with Banbury rotors for feedstock homogenization and a Bohlin high-pressure capillary rheometer for extrusion of test filaments. The target diameter of round filament was 1.75 mm. The printer was a Hage 3D 140L with a special high-friction feed system. A special TPE binder was used to fabricate filaments. Binder system requirements included flexibility for spooling and at the same time stiffness for pushing through the nozzle. In addition, low viscosity was needed in the molten stage to reduce pressure drop in the nozzle. These properties were maintained during printing by the multi-component binder system containing both high and low melting-point polymers. Filaments were characterized by comparing torques in the Plastograph during homogenization and the bending radii of extruded filaments. With TPE binder system and solids loading between 38 and 45 vol%, the test provided a bend radius of 5–10 mm, suitable for spooling during filament manufacture as well as printing. Print nozzle temperature was 170 °C, print speed 15–20 mm/s and layer height 0.3 mm. Printed samples were debound in a combined hydrogen and chemical regime. Sintering took place in a SinterHIP furnace with 100 bar argon pressure between 1350 and 1450 °C. Polished specimens were examined by FESEM (Field Emission Scanning Electron Microscopy) and by optical microscopy. Vickers hardness (HV) was measured with an indentation load of 10 kp and fracture toughness (K Good test structures were achieved with both solid contents. For further characterisation, only test parts printed with the higher solid content of 45 vol% were used. Samples made from filament WC-F-8.5 Co with wall thickness of 1–2 mm showed after debinding and sintering at 1400 °C a magnetic saturation (mS) value of over 97% theoretical. The optical microscopy images of To study the influence of both chemical and thermal debinding at higher temperature, printed parts produced from both filament WC-F-8.5 Co and WC-M-12 Co were debound and sintered at 1450 °C. Dependence of density and magnetic properties on the debinding system is illustrated in As can be seen from the magnetic saturation (mS) values, increase of debinding temperature under H Optical images ( For detailed examination of microstructures, SEM images were combined with magnetic properties. Tests included FESEM and EDS, to help identify unknown phases within the microstructure. Trial A, a fine-grained hardmetal with 8.5 wt% Co, debound at 400 °C and sintered at 1450 °C, showed too high a magnetic saturation. The FESEM image of Spectrum 1 of Thermal debinding at 600 °C hydrogen did not change the hardmetal microstructure much as compared to 400 °C hydrogen atmosphere sintered samples, as shown in In WC grain sizes were visibly larger compared to the material with 8.5 wt% cobalt. The coercive force of 8.4 kA/m indicated average WC grain size of 1.9 µm, though the grain size distribution was poor, as expected in the absence of ggis. The hardness measured for optimal debound samples (Trials B and D, up to 600 °C under hydrogen) gave for the WC-F-8.5 Co samples a value of approximately 1400 HV10 and a fracture toughness of 13.0 MPa m This study showed that it was possible to 3D print hardmetal components by the Fused Filament Fabrication technique with varying Co content and WC grain sizes. With grades having cobalt contents of 8.5 and 12 wt%, dense samples could be achieved, showing similar properties with regard to density, magnetic values, hardness and microstructure to hardmetals produced by conventional techniques. It was intended that future work would focus on a wider range of hardmetal compositions, presumably including genuinely fine and superfine grades incorporating grain-growth inhibitors. It would also include the evaluation of technological boundaries with regard to part size, complexity, increased resolution and decreased surface roughness. With this group of papers, in a session combining two of EPMA’s conference themes, AM for HM is at last launched as a workable industrial process. Much work remains to be done, to establish both technologies and applications, and to register reliability and reproducibility. But the industry is well and truly launched.