In this study, a closed loop two-stage leaching process has been experimentally and theoretically established for the selective dissolution of metals from electrode material of spent Ni-MH batteries. In the first step, baking parameters, such as temperature, acid concentration, and duration were optimized as 300 °C, 2 mL H2SO4 for 1.5 g of cathode powder, 90 min. The thermodynamic feasibility of the process ascertained the spontaneous formation of water-soluble sulfates of nickel, zinc, and rare earth elements during the acid baking. Post-baking, a two-stage leaching was performed for leaching of different metals present in the baked material. In first stage leaching with water, 91.73% Ni, 94% Zn, 91% rare earth elements were extracted with a low recovery of 36.5% Co, 22.1% Fe, 23.5% Mn at 75 °C in 1 h. Owing to the low recovery of Co and Mn, 2nd stage leaching was performed using NaHSO3 in H2SO4 at 95 °C for 1 h, improving extraction to Co (55%) and Mn (74%). The overall recovery of the metals was found to be 98.2% Ni, 91.4% Co, 98% Zn, 97.8% Mn and 96% rare earth elements. The two-stage process (baking and leaching) outperforms direct sulfuric acid leaching of cathode powder due to lower acid consumption and its selectivity of metals.Electronic gadgets are meant to make our lives happier and simpler, but they contain toxic as well as valuable substances, causing its disposal and recycling being hazardous and uneconomical. India is placed among the global nations which have generated more E-waste in quantity and especially urban India needs an urgent approach to tackle this issue ( Pyrometallurgical and hydrometallurgical processes have been considered for recycling of NiMH batteries ( The maximum extraction of 91.6% nickel (Ni), 97.8% cobalt (Co), 65.5% iron (Fe), 93.5% manganese (Mn) and 99.2% zinc (Zn), was achieved in a single stage under the optimum conditions comprising of 2 M H Nearly 5 kg spent Ni–MH batteries from camcorder cells were collected from the local sources (spent battery warehouses, electronic shops, etc.) and especially of specific brands (KODAK The electrochemistry of the nickel-metal hydride battery is generally represented by the following charge and discharge reactions as shown in Eqs. At the positive electrode: At the negative electrode: The final cell reaction is expressed in Eq. M stands for the hydrogen storage alloy and n is the maximum stoichiometric number for H in the hydrogen storage alloy. Batteries were dismantled ( Baking tests were carried out in a temperature-controlled electrically operated muffle furnace (ELECTROHEAT, Naskar and Co., India). In each experiment, a known weight of mixed electrode material (ground composite powder of cathode and anode) of spent NiMH was properly mixed with a suitable amount of concentrated sulfuric acid (98%) in a porcelain crucible. The crucible was weighed and transferred to the muffle furnace, which was preheated to the desired temperature for pre-fixed duration upon which the crucible was taken out, cooled to room temperature and weighed ( The electrode powder of the spent batteries contained ∼59% Ni, 4.6% Co, 2.9% Mn, 2.8% Fe, and 2.0% Zn, apart from 18.3% REEs {2.7% lanthanum (La), 4.5% Nd, 6.2% Sm, 2.29% Pr, 2.58% Ce}, and other trace elements like copper (Cu), potassium (K), aluminium (Al), etc. XRD analysis of the powder in Low temperature (100–300 °C) sulfuric acid baking was tested in order to assess the selective leaching of some of the metals over others found in the electrode material. Acid baking transformed the phases of the material which were identified by XRD studies as NiSO The amount of sulfuric acid (0.5–3 mL) per 2 g of electrode material for baking affecting the recovery of metals was investigated keeping other conditions constant (baking temperature-300 °C, time-90 min). The baked material was subjected to water leaching at 75 °C and 500 rpm for 120 min and results are presented in The effect of the baking temperature was studied in the range 100–400 °C for 120 min using 1.5 mL H The effect of the baking duration (30–120 min) on the leaching efficiency of metals was investigated by baking the battery material (2 g) at 300 °C with 1.5 mL sulfuric acid. Results shown in Certain phases of Ni, Zn and REEs (La, Nd, Ce, Sm, Pr) formed during the baking reaction of electrode powder, can selectively dissolve in water over Co, Mn, Fe and a few REEs. Using the thermodynamic data (HSC Chemistry 7.14), the change in the standard free energy can be calculated to predict the feasibility of such reactions. Equations The high negative values of standard free energy change for Eqs. As seen in the previous section, the dissolution of Ni, Zn and REEs from the acid baked material is selective in the water leaching stage whereas dissolution of Fe, Mn and Co is much lower. Keeping the optimized conditions of the baking while using the same amount of acid (1.5 mL H In order to examine the dissolution behavior of metals from the baked material, leach experiments were conducted using water and sulfuric acid (1 M) as lixiviants, and percentage metal leaching is shown in  The effect of pulp density on the metal dissolution from the baked material is shown in The baked material is leached with distilled water at 75 °C and 50 g/L PD for different time periods (5–120 min). Improved metal extraction is observed ( It is necessary to understand the thermodynamics of reaction during the water leaching of the acid baked phases. After water leaching, the formation of dominant phases of Nd, Mn, Co makes these metals prevalent in the residue which can be identified by calculating the standard free energy change for the water leach reactions of the baked material. Equations The results of the treatment of water leach residue (rich in cobalt and manganese) obtained above using different lixiviants are presented and discussed. The effect of acid concentrations on the leaching of Co and Mn from the leach-I residue generated at 75 °C, 50 g/L PD and 60 min, was tested. Initial experiments were carried out using the H Eqs. The two-stage leaching process represents the leaching of the baked electrode material by water (leach-I) at 75 °C and 50 g/L PD for 60 min, followed by leaching with the NaHSO The leach residues obtained from the treatment of the electrode material were characterized using XRD analysis ( The leaching of metals with time was further examined by comparing the morphological changes through the SEM studies and also the elemental distribution in the leach residues with that of the untreated sample ( The two-stage leaching process for the treatment of electrode material of spent NiMH by a low-temperature sulfation and water/reductive acid leaching is advantageous for selective dissolution of Ni, Zn, REEs vis-à-vis other metals. Baking of electrode material (2 g) at a low temperature (300 °C) with 1.5 mL sulfuric acid for 90 min transformed the major phases, (Ni(OH) This work was supported by the The following is the supplementary data related to this article: Supplementary data related to this article can be found at