Describe the results of proximal humeral fractures surgically treated with the Philos locking plate system. Method: Between March 2003 and October 2004 we prospectively reviewed 24 of 26 patients with proximal humerus fractures treated with a Philos plate. The mean follow-up time was 12 months and the mean age of patients was 57 years. Six patients had four-part proximal humerus fractures, 11 patients had three-part proximal humerus fractures, and nine patients had two-part proximal humerus fractures. Clinical evaluation was performed using the University of California at Los Angeles (UCLA) criteria. Results: The mean UCLA score was 30 points (17-34). All fractures showed union. Three patients showed fracture union at varus position. The mean UCLA score for these patients was 27 points. Conclusion: Osteosynthesis with Philos plate provides a stable fixation method with good functional outcome.The incidence of fractures of the proximal humerus accounts for 4-5% of all fractures Most of these fractures are stable and with minimum deviation, and closed treatment is possible. However, in 15 to 20% of cases, surgical intervention is necessary. Whenever possible, the osteosynthesis is the option employed, since the functional results of hemiarthroplasty are not sufficiently satisfactory in most cases The choice of the type of reduction or synthesis material to be used depends on the pattern of fracture, bone quality, age, and activity level of the patient The use of the plate and screw fixation method as an option is widespread among orthopedists. However, any method is subject to complications such as loosening of the fasteners, especially in older patients Therefore, the fixed-angle locked plate was developed to allow for more stable fixation, especially in poor quality bone. The Philos (Proximal Humeral Internal Locking System) plate is an example of this new generation of implant plates with a locking system; it is considered a fixed-angle implant, whose design was based on the anatomy of the proximal humerus The objective of this study was to describe the technique of using a fixed-angle plate with Philos locking screws and evaluate the results in 26 patients with traumatic injuries of the proximal humerus who underwent osteosynthesis using this type of implant. Between March 2003 and October 2004 a prospective cohort study was conducted in which 26 patients, 14 females and 12 males, were treated surgically by the Shoulder and Elbow Group of the National Institute of Traumatology and Orthopedics (INTO-RJ), due to fracture of the proximal humerus. Fixed-angle plate with Philos locking screws was used as the fixation method for the proximal humerus. All cases of fractures of the proximal humerus treated with indication for osteosynthesis during that period were included. In the preoperative period, a form was completed identifying the age, gender, trauma mechanism, presence of associated injuries, and the fracture classification according to Neer and the AO (Arbeitsgemeinschaft fúr Osteosynthesefrägen). The average age of patients was 57 years (24-85 years). The mechanism of fracture was a fall in 17 patients, car accident in five, and four different causes for the others. In patients younger than 50 years (11), the automobile accident was the most common cause of fracture. According to the Neer classification, nine fractures were classified into two parts, 11 in three parts, two of which were associated with anterior dislocation ( We assessed the range of motion of the shoulder, fracture healing, patient satisfaction, and the presence of complications related to the surgical technique or implant. Clinical evaluation was performed using the system of points defined by the University of California at Los Angeles (UCLA) All surgeries were performed under general anesthesia and with a scalene block for postoperative analgesia. Prophylactic antibiotic therapy (cephalosporin) was initiated with the anesthetic induction, lasting for 24 hours after the surgery. Patients were positioned supine, in the beach chair position, on a table made specifically for shoulder surgery, which allowed for radiographs in the three planes essential for the procedure, these being: anteroposterior, axillary, and lateral profiles of the shoulder. The image intensifier was placed at the head of the operating table so that the arc could rotate freely. Deltopectoral approach was used. Since plate positioning determines the position of the screws on the head of the humerus, whenever possible, we positioned the implant so that the screws were located mainly in the central, inferior, and posterior regions of the humeral head. On average, five screws were placed in the humeral head (three to six screws). In the immediate postoperative period, the upper limb was kept in the sling, starting mobilization after the first outpatient visit between the fifth and seventh days. Of the 26 patients enrolled, 24 returned for evaluation with a mean follow-up period of 12 months (ranging from eight to 24 months). All fractures consolidated with clinical and radiographic evidence. The time between fracture and osteosynthesis averaged 14.4 days (ranging from two to 50 days). Seven patients had an interval of more than 21 days between injury and surgery. The functional outcome assessed by the UCLA protocol had a mean score of 30 points, ranging from 17 to 35. The patients had active anterior flexion, which ranged from 60° to 180° (mean 135°), lateral rotation from 25° to 60° (mean 41°) and medial rotation of T8 to L1 (mean T9). Three patients (11%) had consolidation with varus angulation ( All patients reported satisfaction with the end result and 20 (83%) returned to work activities with the affected limb. Several techniques have been described for fixation of fractures of the proximal humerus, such as the use of cerclage wire, tension band, Kirschner wire, T-plate, intramedullary nail, blade plate, and more recently the fixed-angle locked plates, each of these methods having their advantages and disadvantages Less invasive fixation methods such as percutaneous fixation as described by Braman and Flatow The primary goal of fracture fixation of the proximal humerus is to obtain a stable construction that allows for early rehabilitation. Koval et al. Some authors report satisfactory results with osteosynthesis using conventional plates. Wanner et al. Kristiansen and Christensen Hintermann et al. Siffri et al. Fixed-angle locked plates were developed to meet stability requirements, especially in osteopenic bone, without increasing the risk of osteonecrosis. There are few studies in the literature using Philos plates for these fractures. In a recent study, Bjorkenheim et al. Koukakis et al. More recently, Moonot et al. In our study, all patients had their fractures consolidated, different from the study presented recently by Rose et al. In our experience, osteosynthesis with this type of plate revealed no major difficulties in relation to other previously used implants and the main challenge was to obtain anatomic reduction, especially in fractures in three and four parts. The high rate of consolidation, together with patient satisfaction, makes this method a good alternative in the treatment of these fractures. The osteosynthesis of fractures of the proximal humerus with fixed-angle plates and locking Philos screws proved to be a technique with satisfactory functional results and a low complication rate in this group of patients.