The agricultural sector released about 5.4 Gt CO2 eq in 2010, of which 57% was due to the livestock sector. Cattle are the main contributors (65%) to the livestock sector's emissions, while sheep and goats (small ruminants) are responsible for about 6.5%, corresponding to 475 million tonnes CO2 eq. The Life Cycle Assessment method has been largely adopted to assess the environmental impacts connected to the livestock sector and to related products. Despite this, very few pieces of research are specifically addressed to analysis of the environmental performances of sheep cheese and, particularly, to the proposal of improvement strategies that may allow the reduction of environmental impacts. In this context, the Life Cycle Assessment method is applied in order to assess the environmental hot-spots of Tuscan “Pecorino” cheese (a traditional Italian dairy product obtained from sheep milk processing) and to evaluate potential improvement scenarios. The analysis follows a “cradle to gate” approach by including the processes related to sheep breeding (intensive system), milk transport and cheese production. The functional unit selected is 1 kg of “Pecorino” cheese, packaged at dairy farm gate and ready to be distributed. Focusing on Climate Change impacts, the results highlight that the total impacts related to the functional unit are 22.13 kg CO2 eq. The environmental hot-spots are mainly connected to direct emissions from the sheep enteric fermentation and to the production of feed used in sheep breeding, as well as, to waste water treatment and electricity consumption during cheese production. The adoption of a different breeding system (from intensive to extensive) may represent a good improvement option for the reduction of environmental impacts related to the baseline system, as well as the utilisation of a photovoltaic system as an alternative energy source for production of the electricity used in the cheese production phase.Small ruminants (sheep and goat) are responsible for about 6.5% of greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions related to the livestock sector, corresponding to 475 million tonnes CO The present research focuses on the production of Tuscan “Pecorino” cheese, which is a traditional Italian dairy product made by the processing of sheep milk. This type of cheese is very popular worldwide, principally due to the quality label “Protected Designation of Origin - PDO” ( Different Life Cycle Assessment (LCA) studies have focused on assessment of the environmental impacts related to sheep milk production and, in particular, to breeding processes (e.g. Favilli at al. (2008) assessed the sustainable production of “Tuscan Pecorino PDO” in a geothermal district in which renewable energy sources were adopted. The analysis underscored that Global Warming related to 3.053 kg of “Pecorino” cheese was 47,299.64 g CO  To the authors' knowledge, the scope of the previous LCA studies only extends to the identification of the environmental hot-spots connected to the production of “Pecorino” cheese and none of the LCA studies focus attention on the proposal of alternative and improvement strategies for processes related to the environmental hot-spots. In this context, this study has two main goals. Firstly, a detailed study is performed of the environmental burden of Tuscan “Pecorino” cheese production made by the processing of sheep milk obtained in an intensive sheep breeding system, through implementation of the LCA method. This allows us to underscore the environmental hot-spots and to include detailed information related to the system considering the whole life cycle. The choice of assessing Tuscan “Pecorino” cheese production is connected to the importance of this product in Italy and worldwide. In addition, the study investigates a particular and specific type of sheep breeding. Indeed, there are very few companies that adopt an intensive sheep breeding system, in Italy (the choice of managing intensive sheep breeding is mainly related to specific traditions passed down for generations). Furthermore, because of the lack of information regarding the environmental impacts of this particular breeding system, a detailed analysis can add valuable information to the scientific literature. The second goal of this analysis is to quantify and compare potential improvement scenarios that use alternative practices for processes related to the environmental hot-spots of the baseline system. In this context, the study aims to improve the scientific literature related to this specific product, by proposing potential improvement options that may allow reduction of systemic environmental impacts. This paper is structured as follows: Introduction - summarizing the general aim of the paper and its structure; Materials and methods - explaining the analysis framework applied; Results and discussion - divided into: characterisation results, normalisation results, proposal for environmental improvement strategies, and sensitivity analysis; Conclusions - summarizing the main findings of the paper. The analysis starts with a detailed description of the production of Tuscan “Pecorino” cheese (baseline system) and assessment of the environmental hot-spots related to this system by applying the LCA method. Secondly, a comparative LCA is implemented on the environmental hot-spots of the baseline system and potential improvement scenarios, in order to propose strategies that would improve the environmental performance of the system. The potential improvement scenarios are described in section Lastly, a sensitivity analysis is performed in order to evaluate the potential influences on results related to the inventory data. Analyses are carried out by means of the LCA method. LCA is a standardized tool that allows analysis of the potential environmental impacts of a product, process or service throughout its whole life cycle, from raw material extraction and processing, through manufacturing, transport, use, reuse, recycling and final disposal ( The goals of this study are to define the environmental burden of Tuscan “Pecorino” cheese production through a hot-spot analysis and to analyse improvement scenarios for processes related to the identified environmental hot-spots. The scope is to propose a detailed picture of the environmental performance of the system as well as to propose improvement options/processes for the reduction of environmental impacts. System boundaries related to “Pecorino” cheese production (baseline system) are based on a “cradle to gate” approach ( The hot-spot analysis (baseline system) and comparative LCAs (alternative scenarios) were carried out using the functional unit (FU) of Inputs and outputs of the baseline system ( Breeding – in this phase sheep breeding, through an intensive system (700 livestock units – Sardinian breed), and milking are considered. The livestock is permanently housed in a shed (700 m Milk transport – in this phase the transport of milk, in refrigerated trucks, from the farm to the dairy factory is considered. Milk is sent to the dairy factory three times a week. The average distance covered during transportation is about 40 km per week; Cheese production – in this phase the transformation processes of milk into “Pecorino” cheese at the dairy factory (1700 m The inventory analysis related to the FU of Due to the co-production of sheep milk, meat live weight (LW), and greasy wool during the breeding (phase 1), the economic allocation method was selected to face the problem of multi-output process in the studied system ( SimaPro 8.0.2 software ( In this section, characterisation and normalisation results related to the baseline system are presented and discussed in order to highlight which phases and processes (environmental hot-spots of the system) have greatest impact and to analyse which categories present the highest environmental impacts. After the hot-spot analysis, the potential improvement scenarios are described and compared to the baseline system. Lastly, the results obtained from the sensitivity analysis are presented. Characterisation results related to the Tuscan “Pecorino” cheese production (baseline system) are shown in The analysis of Climate Change, which is one of the most important environmental indicators used in the agricultural and dairy sectors ( The transport of milk from the farm to the dairy factory (phase 2) shows the lowest Climate Change impact related to the baseline system. The analysis of this phase underscores that higher impacts are related to diesel production and use during transportation, for which the results show a value of 0.04 kg CO The Climate Change results related to cheese production (phase 3) underscore that the main impacts are connected to the waste water treatment process (1.87 kg CO Results related to the other impact categories underscore that the percentage contributions of the system to the impacts range from about 99.9% for agricultural land occupation to 71.7% for water depletion in phase 1, from 0.8% for natural land transformation to 0.0003% for agricultural land occupation in phase 2, and from 27.8% for water depletion to 0.007% for agricultural land occupation in phase 3. The results highlight that the highest impacts for all the selected impact categories are associated with the breeding process (phase 1). In particular, phase 1 shows the highest potential environmental impacts in marine eutrophication by accounting for 99.4% (0.12 kg N eq per FU), in terrestrial ecotoxicity by accounting for 99.8% (0.03 kg 1,4-DB eq per FU), and in land use, including both agricultural land occupation (99.8 m The characterisation results allowed a detailed analysis related to the specific production of Tuscan “Pecorino” cheese. In this context, the main environmental hot-spots are related to agricultural practices and sheep breeding (phase 1), followed by the cheese production process (phase 3). However, the hot-spot analysis is directly connected to the type of impact category analysed. For example, when the Climate Change impact category is assessed, the system environmental hot-spots are mainly related to feed production, at industrial and farm level, as well as to emissions from enteric fermentation, in phase 1, and to the waste water treatment and electricity consumption, in phase 3. On the contrary, the environmental hot-spots are only related to the production of feed at industrial and farm level (phase 1), when, for instance, marine eutrophication, terrestrial ecotoxicity and agricultural land occupation are evaluated. The allocation method adopted to face the problem of multi-output processes, by considering the economic values of the co-products, in phase 1, can play an important role in the results obtained from the analysis. In this context, a sensitivity analysis is carried out (in section Normalisation results ( Results related to the agricultural land occupation impact category highlight that the breeding process (phase 1) causes the main contribution (2.21E-02 Pt per FU). In particular, the production of hay (industrially produced feed), for which the land use background data included in the Ecoinvent database were related to “Occupation, pasture and meadow, extensive”, shows a value of 1.22E-02 Pt per FU. Furthermore, the production of feed on farms accounts for 6.82E-03 Pt per FU to agricultural land occupation. Regarding natural land transformation, the main contribution to the impacts is due to the production of diesel used in agricultural machinery during the production of feed on farms, by accounting for 47.5%. Indeed, the process that causes the main impacts is related to land transformation from forest to mineral extraction site. In addition, the electricity production process in phase 3 accounts for 6.9%. Hay production and soy production show their main impacts when the freshwater eutrophication and marine eutrophication impact categories are assessed. In particular, phosphate (PO Although the normalisation results allow us to understand which impact categories in the analysed system make the greatest contribution, it is important to highlight two main points: a) the normalisation results are strongly related to the reference selected to carry out the analysis, which is associated with Europe in this study; b) the normalisation results related to the impact categories may give a biased outcome directly connected to the method selected and, therefore, may present potential uncertainty, in particular when an external normalisation reference is adopted. The analysis highlighted that the main environmental hot-spots of the baseline system were connected to feed production in phase 1 (breeding), as well as to waste water treatment and to electricity consumption in phase 3 (cheese production), particularly when the Climate Change impact category is evaluated. Due to the importance of reducing the environmental impacts (especially for GHG emissions) related to the agricultural sector, potential improvement solutions should be evaluated. In this context, two hypothetical improvement scenarios were analysed and compared with the baseline system. Scenario 1 focuses on proposing an improvement practice in phase 1 by changing intensive sheep breeding to an extensive breeding system (in which the livestock is mainly managed on grazing and only housed one month per year in the shed). Extensive sheep breeding was also selected in accordance with Scenario 2 was compared to the baseline system by changing the conventional electricity source adopted in cheese production (phase 3) to a photovoltaic system. The potential improvement practices are highlighted in red in The main differences between intensive sheep breeding (baseline system) and the extensive breeding system (scenario 1) are related to a different amount of inputs and outputs between the two systems, and, particularly, to the type of feed used for feeding the livestock. Indeed, the feed adopted in the baseline system (produced on farms and at industrial level), is largely replaced by grass grazing in extensive sheep breeding (scenario 1). In this context, the extensive system allows a reduction of about 85% in the utilisation of industrially produced feed. Moreover, the feed obtained on farms in intensive sheep breeding (baseline system) is produced yearly, while seeds, fertilizers, diesel, and agricultural machinery (without pesticides) are used only once every four years for the farm produced feed (only grass production) in the extensive breeding system. The adoption of an extensive breeding system also allows a higher performance in terms of milk production (from 170 L head The differences between the baseline system and the scenario 2 are connected to the type of electricity source used in phase 3 (cheese production). In this context, the Ecoinvent database process related to conventional electricity production in the baseline system (Electricity, medium voltage, at grid/IT U) is replaced with the photovoltaic electricity production process in scenario 2 (Electricity, production mix photovoltaic, at plant/IT U). This choice was adopted in order to evaluate the potential improvement connected to the utilisation of an alternative energy source. The comparison results ( The main environmental benefits connected to scenario 1 are highlighted in the terrestrial ecotoxicity impact category, which shows a reduction of impacts from 0.034 kg 1,4-DB eq per FU (baseline system) to 0.008 kg 1,4-DB eq per FU (scenario 1). The results highlight that extensive sheep breeding allows a reduction of −12.5% in terrestrial ecotoxicity impacts, when the two breeding systems (in the baseline system and in scenario 1) are compared. The impact reduction is mainly connected to the replacement of industrially produced soy (baseline system) with farm produced grass (scenario 1). On the contrary, the adoption of a photovoltaic electricity production system in scenario 2 may cause higher impacts than the baseline system (conventional electricity production) in terrestrial ecotoxicity. An improvement of environmental performances related to the scenario 1 is also highlighted in marine eutrophication (0.04 kg N eq per FU) and freshwater eutrophication (0.002 kg P eq per FU), for which the main environmental benefits are connected to the use of grass for feeding livestock in scenario 1, as substitute for industrially produced feed in the baseline system (particularly soy and hay). Regarding the improvement scenario related to the utilisation of electricity produced by means of a photovoltaic system (scenario 2) in the cheese production phase (phase 3), the results underscore that this change may bring about higher environmental benefits in ionising radiation (0.006 kBq U235 eq per FU), in water depletion (2.4 m The results related to the Climate Change impact category show a smaller variation of the impacts among the three analysed systems. Scenario 1 (use of the extensive sheep breeding system in phase 1) causes the lowest potential environmental impacts (19.74 kg CO Regarding land use impacts, the results show that the adoption of extensive sheep breeding (scenario 1) may be a good option to reduce environmental impacts in comparison with the intensive system (baseline system). This is mainly highlighted in agricultural land occupation and in urban land occupation, where the impacts range from 99.9 m This comparative analysis allowed useful information to be added to the existing literature by proposing improvement practices directly related to sheep cheese production and, particularly, by assessing scenarios in which the production of sheep milk through different breeding systems and related manufacturing processes (including a comparison between different electricity sources) adopted to produce “Pecorino” cheese. This may allow the best practice to be found, considering all the different phases involved in the production of sheep cheese. As reported in the previous discussion (section A first assessment underscores that the main differences in terms of allocation factors ( The application of the energy allocation method causes a remarkable decrease in all the impact categories. For instance, the results of the three allocation methods related to Climate Change impacts are a value of 22.1 kg CO The “cradle to gate” LCA analysis applied to the production of Tuscan “Pecorino” cheese allowed us to identify and assess the environmental impacts and hot-spots connected to the system. Furthermore, the analysis allowed assessment of potential improvement strategies in order to propose alternative practices that can lead to environmentally sustainable production. The hot-spot analysis highlighted that the highest contribution to environmental impacts, for all the considered impact categories, is connected to agricultural activities occurring in intensive sheep breeding (phase 1), followed by cheese production (phase 3), while the lowest impacts are connected to the milk transport phase (phase 2). The analysis of Climate Change showed that the highest impacts related to phase 1 are due to the production of feed at industrial level, followed by direct emissions from sheep enteric fermentation. This is in accordance with various LCA studies related to the dairy sector, which underscored that the main environmental impacts are connected to agricultural practices, especially when Climate Change is considered (see e.g. Concerning the normalisation results, the analysed system caused the main contribution in agricultural land occupation, followed by natural land transformation, marine eutrophication and freshwater eutrophication. The production of feed (at industrial and farm level) were the processes that mainly contributed to the impacts in these categories. Despite this, it is important to highlight that the use of an external normalisation reference (in the analysis presented the normalisation factors were referred to Europe) may give a biased outcome and therefore the results may be affected by uncertainties ( The analysis also allowed the proposal of improvement scenarios in order to assess alternative practices for processes related to the environmental hot-spots. In this context, the replacement of the intensive sheep breeding system with an extensive breeding system in phase 1 (scenario 1), as well as the adoption of a different electricity production source in phase 3 (from conventional to photovoltaic system in scenario 2) may represent two good options for reduction of the impacts connected to the baseline system. Indeed, the extensive sheep breeding system may bring about higher environmental benefits in all the assessed impact categories, except for ionising radiation, water depletion and fossil depletion, in which the adoption of a photovoltaic electricity production system showed lower impacts. This is in accordance with Lastly, the sensitivity analysis allowed us to highlight the uncertainties in the inventory data caused by the type of allocation method applied. Indeed, the comparison between three different allocation methods (economic, mass and energy) showed remarkable differences in the allocation factors and in the results when the energy allocation method is adopted. This underscores the importance of the decision over the use of the appropriate method when the multi-output problem occurs. This study allowed useful information to be gathered relating to LCA studies applied to the agri-food sector, since, to the authors' knowledge, very few studies have been carried out proposing a detailed assessment of environmental impacts related to Tuscan “Pecorino”, and none of these has proposed improvements in practices, also considering all the phases related to its production. Furthermore, this study can provide supporting information for Tuscan “Pecorino” cheese producing firms that are involved in the reduction of environmental impacts related to the final products. This could be achieved by selecting appropriate suppliers (by purchasing milk from farmers that adopt extensive sheep breeding) or by improving the environmental performance of the plant (by adopting a photovoltaic system for electricity production). However, since the adoption of intensive sheep breeding is connected to territorial traditions, changing suppliers, and therefore the breeding system, may cause negative social impacts related to the local communities. Giovanni Mondello, Roberta Salomone and Elena Neri defined the research design and carried out the LCA analysis. Nicoletta Patrizi, Simone Bastianoni and Franceso Lanuzza carried out a detailed revision. All authors wrote the body of the paper and read and approved the final manuscript.