Results of a kinetic study on sphalerite leaching in ammonia using Cu(II) as an oxidation catalyst are presented. The effect of oxygen partial pressure, temperature, particle size, pH, NH3 and Cu(II) concentration was studied. Kinetic analysis of the experimental data was made both by differential approach (initial rate method) and integral approach (Shrinking Core Model). Rate controlling step was found to be surface reaction. Apparent activation energy was estimated to be 48.3 kJ/mol and apparent reaction orders of 0.2, 0.3 and 0.3 were obtained with respect to PO2
                     , [NH3] and Cu(II) concentration, respectively. Catalytic action of Cu(II) was attributed to redox couple Cu(II)/Cu(I), where cupric ammine [Cu(NH3)4
                     2+] oxidizes sphalerite and the reduced state cuprous ammine [Cu(NH3)2
                     +] is subsequently oxidized by dissolved oxygen.Most oxidation reactions of sulfide dissolution take place with very slow kinetics; however, the rate can be accelerated considerably in the presence of a suitable catalytic ion as suggested about 5 decades ago by The catalytic influence of Cu, Bi, Ru, Mo and Fe on the oxidation of ZnS has been studied by Influence of Co(II) and Ag(I) ions on the extraction kinetics of zinc dissolution from sphalerite in dilute sulfuric acid under elevated temperature and oxygen pressure was examined by In different studies, the role of cupric ions in catalyzed leaching reactions has been reported. Several mechanisms have been proposed to explain the catalytic activity including the one which attributed it to change in surface reactivity   In the literature, information is not available on the systematic kinetic study on ammonia leaching of sphalerite concentrate using oxidation catalyst. In the present investigation, influence of Cu(II) on the kinetic parameters of leaching of sphalerite has been studied and empirical rate equation has been developed. Composition of sphalerite concentrate used for the present study is as follows: Zn—53.5%, Fe—10.2%, Cu—0.05%, Pb—1.1% and S—34%. Experimental procedure and apparatus are same as described in Part I Concentration of Cu(II) in the leach solution at different interval was measured by Perkin-Elmer Atomic Absorption Spectrophotometer (Model 3100). Kinetic data were generated using 1% slurry density. Standard experimental conditions are same as in Part I  Under standard conditions mentioned earlier, stirring speed was varied from 300 to 750 min Experimental results on the catalytic leaching of sphalerite are presented in Total ammonia concentration was varied from 1.54 to 4.35 M by keeping pH constant at 10.75 through the constant ratio of [NH Initial concentration of Cu(II) in the leaching solutions was varied from 5 to 100 mg/l while keeping other variables constant at standard values. It is observed that In presence of 25 mg/l Cu(II) leaching temperature was varied from 90 to 130 °C. It is observed from In order to investigate the effect of particle size on leaching rate, size was varied from (−90+75) to (−53+45) μm in four different narrow-size fractions. Variation of pH was made in the range of 10.4–11.2 while keeping the total NH Cu(II) forms a number of soluble ammines in ammoniacal system and the most stable one is tetra-ammine. Following are three possible routes through which Cu(II) can catalyze the leaching process Through formation of cupric sulfide by exchange reaction with ZnS Through formation of cuprous sulfide by exchange reaction with ZnS Through redox couple: The formation of both CuS and Cu Initial rate method is one of the standard methods that can be employed to determine the reaction orders of parameters that affect the reaction rate Differential rate expression for sphalerite leaching (without cupric ions) has been derived elsewhere Taking the slope at From the slope of the straight line of log–log plot of From the initial rate method, estimated high-activation energy coupled with fractional reaction orders is a preliminary indication that the process is controlled by the chemical reaction at the particle surface. In order to ensure that there is no change in reaction mechanism with the progress of conversion, shrinking core model can be tested. According to The data given in The extraction data at different temperatures  Similarly,  For different particle sizes reacting according to shrinking core or shrinking particle models for surface reaction controlled process, apparent rate constant has be inversely proportional to the particle size. The linearity of the apparent rate constants ( From the slope and intercept of Arrhenius plot of Use of Cu(II) together with oxygen during ammonia leaching of sphalerite has a synergistic effect on dissolution rate. It is established that Cu(II)-activated leaching rate is enhanced by increasing temperature, NH The authors are thankful Dr. V.N. Misra, Director, Regional Research Laboratory, Bhubaneswar, for his kind permission to publish the paper. Thanks are also due to Dr. (Mrs.) S. Anand, Scientist, Hydrometallurgy Division, Regional Research Laboratory for suggestions during manuscript preparation.