The combination of LIX®63 with Versatic 10 exhibits synergistic properties, enabling direct separation of Co and Zn from Mn, Mg and Ca, a process of interest to the proposed El Boleo copper/cobalt project. However, acceptable reagent stability is also required. The present work was undertaken to primarily assess the stability of LIX®63 oxime (‘oxime’) when mixed continually over 54 days at both 40 and 50 °C under proposed El Boleo extract and strip conditions, along with the impact of the resulting degradation products on metal selectivity and phase disengagement properties. High temperatures were used to accelerate oxime degradation.
                  Oxime degradation under strip conditions, which resulted in diketone and acyloin formation, was found to be associated with the presence of Versatic 10. Oxime half lives were 90 and 49 weeks at 40 and 50 °C, respectively. Degradation via this mechanism, which would occur throughout the circuit (extract and strip stages, mixing and settling), could be minimised by decreasing operating temperature.
                  Oxime degradation under the extract conditions used was considered to occur primarily via cobalt and/or manganese-complex-catalysed oxidation, resulting in some diketone formation and a new species believed to contain both carbonyl and oxime groups (‘keto-oxime’). Oxime half lives were 19 and 10 weeks at 40 and 50 °C, respectively.
                  Despite considerable loss of oxime under extract conditions, negligible changes in the pH isotherms resulted. It is possible that degradation resulted in a product with synergistic capabilities comparable to those of oxime. An alternative explanation involving oxime isomer inter-conversion is also proposed.
                  The presence of oxime degradation products including (but not necessarily limited to) diketone, acyloin and keto-oxime did not result in any clearly adverse effect on phase disengagement time.Synergistic solvent extraction (the use of one or more additional reagents to improve the selectivity of existing extractants) has been known and used to separate metals for decades (e.g. Recent work has raised interest in the use of a LIX The application of such a synergistic reagent combination is not limited to the treatment of nickel laterite-derived solutions. Indeed, a similar separation process has the potential for application at Baja Mining Corporation's proposed El Boleo (‘Boleo’) copper/cobalt project in Mexico, where separation of Co and Zn from Mn, Mg and Ca is desired. Previous work has shown that a combination of LIX The active component in LIX There are major differences in the chemistry of the aliphatic α-hydroxyoxime in LIX In contrast, decomposition of LIX Besides undesirable loss of reagent, degradation products also have the potential to adversely affect any commercial system (e.g., reduced metal selectivity, poorer phase disengagement properties). Diketone at a nominal concentration 14 g/L was found to have no adverse effect on metal selectivity in the LIX Overall, the relative stability of LIX Considerable effort has gone into understanding, controlling and minimising oxime degradation in this synergistic system under Boleo conditions. Indeed, the DSX process is now set to be a main process plant component in the Boleo project ( Additional studies were also undertaken to assess the effect of Versatic 10 on oxime stability at 40 and 50 °C in the absence of an aqueous phase. An organic solution (5.1 L) containing 0.39M oxime as LIX A sulfate-based synthetic aqueous feed solution was prepared and analysed for metal content ( A synthetic aqueous strip solution of 10 g/L sulfuric acid in deionised water was prepared. The extract and strip stability tests were performed in square glass jars (108 mm width The aqueous phases were replaced fortnightly. For the extract systems, organic was stripped and reloaded at pH 4.5. Organic samples were taken after mixing for 7, 14, 27, 41 and 54 days, stripped (100 g/L sulfuric acid), washed (distilled water) and dried (Na For the four aqueous-free tests, the LIX GC analysis was performed using a Varian 3800 gas chromatograph with a flame ionisation detector (FID). The chromatograph was fitted with an AT-5MS fused silica capillary column (30 m To enable detection of the oxime extractant in LIX Electronic spectra of the metal-stripped and centrifuged fresh and day 54 extract-degraded and strip-degraded organic solutions were acquired in the range 350-650 nm using a Cary 1C instrument (Varian) with a 1.00 cm pathlength cuvette. Where required, samples were diluted in hexane. Phase disengagement time (PDT) tests were performed on fresh, extract-degraded and strip-degraded organic solutions. Stripped organic was loaded, filtered and used to determine PDT under extract conditions as described below. Once completed, these were stripped (10 g/L sulfuric acid, A:O 1:1) and the resulting solutions used to determine PDT under strip conditions. The method employed to measure PDT was comparable to that described previously ( Metal selectivity tests were performed on fresh, extract-degraded and strip-degraded organic solutions. Organic (200 mL) and synthetic feed solution (400 mL) were mixed and sampled as described previously ( Mixing of the organic for 8 weeks under extract and strip conditions resulted in a darkening of the organic solution, from yellow (fresh) to darker yellow (strip) and orange (extract). Systems operated at 50 °C were slightly darker than their 40 °C counterparts. The aqueous-free LIX The relative absorbance of the extract and strip samples (at 1/5 concentration) are shown in The oxime content in the fresh organic solution was found to be 85 g/L, and 83 g/L in the LIX The percent oxime concentration observed in each organic solution throughout the trial is listed in Based on the present results, operation under strip conditions at 50 °C resulted in an oxime half life of almost one year, superior to the 30–34 weeks seen previously at 60 °C under similar conditions ( Oxime half lives observed under extract conditions were less positive, being only 19 and 10 weeks at 40 and 50 °C, respectively. That is, oxime loss occurred almost five times faster under extract conditions relative to strip conditions. Although only very approximate given the limited data, extrapolation of the current results via an Arrhenius plot to estimate the loss rate at 30 °C suggested an oxime half life of only 37 weeks would be obtained. Given the general experience in copper SX, including LIX The percent oxime concentration observed in the four different aqueous-free stability tests and resulting rate constants are listed in In the absence of an aqueous phase, LIX In addition, due to the necessary excess of LIX It is unknown from the present data whether the faster rate of oxime loss observed during mixing under extract conditions would persist during settling. Oxime degradation resulted in the appearance of peaks in the GC traces of the extract and strip systems as shown in The ‘unidentified doublet’ peak set from the earlier work ( Given that the proposed mechanism of oxime degradation to diketone and acyloin under strip conditions is also considered likely to occur under the extract conditions used here ( The diketone concentration in the different samples was determined using the previously isolated material which was assumed to be 100% pure ( The amount of ‘new’ diketone generated in each system with time is listed in ➢ At a given temperature, diketone formation ➢ Under a given aqueous condition, diketone formation This second point suggests diketone is a thermodynamically preferred degradation product. This is supported by the earlier work where the percentage of diketone generated in the LIX As both diketone and keto-oxime are oxime oxidation products, it is conceivable that addition of an anti-oxidant such as butylated hydroxytoluene could prevent or inhibit their formation. However, given that diketone formation is promoted by the ever-present Versatic 10, it is possible that such a sacrificial anti-oxidant would be readily consumed and therefore may not prove to be economically viable. In addition, as diketone forms via oxidation of acyloin, the presence of an anti-oxidant would not prevent the loss of oxime via hydrolysis to acyloin. The amount of ‘new’ diketone and the percentage of oxime loss resulting in diketone formation in the aqueous-free organic samples are presented in For the aqueous-free LIX The diketone results observed for the aqueous-free LIX On this basis, degradation of oxime in the LIX The pH isotherms of fresh and 50 °C extract- and strip-degraded organic solutions are shown in Degradation under extract conditions at 40 °C did not result in any adverse change in the pH isotherms and therefore the pH Two possibilities could account for this result. The first is that the generated degradation products are affecting the pH isotherms. In particular, products generated under extract conditions (and which may still contain nitrogen, e.g. keto-oxime) could have a similar synergistic effect as oxime does under the trialled conditions. This may be possible if for one or more metals the oxime simply acts as a solvating, N-donor ligand around the metal-Versatic 10 complex. At the very least, the results indicate that these extract stage-generated degradation products do not have a major adverse effect on the pH isotherms. The observed shift in pH isotherms under strip conditions is associated with the loss of oxime (implying keto-oxime must act as a synergist) and/or the presence of one or more degradation product(s) formed under strip (but not under extract) conditions which causes the antagonistic effect. Also, as considerably less oxime degradation occurred under strip conditions, the effect of the resulting degradation product(s), if these are indeed the cause of the shift rather than oxime loss, must be considerable. As diketone was formed under both extract and strip conditions, it is unlikely to be responsible for the effect. Additionally, previous work has indicated that the presence of diketone has no clear adverse effect on the desired metal selectivity, but that other generated species potentially had a small, adverse effect ( The alternative possibility which might also explain the current observations involves oxime isomer inter-conversion. The oxime in LIX These possibilities, namely the impact of degradation products formed under extract and/or strip conditions and investigation of possible oxime isomer inter-conversion are addressed in an upcoming paper ( The distribution coefficients and separation factors of Cu, Co and Zn over Mn (β It is possible to observe two distinct processes occurring during separation of the organic and aqueous phases after mixing is stopped. First, the mixture separates by sedimentation into bulk aqueous and organic phases (primary phase disengagement, 1 PDT). Then, the droplets of the discontinuous phase coalesce (secondary phase disengagement, 2 PDT). Changes in phase disengagement time (PDT) for different samples are effectively represented by comparison of the time required for 90% phase disengagement in each system. The times required for 90% primary and secondary phase disengagement for the different organic solutions under extract and strip conditions after both aqueous continuous (A/C) and organic continuous (O/C) mixing are plotted in The present work was undertaken primarily to assess the stability of LIX Oxime half life under strip conditions was found to be 49 weeks at 50 °C, increasing to 90 weeks at 40 °C. Degradation under strip conditions was not associated with the aqueous phase used but rather the presence of Versatic 10 in the organic phase. As a result, degradation via this mechanism would be expected to occur throughout the circuit i.e. during both extract and strip stage mixing and settling. Operation below 40 °C would minimise the rate of oxime loss by this mechanism. Diketone and acyloin were generated under strip conditions. Diketone formation predominated as the temperature was increased, indicating it to be the thermodynamically preferred degradation product. An ‘unidentified doublet’ observed via GC in the current and earlier work was concluded to be an artefact of the derivatisation conditions used. Marked oxime loss occurred during mixing under extract conditions, with oxime half lives of 19 and 10 weeks at 40 and 50 °C, respectively. Degradation potentially occurs primarily via cobalt and/or manganese-complex-catalysed oxidation, resulting in some diketone formation and a species believed to be keto-oxime. Additional work undertaken to understand and minimise oxime degradation under extract conditions will be reported in a future paper. The presence of diketone, acyloin and keto-oxime derived from oxime degradation did not result in any adverse effect on phase disengagement time. There was no significant difference in metal pH isotherms and metal selectivity between the fresh organic solutions and those degraded under extract conditions, despite the loss of over 40% oxime in the 50 °C system. In contrast, loss of only 6–10% oxime under strip conditions resulted in a small, adverse change. It is possible that degradation under extract conditions resulted in a nitrogen-containing product (keto-oxime) with synergistic capabilities comparable to those of LIX Dr. David Dreisinger (Vice President-Metallurgy, Baja Mining Corporation) is thanked for the permission to publish this work. Mr. Mark Urbani, Dr. Jian Li and Mr. Peter Miovski are thanked for their contributions to the experimental work. Dr. Mike Virnig (Cognis) is thanked for his valuable input.