The equilibrium size distribution, F
                     0(v), of organic drops produced in a batch mixing vessel has been determined experimentally for very low dispersed phase fractions (0.006) in order to reduce the coalescence between drops to negligible values. The organic phase used was a 1:1 mixture of a salicylaldoxime (LIX 860N-IC) and a ketoxime (LIX 64-IC) in an aliphatic diluent (Escaid 103). The aqueous phase was a 0.25-M sodium sulfate solution.
                  The results indicated that the system reaches an equilibrium drop size distribution in less than 30 min of stirring time. An increase in the stirring speed increased the tendency of the organic drops to break, shifting the drop size distribution toward the smaller drop sizes.
                  An increase in temperature from 22 to 32 °C decreased the size of the organic drops, while a change in the concentration of the extractant in the organic phase from 7% to 20% by weight had little effect. Both effects can be attributed to changes in the physical properties of the system.
                  A decrease in pH of the aqueous phase from 5.7 to 2.0 increased progressively the tendency of the organic drops to undergo breakage giving finer drop size distributions due to changes in the surface charge of the organic drops produced by the pH change.
                  In all cases, the experimental drop size distributions could be accurately represented by a lognormal distribution.In many industrial operations, liquid–liquid dispersions are formed to enhance the mass and heat transfer between the phases or to enhance the rate of a chemical reaction. In the copper industry, the recovery of metal from dilute leaching solutions is carried out by solvent extraction, usually in mixer–settler units. In the mixer, dispersions are generated mainly by mechanical agitation to accomplish the extraction of the copper from the leaching solution into the organic phase for subsequent stripping of the organic into an electrowinning electrolyte. The drop size distribution produced in the mixer is critical for the performance of the solvent extraction reactor because it not only affects the rate of the extraction and stripping reactions but it also influences the subsequent phase separation in the settler. The organic losses by entrainment in the solvent extraction process are also intimately related to drop size distributions. In order to understand better the formation of dispersion in a solvent extraction process and how it is affected by the operating variables, this work focuses on the study of drop breakage in a batch mixer. The size distribution of drops produced in a mixer evolves as a result of two processes: drop breakage due to the turbulent field and coalescence due to collisions between drops. The kinetics of both rate processes must be known to predict and control the size distribution of drops in a mixer. However, since both rate processes occur simultaneously, it is extremely difficult to elucidate how the physical properties of the system and the operating variables affect each, unless the experimental conditions are chosen to minimize or completely eliminate one of the two processes. Two methods have been used to eliminate coalescence between drops: (i) the addition of surfactant substances to the system It has been shown It is generally accepted that a drop in a turbulent field breaks mainly under the influence of inertial stresses arising from the turbulent pressure fluctuations, which tend to deform the drop. On the other hand, the elastic stress due to the interfacial tension and the viscous stress due to the internal flow tend to resist the deformation of the drop. As the size of the drop decreases, the deforming stress across it also decreases, whereas the restoring stresses increase. A size is finally reached where the deforming stress is unable to break the drop. This critical size is normally referred to as  Recently, various models have been proposed taking into account the effect of the dispersed phase viscosity on the maximum stable drop size.  The existence of a maximum stable drop size implies that the size distributions of drops in a batch mixing vessel will reach a steady state where all the drops will be smaller than the critical size. If the size distribution is produced by two competitive processes such as breakage and coalescence, this steady state is dynamic and it is the result of a balance between these opposite rate processes. The dynamic steady state should be independent of the earlier conditions of the system and, therefore, of the initial conditions. On the other hand, if only breakage occurs in the system, this steady state can be called static, in the sense that the drops smaller that the critical size undergo no further change and the drop size distribution could depend on the earlier conditions of the system. In spite of the widespread use of the solvent extraction process in the copper industry, very few studies on dispersions have dealt with organic phases containing copper specific extractants, or have used pump–mix impellers, widely used in solvent extraction plants. Consequently, the characteristics of the dispersions produced in such processes are little known. The objective of this work was to determine how the various operating variables, pertinent to solvent extraction plants, affect the drop breakage process and the resulting equilibrium drop size distribution in dispersions produced by mechanical agitation. The organic phase used in this study was a 1:1 mixture of a salicylaldoxime (LIX 860N-IC) and a ketoxime (LIX 84-IC) in an aliphatic diluent (ESCAID 103). This mixture of hydroxyoxime extractants is used in several copper solvent extraction plants for the recovery of copper from sulfate solutions. The concentration of the organic phase in most experiments was 7% by volume of extractant (3.5% of LIX 860N-IC+3.5% of LIX 84-IC). The aqueous phase was a 0.25-M sodium sulfate solution which was used instead of a copper sulfate solution mainly to eliminate mass transfer from the aqueous to the organic phase. Small amounts of sulfuric acid were added to regulate the pH when necessary. The experiments were carried out in a batch mixing vessel made of transparent acrylic. The mixer was a rectangular vessel of 25×25×26 cm. A pump–mix impeller, 15 cm in diameter, double shrouded and with eight curved blades, was used to generate the dispersion. The impeller was located in the center of the mixer, 4 cm above the bottom of the vessel, through a stainless steel shaft connected to a variable speed agitation system. All the experiments were carried out under aqueous continuity with a low organic phase fraction to reduce the coalescence of drops to negligible values. The procedure consisted of filling the mixer with 16 L of aqueous phase at the temperature specified for the experiment. Then, the stirring speed was incremented to the desired level and a small amount of organic phase, usually 100 cm Experiments were carried out under various conditions to determine the effect of the operating variables on the equilibrium size distribution of the organic drops. The variables studied were stirring speed, pH of the aqueous phase, concentration of extractant in the organic phase, and temperature. The volume, Interfacial tensions were determined using a du Noüy ring apparatus, the densities of aqueous and organic phases were determined through specific gravity measurements using hydrometers and the viscosities were determined by an Ostwald viscometer. In order to test the validity and reproducibility of the method used for the drop size characterization, particularly, the procedure used for sample withdrawal, duplicate experiments were carried out under identical experimental conditions and the drop size distributions were determined and compared. The time required for the dispersion drops to evolve to a constant or equilibrium drop size distribution in a batch mixer seems to vary widely for different liquid–liquid systems. In addition, the time to reach equilibrium has also been found to depend on the type of impeller used to produce the dispersion To assure that breakage was the dominant process controlling the drop size distribution, experiments were carried out using three volumetric fractions of organic phase: 0.006, 0.012 and 0.018. The resulting drop size distributions are shown in We can observe in For stirring speeds lower than 250 rpm an organic layer was observed at the top of the mixing vessel, and for stirring speeds higher than 350 rpm there was an increasing tendency to trap air. Therefore, mixing tests were carried out at stirring speeds of 250, 300 and 350 rpm, which produced good dispersion conditions. The results are shown in  The change in concentration of the extractant in the organic phase from 7% to 20% does not affect appreciably the equilibrium drop size distribution in the mixer as seen in  In this research, experiments were conducted to determine the drop size distribution for pH 5.7, 4.0 and 2.0. The corresponding values of When the experimental data on drop sizes were plotted as the fraction of drops in each volume interval versus the logarithm of the average volume of the interval, a characteristic bell shaped form was observed. This suggested that the size distribution of the drops could be represented accurately by a lognormal distribution with density function given by  Additionally, the values of The minimum value of the mean root deviation obtained for the experimental data was The Calabrese model, From the results of the experimental determination of the equilibrium size distribution of dispersion drops in the system LIX 860N-IC+LIX 84-IC in Escaid 100–Na The system reaches an equilibrium drop size distribution in less than 30 min of stirring time. An increase in the stirring speed increased the tendency of the organic drops to break, shifting the drop size distribution toward the smaller drop sizes. An increase in temperature from 22 to 32 °C decreased the size of the organic drops, while a change in the concentration of the extractant in the organic phase from 7% to 20% by weight did not affect the drop size distribution. A decrease in pH of the aqueous phase from 5.7 to 2.0 increased progressively the tendency of the organic drops to undergo breakage, giving finer drop size distributions due to changes in the surface charge of the drops produced by the pH change. The experimental drop size distribution data was represented accurately by a lognormal distribution. Support from the Fondo Nacional de Ciencia y Tecnologı́a (FONDECYT) of Chile, through the Project No. 1980473 is gratefully acknowledged.