In the present paper, the effects of suspension pH and charge density of anionic polyacrylamide (PAA) on flocculation behavior of two different natural stone suspensions (NSS) marble and travertine were investigated by settling rate and turbidity as indicators. The flocculation of NSS occurs even when the natural stone (NS) powders and the flocculants carry the same sign of the charge. The polymer bridging mechanism is responsible for flocculation of marble and travertine suspensions. The settling rate of NSS exhibits an optimal balance between the flocculating power of the polymer resulting from its expanded position in suspension due to its anionicity degree and the repulsive forces between the negatively charged NS powders and anionic flocculants. At high pH of 11, the settling rate of both natural stones increased significantly with each polymer except the 40% anionic polymer. In contrast, at low pH of 6, the supernatant turbidity of both suspensions was at the minimum level with no significant difference between them. However, when considering the settling rates, each polymer except the nonionic one showed different flocculation performances. The settling rate and turbidity results are analyzed in the light of zeta potential data to identify the mechanism of polymer uptake onto NSS.In natural stone (NS) factories, marble cutting and polishing requires a large amount of water which is reused in the factory upon decantation in wastewater ponds. Cutting of a marble block, for instance, produces approximately a part of 30–40% in weight of the block as fine powder ( Settling rate and turbidity are indirect but provide a simple way to measure the performance of a flocculation process, and are governed by the floc size distribution. The floc size distribution can generally be controlled by proper flocculant selection and appropriate use of flocculant addition and mixing conditions ( Natural stones such as travertine and marble consists of over 90% calcite (CaCO To the knowledge of author, there are only a few studies about the flocculation of NSS. In this study, the influence of suspension pH and the anionicity degree of flocculant on flocculation of NSS is extensively discussed in terms of settling rate and turbidity. Furthermore, the influence of the type of NSS on their settling rate and turbidity are evaluated. In the experiments two different NSS, marble and travertine suspensions, were used. The commodity name of the natural stones are Denizli Travertine and Akşehir Black Marble (hereafter, they will be called as travertine and marble or natural stone), which were processed in marble factories in Afyon (Turkey) which is called the Marble City of Turkey. The marble slurry has been supplied from Gürel Marble and the travertine slurry supplied from Tureks. The two samples were taken in their original slurry state from the wastewater collector pool present previous to sedimentation tank and brought to our laboratory. The pH and solid ratio of the original travertine and marble slurry were 8.4 and 9.8, and 2.2% and 8.6% (w/w), respectively. They were passed through a 0.1-mm of sieve and dried at room temperature. The mineralogical analyses of these powder natural stone samples were characterized by XRD (Shimadzu-6000) using Cu Kα and almost all peaks represented a typical calcite (CaCO Flocculation tests of marble and travertine powders were carried out in a 500-mL of graduated mixing cylinder using tap water. Prior to the flocculation tests 0.1% (weight/volume, w/v) stock solution of the flocculant was prepared with distilled water and diluted to 0.01% (w/v) before use. The NS suspension was prepared by addition and dispersion of 21 g of powder sample in 500 mL of tap water in mixing cylinder. Solid ratio of the suspension was selected as 4% (w/w), which is a medium value for the original NS slurries. Then, pH adjustment (only for pH 6 and pH 11) was made using 1 M NaOH and HCl solution. The pH measurements were made by Inco-lab pH-Meter. Afterwards, the desired amount of flocculant solution was taken and added to the suspension by an adjustable automatic pipette. The cylinder was sealed and inverted four times to obtain a good mixing, and put on a smooth ground to track the flocculated NSS. The settling rate of the flocculated suspension was determined by recording the height of the suspension/water interface as a function of time. As recommended by the flocculant manufacturer (Ciba) in the calculation of settling rate, a depth of 3 and 8 cm from the suspension surface was used. At the end of the 15 min settling period, a sample of 12 mL from the supernatant liquid was siphoned out from a depth of 12 cm and its turbidity was measured by Velp-115 turbidimeter which gives the turbidity result as Nepheleometric turbidity unit (NTU). The tap water used in the flocculation tests had the following properties: pH 7.3–7.5, turbidity 0.3 NTU, specific conductivity 1380–1450 μmhos/cm, including anions and cations as mg/L Cl The zeta potential (ZP) measurements of marble and travertine powders, and pure calcite minerals were made in distilled water of a constant ionic strength (0.01 M NaCl) by Zeta-Meter 3.0. Prior to ZP measurements powder sample was dispersed at 0.1% (w/v) solid ratio in distilled water, pH and ionic strength was adjusted to desired value and was stirred on a magnetic stirrer for 5 min at room temperature. Required amount of suspension was transferred into the electrophoresis cell of the zeta meter. During the ZP measurement 10 particles were tracked and the average of their ZP values was taken. Consequently, the ZP changes of travertine and marble as a function of pH were determined. The working principle of the zeta meter 3.0 is based on the electrophoresis method ( The zeta potentials of marble, travertine and pure calcite mineral versus the suspension pH were determined in The settling rate curves for travertine ( On the other hand, Looking at both However, an excess increase in the charge density causes long-range electrostatic repulsive forces between the polymer and negatively charged NS particles which adversely affect the flocculation power of the polymers. Hence, the settling rate of the NSS is reduced Similar trend has been obtained in the flocculation of coal tailings by PAA based anionic polymers ( Another important result inferred from The main difference between the flocculation behavior of marble and travertine is that the former showed the best performance at 34% anionic polymer ( High suspension pH (i.e., pH 11) may affect the flocculation of NSS in two ways: (i) Increases the long range electrostatic or electrical double layer (EDL) repulsive forces between NS particles and Na-PA due to increase in the zeta potential of NS particles (  Turbidity results from inadequate destabilization of submicron (or colloidal sized) NS particles. It is known that HMW polymers (>10  The following results can be inferred from this study: The polymer charge density and the suspension pH play a crucial role on the flocculation of NSS. The type of natural stones has important effect on their settling rate, but the same effect was not observed on their supernatant turbidity. The zeta potential curves of NS powders are very different from calcite mineral; that is, isoelectrical point for neither marble nor travertine was not obtained while the calcite exhibits an isoelectrical point at about pH 11 as expected. The electrostatic forces play an important role on polymer–marble and polymer–travertine attachment and thus on the flocculation of NSS. In marble suspension, 34% anionic polymer gave the best flocculation performance for both settling rate and turbidity. In travertine suspension, 28% anionic polymer gave the best settling rate, while 34% anionic polymer gave the best clarity at low dosages. High suspension pH enhances the settling rate of both the NSS and increases their supernatant turbidity. Since the turbidities are at acceptable levels, pH 11 and 28% anionic polymer for flocculation of travertine suspension, and pH 11 and 34% anionic polymer for flocculation of marble suspension can be selected. The author acknowledges the support by the Commission of Scientific Research Projects (BAPK) of Afyon Kocatepe University.