The effect of hydrophobic and magnetic plastic particles having a contact angle of around 83° on flotation performance was evaluated using coal particles of varying degrees of floatability. The magnetic plastic material were recovered by a low intensity magnetic separator and recycled back to the flotation feed for re-use. Flotation rate tests conducted on coal using a conventional cell proved that combustible recovery and flotation rate were significantly enhanced with the addition of the plastic particles, especially for difficult-to-float coals, which was corroborated by flotation column tests. Carrying capacity and particle size-by-size flotation tests further showed that the magnetic plastic particles preferentially increased the recovery of coarse particles by as much as 35 absolute percentage points due to froth stabilization which reduced the selective detachment of coarse and/or weakly hydrophobic particles. The enhanced flotation recovery was attributed to the influence on liquid drainage rate in the froth zone, froth stability, bubble coalescence and flotation rates.Froth flotation is the most commonly used process to recover and upgrade ultrafine (<150 The separation of the valuable mineral from the non-valuable mineral components in the collection zone is based on differential flotation rates which are determined by critical parameters involving the processes of bubble-particle collision, attachment and detachment ( In the froth zone, froth stability which is impacted by bubble coalescence and water drainage has been shown to play a significant role in determining froth zone recovery and thus overall flotation recovery ( For decades, research efforts have targeted methods that have the ability to enhance flotation performance including the addition of particles having a higher degree of hydrophobicity ( The ability to stabilize the froth phase by the addition of intermediate hydrophobic nanoparticles was studied in detail by Two different bituminous coal samples were used for the investigation which included representative samples collected from operations treating Pittsburgh No. 8 and Coalburg seam coals. The Pittsburgh No. 8 coal was easy-to-float and contained a relatively high amount of coal pyrite while the Coalburg coal had a relatively high content of middling (weakly hydrophobic) particles of around 15% by weight. Representative samples of Pittsburgh and Coalburg coal were collected from operating coal preparation plants in Blacksville and Logan W.V. (USA), respectively. Each coal type was crushed using a laboratory jaw crusher to reduce the particle size to below 1.27 The magnetic plastic material is commercially known as PolyMag™ Black Pellet (PMBP) which is composed of about 70% magnetite (Fe The morphology of the magnetic plastic particles was studied using a Hitachi S-2700-Scanning Electron Microscope at 500 Representative samples of both coal sources and the magnetic plastic material were prepared for the flotation tests using a laboratory hammer mill to reduce the particle size to finer than 177 The degree of surface hydrophobicity for each of the materials used in this study was assessed using the three phase contact angle which is the angle formed at the solid-liquid-vapor interface when a water droplet is brought into contact with a solid surface. The sessile drop method was employed to measure the contact angle using a goniometer (Rame-Hart Model 100-00). Block samples of coal and the magnetic plastic material were cut by a diamond saw and wet-polished using 6-, 3-, and 0.25-μm diamond pastes on a Texmet-covered disk. The final polishing was done on a microcloth-covered disk with 0.05-μm alumina. Distilled water was used to conduct the contact angles measurements at neutral pH and a temperature of 25 The results from the contact angle study presented in Conventional flotation rate tests were conducted with and without the addition of magnetic plastic material for both Pittsburgh and Coalburg coal samples following the ASTM Fuel oil No. 2 and a polyglycol frother (i.e., ShurFlot 948) were used as the collector and frother, respectively. The collector was added in an amount that equaled 0.5 Six repeat tests were conducted using an addition of 10% plastic particles by weight under standard test conditions. The relative error associated with combustible recovery values varied from 9.60% after 15 To better quantify the impact of magnetic plastic materials on froth stability and thus separation performance, continuous column flotation experiments were conducted which allowed deeper froth depths to be employed and carrying capacity measurements to be performed. The operating parameter values listed in The flotation column was constructed of Plexiglas and measured 5-cm in diameter and 2.4 Steady-state operation was ensured before taking samples of the concentrate and tailings by allowing a time equal to three volumetric retention times after any change to the column operation. Representative samples from each stream were collected and processed through the magnetic separator to remove the magnetic plastic material and the non-magnetic portions of the samples were analyzed for ash content. Five repeat tests were conducted for each volumetric flow rate evaluated with 10% plastic particles by weight and with no plastic particle addition in the feed stream. The relative error value associated with the combustible recovery value was 9.0% for the tests without the addition of the plastic particles and when the plastic particles were added in the feed stream. The experimental error was used to provide the error bars shown in the figures representing the column flotation results. The magnetic plastic material was comprised of about 70% magnetite, which made it naturally magnetic and thus recoverable by low intensity magnetic separators. The magnetic strength of the magnetic plastic material was evaluated by using a Davis tube at full magnetic strength of 4000 Gauss. The results showed that 96% of the total sample reported to the magnetite stream, which indicates a high magnetic strength for the plastic material. The magnetic plastic material was recovered from the flotation slurry samples using a laboratory-scale, high-intensity wet magnetic separator (HIWMS, Series-L, Model-4) from Eriez Manufacturing Co. A low-intensity magnetic separator unit would have been sufficient but the high-intensity unit was available and recovery of the plastic particles from each test was relatively easy using the Eriez unit. The magnetic plastic recovery process was repeated three times for each sample to ensure nearly 100% recovery of the magnetic particles. Kinetic rate tests were conducted on both the Pittsburgh and Coalburg coal to evaluate the effect of magnetic plastic material on coal separation performance. Tests were conducted without the plastic particles and with the particles at a concentration of 10% by weight of the total solids. With the addition of the magnetic plastic material, the combustible recovery of both coal samples was significantly enhanced as shown in Using the data in As expected, the recovery of the plastic particles occurred at a much faster rate as shown in In regards to selectivity, the plastic particles provided a limited to no improvement as shown in Given the impact on the flotation rate of both coal sources, continuous column flotation tests were performed over a range of volumetric flow rates, which assessed the performance over a range of particle retention times in the collection zone. The solids concentration was fixed at 7.5% by weight. Test results reveal that the recovery response was nearly steady up to 400 While recovery value gains were realized from the column flotation tests, the overall improvement using the plastic particles were not as significant as the values obtained from the conventional cell experiments ( All flotation systems have a limitation on the amount of product that can be conveyed to the collection launder, which is typically referred to as the carrying capacity. Carrying capacity is a function of the bubble-surface area flux rate which is affected by the bubble size distribution and number of bubbles exiting the cell per unit time. As such, efforts to improve froth stability was expected to positively influence carrying capacity. To examine the effect of the plastic particle addition, the feed solids concentration was increased while holding the volumetric feed rate constant at 800 To evaluate the effect on flotation recovery by particle size, conventional flotation tests were conducted for a period of one minute using Pittsburgh No. 8 coal and the concentrate combined into a single container. The concentrate and the material remaining in the cell were wet screened and the results used to determine recovery values which are shown in Separate flotation rate tests were also conducted on individual particle size fractions to validate the hypothesis that (1) the suppressed coarse coal recovery was a result of competition with the flotation of finer particles and (2) the addition of the plastic particles helps to reduce the selective detachment of coarse particles ( To explain the impact of the highly hydrophobic plastic particles, previous investigations indicate that, in the presence of entrapped hydrophobic solids between bubble films, the bubble coalescence rate substantially decreases due to reduced liquid drainage in the bubble films which can be further attributed to an increased viscosity in the liquid entrapped between bubble films ( The addition of hydrophobic and magnetic plastic material was investigated to evaluate the potential benefit provided in froth flotation performance through froth stabilization. The plastic material was found to have a high degree of surface hydrophobicity with a three-phase contact angle of 83.1°. The plastic particles contained a sufficient amount of magnetite to allow recovery using a low-intensity magnetic separator that applies a field strength of 4000 gauss. Nearly 100% of the plastic material was recovered from the flotation concentrate. As such, commercial practice would involve recovery of the plastics particles from the froth concentrate stream only. Conventional batch flotation tests and continuous column flotation tests were performed using coal with distinctly different characteristics including a difficult-to-float coal. Conventional flotation test results proved that the addition of the hydrophobic plastic material at a concentration of 10% by weight created a stable froth phase when floating the weakly hydrophobic coal which resulted in a flotation recovery gain of 16 absolute percentage points. Similarly, a 11 absolute percentage point recovery increase was obtained when treating a more hydrophobic coal. A particle size analysis of the froth concentrate and tailing samples found that the recovery improvement was primarily due to improved efficiency in recovering the coarsest particle size fractions although gains were realized for all size fractions. An increase in combustible recovery of around 35 absolute percentage points was obtained for particle sizes larger than 150 Continuous column flotation experiments revealed that carrying capacity was not increased when using the plastic particles. However, when the column was operated above the carrying capacity limit, the presence of the plastic particles virtually eliminated the selective detachment of the coarse particles as indicated by only a minor decrease in the product mass flux rate. Tests conducted over a range of volumetric feed flow rates found recovery improvements in the range of 3–5 absolute percentage points which occurred at the higher feed rate values. There were no measured impacts on the selectivity of the process.