Carbon coated Fe3O4 composite (Fe3O4@C) with bi-morphological architecture has been prepared via a chemical vapor deposition at 450 °C from Fe2O3 nanoparticles by using acetylene as the deposition vapor and carbon source. The Fe2O3 are fully reduced to Fe3O4 in a 10 min of deposition, showing submicron-sized octahedral Fe3O4 particles coated partially with a thin carbon layer mainly, and a few nano-sized Fe3O4 particles coated with carbon also. The deposition period of 20 min results in a further growth of the octahedral Fe3O4 particles and a reduction of the number of the nano-sized ones, correlating to a thick and fully coated carbon layer. Impurities of iron carbides generate in the composite with further prolonging the deposition to 30 min. The Fe3O4@C composite from 20 min of deposition shows superior electrochemical property to others. An initial reversible capacity of 570 mAh g−1 is obtained and the capacity fading is less than 5% after 60 cycles. The fabrication method is facile and time-saving. Such submicron size-predominated Fe3O4@C composite is hopefully not only favorable in alleviating the agglomeration of the iron oxide during cycling, but also helpful in getting high packing density of the anode material.With the increasing consumption of conventional fossil fuels, new energies have attached intense attention nowadays. Lithium-ion batteries (LIBs) are promising energy suppliers for the power sources of hybrid, plug-in hybrid, and electrical vehicles, where high energy-density and high power-density are required. LIBs also have potential utilizations in the back-up for wind and solar energies. Electrode materials of large capacity, long-cycling stability, low cost and high safety are highly demanded in the next generation LIBs. Since Tarascon et al. Nanostructured Fe Introducing a carbon layer on the surface of the iron oxide particles is an alternatively effective route to improve the cycling stability and rate capability. Carbon coating can not only increase the electrical conductivity and accommodate the volume change of iron oxides during cycling Progress has been achieved in improving the electrochemical properties of iron oxide by coating a carbon layer via CVD Considering that the deposition temperature of C Self-prepared Fe The CVD process was performed at 450 °C for 10–30 min by using C X-ray diffraction (XRD, X'Pert Pro, Cu Kα), field-emission scanning electron microscopy (FE-SEM, Hitachi S4800), transmission electron microscopy (TEM, Philips-FEI Tecnai G2 F20) and high resolution TEM (HRTEM) were used to study the structure of the CVD products. Carbon content of the products was measured by an element analyzer (EA, ThermoFinnigan, Flash EA 1112). The working electrode was prepared by mixing the synthesized Fe For comparison, selected parallel tests were also performed for the pristine Fe XRD patterns of the CVD products from different periods of deposition and the pristine Fe FE-SEM image of the pristine Fe  Previous investigations on the preparation of a carbon layer on the surface of the iron oxides by CVD technology showed that there were almost no morphology and size changes during the CVD process  Further seen from  The present Fe  In summary, we synthesize a bi-morphological Fe The Fe We acknowledge the financial support by