Background
                  Previous meta-analyses comparing the surgical and nonsurgical treatment of midshaft clavicle fractures have demonstrated extensive heterogeneity, that is, treatment effect variation, in different pooled outcomes. We aimed to investigate the amount of heterogeneity seen in pooled treatment effects and to explore which moderator variables serve to explain this heterogeneity.
               
                  Methods
                  A follow-up literature search, based a previous study, was conducted. All randomized controlled trials and high-quality observational studies with suitable treatment cohorts were identified and included in this systematic review and meta-regression analysis. The proportions of male patients, patients with the dominant hand injured, and smokers, as well as fracture type and mean age, were included as covariates in meta-regression analyses investigating the effect on the pooled estimate of treatment effect heterogeneity. The pooled treatment effects assessed were nonunion rate, malunion rate, Disabilities of the Arm, Shoulder and Hand score, and Constant score at 1 year, as well as revision surgery rate.
               
                  Results
                  High heterogeneity was observed in 4 of 8 pooled treatment effects and moderate, in 2 of 8. An association between any of the covariates, including smoking, with the pooled treatment effect for the nonunion rate could not be established. Regarding malunion, the proportion of patients with the dominant hand injured showed linear dependency with the risk ratio. The proportion of male patients correlated with the pooled mean difference in both the Disabilities of the Arm, Shoulder and Hand score and Constant score. Mean age and fracture type correlated with the pooled mean difference in the Constant score.
               
                  Conclusion
                  On the basis of our results, several potential moderators influence the treatment effect when comparing surgical and nonsurgical treatment of midshaft clavicle fractures. These findings have implications for shared decision making and when making treatment recommendations.The incidence of clavicle fractures has almost doubled since the beginning of the century, being 59 per 100,000 person-years in 2012. For the treatment of patients with midshaft clavicle fractures (MCFs), there are a variety of possible measures to assess the overall outcome. These include the nonunion rate, malunion rate, secondary or revision surgery, complication rate, functional outcome using patient-reported outcome measures, return to work, return to sports, overall satisfaction, cosmesis, and overall cost. In addition to the numerous possible outcomes, there is usually some variability in baseline characteristics between studies. This includes factors such as the sex ratio, age, smoking, and fracture morphology. This variability may result in heterogeneity in the pooled estimate of the treatment effect, such as the nonunion rate or Disabilities of the Arm, Shoulder and Hand (DASH) score. Heterogeneity means that the estimate of the treatment effect varies between studies. Previous meta-analyses investigating MCFs have shown an extensive amount of heterogeneity for different pooled estimates of treatment effects. Thus, the decision to operate or to prefer nonsurgical treatment should potentially be a shared decision based on patient preferences and the best available evidence. Meta-regression is a way to assess the effect of moderators on the pooled estimates of treatment effects and to provide more evidence for decision making between surgical and nonsurgical treatment regarding expected outcomes. We performed a follow-up analysis based on the meta-analysis by Smeeing et al. The methodologic quality was assessed as previously described. From the included studies, we extracted the first author, country, year of publication, study design, number of patients in both treatment arms, total number of male patients, total number of patients with the dominant hand injured, total number of patients who smoked, total number of patients with a comminuted fracture, fixation method used in the surgical group, and fracture classification. We did not differentiate between different surgical methods, but both plate fixation and intramedullary devices were included in surgical treatment. For fracture classification, we recorded whether the Robinson classification, the AO Foundation–Orthopaedic Trauma Association classification, or comminution in general was used. For the total number of male patients, patients with the dominant hand injured, patients with a comminuted fracture, and patients who smoked, we calculated the corresponding baseline proportions, which were then used as moderator variables. If fractures were classified according to the Robinson classification, we calculated the proportion of patients with grade 2B2 fractures. For the AO Foundation–Orthopaedic Trauma Association classification, we calculated the proportion of class C fractures. The numbers of nonunions and malunions were extracted, as described in the original studies. DASH and Constant scores were extracted if reported in the studies. We only focused on functional outcome with a minimum of 1 year of follow-up. In 1 large RCT, functional outcome was only reported at the 9-month time point, and this trial was included. The data included in the study by Smeeing et al Twenty studies were included in the study analysis. The RD for nonunion was –10.1% (95% CI, –13.3% to –6.8%; The RD for malunion was –9.8% (95% CI, –17.0% to –2.60%; The pooled MD for the Constant score in the long term was 4.51 (95% CI, 1.55-7.45; The pooled MD for the DASH score in the long term was –2.62 (95% CI, –5.5 to 0.3; The RD for revision surgery was –2.91% (95% CI, –9.2% to 3.4%) ( In this study, we updated the work by Smeeing et al Surgery is associated with a lower risk of nonunion, a higher risk of complications, and better functional outcomes. However, the difference may not exceed the established minimal clinically important difference (MCID). Thus, it is fair to conclude that an objective superiority between surgical and nonsurgical treatment cannot be clearly established. This approach is strongly supported when summing previous conflicting conclusions on this topic ( In addition to individual RCTs, several meta-analyses comparing surgical and nonsurgical treatment have been published. Regardless of minor fluctuations, the actual data in these studies are basically the same, but the studies lack inferential reproducibility, that is, even though the same data are used, the conclusions are different. Woltz et al We postulate that the considerable heterogeneity between the studies in our review and those in other reviews, that is, the variability in the estimate of the treatment effect, is mainly because of the differing baseline characteristics of the research subjects. Moreover, because the interventions are similar and the outcomes measured have a high signal-to-noise ratio, the outcomes measured are accurate, are transferable, and have low levels of error sources. This finding further supports the conclusion that objective superiority does not exist between surgical and nonsurgical treatment. Therefore, the treatment decision should be made according to shared decision making. Moderators of heterogeneity can, however, be assessed using meta-regression, and these may be taken into account when making the final decision in the shared treatment process and when making informed decisions. For many pooled outcomes, there were different moderators, which explained some of the heterogeneity. For malunion, the proportion of patients with the dominant side injured was a moderator for the pooled effect for malunion. However, malunion is not clearly defined in the literature and is most commonly defined by symptoms and radiologic findings. Assuming the association seen in our study is the true population value, we postulate that patients are more alert to symptoms in their nondominant hand whereas satisfaction is greater to the recovery of their dominant hand. This would mean that patients are more satisfied with less in their dominant side. The moderator effect of sex on functional outcome may be a result of female patients' higher demand for pain reduction and function. Preoperative expectations of and satisfaction with other surgical procedures have been shown to have noteworthy sex-based differences, namely female patients are more dissatisfied than male patients. The moderators that explained the heterogeneity should not be taken as true population values but instead as preliminary findings that require validation in larger clinical cohorts. Moreover, it is paramount to understand that moderator variables, such as age or sex, suggested by a meta-regression analysis do not directly indicate that individual treatment effect heterogeneity is explained by these variables. Instead, these variables account for variability in the average treatment effect across different studies. When more studies are published, the point estimates reported in our studies should become more precise. The overall treatment effects seen in meta-analyses only highlight the population-level effects, which are prone to a lack of inferential reproducibility. Instead of another RCT investigating the difference between surgical and nonsurgical treatment, we advocate sufficiently large RCTs that focus on the potential effects of the moderator variables, such as the effect of sex on functional outcome, described in this study. The main strength of our study is the number of studies included. Along with Achilles tendon rupture, clavicle fracture is probably the most common subject of RCTs in the field of orthopedics. Hence, there remain only a few topics for which meta-regression is feasible to assess the moderators of heterogeneity. The main methodologic weakness of our study lies in our research setting. In total, we had 5 hard outcomes and 7 moderator variables of interest, and we assessed the effect of each moderator on each outcome variable. Hence, we had 49 single meta-regression analyses. This raises the issue of multiplicity and increases the chance of a type I error. Therefore, our results should be interpreted with caution when CIs for coefficients are wide. Being the first in this particular field, our study was only exploratory in nature. The literature on the treatment of MCFs is vast, and it is still increasing. Although the results of meta-analyses that have pooled the results of these studies are somewhat parallel, there is great variability in the inferences drawn from the results of the studies. As seen in our study, the heterogeneity of pooled estimates of treatment effects in the meta-analyses is high, and this indicates variability in the treatment effects. It is evident, therefore, that objective superiority between surgical and nonsurgical treatment relies on the values of both surgeons and patients. On the basis of our results, several potential moderators affect the treatment effect. This implies a possible treatment effect heterogeneity contradicting “one-fits-all” treatment decisions. Our study was only exploratory in nature; hence, further confirmatory studies are needed to verify our results and the validity of the guidance given on shared decision making between doctor and patient. The authors, their immediate families, and any research foundations with which they are affiliated have not received any financial payments or other benefits from any commercial entity related to the subject of this article.  Supplementary data to this article can be found online at