Objective
                  This study assessed the degree of relationship between masticatory laterality and lateral asymmetry of masticatory performance using silicon pieces enclosed in a latex bag.
               
                  Design
                  Forty-two young adults with natural dentition participated in this cross-sectional, observational study. They performed four different masticatory assays, each consisting of five trials of chewing three pieces of silicon for 20 cycles. In one assay, they were asked to masticate unbagged silicon free-style, whilst in the three other assays they were asked to masticate bagged silicon free-style, unilaterally on the right-hand side and unilaterally on the left-hand side. The preferred chewing side was determined by calculating the asymmetry index for both the free-style assays. Masticatory performance was determined by sieving the silicon particles and the cycle duration was also recorded. Data were analysed using independent samples or paired t-test and linear regression.
               
                  Results
                  Masticatory function using the bagged silicon was similar to that using the unbagged silicon. A significant and positive relationship was observed between the preferred chewing side expressed as the asymmetry index and the side with better masticatory performance. Alternate unilateral chewers demonstrated better masticatory performance than unilateral chewers. However, when free-style and unilateral chewing were compared for each subject, unilateral chewing was found to be as efficient as – or even more efficient than – free-style chewing.
               
                  Conclusions
                  There is a positive association between the preferred chewing side and the more efficient side. Alternate unilateral mastication per se does not promote better masticatory performance than consistently unilateral mastication.One of the main objectives of dental treatment is to restore or improve masticatory function, which is evaluated by self-assessment of chewing ability and/or objective masticatory performance measured using laboratory tests. Although mastication may occur bilaterally or alternating both sides, it is thought that the majority of people chew more on one particular side, i.e. they have a preferred chewing side (PCS). Although natural foods can be used to assess masticatory function, artificial test food can be easily standardised and its physical properties remain the same over time. Bite force and occlusal contact area are the best predictors of variation in masticatory performance, The first aim of this study was to assess the degree of relationship between masticatory laterality and lateral asymmetry of masticatory performance, using silicon tablets enclosed in a latex bag as a test food in young adults with natural dentition. The second aim was to determine whether free-style mastication achieves better efficiency than unilateral mastication. Forty-two young adults (23 women and 19 men) with natural dentition were selected from volunteer students and staff at the University of Barcelona Faculty of Dentistry (Barcelona, Spain) to participate in this cross-sectional study. Their ages ranged from 21 to 45 years old with a mean age of 26.8 (SD Each subject performed four different masticatory assays, each consisting of five trials of 20 cycles each chewing 2 Masticatory performance was evaluated for each masticatory assay by assessing the degree of comminution of the silicon test food. A video camera (Sony HDR-UX7E, Japan) recorded mandible displacement while closing during each free-style mastication assay. The side of mandible lateralisation while closing was counted for each chewing cycle using a slow-speed playback mode to calculate masticatory laterality. The asymmetry index (AI) for each free-style mastication of bagged or unbagged silicon, was calculated according to Mizumori et al. The side difference of masticatory performance was calculated as absolute difference between the MPS obtained chewing unilaterally on the right-hand side and the MPS obtained chewing on the left-hand side (MPS In order to evaluate the reproducibility of the parameters used in this study, the assays were all repeated with 10 of the subjects 2–4 weeks after the first measurements were taken. Intraclass correlation coefficients and the smallest detectable difference in the main parameters were determined as measures of reliability and agreement, respectively ( The normal distribution fit of the data was tested by means of a Kolmogorov–Smirnov test. Comparisons were performed using Student's To determine whether each subject had a chewing side preference, the threshold was set at 33%, so that the subject was considered an alternate unilateral chewer if the AI value for PCS ranged from −0.33 to 0.33, and a consistent unilateral chewer if the AI value was less than −0.33 or more than 0.33. This threshold was selected in order to obtain three balanced groups and according to other studies. Statistical analysis was performed using the SPSS software package (version 20.0; SPSS, Chicago, IL, USA) and All the variables tested showed a normal distribution ( A significant and negative relationship was observed between the preferred chewing side expressed as AI (range −1 to +1) and the side difference obtained for MPS ( Using the threshold of 33%, 19 subjects were classified as consistent unilateral chewer (5 left side and 14 right side) and 23 as alternate unilateral chewer. The MPS obtained from free-style mastication by consistent unilateral chewers (MPS Young adults with natural dentition showed better masticatory performance on the PCS. However, the side difference in masticatory performance only explained 16% of the variation in chewing side preference. In another study, no significant relationship between the side difference in masticatory performance and masticatory laterality was found, Mastication of silicon tablets placed in a latex bag showed a similar laterality, efficiency and duration to mastication of silicon without a bag, and a high intra-subject correlation was observed. Moreover, the high ICC values of masticatory function with bagged silicon obtained in the test–retest analysis demonstrated that this is a reliable method for assessing masticatory function. The main advantages of this type of test food are that chewing becomes easier and more comfortable for the volunteer, no pieces of silicon are lost, and it is easier for the operator to assess the PCS. Alternate unilateral chewers were observed to chew more efficiently than consistent unilateral chewers, a finding also reported by Farias Gomes et al. One of the limitations of the present study is that only one test food was used to assess masticatory function and the results are thus only applicable to this type of food. Another weakness of this study was the low sample size and the high intra- and inter-subject variability of the AI for the PCS. The more efficient masticatory side was more likely to be used for chewing. However, due to the cross-sectional design of this study we cannot demonstrate whether an increase in masticatory performance on one side would be the result or the cause of preferring this side for chewing. Longitudinal studies are needed to clarify the cause-effect of these correlations. Nevertheless, restoration of missing teeth on the non-preferred side would improve masticatory performance but to a lesser extent than prosthodontic restoration on the preferred side. In conclusion, there is a positive association between the preferred chewing side and the more efficient side. Alternate unilateral chewers masticate more efficiently than consistent unilateral chewers. However, alternate unilateral chewers can masticate as or more efficiently when they chew unilaterally. This research received partial funding from the None declared. This study was approved by the Ethics Committee of the Dental Clinics of the University of Barcelona. Code 17/12. We are very grateful to the subjects for their kind cooperation in this study. The authors would like to thank Prof. Jover for assistance in data management and Denise Phelps for correcting our English. The authors have no competing interests to declare.