Zircon U–Pb SHRIMP, petrographical and geochemical data lead to the first characterization of the Tonian plutonism (Salto da Divisa Granite Suite), ascribed to the continental rift stage of the precursor basin of the Araçuaí Orogen (Eastern Brazil). The suite includes batholitic plutons and comprises mainly fluorite-bearing, dominantly mesoperthitic hornblende–biotite leucogranites. The presence of mafic (tholeiitic) gabbroic enclaves and syn-plutonic dykes confers to the suite a bimodal character. The plutons were locally deformed and foliated under amphibolite facies conditions, in response to the Neoproterozoic collage of the Araçuaí Orogen against the São Francisco Cratonic margin. However, undeformed magmatic facies are well preserved at inner portions of the plutons. The granitoids are metaluminous, with high SiO2 and HFSE: Nb, Zr, Y, Ta and REE (except Eu); low CaO, Al2O3, Sc, Ba, Sr; high FeOt/MgO ratios, characterizing a chemical signature akin to the subalkaline, A-2 type granites. U–Pb SHRIMP data obtained on zircons from the main pluton yielded a magmatic crystallization age of 875±9 Ma. Some inherited xenocrysts revealed ages of ca. 2080 Ma, corresponding to ages of the host rocks, a Paleoproterozoic basement. Nd isotopic evolution studies confirm the Paleoproterozoic influence on magma genesis with a TDM model age of ca. 1.6 Ga and εNd of −5.58 at 880 Ma. The African counterpart, the West Congo Belt, encompasses thick rift-related alkaline volcanic-sedimentary basin (Zadinian and Mayumbian groups, and associated anorogenic granites), dated in the interval of ca. 1000–900 Ma. The age differences between the Salto da Divisa Suite intrusion and the anorogenic magmatic episode at the West Congo Belt suggests a westward migration (i.e. to the Brazilian side) of the thermal axis of the rift, ca. 30 Ma after the ending of the extensional process in Africa.South America has prominently figured in recent reconstructions of supercontinental assemblies (eg: Previous attempts to constrain the age of the continental rift phase, precursor to the Araçuaí Orogen, were based only on indirect evidences from a glacial episode, in the range of We present here the characterization of a rift-related A2 ( The Salto da Divisa Granite Suite comprises a series of multiple plutons intruded into Paleoproterozoic orthogneisses that form the northeastern basement of the Araçuaí Belt ( The main pluton is flanked to southwest by amphibolite facies paragnaisses (thrust and fold belt), through prominent shear zone ( In low strain domains the massif comprises pink, medium to coarse grained, even-grained, Mafic plutonic enclaves are abundant but in many cases they were deformed and recrystallized in different intensities, with development of incipient to very penetrative foliation accompanied by biotitization of the amphibole and transformation of the original pyroxene to hornblende, resulting in biotite amphibolitic rocks. However, in low strain domains the original hornblende–clinopyroxene gabbroic composition is preserved. Contacts between the granite and the gabbroic enclaves are either sharp and angular, suggesting high viscosity contrasts between both magmas (“pseudo” xenoliths), or ill defined, concave–convex, showing partial assimilation of the enclaves by the surrounding granitic rock, suggesting low viscosity contrast ( Twelve samples from two distinct facies were selected for the chemical study. Five samples are from the dominant syeno-granitic to quartz monzonitic pinkish gneissic facies (Salto da Divisa), including the dated sample (labeled JM O7B in The chemical analyses were performed at the GEOSOL Laboratory in Belo Horizonte, Minas Gerais state, Brazil. The major elements as well as Ba, Sr, Ta, Nb, Hf, Zr, Y were analyzed by means of X-ray equipment; Cr, Ni, Pb e Zn, by atomic absorption; rare earth elements (REE) with ICP equipment, and F by specific ion electrode technique. The average chemical composition is shown in On the multicationic R1–R2 diagram (modified from On the multi-elemental diagram of In addition to indicating magma mingling and mixing, the presence of tholeiitic gabbroic magmas in the form of pseudo xenoliths and autholiths as well as syn-plutonic dykes, temporally and spatially associated with the granite, indicates a bimodal nature of the pluton. However, the absence of other rocks-type displaying intermediated composition between the gabbro and granite, such as tonalites and granodiorites demonstrates that the latter (granite) do not represent the felsic end member of a magmatic series. The same restriction is deduced from the scarcity of rocks with syenite, and composition less evolved than gabbros do not favoring models of fractionation of an original mafic/ultramafic (or intermediate) mantle-derived magma. The typical A2 chemical signature indicates a (deep) crustal origin for the magma, whereas its metaluminous composition implies an orthogneissic source. Additionally, the petrographic and chemically compositional uniformity, suggests the extraction of the magma from a single and uniform orthogneissic precursor. Accordingly, fractionation processes from primary minerals should be considered the main mechanism responsible for the (slight) compositional variations, as also demonstrated for other A2 suites from northern Brazil ( One sample with about 15 kg of rock was collected from the most typical exposure of the targeted pluton. The sample was first reduced to fragments of the size of a fist and thoroughly washed in running water and dried before grinding and sieving to fractions between 0.125 mm and 0.065 mm. Heavy minerals were concentrated by means of manual methods (Pan), with further separation of magnetite and ilmenite. The final heavy concentrates were processed in a Frantz Isodynamic Magnetic separator at 0.5A and 10° side-slope, followed by a second run at 1.0A and 5° side-slope. The initial sample preparation was performed at the laboratory of the Universidade Federal de Ouro Preto, Brasil. The final preparation was performed at the laboratory of the Australia National University — ANU, in Canberra. The less magnetic fractions were examined with a binocular microscope for hand picking of zircon grains, and sorted according to distinct shape, color and transparency of populations. About 100 crystals were selected from the least magnetic zircon fraction and then cast in a standard 25-mm epoxy mount and sectioned by polishing. The analyzed crystals were photographed under reflected and transmitted light microscope, followed by the generation of images through panchromatic light (Cathodoluminescence), at a Hitachi S-225ON electronic microscope, operated at 15 kV. The equipment is housed in the ANU Electron Microscopy Unit Research School of Biological Sciences. All the dated crystals had images done before the SHRIMP analyses. The mount was later lightly repolished and gold-coated for the SHRIMP micro-analytical isotopic determinations. The isotopic U–Pb analyses were obtained at the SHRIMP II equipment at The Australia National University in Canberra, Australia. Instrumental conditions and data acquisition have been described in The zircon morphology is very simple and is characterized by two subgroups ( Seventeen analyses were obtained from 17 zircons. Results are given in Five analyses do not fit in here (white error elipses): spot # 14.1 is apparently younger (206 In order to better constrain the ages of the possible sources of the Salto da Divisa magma the dated sample was also analyzed for Sm–Nd isotopes. The analysis was obtained at the Laboratory of Geochronology in the Instituto de Geociências, Universidade de Brasília, Brazil. The rock samples were dissolved using a mixed hydrocloric–nitric acid solution. Isotopic dilution concentration measurements of Sm and Nd, and Nd isotopic evolution diagram for sample Sm–Nd data yielded a moderate negative ε Prior to the formation of the Brasiliano/Pan-African branched system of orogens the breakup of the southeastern southwestern African cratons gave rise to a complex interconnected system of rift basins developed between The age differences between the intrusion of the Salto da Divisa granite ( Despite the lack of reliable radiometric ages (U–Pb) for the collisional stage in Africa, comparison of the orogenic events in both belts also favors an integrated evolution from break up to collision (the AWC Orogen), as shown in the reconstruction model depicted in The authors are grateful to the reviewers Benjamin Bley de Brito Neves and William Randall Van Schmus and to the guest-editor Renata Schmitt for their suggestions, which led to great improvement of the original manuscript.