The flotation recovery of pyrochlore from the Saint-Honore Carbonatite ore has been related to the variability in the mineral matrix Fe content; high Fe pyrochlore grains consistently report to the tails. Previous research has tentatively suggested that surface oxidation of high Fe pyrochlore grains may be driving partitioning of the pyrochlore grains to the tails. X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) was used to examine the relationship between matrix Fe content and surface oxidation in high Fe pyrochlore grains and high Fe zoned regions in pyrochlore grains from the Carbonatite ore. XPS analyses of pyrochlore grains showed that a greater proportion of surface oxidation species corresponded to the zones with high matrix Fe content. The XPS data along with previously presented Time of Flight Secondary Ion Mass Spectrometry (TOF-SIMS) data demonstrates a relationship between matrix Fe content and collector attachment. The Fe rich pyrochlore grains or zones show a higher degree of oxidation relative to the Fe poor grains or zones. The data reveal that collector attachment favors low Fe grains or zones, likely in response to a lower degree of surface oxidation.The separation of pyrochlore, main source of niobium (Nb), from the remainder of the gangue phases in the Saint-Honore Carbonatite Nb deposit (Niobec) is accomplished by froth flotation. The overall Nb recovery at Niobec is less than 60%. Investigations directed towards understanding factors leading to poor recovery include: Recent work by Further work by the same group using TOF-SIMS analyses identified a potential relationship between pyrochlore matrix composition and collector adsorption ( Zonation in pyrochlore (A Surface sensitive techniques, scanning Auger microscopy (SAM), scanning tunneling microscopy (STM), atomic force microscopy (AFM), SEM and X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) along with the more indirect methodologies like zeta potential, cyclic voltammetry ( In this study XPS analyses were performed to examine the variability in surface oxidation of compositional zoning in pyrochlore grains with different Fe content. The aim of the study is to link pyrochlore matrix composition to variability in surface oxidation in order to evaluate this relationship to the observed mineral recovery. The results will provide understanding regarding the loss of selected pyrochlore grains. The results will also be used towards the selection of potential alternative commercial reagents, for optimizing selectivity and recovery, or to help design reagents particularly suited for pyrochlore in this flotation context. Pyrochlore grains were collected from the St-Honoré carbonatite deposit, Niobec, Quebec, Canada. The concentration of matrix elements was measured in pyrochlore grains with a LEO 440 SEM equipped with a Gresham light element detector and a Quartz XOne EDX system. The instrument was operated at 20 The XPS analyses were carried out with a Kratos Axis Ultra spectrometer using a monochromatic Al Ka source (15 In order to develop a baseline for comparative analyses between high and low Fe zones, selected grains were mounted in epoxy and polished to a 0.3 SEM–EDX analysis has identified that the Fe-pyrochlores grains are compositionally zoned. X-ray concentration maps for Fe-pyrochlore grain is given in The various Nb species were assigned based on the binding energy data provided by the NIST data base, these are: Nb  Compared to the other transition metal species, the complex multiple species fitting of Fe is the most problematic. The pyrochlore family is complex. The general mineral formula can be given by: A Unfortunately, the concentration of Fe in the low Fe pyrochlore grains did not allow for the collection of spectra amenable to reasonable interpretation. Hence a direct comparison between the development of Fe species on grains with very low Fe contents was not possible. What follows is a comparison between grains considered as high Fe pyrochlore grains with differing Fe contents. The objective is to determine if there are reasonable, measurable chemical state differences similar to those observed in the TOF-SIMS analyses which can be potentially linked to the observed flotation response. Representative XPS spectra of Fe on the surface of sputtered and conditioned high Fe pyrochlore zones are show in The XPS was used to examine the development of surface oxidation species in relationship to pyrochlore matrix compositional zones. XPS spectra were collected from low Fe and high Fe compositional zones after sputtering, and after conditioning ( Observations by Previous investigations at Niobec have shown that a higher concentration of matrix Fe in pyrochlore grains can potentially be linked to poor selectivity ( While the XPS analyses was not able to fully differentiate the types of Fe oxidation species on the surface of the pyrochlore grains, variations in the relative proportions of oxidation products demonstrate a number of factors in support of the contention that collector attachment is linked to preferential surface oxidation of Fe rich grains or regions. A significant line of support comes from the oxygen data which shows an overall higher O content on the surface conditioned Fe rich pyrochlore grains or zones relative to the low Fe pyrochlore particles or zones ( Previous studies of pyrochlore grains have linked poor flotation performance to an increase of Fe content in the matrix of grains. One possible explanation linking high Fe content to poor recovery suggested that high Fe content resulted in a variable degree and rate of surface oxidation. Surface analysis techniques such as XPS allow for a direct ex situ determination of the degree of oxidation on the surface of minerals. The present study utilizes the XPS technique to investigate the oxidation states on the surface pyrochlore of different Fe content and grains that are compositional zoned pyrochlores (areas of high and low Fe content). Bench testing and XPS analyses of variable Fe content pyrochlore grains verify a relationship between pyrochlore surface oxidation and Fe content in the mineral matrix. It was demonstrated that on the surface of conditioned samples, a greater proportion of oxygen was identified in high Fe zones in comparison to those with low Fe contents. Furthermore, the analyses revealed that there was a greater proportion of higher valence state Fe and Nb species developed on the surface of the high Fe pyrochlore zones during the conditioning tests. These data provide evidence that the previously identified link between matrix Fe content and collector attachment is likely in response to selective oxidation on the surface of Fe rich pyrochlore grains or zones within the pyrochlore grains. The data may be of significant value as they can be applied to testing scenarios designed in order to evaluate to flotation improvement strategies. This work was partially completed with funding provided by the