An algorithm-based method for synthesis of hydrometallurgical processes using limited amounts of experimental data is presented. The method enables simultaneous selection and sequencing of unit operations and optimization of operating parameters. An ant colony optimization (ACO) based algorithm is used to identify the most economic process alternative in an iterative manner. Key performance indicators are used for comparison of candidate processes: a purification performance index measures purity improvement and a separation cost indicator is used as an objective function in process optimization. Computational times were reduced significantly with the suggested method compared to an algorithm which evaluates all the possible process options. The practical applicability of the method to hydrometallurgy is demonstrated by investigating zinc recovery from argon oxygen decarburization dust with two alternative leaching methods and recovery of lanthanides from nickel metal hydride (NiMH) batteries. In the first zinc recovery process, 150min normal batch leaching with 0.5M H2SO4 is used, and in the other one 270min batch leaching with H2SO4 is done by controlling the pH (>3.0). In both cases the leachate is extracted with D2EHPA at pH4.27, and stripped with circulating solution from zinc electrolysis. For lanthanides recovery the algorithm suggested a process in which the raw material is leached with 1.3M HCl, the leachate is extracted with D2EHPA at pH2.2, organic phase is stripped with 2.0M HCl and 99% pure Ln-oxalates are precipitated with oxalic acid at pH0.6. Compared to previously suggested process for the same raw material, the algorithm suggests operating the leaching step such that higher selectivity is achieved by sacrificing some yield. ant colony optimization argon oxygen decarburization central processing unit energy dissipation rate internal rate of return key performance indicator purification performance index separation cost indicator flow rate, m concentration of contaminants, kg/m concentration of extractant, m cost, item of expenses, €/kg specific cost of a leaching step, €/kg specific cost of a purification step, €/kg probability number of components in a chemical system number of ants in a colony number of process steps number of discrete values of operating parameters solvent loss in solvent extraction concentration of a target metal in the system, kg/m batch time in leaching, s number of unit operations volume of leaching vessel, m purity yield the degree of importance of the pheromones parameter used to control the scale of the global updating of the pheromone amount of pheromone in a cell pheromone decay factor initial batch chemicals electricity extractant final contaminant leaching process step organic phase value of operating parameter raffinate solvent stripping total process SCI unit operation aqueous phase ant raffinate Hydrometallurgical process development usually starts with analysis of the raw materials to be treated, i.e., chemical composition, mineralogy, state, particle size, volume etc. (  When a new hydrometallurgical process is being developed, comparison between process alternatives and process optimization is usually done based on the experience of scientists and engineers, as well as on extensive experimentation ( Hydrometallurgical purification process development is usually based on scale-up of processes established on a laboratory or pilot scale. Conceptual design or process synthesis in the early stage is thus viewed as the most important stage of process development (  Numerical measures for assessment of process performance are required for efficient application of optimization based method. These measures have to reflect the main features of the alternative unit operations and form a reliable base for comparison. The main criteria for decisions on process synthesis in extractive metallurgy are technical feasibility and economic potential, along with environmental, safety and other aspects ( Solution of an optimization problem requires a suitable and efficient algorithm that is capable of identifying the minimum value of the target function and the corresponding sequence of unit operations and their operating parameters. Mathematical programming algorithms and methods available for synthesis of chemical processes have been the subject of a number of reviews ( The objective of this research was development of an algorithm-based method for synthesis of hydrometallurgical processes using experimental data. Key theoretical aspects of in silico hydrometallurgical process development using ant colony optimization (ACO) and key performance indicators (KPIs) are discussed and the developed method and algorithm are presented. The efficiency of the algorithm is demonstrated, and utilization of the method is examined based on two case studies, namely recovery of Zn from argon oxygen decarburization (AOD) dust, and extraction of lanthanides from spent nickel metal hydride (NiMH) batteries. The proposed method for design and optimization of hydrometallurgical purification processes consists of five steps: feed characterization and product specification, preselection of unit operations and the mass separation agents, collection of data (experiments or literature search for missing data), automated process synthesis, verification and validation of the constructed process. In the first step, the specific characteristics of the purification process are set, e.g., the composition of the raw material, target purity, target concentration and other constraints. Based on these, a number of promising separation unit operations and corresponding mass separation agents are preselected. The latter are experimentally investigated by data collection experiments (construction of ad- and desorption isotherms, concentrations in leaching versus time or pH, step yields, changes of concentrations, etc.). The missing data can be also collected using literature search. The acquired data are used for simultaneous design and optimization of a purification process by means of a developed ACO-based algorithm and the synthesized process is then studied and developed further. A hydrometallurgical process chain is built of individual unit operations: leaching, solvent extraction, stripping, chemical precipitation, etc. However, in general the unit operations are considered in the ACO-based algorithm as black boxes with inputs and outputs, and could just as well be continuous (e.g. SX) and even consist of multiple stages. An output from a unit operation is an input for the next one in the constructed process chain, i.e., the yield from one unit operation affects the feed composition of the next one. A model for each unit operation comprises mass balance equations. ACO is a probabilistic technique for solving computational problems ( The hypothetical ants travel through a multi-layered structure ( The main features of the devised ACO-based algorithm are given as a flow chart in The layer transition rule determines the probability of choosing a cell on each process step. The probability relies on the pheromone value, As the raw materials are solids in the cases considered in this paper, prior to the first iteration the pheromone is uniformly distributed over the search domain in such a way that only leaching can be chosen as a unit operation of the first layer. In addition, heuristics and a phase selection rule are applied in the ACO-based algorithm to govern the selection of successive unit operation. The former one renders the logic of hydrometallurgical process synthesis and determines, for example, that only solvent extraction or precipitation can follow the leaching step and not stripping. The later one postulates that the phase with yield of target element more than 50% is subjected for further treatment. The heuristics and the rule are realized by respective pheromone redistribution for each hypothetical ant before it makes a decision on the next layer. After each iteration, the pheromone value of each cell is updated according to the pheromone updating rule Eq. At the end of an iteration, when each ant has chosen a cell on each layer, i.e., after construction of the solutions' superstructure, the constructed processes have to be evaluated and compared to identify the best one. SCI function, which represents dependence of specific costs of final product on composition of raw materials and unit operation parameters, is used as an objective function for optimization. The pheromone deposited on cell The pheromone decay factor In order to evaluate the suitability of different process alternatives in the early stages of process development, selectivity and estimated relative costs or KPIs introduced by Purity, defined as the fraction of the target product in a mixture with contaminants, is an essential concept in description of performance and can be described by Eq. For assessment of the purification of one step as a percentage of the purification of the total process to be designed, the purity of the initial mixture Due to high nonlinearity of arctangent function, Eq. As soon as a complete process scheme is established, the influence of single purification steps on total process costs is readily quantifiable using a separation cost indicator ( Both The optimization task of the purification process synthesis is minimization of total specific production costs for the process. Therefore, the sum of specific costs of the process steps is taken as the target function. The specific costs of the whole process are equal to the sum of step-specific costs of all purification steps within the process: For comparison purposes, the costs of alternative leaching processes, Only the chemical costs and the costs of electricity required for mixing are here taken into account in estimation of specific costs of leaching step. Chemical costs are calculated based on the quantity of each chemical required for the process and its unit price. The quantity of acid needed is calculated from the process chemistry, the composition of the solids and its consumption in the process. The costs of mixing accounts electricity needed for slurry mixing. Both chemical and electricity costs are calculated per unit mass of target metal in the leachate. For simplification and generalization, operating costs of solvent extraction are here assumed to result from the introduction of the organic phase to the process stream, stripping by aqueous solution and power consumed in mixing and pumping of the phases. The function for calculation of the operating costs resulting from losses of the target compound and solvent, for both solvent extraction and stripping stages, is ( Pumping and mixing costs can be estimated from their ratio with reagent costs, as the operating costs of solvent extraction are stated as consisting of 89.9% reagents and 10.1% electricity ( The ACO-based algorithm was implemented in Matlab. In order to demonstrate the efficiency of the method, calculation times were compared with an enumeration algorithm also implemented in Matlab. The latter constructs all possible combinations of process alternatives and operating parameters and finds the one with the lowest specific production costs for the target component using the SCI function. Arbitrary pyrity and yield data were used as inputs, and the number of process steps and operating conditions were varied to vary the total number of process alternatives. As seen in The efficiency of the ACO-based algorithm in process synthesis originates from the fact that it identifies the best combination of process steps without evaluation of all possible process combinations. Instead, it performs selection of the best process options in an iterative manner, discarding the worst unit operations or operating parameters at the very beginning. Hence, it is possible to evaluate many processes and select the best one in a reasonably short time. The difference in calculation times would be even more critical if the computational effort required to evaluate the PPI and SCI on each layer was considerable. This is the case if dynamic simulations are involved or iterative solutions of sets of algebraic equations are required. In order to evaluate the proposed method and algorithm from hydrometallurgical point of view, two case studies are presented. The first case is synthesis of hydrometallurgical processes for Zn recovery from argon oxygen decarburization (AOD) dust. The second case focuses on hydrometallurgical recovery of lanthanides from spent NiMH batteries. Single stage batch unit operations are exclusively considered in the example case studies. The enumeration algorithm was employed to ascertain that the ACO-based algorithm has identified the optimal process, which was the case in both examples. The original intention of the SCI was to rate single process steps in terms of the costs of the purification scaled up to 100% ( Argon oxygen decarburization (AOD) dust is generated in stainless steel production processes, and contains valuable heavy metals. Its composition is presented in The most common way to produce metallic Zn in hydrometallurgy is by electrolysis of ZnSO The process was constructed utilizing H Experimental data on leaching of AOD dust and solvent extraction were taken from literature ( The developed ACO-based algorithm was used for simultaneous process design and optimization, i.e., for selection of the most economical sequence of unit operations and its operating parameters. A separation cost indicator (SCI) was used for evaluation of the process performance. Specific costs for the leaching ( Consumption of H Reaction The specific cost of chemicals is then calculated as: A value of 0.145 We assume complete particle suspension in a severe agitation operation with energy dissipation rate (power input/unit mass) Eq. In the stripping stage, the costs for neutralization of stripping electrolyte with NaOH to the certain pH are taken into account, and thus Eq. The price of Zn is assumed to be 1.39 The hydrometallurgical processes for the recovery of Zn from AOD dust constructed by the ACO-based algorithm are presented in The process constructed by the ACO-based algorithm for the direct leaching method consists of three steps. The time for leaching step with H From the data for direct method ( The most important characteristics for process performance of the constructed purification sequence for direct leaching process are presented in The calculated specific production cost (5.06 Present-day NiMH batteries contain multicomponent alloys such as La The aim of this case study was to investigate the feasibility of the presented method to identify what should be the targets of each process step by utilizing data collected from literature sources. More specifically, the ACO based method was used to analyze whether it is better to design the first process steps such that high yield or high purity is achieved. High purity in leaching is usually achieved only by sacrificing the yield but this may be desired if the subsequent purification costs dictate the total costs. Potential mass separating agents were selected based on the literature ( The constructed hydrometallurgical process sequence for recovery of lanthanides from Ni-MH batteries is presented in The constructed process resembles the conceptual flowsheet presented by A simple and computationally efficient process synthesis method applicable to the initial stages of hydrometallurgical process development was presented. The method consists of three parts: experimentally obtained data, an ant colony optimization based algorithm and key performance indicators (KPIs). The core of the method is the use of the ACO-based algorithm that efficiently identifies the most promising process alternative in an iterative manner. Experimental data are used for construction of the superstructure of process alternatives. The total process costs, estimated as sum of step specific costs (SCI), serve as the objective function. A critical assumption in the procedure described here is that calculation of the yields and purities on a given stage from (interpolated) experimental data remains reasonably accurate under all conditions included in the optimization. For higher accuracy, one may perform a second iteration with refined experimental data once the most promising process schemes have been identified. It is also straightforward to include any kind of numerical simulations to calculate the purity and yield on a given stage. The practical applicability of the method was demonstrated for synthesis of recovery processes for Zn from argon oxygen decarburization (AOD) dusts and for recovery of lanthanides from spent nickel metal hydride (Ni-MH) batteries. The high efficiency of the algorithm (measured as CPU time) for large problems originates from the fact that inefficient process alternatives are excluded from the iterative solution in the early stages. Besides hydrometallurgy, the method is considered applicable for the design of any chemical purification process that involves simultaneous selection of mass separation agents, definition of the operating parameters of the unit processes involved and selection of their sequence. The work was part of METDUST project in Finnish Metals and Engineering Competence Cluster's (FIMECC) research program Energy and Life-cycle Efficient Metal Processes (ELEMET). The participating organizations were Lappeenranta University of Technology, Aalto University, University of Oulu, Outokumpu Oyj, Outotec (Finland) Oy and Boliden Oy. The experimental data used as an input in the ant colony optimization algorithm for the case of Zn recovery from AOD dust is presented in The experimental data used as an input in the ant colony optimization algorithm for the case of lanthanides recovery from spent NiMH batteries is presented in