The Montviel 250 Mt carbonatite-hosted REE–Nb deposit is hosted in a Paleoproterozoic alkaline suite located in the Sub-Province of Abitibi, in the Archean Province of the Superior. The alkaline intrusion consists of biotite clinopyroxenites, melano- to leucosyenites, a melteigite–ijolite–urtite series, riebeckite granite, a series of carbonatites and a carbonatite polygenic breccia. The carbonatite series includes silicocarbonatites, calciocarbonatites, rare magnesiocarbonatites, ferrocarbonatites and mixed carbonatites and are cut by a late, high-energy carbonatite polygenic breccia. Diamond drill hole assays and microscope observations indicate that Nb is hosted in pyrochlore from silicocarbonatite whereas the REE mineralization is mainly hosted in ferrocarbonatite, late mixed carbonatites and polygenic breccia, in REE-bearing carbonates and fluorocarbonate minerals. Diamond drill hole underground mapping and systematic assays have shed light on zones enriched in Nd and LREE with preferential Ba and Sr hydrothermal precipitation and zones enriched in Dy, Y and HREE displaying preferential F and P bearing hydrothermal precipitation. Petrographic observations, electron microprobe analyses, LA-ICPMS and X-ray diffraction were used to study the mineralization processes and to identify and quantify the REE-bearing burbankite–(Ce), carbocernaite–(Ce), ewaldite–(Y), huanghoite–(Nd), cordylite–(Ce), cordylite–(Nd), kukharenkoite–(Ce) and synchysite–(Ce). Most minerals are enriched in total LREE with values around 19.3wt.%, have total MREE values around 2.2wt.% and extremely variable total HREE values, with very high contents of Dy and Y averaging around 0.3wt.% and 1.0wt.%, respectively, and with total HREE reaching up to 10.0wt.%. A paragenetic sequence is proposed that consists of: (1) a silicocarbonatite Nb stage, and (2) a calciocarbonatite stage, dominated by magmatism but accompanied by hydrothermal fluids, (3) a main ferrocarbonatite stage, dominated by episodes of Ba- and Sr-hydrothermalism and LREE mineralization, F- and P-hydrothermalism and HREE mineralization and evolved ferrocarbonatitic magmatism, (4) a renewed, mixed carbonatite magmatic stage with minor but increasing hydrothermalism, and (5) a terminal stage of fluid pressure buildup and explosion, leading to the creation of a HREE-enriched polygenic breccia. Globular melt inclusions of Ba–Cl–F (±Si–O) may indicate the presence and contribution of barium-bearing chlorofluoride melts during hydrothermal activity and mineralization of the carbonatite.Five metals have been labeled ‘critical’ for the low-carbon energy sector by the European Commission, two of which are REE: Nd and Dy. Furthermore, out of the 16 rare earth elements (the 14 lanthanides plus Group III Y and Sc), 5 were declared to be economically critical by the US Federal Administration and include Nd, Eu, Tb, Dy and Y. Hence, not all REE are equivalent and the size of REE deposits should not be blindly considered without also taking into account which of the REE are economically enriched. For example, Bayan Obo, in China, is the world's largest REE deposit (48 Most rare earth element (REE) deposits are found in carbonatites, peralkaline granites and pegmatites, and peralkaline, Si-undersaturated feldspathoidal rocks. Carbonatite-hosted REE deposits typically are enriched in light REE (LREE) whereas siliceous REE deposits are more inclined to contain abnormally high levels of heavy REE (HREE) ( The mechanisms of REE concentration in carbonatites are diverse. The origin of REE mineralization can be magmatic, hydrothermal, supergene or a combination of these. Most carbonatites experience hydrothermal alteration and carbonatites rarely host solely magmatic REE mineralization. The only example of magmatic carbonatite REE mineralization known to date is that of Mountain Pass carbonatite, USA ( Carbonatites usually host the REE in magmatic calcite, apatite, titanite, REE-bearing perovskite (loparite) or burbankite–(Ce), depending on the activity of REE, P, F and CO Montviel is an alkaline intrusive suite located in the northeast side of the Abitibi greenstone belt, Canada ( The Montviel area was first investigated by R. Bell of the Geological Survey of Canada in 1895 and was frequently revisited throughout the 20th century but was not systematically mapped until 1949 by P.E. Imbeault ( In the present paper, field, drill core, hand sample and conventional optical microscope observations, systematic core sample assays, microscope and scanning electron microscope petrography, electron dispersive X-ray (EDX), X-ray diffraction, electron microprobe (EMP) wavelength dispersive spectrometry (WDS), and laser ablation inductively coupled plasma mass spectrometry (ICP-MS) are integrated to characterize the Montviel carbonatite-hosted REE–Nb deposit. Special emphasis is given to the petrographic relations within the different carbonatite units, the hydrothermal nature of the REE mineralization and to the mineralogy of the REE carbonates and fluorocarbonates. A paragenetic model is proposed on the basis of the above observations, analyses and interpretations. Rare earth elements (REE) are typically represented by the 14 lanthanides and by Y, which is also a member of the Group III of the periodic table of the elements. Rare earth elements (REE) are subdivided in terms of light rare earths (LREE; La, Ce, Pr, Nd), medium rare earths (MREE; Sm, Eu, Gd) and heavy rare earths (HREE; Tb, Dy, Y, Ho, Er, Tm, Yb, Lu). Economically critical REEs include Nd (a LREE), Eu (a MREE), Tb, Dy and Y (HREEs), as explained in Drill cores were analyzed by ALS Val d'Or (Canada) using lithium borate fusion ICP-MS and X-ray fluorescence for Nb. Samples consist of NQ-size half cores normally cut in 1.5 Samples of calciocarbonatites, magnesiocarbonatites, ferrocarbonatites, silicocarbonatites and polygenic breccia were crushed, pulverized and scanned using a Siemens D500 X-ray diffractometer equipped with a Co tube and a Si detector at the Université du Québec à Montréal. X-ray diffraction spectra were identified using Eva software version 1.3. Polished sections of silicocarbonatite, calciocarbonatite, magnesiocarbonatite, ferrocarbonatite and polygenic breccia were prepared and observed using a Leica DMLP petrographic microscope equipped with a Leica DFC450 digital camera and using a Hitachi TM3000 tabletop scanning electron microscope (SEM) equipped with a Bruker Quantax 70 energy dispersive X-ray spectrometer (EDS). Rare earth carbonates and fluorocarbonates were analyzed for selected major elements (Ca, Ba, Sr, Na, Fe, Mn, Mg, Na, Si, F, La, Ce, Sm, Pr, Nd, Dy, Y) using a JEOL JXA-8900L electron microprobe (EMP) with a 20 Attempts to analyze the same crystals for all REE using a laser ablation ICPMS system were made in the Geotop Laboratories at UQAM, Montreal. The system consists of a Photon-machines Analyte.193 G2 Pulse Excimer laser and a Nu Instrument Attom, high resolution, sector field ICPMS. The system was monitored using a NBS610 glass standard and REE quantified using a USGS MACS3 calcite standard. The concentration of RE elements was calculated by using Sr as the internal standard. The alkaline–carbonatite intrusion of Montviel is located in the Archean Craton of the Superior, in the NE of the Sub-Province of Abitibi. The Paleoproterozoic (1.894 Silicocarbonatites (SiC) display three different facies. The first facies is a lamprophyre-like, carbonate-rich SiC which consist of phenocrysts of biotite and phlogopite, and pseudomorphs of olivine altered to antigorite, magnesite and ilmenite, in a matrix of dolomite, ankerite, calcite, pyrite, late hematite and quartz and minor to trace amounts of fluorapatite, titanite, cancrinite, REE carbonates and fluorocarbonates, monazite–(Ce) and xenotime–(Y). Some lamprophyre-like SiC are strongly altered and enriched in REE (particularly HREE), and show pseudomorphs of olivine altered to Fe–Mg carbonates (breunnerite or mesitite), Fe–dolomite, Ti–biotite, fluorapatite, Nb–ilmenite, minor amounts of REE carbonates and fluorocarbonates, monazite–(Ce), xenotime–(Y), antigorite, dickite, and late pyrite and quartz. In contrast, some SiC are better described as glimmerites brecciated by carbonates such as calcite, dolomite, ankerite, strontianite and witherite. This second facies of SiC contains minor to trace amounts of fluorapatite, fluorite, pyrochlore, ilmenite, K feldspar, pyrrhotite, pyrite, chalcopyrite, REE carbonates and fluorocarbonates, monazite–(Ce), xenotime–(Y) and late quartz are also present. In this SiC, the glimmerite hosts Nb in pyrochlore whereas the carbonates host the REE in carbonates and fluorocarbonates. Some apatite in the biotite-rich SiC are metamict and display pleochroic aureoles and some contain numerous melt, fluid, Fe oxide and unidentified Cl-bearing inclusions. Carbonatite melt inclusions are also present in calcite. Based on qualitative EDX analyses coupled to the SEM, F is present in biotite, fluorapatite and fluorite, Ti is present in biotite and ilmenite, Nb is hosted in pyrochlore and ilmenite and Ce is present in apatite. The third facies of SiC is represented by the late SiC dyke crosscutting the carbonatites ( Magnesiocarbonatites (MgC) are present as rare dykes, pods and lenses that are strongly altered and dominated by dolomite. Ba–Ca–Mg carbonate (Ca-bearing norsethite?), calcite, barytocalcite, strontianite, fluorite, REE carbonates and fluorocarbonates and albite are present in major concentrations. Sphalerite and pyrite occur in minor but significant concentrations. Purple fluorite and zones of Ba alteration within the MgC host globular inclusions with EDX compositions of Ba–Cl–F–Si–O and Ba–Cl–F, equivalent to no existing minerals (except zhangpeishanite, BaFCl; Calciocarbonatites (CaC) are dominated by calcite and range from very pure, barren, coarse sövites to LREE-bearing and HREE-bearing hydrothermalized and/or brecciated CaC. Barren sövites consist of coarse calcite with minor to trace amounts of fluorapatite and REE carbonate and fluorocarbonate. Light and heavy REE-bearing CaC also contain major amounts of dolomite, ankerite, strontianite, witherite and barytocalcite and minor to trace concentrations of fluorapatite, barite, REE carbonate and fluorocarbonate, sphalerite, galena and pyrite. Calciocarbonatites contain very few ferromagnesian silicate minerals but do have minor amounts of biotite and aegirine–augite. Chlorite is also present in minor to trace concentrations. The only oxides are late and consist of hematite and goethite. Ferrocarbonatites (FeC) usually cross-cut the CaC, are more strongly hydrothermally altered than the CaC and host more hydrothermal precipitates and most of the REE mineralization, along with the polygenic breccia and the late, mixed carbonatites. They are dominated by ankerite and Fe–dolomite, contain major to minor amounts of siderite, calcite, barytocalcite, strontianite, witherite, fluorite, fluorapatite and secondary hydroxyapatite, as well as minor to trace amounts of biotite, aegirine, arfvedsonite, loparite (a REE-bearing perovskite), barite, REE carbonate and fluorocarbonate, nepheline, sodalite, scapolite, sphalerite and galena. The FeC contain zones that are enriched in LREE or HREE, that display widespread P hydrothermal precipitation dominated by apatite with monazite–(Ce) and xenotime–(Y), and widespread Ba hydrothermal precipitation dominated largely by barytocalcite and Ba–Ca–Mg carbonate, and lesser amounts of witherite, barite and REE carbonate and fluorocarbonate. Silicocarbonatites, CaC and FeC similar to those described above appear to have mixed under magmatic conditions (the liquid state) and crosscut pre-existing SiC, CaC and FeC and their hydrothermally altered products with diffused contacts, thus showing up as lenses, dykes and pods. Carbonatites in the magmatic plumbing system thus appear to have been repeatedly injected over prolonged episodes and hydrothermal activity sometimes appears to have preceded mixed SiC–CaC–FeC magmatism. Although REE carbonates and fluorocarbonates are present in significant concentrations in these late mixed carbonatites, they are generally less altered than the pre-existing SiC, CaC and FeC. The polygenic breccia (BXP) is enriched in REE, particularly in HREE, and consists of clasts and xenocrysts of SiC, CaC and FeC in a hydrothermally altered matrix of dolomite, calcite, strontianite, barytocalcite, fluorapatite, biotite, aegirine–augite, and ferro-potassic magnesio-hastingsite. Minor to trace amounts of rutile, magnetite, barite, an Y-Th silicate (huttonite or yttrialite?), a Ce–Ca–Fe–Ti–Nb oxide (aeschynite?), sphalerite, galena, pyrite, REE carbonate and fluorocarbonate were also observed. The concentration of Nd, Y, and Yb varies with depth in the eight selected drill cores ( The following 3 holes (MVL1130, MVL1142 and MVL1378; MVL1142 are shown as 42 in All of the ore-bearing holes (the first 7 holes) also display a striking ‘saw-tooth’ pattern, most noticeable when compared to the pyroxenites and gabbros (MVX1203). This saw-tooth pattern varies on the scale of one to a few meters and the high Nd, Y and Yb zones mentioned above are not related to this saw-tooth pattern and correlate better with dominant lithologies. The magmatic relations among pods, lenses and dykes of carbonatites at Montviel are very complex and do vary at this scale. Nevertheless, most carbonatites are hydrothermally altered and this saw-tooth pattern probably originates both because of magmatic and hydrothermal interaction. This is taken up again in the discussion section. The high Nd zones, the high Y and Yb zones and the barren pyroxenites and gabbros described above were used to represent high LREE and high HREE zones and their correlation with Ba, Sr, F and P ( X-ray diffraction patterns identified the major minerals in silicocarbonatite, LREE-bearing calciocarbonatite, HREE-bearing calciocarbonatite, HREE-bearing, Ba-altered calciocarbonatite, LREE-bearing magnesiocarbonatite, LREE-bearing ferrocarbonatite, F-altered ferrocarbonatite, mixed SiC–CaC–FeC and polygenic breccia ( Transmitted light photomicrographs of REE-bearing carbonates and fluorocarbonates shown in A 2 Backscattered electron (BSE) images shown in These transmitted light photomicrographs and BSE images illustrate the omnipresence of REE, Na, Ba, Sr, F and P in the hydrothermal fluids associated with REE mineralization as well as in the host carbonatite. These fluids could be related to fluids observed in fluid inclusions and potentially also to denser fluids, which we term ‘melts’ and that seem to have been composed of Ba, F, and Cl (± No pure REE fluorocarbonate (bastnäsite–(Ce)) was identified at the Montviel deposit and the identification of the different REE carbonates and fluorocarbonates was challenging. Burbankite–(Ce) [(Na,Ca) The formulas above agree with those of the Handbook of Mineralogy of the Mineralogical Association of America (MAC), except for a few differences described hereafter. Ewaldite–(Y) is reported by the MAC to have the formula Ba(Ca,Y,Na,K)(CO Minerals did not return exact stoichiometric ratios due to: (1) the presence of solid solutions among end members; (2) alteration and mixtures between minerals; (3) inclusions within the minerals; and (4) because not all REE were analyzed by the electron microprobe. Nevertheless, mineral names could be derived for most analyses. A subset of these ore minerals was analyzed for REE using laser ablation ICP-MS (LAICPMS; Significant discrepancy exists between electron microprobe and laser ablation ICP-MS data points, especially for heavy REE concentrations. This discrepancy can be observed for ewaldite–(Y) ( Light REE (LREE; La–Ce–Pr–Nd) are more concentrated than medium REE (MREE) and heavy REE (HREE), and range from about 400 Medium REE (Sm–Eu–Gd) have concentrations that are intermediate between LREE and HREE, ranging from about 173 Heavy REE (Tb–Dy–Y–Ho–Er–Tm–Yb–Lu) are most depleted, ranging from 0.1 Although REE concentrations are highly variable, almost all minerals have similar REE concentration patterns, showing up to tens of wt.% LREE and gradually less medium and heavy REEs. Ewaldite–(Y) is a significant exception and displays MREE and HREE enrichments relative to other minerals, with Eu ranging from 381 Rare earth concentrations were normalized to chondrites ( Burbankite–(Ce), carbocernaite–(Ce) and kukharenkoite–(Ce) have negative and relatively gradual slopes for the LREE. Cordylite–(Ce) has a flat LREE to MREE patterns and displays a relative enrichment in Nd and MREEs (one is actually cordylite–(Nd)). Huanghoite–(Nd) has a positive LREE to MREE slope and displays significant enrichment in Nd and Sm. Ewaldite–(Y) has lower LREE enrichments but strong MREE and HREE enrichments, displaying flat to slightly negative REE patterns. Gadolinium often shows a positive anomaly although this could be due to an analytical error of the LAICPMS. All rare earth element-bearing carbonates and fluorocarbonates at Montviel host Ba (except 2 EMPA points on mixed minerals in sample LP12.CACB01A.C3; Although fluid inclusions were commonly observed in calcite and apatite, globular inclusions with Ba–Cl–F–Si–O and Ba–Cl–F compositions and hosted in dolomite were observed in close association with mineralization and alteration ( The signatures of REE mineral precipitation, alteration and remobilization are seen as ‘saw tooth’ patterns in the drill core plots ( Absolute REE concentrations in REE carbonates and fluorocarbonates vary over 6 orders of magnitude, from ppm-level HREE to 20 Since all REE minerals are either altered or of unequivocal hydrothermal origin, partitioning can be measured between a mineralizing fluid and REE minerals, although according to Zones of P and Ba hydrothermal precipitation were identified based on drill core assays during advanced exploration work and were sufficiently extensive to be shown on the scale of the carbonatite intrusion map ( Given that LREE are more mobile than HREE (  According to this paragenetic model, during the SiC stage, silicate magma coexisted with carbonatite magma and their magmatic volatile phases so that fresh, magmatic olivine was altered to ilmenite and carbonates (and serpentine, not shown in During the CaC stage, magmatic Ca- and Mg-bearing carbonatite (calcite and dolomite) became preponderant but were still accompanied by significant concentrations of biotite, aegirine–augite and aegirine. Pyrochlore and monazite–(Ce) were still crystallizing from the carbonatite magma. Rare earth minerals which are non-equivocally magmatic could generally not be identified at that stage, except perhaps some euhedral and altered phenocrysts of burbankite–(Ce) ( Subsequent injections of silicate and carbonatite magmas initiated the mixed, SiC–CaC–FeC stage, with renewed augite, aegirine–augite, aegirine crystallization and autometasomatism. Calcium- and Mg-dominated carbonatite took over other Fe–Ba–Sr-type carbonatite and lesser amounts of fluoroapatite, barite and fluorite crystallized. Nevertheless, REE carbonate and fluorocarbonate continued to precipitate from carbonatite magmatic hydrothermal fluids. The terminal stage also appears to have been accompanied by renewed silicate and carbonatite magmatism with the crystallization of aegirine–augite, aegirine, calcite and dolomite. Nevertheless, this magmatic activity must have declined, as evidenced by preliminary results of δ Although the exact timing of periods of magmatic and hydrothermal activity and the extent to which they alternated remains unknown at Montviel, the paragenetic sequence generally indicates that hydrothermalism does not necessarily follow magmatic stages but that, instead, magmatism and hydrothermalism can be simultaneous and pulsatory. Repeated magmatic injections evolving towards hydrothermal end members resulted in a complex array of cross cutting magmatic and hydrothermal fingerprints. Montviel should thus been seen as an example of pulsatory magmatic–hydrothermal system, in contrast to more traditional unidirectional magmatic-to-hydrothermal systems. Within this magmatic–hydrothermal system an immiscible BaFCl (± The results and interpretations presented herein suggest the evolution of carbonatites whereby magmas and magmatic volatile phases evolved simultaneously via multiple injections of fluid-saturated carbonatite magmas. A paragenetic sequence ( More experimental work is required before differential REE transport capabilities are understood and zones enriched specifically in Nd, Dy and Y and mineral enriched in a variety of specific rare earth elements can be explained. This study underlines that despite their so-called similar geochemical behavior ( The discovery of BaFCl (± This paper results from the financial contribution of The following is the Supplementary data to this article. Supplementary data to this article can be found online at