A dump located in the proximity of the Vlaikov Vrah mine, Bulgaria, and containing about 120,000tons of run-of-mine mining wastes (low-grade ores and rock mass), since 1968 was subjected initially to spontaneous natural bioleaching based on the rains as irrigating leach solutions, then from 1972 to 2003 to commercial-scale bioleaching by means of irrigation with acidified leach solutions, and since 2004 again to spontaneous natural bioleaching. The monitoring of these processes during this 40-year period revealed considerable changes in the composition, geotechnical and acid–base properties of the dump material, as well as in the diversity, number and activity of its microflora. The data obtained during this study were used to stimulate the bioleaching process in the huge commercial-scale copper dump leaching operation at Vlaikov Vrah mine in which about forty million tons of such mining wastes were treated.The ore piles located in the proximity of the copper Vlaikov Vrah mine, Bulgaria, contain about forty million tons of mining wastes consisting of low-grade sulphide, oxide and mixed copper ores and rock mass from the open-pit mining. These ores, after rainfall, were sources of acid drainage waters generated as a result of the oxidative activity of the indigenous chemolithotrophic bacteria inhabiting the piles. The waters had a pH usually less than 3 and contained heavy metals (mainly copper and iron) in concentrations much higher than the permissible levels for waters intended for use in agriculture and/or industry. These data were the reason to start (in 1968) a detailed study on this spontaneous natural bioleaching with the objective to stimulate and turn it into an effective commercial-scale dump leaching operation for copper recovery. This operation was put in action in 1972 and for more than 30 The commercial-scale operation was ceased in 2003 due to the decrease of the copper content in the ore dumps. However, since that time the dumps are again sites of spontaneous natural bioleaching based on the rains and the abundant populations of chemolithotrophic bacteria still inhabiting these dumps. This paper contains some essential data about the changes in an ore dump, which for a period of about 40 The dump used in this study was formed on a moderately steep hill without any ground preparation. The dump has the shape of a truncated cone, was 12 Pyrite was the main ore mineral in the dump. Chalcopyrite was the main copper-bearing material but some secondary copper sulphides such as chalcocite, bornite and covellite were also present, together with some copper oxide and carbonate minerals. Quartz and feldspars were the main minerals of the host rock. Characterization of the dump material was carried out by methods described elsewhere ( The isolation, identification and enumeration of microorganisms were carried out by methods described elsewhere ( The leaching of copper from the dump was quite efficient and 71.4% of this metal was extracted within the 40-year period ( The leaching of the secondary copper sulphides was also efficient. However, only 35.4% of the copper present as chalcopyrite was leached. The copper extraction from the ore pieces larger than 100 Pyrite was efficiently leached and this resulted in a steady increase of the acidity and concentration of dissolved iron in the pregnant dump effluents (  The microbial activity in situ in the dump depended on some essential environmental factors such as the water and oxygen content in the relevant zone in the dump, pH and composition of the waters penetrating through this zone as well as the level of temperature. The highest activity was measured in zones with a pH in the range of about 1.7–2.3. In zones with pH higher than 3.5 both the number and activity of the acidophilic chemolithotrophs were relatively low. Water content within 55–60% from the pore-filled capacity of the ore was needed for optimal bacterial activity. This was achieved by applying an interrupted regime of irrigation in which the ratio of the duration of irrigation periods to the duration of period of pauses varied in the range from 3:1 to 1:3, and the irrigation rates varied in the range from 10–50 In the period 1974–1976 a mutant strain of Copper was recovered from the pregnant dump effluents by means of cementation by metallic iron ( The data obtained during this study were used to stimulate the bioleaching process in the huge commercial-scale copper dump leaching operation at Vlaikov Vrah mine in which about forty million tons of such mining wastes were treated. It was found that the regime and rate of dump irrigation, as well as the pH and iron content of the leach solutions were the most essential factors to control to some extent the bacterial leaching of copper. These factors were not stable and change during the progress of leaching. The local natural populations of acidophilic chemolithotrophic bacteria were well adapted to the real dump conditions and the introduction to the dump of laboratory-bred bacteria possessing higher oxidative activity towards ferrous iron and finely ground sulphide minerals tested in agitated flasks and reactors had no positive effect on the leaching under real field conditions. Regardless of the fact that most of the environmental parameters in the dumps of the type used in this study are not optimal for the acidophilic chemolithotrophs inhabiting these dumps, it is clear that the commercial-scale bacterial dump leaching of copper in most cases is quite profitable, its application prevents environmental pollution by controlling the drainage dump effluents and facilitates the future remediation of the dump area. Most of the findings established worldwide in connection with the copper dump bioleaching have been later used in the efficient heap bioleaching operations in which copper is extracted from higher-grade ores (