This paper describes a process for recovering gold from aqueous cyanide solutions using naturally occurring soil microorganisms. In this research, microbes successfully liberated gold cations from aurocyanide complexes. The gold was subsequently captured on iron and zinc electron donors.
                  Three sets of bench scale experiments were conducted using cyanide degrading biomass that had been enriched on cyanide as a sole nitrogen source. After cyanide degrading microorganisms populated microcosm reactors, the biomass was fed with a gold cyanide solution. Microorganisms consumed the CN− moiety of aurocyanide complexes, releasing gold cations. A portion of the gold was recovered on steel wool or zinc which served as cathodes. Although gold recovery rates were low, methods for improving efficiency were investigated.Cyanide is widely used in mining and other industrial processes. Cyanide can be produced by certain bacteria, fungi, and algae and is found in a number of plants. Many species of higher plants are cyanogenic. These plants release significant amounts of inorganic cyanide upon decay or during postharvest processing ( Hydrogen cyanide (HCN) is a colorless gas with a faint, bitter, almond-like odor. Sodium cyanide and potassium cyanide are both white solids. Cyanide salts and hydrogen cyanide are used in electroplating, metallurgy, production of chemicals, photographic development, making of plastics, fumigating ships, and mining processes, such as milling of gold ore (  The term free cyanides is generally used when referring to one of two species, cyanide ion (CN Simple cyanide salts are those consisting of a single cation in combination with the cyanide ion. Metal cyanide complexes are produced during the gold cyanidation stage by the reaction of cyanide with a variety of minerals. They may be considered as the soluble products of the reaction between the corresponding insoluble simple cyanide and excess cyanide ion. They are formed as weak, moderate, or strong complexes in terms of chemical stability. Ferrocyanide [Fe(CN) From the environmental standpoint, the types of cyanides to be considered are best identified by the analytical method used in determining cyanide concentration in effluents. These three groups are usually referred to as free cyanide, weak acid dissociable cyanide, and total cyanide. As cyanide comes in contact with milled ore, it dissolves gold and forms gold cyanide complexes and complexes according to Eqs. (1)–(3) ( As seen from the above equations, oxygen is necessary for gold dissolution. It is believed that Eq. (1) is the major mechanism of gold dissolution, whereas Eq. (2) is minor but still important. Thus, Eq. (3) combines the first two and represents the present theory of gold dissolution in cyanide solutions. The dissolution rate of gold depends on many factors. The most important of which are the cyanide concentration, pH, and temperature. The optimum cyanide concentration is usually near 0.05% (500 mg/l), and the optimum pH is near 10 ( In gold milling operations, cyanide is added to the feed slurry in the form of sodium, potassium, or calcium cyanide to affect the dissolution of the gold according to Eq. (3). As a result of the reactions taking place with various constituents in the ore during gold dissolution, the barren solution from a gold mill will contain a variety of cyanide compounds and derivatives. These will include free cyanide ions, metal–cyanide complexes, cyanates, and thiocyanates. Treatment processes for destroying cyanide in gold mill effluents have been the subject of numerous studies for many years. Different methods for removing cyanide from solutions are reviewed in Due to their great potential, biotechnologies attract more and more attention in the field of industrial processes ( Although cyanides are harmful for many living organisms, bacteria and fungi can decompose cyanide and cyanide compounds. In most studies, cyanide concentrations of the wastewaters were less than 250 parts per million (ppm), which corresponds to the typical cyanide content in mining wastewaters ( Biological degradation of cyanides under aerobic conditions can be illustrated in two stages in Eqs.  Gold in aqueous solution forms a complex with cyanide [Au(CN)2] Due to its galvanic properties, the gold ion should aggressively seek an electron from the close surroundings and be stabilized in the metallic form (Eq. Metals such as iron and zinc that are low on the galvanic series could serve as suitable electron donors. The reduction reaction takes place on the donor's surface; that is, metal gold should plate on the surface of the electron donor. The goal of this research was to investigate gold recovery from pregnant solutions using cyanide degrading microorganisms. Cyanide solutions at pH lower then 9 release hydrocyanic acid (HCN), which easily leaves the solution as a gas. Due to its high toxicity, most of operations that use cyanides stipulate that the pH of such solutions remain higher than pH 9. In gold milling operations, the typical pH level in cyanidation tanks is kept between 10 and 12. Many microorganisms, however, prefer pH values closer to 7–8. In this research, the pH of the cyanide solutions was lowered to 8 in a sealed reaction vessel to encourage microbial growth and prevent the escape of HCN. To provide oxygen to the aerobic microorganisms, reactors were prepared in a closed system manner with oxygen permeable silicon tubing to supply molecular oxygen, as shown in A list of the chemicals used in the experiments is given in pH measurements were carried out using indicator paper because of its simplicity and the assurance that cross contamination between the reactors would be prevented. Concentrations of cyanides were measured using the pyridine–pyrazolone method. This is a colorimetric method widely used due to its simplicity and reasonably low volume demand for the analyte solution. Cyanide measurements were performed on a HACH DR/2010 spectrophotometer. HACH propriety auxiliary reagents were used for these measurements. Samples were diluted with deionized water to bring the concentrations into the linear range of the instrument. The linear range of the instrument was 0 to 0.2 mg/l. Most of the samples of reactor contents were diluted 500 or 1000 times to reach the linear range. Ammonia nitrogen (NH Concentrations of gold were measured with atomic adsorption (AA) spectrometry. Solids analyzed for gold were treated with a minimum volume of aqua regia and diluted with 20% hydrochloric acid until the concentration was within the linear range of the instrument. When concentrations of the analyte were below the linear range of the instrument, samples were evaporated. A Perkin Elmer AA spectrometer was used for determination of dissolved gold concentrations. The flame method's linear range was 0 to 60 mg/l. Calibration was performed on three points, 10, 30, and 50 mg/l, and yielded a linear curve. Dissolved oxygen was monitored using a YSI model 58 instrument. The YSI DO meter was calibrated to 9.0 mg O Pyrolysis-gas chromatography/mass spectrometry (Py-GC/MS) was used to analyze organogold complexes. Py-GC/MS was conducted on the suspended and dissolved solids in the aqueous portion of the reactors only. In preparation for analysis, liquid samples were dried at 60 °C. The dried solids were collected and analyzed. Py-GC/MS was conducted with a CDS Analytical Pyroprobe 2000 pyrolyzer and AS2500 autosampler in tandem with a GC/MS. The pyrolysis reactor was mounted on an HP 6890 GC, with a Restek Rtx35-MS column, 30 m×0.32 mm×0.25 μm. Before pyrolysis, the sample was held in the 280 °C interface chamber for 15 s, while the chamber was purged with helium carrier gas. During pyrolysis, the sample was heated from a starting temperature of 280 to 700 °C at 10 °C/ms and held at a constant 700 °C for 10 s. Pulsed splitless injection was used, with pulse pressure of 25 psi. After 1 min, the pyrolyzer was switched offline, and column head pressure was reduced to provide constant flow of helium at 2.0 ml/min. The GC temperature program was 40 °C for 10 min, then ramp at 1 °C /min to 110 °C. A final ramp at 20 °C/min to 280 °C and hold for 10 min was used to clean out the column in preparation for the next sample. The GC was plumbed directly to an HP 5973 mass selective detector on electron impact (EI) mode. The MS scanned mass units 45 to 650. All mass spectra were compared to the Wiley275 spectral library. An Olympus BX60 System microscope was used to study the metal surfaces for gold deposition and other chemical deposits. An electroscan E2020 environmental scanning electron microscope (ESEM) was used to create more detailed images at 500× magnification. The experimental setup for microbial enrichment consisted of five 500-ml Erlenmeyer flasks with rubber stoppers to ensure air tightness. The reactors were labeled 1–4 and “C” for the abiotic control reactor. The stoppers had glass tube ports for connecting silicon tubing. Each reactor contained 1 m of silicon tubing inside except for one reactor (#3) which contained 1.5 m of silicon tubing. The purpose of reactor #3 was to determine if the amount of silicon tubing in the reactor was a factor in gold recovery. Both ends of the tubing were connected to the glass ports on the stoppers. The reactors were set up in series with respect to the aeration system flow. Soil from the Fort Knox gold mine tailings pit was collected to inoculate the reactors. The location of the soil collection was selected to satisfy the following conditions: soil must be exposed to cyanides for a long time period; soil must have indication of biological activity; and collection spot must be accessible. The collection spot was picked on the bank of the tailings holding pond. Plants growing close to the location revealed the presence of biological activity. Closeness of treated wastewater insured the exposure of the soil to low concentrations of cyanide. In addition to the soil collected from Fort Knox, some soil was collected from the Ryan Lode mine, F-heap leachate pond. The F-heap was the only one of six heaps not yet fully detoxified under the mine's decommission plan ( All vessels were inoculated with both Fort Knox and Ryan Lode soil except two, one of which was inoculated with only Ryan Lode soil and another one with only Fort Knox soil. The vessels were buffered with dibasic potassium phosphate up to pH 8 and were fed with a cyanide solution to maintain the CN In the reactors that were inoculated with Ryan Lode soil, cyanide degradation rates between 0.8 and 1.3 mg/l h were observed. This was consistent with previous findings for a similar setup reported in To perform an initial test of the hypothesis, the reactor vessel with the highest cyanide degradation rate was dosed with gold pregnant solution instead of barren cyanide solution. A strand pulled from steel wool was fixed suspended in the reactor. After 3 days, the strand was recovered and examined under a microscope with comparison to a control strand that was not exposed to pregnant solution. The strand in the presence of pregnant solution was coated with gold. The enrichment obtained from the soil was a mixed consortium of bacteria. The enrichment contained all those microorganisms that were cyanide degraders and those that were cyanide-tolerant. There were no pure cultures added to the enrichment. In previous research ( After a successful enrichment for a cyanide degrading microbial consortium in all five vessels of the setup, one reactor (#C) was dosed with 1.04 g of sodium azide (NaN To provide an electron donor for the gold cation (Au During 21 days, the reactors were monitored for pH and buffered to pH 8–8.5 with potassium phosphate dibasic solution when the pH dropped below this level. The reactors were fed with a total of 2 to 4 ml of the gold pregnant solution depending on particular reactor's CN concentration during this period (see At the end of the 21-day period, the experiment was stopped. The steel wool from each module was dissolved in a known volume of aqua regia to convert gold precipitated on the steel surface to solution. The aqua regia solution from each reactor was analyzed using AA for the concentration of gold. Besides steel wool, the liquid phase of the reactor and soil in the bottom of each vessel were analyzed for gold. As shown in Some steel wool strands were examined under the microscope. When two strands, one never processed through the experiment and another from reactor #3, were examined simultaneously, it was seen that the strand from the reactor was fully coated with gold and the other was not ( The cyanide concentration in reactors was not detectable at the end of the experiment, leading us to believe that the gold was liberated but was complexed in biomass or another suspended, possibly organic form. To determine the form of gold in the liquid, a sample of the solution from reactor #3 was analyzed by Py-GC/MS. The results of mass spectrometry confirmed that gold was present in the solution and primarily associated with two principle complexes. The largest of these complexes was a auro-phenolic complex, possibly derived from microbial protein. The second largest was a long chain auro-alcohol. Additional information on these compounds is the subject of ongoing research. To test the adequacy of the steel surface to provide electrons, a second experiment was conducted. In this experiment, significantly less volume of pregnant solution was introduced to the reactors. For this experiment, new reactor vessels were constructed, and new biomass was enriched. This was done to prevent cross-contamination with gold from the previous experiment. In this experiment, a total of four reactors were used, one reactor (#3) was not fed with pregnant solution at all to test for background gold content in the inoculate soil, one reactor was used as an abiotic control (#C) and was dosed with 1 g of sodium azide to sterilize the reactor's contents. Each reactor was fed with 0.5 ml of gold cyanide solution (pregnant solution 2, Results from the reactor (#3) that was not fed pregnant solution but only with sodium cyanide solution indicated presence of “background” gold in the inoculate soil. Although the amount of gold precipitated (0.19 mg) in this reactor did not compensate for mass balance discrepancies in Experiment 1, it was clear that gold in the inoculate could contribute to the total gold recovered in each reactor (see The percent distribution of gold recovered between liquid and steel wool showed that much more of the total gold put into the reactors was recovered in the steel wool modules and less of the total gold remained in liquid than in the previous experiment ( Microscopic examination of the steel strands showed that a corrosion staining of oxidized iron was found on the strand's surface. Microscopic examination of the steel strands from reactor #3 (no gold added) and #C (abiotic control) showed that, in these reactors, the total surface area of the steel wool covered by iron corrosion stains was significantly higher than in the reactors with gold added. To test an alternative electron donor, portions of Experiment 2 were repeated with a 1-g rectangular shot of pure zinc in place of the steel wool. The zinc was cut from a 0.5-mm-thick zinc sheet. In this experiment, the volume of pregnant solution added was equivalent to 37.5 g of gold. Approximately 12% of the gold was recovered on the zinc. By visual inspection, no gold was recovered on the zinc either the abiotic control or an additional control to which no pregnant solution was added. In the active reactor (#1), it was seen that a substantial portion of the gold, 16%, was recovered on the soil. It is believed that the gold found on the soil may have been in the form of settled biomass since earlier studies found a substantial portion of the gold associated with organic matter. These results showed that the zinc was not able to collect more of the available gold than steel wool but had the added complication of precipitation of zinc salts. Data and findings made during the three experiments led to the following conclusions: A mixed consortium of naturally occurring cyanide degrading microbiota are best taken from sites that have been exposed to high concentrations of cyanides. It was observed that reactors inoculated with soil from a Ryan Lode heap (operated 1987–1990) grew desired biomass at significantly higher rates than the ones with inoculate from Fort Knox (operated since 1996). Since Fort Knox detoxifies cyanide prior to release, the concentrations of cyanide seen by soil microbiota are very low. The biomass grown in the enrichments seemed to grow best as a suspended culture. In previous research, a fixed film developed over time ( It was found that microbial degradation of cyanides in gold pregnant solutions did result in gold recovery in the form of metallic gold on the surfaces of the available electron donors. This process was partially limited by the electron donor's surface (steel wool) and partially by some other processes, such as biosorption, that took place in the reactors. The authors would like to acknowledge Ken Severin of the UAF XRF laboratory for ESEM analysis. This work was supported in part by the National Science Foundation–EPSCoR Grant # EPS-0092040 and the Edmund S. Muskie/FREEDOM Support Act Graduate Fellowship. The authors would also like to thank Kinross for access to the Ryan Lode and Ft. Knox mine sites.