The effect of applied load on the wear behaviour of polymer matrix composites produced using carbonized bone particles (CBp) as reinforcement has been studied. The addition of the CBp ranges from 5 to 20 wt% in the polypropylene matrix. The composites were produced by compounding and compressive moulding. The wear test was conducted by varying the applied load from 5 to 15 N. Microstructures of the worn surface were assessed with high resolution scanning electron microscopy (HRSEM/EDS). The wear rate increased with increases in applied load from 5 to 15 N and decreased with increasing in CBp from 0 to 15 wt%. The work has established that carbonized bone can be use in increasing the wear resistance of polypropylene composites.The use of composites as another class of engineering materials is very vital to the success of any industrialized nation. Numerous research institutes adopted the challenge of developing and improving the existing composites. Record available shows that the present global consumption is continually increasing Aigbodion et al. Vishwanath et al. Unal et al. Suresha et al. Nagaraju et al. Basvarajappa et al. Mahapatra and Vedansh Chaturvedi Atuanya et al. Recent publication of the author and his co-workers Polypropylene, cow bone (carbonized), set of sieves, hacksaw, wear tester, two roll mill, hydraulic press, crucible furnace and scanning electron microscope. Cow bones (limb bones) were washed and cleaned. The bones were carbonized in a crucible furnace at 550 °C for 45 min Compounding was done not only to mix but also to ensure intimate mixing of composite forming constituents. The two roll mill machine, was switched on and set for preheat to a temperature of 180 °C for 1 h Three body abrasive wear tests were performed accordance with ASTM-G65 dry sand rubber wheel apparatus. Silica sand procured from Rolfes Silica with a particle size distribution between 300 and 600 microns was used as the abrasive material at a flow rate of 6.93 g/s From When load is low, the wear loss is quite small and increases with increased in applied load. It is quite natural for the wear rate to increase with applied load. A similar trend was observed independently for different wear distances as a function of load and speed The wear rate increased with increasing applied load and decreased with increasing weight percentage of the carbonized bone filler material. This may be due to the reason that addition of CBp resulted in a pronounced drop in ductility accompanied by an increase in hardness values The decrease in wear rate of the carbonized bone composites may also be attributed to higher load bearing capacity of hard material and better interfacial bond between the particle and the resin which reduced the possibility of particle pull out which resulted in higher wear From The presence of carbonized bone particles in polypropylene matrix lowered the wear rate (see From the results and discussion above the following conclusions can be made: The incorporation of the carbonized bone particles in the polypropylene matrix as a reinforcement increases the wear resistance of the material. The wear rate increased with increases in applied load from 5 to 15 N and then decreased with increased of carbonized bone particles from 0 to 15 wt%. The work has established that carbonized bone particles can be use in increasing the wear resistance of polypropylene matrix composites.