Co-reduction roasting of seaside titanomagnetite and blast furnace dust was investigated to maximize the use of these ores in Indonesia. This direct reduction process utilizes fixed carbon in BFD to reduce iron from BFD and titanomagnetite. X-ray diffraction and X-ray fluorescence analyses were performed to characterize the reduced iron powder. The influences of reduction conditions, such as reduction temperature and duration, C/Fe molar ratio, grinding fineness and fluorite dose, on the indicators of reduced iron powder were evaluated. Fixed carbon and volatile matter contents were lower in BFD than those in coal. However, reduction and separation of titanium and iron exhibited similar effects on reduction roasting. Results showed that the optimum conditions of roasting reduction included C/Fe molar ratio of 0.65, fluorite dose of 4mass%, and roasting temperature of 1300°C for 60min. The reduced iron powder was obtained through two-stage grinding and two-stage magnetic separation of the roasted product. The former contained 94.23mass% Fe and 0.58mass% TiO2 and showed total iron recovery of 87.62%. The latter contained 19.72mass% Fe and 25.47mass% TiO2, thereby providing prerequisites for titanium recycling.Titanium is mainly recovered from rutile and ilmenite concentrates. However, high-grade rutile and ilmenite deposits are depleted, and processing of these ores results in environmental pollution; as such, titanomagnetite deposits have gained increased attention as a source of titanium and iron. The Indonesian coastline contains numerous seaside titanomagnetite (STTM) resources ( Numerous studies were conducted to improve the utilization of titanomagnetites. Several new techniques, such as pyrometallurgical and hydrometallurgical processes ( Blast furnace dust (BFD) is a solid waste that is not utilized completely. BFD mainly contains iron and carbon as well as low amounts of silicon, aluminum, calcium, and magnesium. Approximately 10 million tons of BFD are produced annually by the blast furnace ironmaking industry in China ( This study aims to investigate the co-reduction roasting behavior of STTM and BFD. The influence of co-reduction conditions, such as reduction temperature and duration, C/Fe molar ratio, grinding fineness and fluorite dose, on Fe grade, iron recovery, and TiO The STTM ore (particle size of <  BFD was obtained from an iron and steel making company in Hebei Province. The mineral and chemical compositions of the BFD ore were determined through XRD and XRF analyses, respectively. The results are shown in Industrial analysis results (air dry) of the BFD included the following: 33.73  Co-reduction experiments were performed in a furnace under a controlled temperature within ± Fe grade, TiO The total iron recovery of RIP was calculated using the following formula: Material properties of the STTM ore and BFD were performed by XRD. The samples were ground to 100 Roasting temperature affects reduction rate and degree. At 1000 The total iron recovery and Fe grade are higher than 85% and 90 Temperature evidently influences co-reduction roasting ( The effect of C/Fe molar ratio on the co-reduction indices of the STTM ore and BFD was investigated at 1300 The total iron recovery and TiO  Although RIP with high total iron recovery and Fe grade was obtained, the TiO  The change of the total iron recovery and Fe grade were within 2%, the RIP yield decreased from 67.58  Roasting duration is important in the reduction reaction and growth of metallic particles. Thus, the effect of roasting duration of titanium and iron separation was evaluated. The roasting duration ranged from 20  Grinding fineness is related to the effect of titanium and iron separation. The effect of titanium and iron separation was studied under different periods of grinding. In this study, the initial grinding fineness ranged from 45.51 Increasing the initial grinding fineness enhanced separation of titanium and iron during co-reduction of the STTM ore and BFD ( The TiO Secondary grinding fineness influenced the TiO The final results showed that the optimum conditions of roasting reduction included C/Fe molar ratio of 0.65, fluorite dosage of 4%, and roasting temperature at 1300 The mineral contents of the co-reduction samples (including roasted ore, RIP, and titania-rich slag) were determined under the optimum conditions in the co-reduction experiments through XRD analysis. Moreover, the elements of the compounds were evaluated using XRF analysis. The results are shown in    (1) Co-reduction roasting of the STTM ore and BFD is feasible. This process not only reduces iron from the STTM ores via carbon in BFD but also reduces iron in BFD. The optimum conditions for roasting reduction included C/Fe molar ratio of 0.65, fluorite dose of 4%, and reduction temperature of 1300 (2) Adding fluorite can promote the separation of iron and titanium through co-reduction roasting and magnetic separation. When the dose of fluorite was gradually increased, the TiO (3) Fixed carbon and volatile matter contents are lower in BFD than those in coal. However, co-reduction roasting enhanced separation of titanium and iron and decreased the C/Fe molar ratio. The proposed process must be further investigated. The authors are thankful to the