The surface properties of enargite as a function of pH were investigated. The zeta potential values increased from −10 mV (pH=3) to −45 mV (pH=12) and no isoelectric point (iep) was detected. The zeta potential of enargite was highly sensitive to pH and interesting peaks/valleys, unusual in common sulfide minerals, were observed. In the present study, these results were interpreted on the basis of the chemistry of enargite, which is a tetra-thioasenate of Cu(I). A thermodynamic approach, including the Eh–pH diagram for enargite, and the hydrolysis diagrams for arsenic, thioarsenic, and oxo-thioarsenic acids was employed. An interpretation based on the simultaneous ionization and dissociation reactions of the hydrolysis products of arsenic and thioarsenic acids on the enargite surface was discussed. On the other hand, covellite (CuS), under low concentrations of arsenate ions, showed similar zeta potential peaks. Additionally, enargite's zeta potential showed sign reversal for a certain pH range, with the addition of low concentrations of Cu(I) and Cu(II) ions, suggesting that other hydrolysis and precipitation reactions may also be involved.Although a selective flotation process that would separate enargite (Cu Little information can be found in the literature regarding the surface properties of enargite, including its electrokinetic properties. Some authors have considered the equilibrium of enargite, but only with arsenate ions where the chemistry is well-known. Enargite, however, is a tetra-thioarsenate of Cu(I) and, consequently, its surface reactions may also involve thioarsenate and oxo-thioarsenate ions as well. Therefore, hydrolysis, disproportionation, and precipitation reactions must be considered, making this a very complex system from a chemical point of view. In previous papers, The aim of this study is to contribute to the interpretation of enargite's surface chemistry as a function of pH, using an experimental and thermodynamic approach and considering the effects of arsenate, cuprous, and cupric ions on the zeta potential response of the enargite. A hand-sorted, high purity sample of natural enargite provided by El Indio Mining Company (Chile) was used. Reflected light microscopy and X-ray diffraction confirmed that enargite was the main crystalline species present. Quartz was the main impurity detected (approx. 7%), along with a minor amount of pyrite (around 0.9%). The chemical assay revealed 40.6% Cu and 18.9% As. The sample was ground in an agate mortar to 100% − A conventional zeta meter (Zeta-Meter Inc.) with a plexiglass cell mounted with Pt and Mo electrodes was employed. All measurements were taken at constant ionic strength solutions by using a supporting electrolyte of 10 The HSC Chemistry 3.02 software was used in the construction of the Eh–pH diagrams. A Gibbs free energy of formation Δ The surface layer of enargite, a tetra-thioarsenate of Cu(I), may be made up of diverse Cu–As–S–O compounds. The Eh–pH diagram ( As can be concluded from the Eh–pH diagram shown in The literature shows that the oxidation of enargite under an alkaline medium could result in the formation of AsS In the presence of oxygen, the surface could form CuO or HCuO On the other hand, a CuO enrichment of the enargite surface by the simultaneous oxidation of Cu(I) to Cu(II), and the dissolution of tetra-thioarsenate ions, was reported by In the same line, Therefore, according to the literature and under oxidizing conditions, an AsS  A negative zeta potential was found across the entire pH range studied, but an isoelectric point (iep) was not reached. In comparison with common sulfide minerals, unusual changes (peaks/valleys) of zeta potential values were found. A zeta potential peak was observed with both supporting electrolytes at approximately pH 5.5. However, a second peak at different positions, pH As enargite is a sulphosalt (tetra-thioarsenate), the hydrolysis of different thioarsenic and oxo-thioarsenic acids must be considered. In a first attempt, the curve of the zeta potential versus pH could be interpreted by considering the adsorption of hydrolysis products. The simplest case only takes into account the arsenic acid and their hydrolysis products (see When comparing this diagram with enargite's zeta potential curves, the local minima (valley) of potential located around pH 4.5 and pH 9.0 can be seen to coincide fairly well with the maximum concentration values of the H The arsenic acid hydrolysis diagram shows a dissociation occurring around pH 4.5 with the release of H However, the chemistry of As–S–O compounds is more complex than that of the arsenic acid, and a series of other chemical equilibria could be involved. As a second case, the hydrolysis of thioarsenic acids could be considered. The present study involves some of these compounds, particularly the thioarsenic and oxo-thioarsenic acids and their hydrolysis products ( Because of enargite's solubility, a small amount of tetra-thioarsenate ions (AsS  At pH values greater than 5.2, the AsS On the other hand, previously reported experimental evidence ( In an acid medium, the decomposition of the thioarsenate ions can give way to the formation of arsenic(V) sulfide ( The idea of altered enargite, partially coated with a thin layer of CuS, was evaluated by measurement of the zeta potential of pure natural covellite (CuS) (see Under alkaline oxidizing conditions, enargite may decompose into CuO and HCuO  The oxidation of Cu(I) to Cu(II) ions, when adsorbed on enargite, is highly likely in an open-air system. Thus, Cu(II) ions were also tested, as shown in The wider pH range of the positive zeta potential values confirms a dependence on the initial concentration of Cu(II) ions. When the concentration of Cu(II) ions was low, the zeta potential was observed to increase around pH 6.0, peaking near pH 7.0. Higher Cu(II) ion concentrations resulted in a much wider band of positive zeta potentials and two apparent peaks of positive potentials around pH 5.5 and pH 8.0. It is well-known that the adsorption of hydrolysis products can lead to changes in the sign and magnitude of zeta potentials when the surface properties of mineral species come into contact with weak electrolyte solutions. The adsorption of metal–hydroxy species, particularly those forming cationic ions (Cu–hydroxy complexes), could even include a reversal of the zeta potential sign ( In order to interpret the zeta potential curves, assuming that active ionic species of cationic character are adsorbed on enargite's surface, a Cu(II) hydrolysis diagram was constructed.  The precipitation of Cu(OH) Apparently, the cationic species Cu(OH) To better illustrate this phenomenon, The sign and magnitude of enargite's zeta potential is governed by the adsorption of the hydrolysis products of the As–Cu–S–H The financial support of this work from CONICYT, (Comisión Nacional de Investigación Científica y Tecnológica de Chile), through the research grant 1970958-1997 M:58, is gratefully acknowledged.