The teetered bed separator (TBS) is a gravity concentration device based on the principle of hindered settling velocity, which has been widely applied for the density separation of coarse coal particles. The influences of the teeter water velocity on the density separation of coarse coal particles were investigated based on the slip velocity model and the experimental results. The ash content of clean coal increased as the teeter water velocity decreased initially and increased afterwards according to the relationship between teeter water and minimum fluidization velocity. It was observed that the foreign slime had an effect on the separation of coarse particles, while the effect of the foreign slime was not as significant as that of the teeter water velocity.Teeter bed separators are hydraulic classifiers that have been recognized as low-cost and high capacity devices for both classification and density separation. Presently over 200 such units have been installed worldwide, in mineral processing applications including silica sand for construction grade, foundry and glass making purpose, mineral sands and hematite processing along with coal (  Most of the published literature on TBS has focused on the prominence if operational variables on the gravity separation of coarse particles. Two types of coal samples with different size distributions were prepared for the study. The narrowly sized, F1, of − Sieve analysis of the feed F2 and ash content according to size distributions are shown in The schematic of the TBS used in this work is shown in Tests of F1 anf F2 were executed at dfferent teetered water velocities of 16.46, 22.05, 28.94 and 34.59 In order to investigate the influence of the foreign slime on the separation performance of coarse particles thoroughly, separation tests were carried out in a TBS with different teeter water velocities. The yield and ash content of clean coal (without slime) are summarized in As shown in Cut density ( In this study, the effect of foreign slime on the separation performance of coarse partocles was summarized in  The slip velocity model was useful to predict the separation process of coarse particles, while the predictions were underestimated compared the experimental results. The teeter water velocity has a more apparent influence on the separation performance of coarse particles compared to the foreign slime, but the effect of the foreign slime cannot be negligible. This work was supported by In a TBS, particles are separated by the segregation based on different hindered settling velocities. Therefore, the separation can be characterized by the relative velocity of each particle with respect to the velocity of an upward current of water (teeter water), which is the slip velocity. Particles with the same slip velocity as the teeter water have equal chances of settling or being transported upwards by water. However, if the slip velocity of the particle is greater than the rising water, the particle settles downwards and reports to the underflow stream; otherwise, it is carried away to the overflow ( There are two categories of settling: free and hindered settling. In free settling, individual particles fall freely in a boundless medium without being hindered by other nearby particles. Gravity, drag and medium resistance created from dominated friction affects the free settling velocity. When the force is balanced, the acceleration of particles will be equal to zero and the settling velocity can reach the maximum. The maximum velocity is termed as the terminal free settling velocity and defined as ( where The Reynolds number of the particle at its terminal settling velocity is given as:  Eq. Contrary to free settling, the particle hindered settling is influenced by the presence of particles in nearby vicinity. Hindered settling is a common phenomenon in TBS. Many models of hindered settling velocity have been developed to adequately model the density separation in a hindered bed. It is concluded that the model proposed by in which