High purity of calcium carbonate deposits are rare. Even the purest calcite marbles contain accessory minerals, which may degrade the deposit in terms of its suitability for paper pigment application. Most of these impurities could be removed by traditional calcite–silicate flotation to produce quality ground calcium carbonate. However, micro-graphite enclosed by calcite remains un-liberated with the traditional flotation particle size distribution. Further grinding alone simply exposes such graphite on the surface of calcite and reduces the brightness of the concentrate.
                  In Kurikka calcite marble, micro-graphite particles of varying morphology occur along calcite grain boundaries and other crystallographic discontinuities. Due to such submicroscopic graphite particles, the calcite concentrate produced from the Kurikka calcite marble by calcite–silicate flotation gives an average ISO brightness value of 83.7.
                  This study shows the application of micro-grinding followed by micro-graphite flotation to remove such fine-grained graphite. As a result, the quality of the calcite concentrate was upgraded to an average brightness value of 92.3.Mining carbonate rocks and consumption of ground calcium carbonate (GCC) increased rapidly during the 1990s ( Many metamorphosed limestone deposits are known to contain course grained disseminated crystals of graphite. For e.g., are those described by Kurikka calcite marble is mainly composed of calcite, silicates (quartz, tremolite, feldspars, diopside, mica and serpentine) and graphite from submicroscopic size to about 0.2–1.5 The flow sheet describing the test procedure is presented in The calcite concentrates were further ground at the Laboratory of Mechanical Process Technology and Recycling in HUT. The target of fine grinding was to liberate the remaining graphite impurities still existing in the calcite concentrate. The test material (600–700 Micro-graphite flotation was applied on the reground calcite concentrates using a 2-l flotation cell with the feed size of 600 The chemical compositions of the feed and concentrates were analysed using a multi-element analyser, XRF. The total carbon, carbonate carbon and non-carbonate carbon contents were also analysed with carbon analyser, Leco. Particle size distribution of the flotation feed, reground calcite concentrates were analyzed by SediGraph 5100. For brightness and yellowness measurements, samples were further ground with Mortar Grinder. The ISO brightness and yellowness of the concentrates were measured by L&W Elrepho SE 070 R. About 75% of the calcite–silicate flotation feed sample is <125 Most of the silicate and sulphide minerals were removed during the first stage of flotation. The CaO content increased from about 45% in the feed to about 54.9% in the concentrate ( Although the graphite carbon content of calcite concentrate is as low as 0.04, it was considerably enough to damage the brightness value. Further grinding was necessary to expose and liberate the intergranular filling micro-graphite particles in calcite. Micro-grinding (a term applied to generate fine particles) of the calcite concentrates resulted in considerable liberations of the micro-graphite from calcite particles. Particle size distribution of the reground calcite concentrate is shown in Micro-graphite flotation was conducted on the reground calcite concentrate. In spite of very fine particle size distribution of the feed ( The CaO content of the first calcite concentrate (54.9) increased to 55.5 in the final calcite concentrate ( The flotation-feed samples are composed of calcite, silicates, graphite, hydrated iron oxides and sulfides. Reverse calcite–silicate flotation was employed where the silicates are floated and removed while calcite is concentrated in the cell. The CaO content increased from 44.8% in the feed to 55.0% in the concentrates. The brightness of the concentrate, however, is 83.7, and yellowness 0.14. These values are explained by the presence of micro-graphite particles that are disseminated in calcite grains mainly as cleavage filling texture. To upgrade the quality of the calcite concentrate, the micro-graphite in calcite should be liberated and removed. Concentrates were further ground for 1, 2 and 4 Despite of the particle size fineness increases from 1