Research in animal models has demonstrated the role of osteocalcin, a bone formation marker, in regulation of energy metabolism. Those studies have led to a new concept of the bone acting as an endocrine organ by secreting osteocalcin, which acts by increasing insulin secretion, lowering plasma glucose, and increasing insulin sensitivity and energy expenditure. Results in humans have been conflicting. On the other hand, antiresorptive drugs used against osteoporosis decrease osteocalcin levels, while anabolic drugs increase osteocalcin levels. However, the effects of these therapies on energy metabolism have not been investigated.Studies in animal models have shown the role of osteocalcin in the regulation of energy metabolism. This 5-kDa noncollagenous protein, also known as bone GLa protein (BGP), is characteristic of bone, is secreted by cells of the osteoblastic line, and is related to the bone mineralization process. Thus, osteocalcin inactivation in mice results in increased visceral fat with carbohydrate intolerance, low insulin levels, changes in insulin response to glucose, and a decreased mass of pancreatic beta cells. The clinical implications of these findings for type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM) and metabolic syndrome are extremely significant, and many observational studies are therefore available. As regards the relation of osteocalcin to adiposity parameters, its role in adiponectin secretion by adipose tissue, leading to increased insulin sensitivity, has already been mentioned. The positive relationship between both substances is significant in postmenopausal women. The most novel In this regard, an interventional clinical study in nondiabetic subjects On the other hand, vitamin K is a co-factor for the enzyme glutamate carboxylase, responsible for the carboxylation of osteocalcin, In conclusion, the finding in animal models that osteocalcin produced by osteoblasts influences insulin secretion and sensitivity opens up new perspectives for understanding the biological mechanisms of carbohydrate and energy homeostasis. Studies conducted to date are however inconclusive, and specifically designed research should be performed in humans to confirm the hypothesis relating bone to energy metabolism. The authors state that they have no conflicts of interest.