The hydraulic system of the Concepción mine is made up of an open pit and an underground mine, which are currently flooded and hydraulically connected. The Concepción pit lake has shown permanent chemical stratification (meromictic lake), where two layers with different density and chemical composition can be differentiated: (i) a thick superficial layer of 11±2m deep, with a low concentration of dissolved solids (mixolimnion) and (ii) a thin bottom layer from 11±2m to 16m deep (monimolimnion), exhibiting vertical changes in its physico-chemical parameters, with decreasing redox potential and increasing T, pH and dissolved solids content with depth. The distribution of the Concepción pit lake layers depends on recharge processes and the loss of water from the system. In winter, rainfall and runoff result in a rapid increase of lake levels. The lake regains its initial level whenever water is lost through an old mine adit, since galleries and shafts act as preferential pathways for inflowing and outflowing water. This network is connected to the bottom of the lake, resulting in the progressive downward movement of the chemocline. Furthermore, runoff generates a less dense superficial layer, which triggers the development of an ephemeral chemocline in the mixolimnion. In summer, the mixolimnion loses water by evaporation which is partially compensated by groundwater inflowing from the lake bottom, resulting in the upward movement of the permanent chemocline. During this period the water level in the system is below the outlet level, which therefore renders the outflow of water inactive. During this stage, the mixolimnion remains homogeneous and the shallow chemocline disappears. Taking into consideration the hydrochemical characteristics of this pit lake and the spatial distribution of the layers identified, a model that explains its seasonal limnological evolution is presented.Numerous mines that are located along the Iberian Pyrite Belt (IPB) have been exploited both as open pit and underground mines, an aspect that favors hydraulic connection between both systems after flooding. The latter event takes place after pumping ceases, which depresses the piezometric level during periods of mineral extraction. At present, the Spanish side of the IPB is host to over 30 Eighty-five percentage of mine lakes in the IPB are meromictic (i.e., they exhibit permanent chemical stratification) while the remaining 15% are holomictic (involving a mixing process during the winter that results in the homogenization of lake water). Thermal stratification occurs in all lakes from the beginning of spring through the end of fall. Summer thermal stratification in meromictic lakes increases the intensity of its overall stratification, therefore enhancing the stability of its water column ( Several works have recently been published which describe the hydrochemistry of the water column in these pit lakes and the limnological processes taking place therein ( The objective of this work is to understand why a pit lake with low depth (16 The Concepción mine, located in the northeast of Huelva province (Iberian Pyrite Belt, Spain) was exploited by underground and opencast mining from 1853 to 1986. Underground mining activities began in 1853 (two floors) using room and pillar methods, reaching a depth of 13 The pit was excavated in a streambed and receives runoff from a basin with a surface area of 0.39 The lake level and the water level in the shafts are regulated by an exit through a mine adit (spring), which is located to the north of the pit lake and is a source of acid mine drainage (AMD). Recent research has revealed the presence of permanent discharges that flow from several abandoned mines into the Odiel River, which is a natural river located very close to mine. The first discharge is from Concepción mine and transfers significant amounts of acid and dissolved metals to the Odiel. During the study, the flowrate of this AMD was of 14 Generally, the sources of water inflows that flood mining pits include groundwater, rainfall and runoff, which favor the oxidative dissolution of pyrite and the subsequent acidification of water, along with the concomitant dissolution of other sulfides (e.g. chalcopyrite, sphalerite, galena, arsenopyrite), hydrated metal sulfates (e.g. epsomite, hexahydrite, copiapite, halotrichite, tetrahedrite–tennantite) and gangue aluminosilicates (e.g. feldspars, chlorite, sericite) from the country rocks. As a result, the pit lake that developed in this mine is acidic (pH ∼3), as in the case of the majority of the mining lakes of the Iberian Pyrite Belt but, unlike the rest, presents low concentrations of sulfate and metals (Fe, Al, Cu, Mn, Zn, Co) ( Field and analytical data correspond to several sampling events between November 2008 and February 2011. Depth measurements and vertical profiles of pH, redox potential (Eh), temperature (T), dissolved oxygen (DO), electric conductivity (EC), turbidity, photosynthetically active radiation (PAR) and chlorophyll-a concentration were collected using a Hydrolab® Datasonde S5 probe from Hach Company. Lake data at different depths were collected from the surface to the deepest point. Additionally, depth measurements and vertical pH, Eh, T, DO and EC profiles were taken in three shafts using a Hydrolab® Quanta probe. The concentration of Fe(II) was measured by reflectance photometry with a Merck RQflex10 reflectometer and Reflectoquant® analytical strips. Two different reagents were used depending on the Fe(II) concentration: (1) Ferrospectral® for the 0.5–20 Changes in water level during the study were measured using Cera-Diver and Baro-Diver sensors (from Van Essen Instruments) to compensate for barometric pressure data. Water temperature was recorded at hourly intervals at 1, 4, 8 and 14 Lake water samples were collected with an opaque, 2.2 L-capacity, BetaPlus® PVC bottle from Wildlife Supply Company®. Depths sampled in the lake can differ as a function of vertical profiles. All samples were filtered on site with 0.45 Water samples were analyzed using Atomic Absorption Spectrophotometry (AAS, Varian SpectrAA 220 FS equipment) for Na, K, Mg, Ca, Fe, Cu, Mn, Zn and Al, Inductively Coupled Plasma-Atomic Emission Spectrometry (ICP-AES, VarianVista MPX equipment) for Ni and S, and Inductively Coupled Plasma-Mass Spectrometry (ICP-MS, Leco Renaissance) for Cr, Mn, Co, Cd, Th, and U. Sulfate was gravimetrically measured as BaSO The average annual precipitation during the period 2001–2010 was 715 The maximum lake level oscillation during the study period (November 2008/February 2011) was 1.2 Taking into account the episodes of lake level increase in January and February 2009 and April 2010, after which precipitation ceased completely until the equilibrium level was restored, it is possible to shed some light on the manner in which water is lost from the lake/groundwater system. In January 2009, 83 During the February 2009 episode, 95 In April 2010 after a winter season characterized by high precipitation (986 During visits conducted when the lake level was above its equilibrium level (February 2009, 2010 and 2011), it was confirmed that the volume of water lost from the lake/groundwater system via upwelling through the partially subsided gallery was within the range of discharged flowrates calculated for each of the three aforementioned events (3–7 In the three aforementioned episodes, water recharge to the lake was 15%, 22% and 17% respectively of the total rainfall collected in the basin. This represents a supply of water equal to 7–12% of the total volume of the lake when it is at its usual level. During the period between June and August 2009, the level of the lake dropped 41 Concepción lake is always chemically stratified, meaning it is a meromictic lake. Two layers of distinct nature can be differentiated in the water column: (1) a mixolimnion, which is an acidic (pH 2.5–3.2), dissolved oxygen rich (7–11 In this mine, the hydraulic system consists of the flooded mining pit (lake), which acts as a reservoir that receives surface water, and the flooded underground mine, whose galleries are connected to the deepest zone of the pit ( A gradual increase in T and EC with depth can be found in lakes where the double-diffusion convection phenomenon takes place ( Normally, groundwater recharge in pit lakes is usually more important than surface water recharge when compared with natural lakes ( The chemocline is the transition zone that separates the mixolimnion from the monimolimnion. During the study period, the chemocline oscillated between 9 and 14 The first process favors the activation of winter mixing, which leads to the homogenization of the mixolimnion. Annual mixing was recorded continuously using T recorders placed at 1, 4 and 8 With respect to the second process, it must also be mentioned that the inflow of fresh water into the lake (mixolimnion) in the form of runoff (see Section In the case of Concepción lake, when the pit receives high surface water inflow, such volume results in an increase in the lake level ( The supply of water to the lake in the wet season causes the chemocline to drop between 1.5 and 2.5 Observations have verified the upward movement of the chemocline during the summer. The chemocline even rose to approximately 9 Therefore and as an example, from May 27th to August 18th 2009 the chemocline went from 10.5 to 9 In the fall, the mixolimnion becomes an oxygen-saturated chemically and thermally homogeneous water layer that reaches an approximate depth of 11 At the end of the winters of 2008/09 and 2009/10, the mixolimnion consisted of three water layers that showed an increasing amount of dissolved solids (greater EC) with depth. This chemical stratification limits the capacity of the mixolimnion to develop certain patterns of thermal stratification and its ability to follow a stepped dissolved oxygen saturation gradient whose values decrease with depth ( The rationale provided by Differential warming in the zone where the ephemeral chemocline is present is an active phenomenon, as proven by the increase in temperature of the maximum value by up to 7 This phenomenon was identified in another pit lake on the IPB (Nuestra Señora del Carmen mine) ( The work of This was observed at Concepción lake when the temperature of the lake increases in the spring. In addition, if the ephemeral chemocline is very weak, the maximum thermal value may end up partially destabilizing the water column, triggering a convective process from the thermal maximum up to the surface. This is what appears to be taking place in our lake. The convective process causes the erosion of the ephemeral chemocline, therefore increasing its depth and causing mixing of the more superficial layer with the deepest one, as proven by the evolution of EC values, which increase simultaneously with the drop of the chemocline until equaling those of the lower layer of the mixolimnion (on-going process from February-09, Thermal stratification (which governs DO distribution) appears as the initial chemical stratification of the mixolimnion disappears. A gradual decrease in temperature and DO was observed in August-09, both disappearing from 6 The processes that can generate drops in the oxygen concentration in the different layers making up the mixolimnion may include: the oxidation of pyrite, the oxidation of Fe(III) (e.g. The water column in shafts is stratified and is made up of two distinct layers with very different thicknesses and composition ( Water in this lower layer is representative of the groundwater that floods the underground mine, especially in shafts 2 and 3 since, as mentioned earlier, the lake floods shaft 1. This layer is usually thermally and chemically homogeneous and does not exhibit T and EC variations (with some exceptions in May-09; Water flooding the underground mine shows temporal variations in composition. EC, which is a reliable and stable measurable parameter, is observed to change through the year ( The hydraulic behavior of the Concepción Pit lake shows certain similarities with the conceptual model proposed by Stage 1 represents a dry period that is gradually colder, with the lake at its level of equilibrium. Progressive cooling of the surface of the mixolimnion induces convective processes that homogenize the layer, which take place simultaneously to the partial erosion of the chemocline, causing the latter to move deeper. The exchange of water between the lake and the underground mine must be practically inactive, as the upwelling of water through which the system losses water ( Stage 2 corresponds to a cold (winter) period with episodes of high precipitation. Coinciding with these is a considerable inflow of water into the lake, both from direct precipitation and runoff ( Stage 3 corresponds to a basically dry period with a gradual temperature increase and with the lake at its equilibrium level ( Stage 4 corresponds to a dry summer period with high temperatures and high evaporation. The loss of water from the mixolimnion due to evaporation causes the lake level to drop gradually in this period as the thickness of the mixolimnion is progressively reduced. This phenomenon is partially offset by the inflow of mine groundwater from underground mine, which thickens the monimolimnion. As a result, the lake and shafts levels remain below the piezometric level, which favors the supply of groundwater from the rock substrate to the system. The outcome of this overall dynamic is that the chemocline approaches the surface of the lake as its elevation becomes progressively higher ( This work has been supported with funds from IGME. We acknowledge the support provided by Jesús Reyes during laboratory work.