Some micromechanics-based constitutive models are presented in this study for porous geomaterials. These micro-macro mechanical models focus on the effect of porosity and the inclusions on the macroscopic elastoplastic behaviors of porous materials. In order to consider the effect of pores and the compressibility of the matrix, some macroscopic criteria are presented firstly for ductile porous medium having one population of pores with different types of matrix (von Mises, Green type, Mises–Schleicher and Drucker–Prager). Based on different homogenization techniques, these models are extended to the double porous materials with two populations of pores at different scales and a Drucker–Prager solid phase at the microscale. Based on these macroscopic criteria, complete constitutive models are formulated and implemented to describe the overall responses of typical porous geomaterials (sandstone, porous chalk and argillite). Comparisons between the numerical predictions and experimental data with different confining pressures or different mineralogical composites show the capabilities of these micromechanics-based models, which take into account the effects of microstructure on the macroscopic behavior and significantly improve the phenomenological ones.In many engineering structures, such as chemical and nuclear waste storage and oil boreholes, geomaterials are widely studied and used. For example, the hard clayey rock (argillite) has been extensively investigated in the context of feasibility study for geological disposal of radioactive wastes (e.g. In this study, we focus on the effects of pores and inclusions on the macroscopic mechanical behavior of porous geomaterials. Some micro-macro constitutive models will be presented to describe the elastoplastic behaviors of the studied material. The paper is organized as follows. In Section In this section, some macroscopic criteria of ductile porous materials with one population of voids will be firstly presented. For this class of porous material, the representative volume element (RVE) is usually chosen as the one in For a ductile porous material with one population of voids, the matrix in There are many macroscopic criteria for porous media with a von Mises matrix. The micromechanics-based model proposed by Based on this famous model, a huge number of extensions have been proposed (e.g. considering the void shape effect ( On the other hand, This criterion was improved in Recently, the Gurson's criterion was improved by As shown in Eq. The limit analysis approach used in Gurson's model will be adopted here to establish a macroscopic criterion for the studied porous medium having a Green type matrix. The local plastic dissipation Considering the RVE presented in The determination of Due to the presence of The determination of the macroscopic criterion requires to compute the integrals of In order to obtain a closed-form expression, the following inequality is classically used: According to Eqs. We need to minimize Similarly to the approach used by Gurson, one can then establish the parametric form of the macroscopic yield function: By eliminating the parameter The macroscopic yield function (Eq. As a final result, the closed-form expression of the macroscopic criterion for the porous medium having a matrix obeying the general elliptic criterion (Eq. The Gurson's criterion can be obviously retrieved when For many polymers and geomaterials ( Due to the compressibility in the matrix and the difficulty in finding a suitable kinematically admissible velocity field, the upper bound approach used in Section Case of purely hydrostatic loading In the special case of purely hydrostatic loading ( For a general case, the exact solution of purely hydrostatic loading (Eq. In Eq. Case of the compressible parameter For an incompressible matrix ( According to the relationship between Eqs. In order to determine the parameter Finally, an expression of parameter The parameter Compared with the Gurson's criterion, the deviatoric part Case of the porosity When the void volume fraction of the porous material becomes zero ( When With this property, the expression of the searched macroscopic criterion is proposed as follows: The parameters Case of The expressions of the parameters The above special cases (1, 2 and 3) should be considered at the same time during the determination of the parameters With Eqs. Taking into account these special conditions and requirements, the searched macroscopic yield function of a porous medium with a Mises–Schleicher matrix can be proposed as follows: Compared with the Gurson's criterion (Eq. The proposed macroscopic criterion (Eq. Drucker–Prager criterion is widely used in geomaterials to capture the plastic compressibility and the asymmetry between tension and compression. For a porous material with a Drucker–Prager type matrix, the matrix in  Recently, In order to obtain a closed-form expression, the implicit criterion was approximated by On the other hand, a porous material with a Drucker–Prager matrix was studied in By using the modified secant moduli method, interpreted by The representation of this elliptic criterion corresponds to a closed surface. It presents a tension-compression asymmetry which is a manifestation of the Drucker–Prager type matrix. Note that the criterion (Eq. Porous materials with one population of pores have been studied in Section For this purpose, the schematization of the studied double porous material containing two populations of spherical voids is illustrated in In For various porous geomaterials, polymers or other pressure-sensitive materials, plastic compressibility is one of the salient features that must be taken into account. To this end, the solid phase at the microscale is assumed to obey a Drucker–Prager type criterion (Eq. Concerning the first homogenization from microscale to mesoscale (see The macroscopic criterion for a double porous medium having a von Mises solid phase at the microscale can be retrieved from Eqs. In many engineering structures, the pore pressure due to the saturation has a great influence on the macroscopic behaviors of porous geomaterial. To consider this effect, Eqs. The kinematical limit analysis approach has been adopted in Section For the first homogenization shown in As the elastic domain delimited by the yield function The stress–strain relationship derived from the support function Note that the secant moduli The homogenized stress–strain relations of the double porous medium can be expressed in the following form: The thermodynamic potential of the double porous medium reads: The corresponding state equations are easily deduced as (see also Eq. Following The homogenized secant moduli Combining Eqs. This closed-form plastic yield function explicitly depends on the two porosities ( Some recently established macroscopic strength criteria have been presented in Sections As a first application, a typical porous geomaterial “Vosges sandstone” will be considered. This material comes from the Vosges mountains in France, which has been studied in a series of experimental investigations ( In order to describe the macroscopic behavior of the Vosges sandstone taking into account the effects of porosity and the asymmetric between tension and compression, the macroscopic criterion (Eq. With this plastic hardening parameter, the macroscopic criterion (Eq. Adopting the normality rule, the plastic flow is given by The variation of the porosity According to the yield criterion (Eq. The microscopic equivalent plastic strain rate Substituting Eqs. The tangent elastoplastic operator of the studied porous material can be determined as follows: The macroscopic elastic properties depend on the evolution of porosity during loading. Then the proposed micromechanical constitutive model is implemented in a finite element code (ABAQUS) via a subroutine UMAT. For the purpose of applying to sandstone porous geomaterial, all the model parameters should be identified. According to the experimental data, the macroscopic elastic properties ( Using the same set of values given in In the second application, a complete constitutive model will be established for a double porous material and applied to describing the mechanical behavior of the porous “Lixhe chalk” which is from the Upper Campanian age and drilled in the CBR quarry near Liège (Belgium). This material has been studied in a series of previous experimental investigations because its mechanical behavior is qualitatively close to that of North Sea reservoir chalks ( The plastic hardening of the solid phase at the microscale is taken into account via the evolution of the frictional coefficient In order to better describe the plastic volumetric deformation, a non-associated plastic flow rule is proposed. Inspired by the work of According to the macroscopic potential (Eq. The equivalent plastic strain of the solid phase is given by The evolutions of micro-porosity Then the proposed micromechanical constitutive model is implemented in a finite element code (ABAQUS) via a subroutine UMAT. Before it is applied to describing the macroscopic behavior of the Lixhe chalk, we need to determine the elastic and plastic parameters of the proposed non-associated model. The plastic parameters are determined by simulating the hydrostatic compression test (see The proposed non-associated model now is used to describe the mechanical behaviors of the Lixhe chalk. The simulation of a hydrostatic compression test is shown in   In the above sections, the effects of porosity have been taken into account on the macroscopic behavior of porous geomaterial. For many materials used in engineering structure, for instance concrete and rocks, complex microstructure with mineral inclusions, granular aggregates and pores can be found. Taking the COx argillite for example, the effects of pores at different scales and the influences of inclusions will be both considered. Because of its low permeability and high mechanical strength, the COx argillite is considered as a potential geological barrier. According to We denote As shown in In the incremental approach, the local stress rate At each iteration step, it is possible to introduce a tangent localization tensor The rate form of the macroscopic constitutive relations can be written in the general form: In general, the local tangent stiffness is not uniform in each phase due to the material heterogeneity. As a consequence, it is not possible to provide a closed-form expression of its average. Some simplifications are then needed to make the homogenization procedure computationally operable. For this purpose, at any point, The local tangent operator With the matrix-inclusion morphology at the mesoscale, the Mori-Tanaka scheme ( It is worth recalling that the Hill tensor As the tangent stiffness depends on the direction of plastic deformation, the local tangent operator The incremental method has been applied to modeling nonlinear behaviors of various heterogeneous materials (see for example Due to the isotropic character of Accordingly, the Hill tensor The proposed micro-macro model is implemented in a standard finite element code (ABAQUS) as a UMAT subroutine. We present here the numerical scheme for the local integration of the model at each Gauss point. The loading path is divided into a limit number of steps. At the step Input data: Initially, the local strain increments in phases 1 and 2 are set equal to the macroscopic strain increment: In phases 1 and 2, the values of The average local strain in the clay matrix is given by At the iteration The Hill tensor is then numerically evaluated by Eq. The tensors It is now possible to evaluate the strain localization tensors Check the compatibility of local strains between two iterations for phases 1 and 2 and evaluate the error If The use of Mori-Tanaka scheme leads to the determination of macroscopic tangent stiffness tensor: Like most geomaterials, the COx claystone exhibits a transition from volumetric compressibility to dilatancy during plastic deformation. In order to capture such a transition, it is generally necessary to use a non-associated plastic flow rule. Inspired by the previous work of As for most porous materials, the porous clay matrix also exhibits a plastic hardening process, firstly due to the evolution of porosities. However, according to some previous studies ( Using the non-associated plastic potential defined above, the plastic flow rule in the clay matrix is given by The equivalent plastic strain of the solid phase in the clay matrix is given by The void evolution laws can be derived as classically from the energy compatibility condition: The proposed non-associated micromechanical constitutive model is now applied to reproducing the macroscopic responses of the COx argillite in uniaxial and triaxial compression tests performed on samples with different mineralogical compositions. The elastic and plastic parameters are identified and given in  The present study has concerned the micromechanics-based constitutive models for ductile porous geomaterials taking into account the effects of pore and inclusion on the macroscopic behavior. These micro-macro models take into account the effects of microstructure and significantly improve the phenomenological ones. For simplicity, porous materials containing one population of pores with different types of matrices (von Mises, Green type, Mises–Schleicher and Drucker–Prager) are studied firstly for the macroscopic criteria. Then, it is extended to a more complex case of double porous media with two populations of pores at different scales. The solid phase at the microscale is assumed to obey to a Drucker–Prager type criterion. Based on these macroscopic criteria, complete constitutive models are formulated and implemented to describe the macroscopic responses of typical porous geomaterials (sandstone, porous chalk and argillite). The accuracies of these micromechanics-based constitutive models are assessed and validated by comparisons between numerical predictions and experimental data with different confining pressures or different mineralogical composites. The authors wish to confirm that there are no known conflicts of interest associated with this publication and there has been no significant financial support for this work that could have influenced its outcome.  Macroscopic stress field of the porous material Microscopic stress field of the matrix Porosity at the microscale Porosity at the mesoscale The volumetric fraction of inclusion Microscopic strain rate Macroscopic strain rate The macroscopic dissipation The plastic multiplier The equivalent plastic strain in the solid phase The bulk and shear moduli, respectively Young's modulus and Poisson's ratio, respectively Scalar Vector Second-order tensor Second-order identity tensor Fourth-order identity tensor The trial velocity field The elastic stiffness tensor The tangent stiffness tensor Simple contraction of two tensors Double contraction of two tensors