The main objective of the present work was to evaluate the bioactivity and safety of amphotericin B–liquid crystal mixtures (AmB–LC). The effects of liquid crystal (LC) materials and AmB–LC ratios on bioactivity and toxicity to respiratory cell lines were investigated. The formation of AmB–LC mixtures did not change the physical properties of LC when the AmB loading was not more than a 1:3 mole ratio (25%). The exposure of respiratory cell lines to LC did not generate any toxicity (2.5–80μg/mL). The inhibitory activity of AmB in all liquid crystal formulations (cholesteryl palmityl carbonate: CPC, dicholesteryl carbonate: DCC and sodium cholesteryl carbonate: SCC) on fungi was significantly enhanced when compared to that of the same amount of pure AmB. However, their toxicity to respiratory related cells and red blood cells was significantly decreased. This could be a huge advantage in clinical applications as there is more possibility for dose adjustments. The exposure of small airway epithelial cells (SAEC) and alveolar macrophages (AMs NR8383) to liquid crystals had no significant detrimental effects at doses of between 2.5 and 80μg/mL (viability was always over 80%). The production of toxic cytokines and inflammatory mediators, including tumor necrosis factor-alpha (TNF-α), interleukin-1beta (IL-1β) and nitric oxide (NO), after treatment with AmB in liquid crystals at concentrations of between 2 and 32μg/mL was significantly reduced by about a 1000-fold compared to that generated by lipopolysaccharide (LPS).The epidemiology of fungal infections has undergone significant changes in the last decade especially in those who are immunocompromised ( An ideal drug delivery system should provide a targeted therapy that will allow effective concentrations of a drug to reach the disease site without exposing other tissues to toxicity. For lung fungal infections the route of drug administration is directly delivered into the lung. It has been shown that AmB can be successfully delivered into the lung with a nebulizer ( Other approaches have aimed to reduce AmB toxicity by modifying the drug formulation. Lipid-based formulations of AmB have been developed. After many attempts to decrease the toxicity of AmB using liposomes, emulsions and other systems; three lipid formulations of AmB (AmBisome®, Amphocil®, Abelcet™) are now commercially available. The toxicity of AmB especially its nephrotoxicity can be reduced by incorporating it into liposomes or by complexing it with various lipids ( In order to try to solve these problems, cholesteryl carbonate esters (cholesteryl palmityl carbonate: CPC, dicholesteryl carbonate: DCC and sodium cholesteryl carbonate: SCC) are being developed for use as AmB carriers for pulmonary infections. It was hypothesized that these thermotropic liquid crystal formulations would improve drug efficiency and safety. In this manuscript, their efficacy has been monitored by measuring the bioactivity of AmB in liquid crystals and comparing them with that of pure AmB. The safety of administering AmB with cholesteryl carbonate esters in the airways was determined to ensure that products did not induce the release of any inflammatory substance in the airways and did not cause toxicity to other cells associated with respiratory system. If the results can be interpreted as being positive in all aspects, these AmB mixtures will then be prepared as a dry powder dosage for the sake of stability and delivered via oral inhalation. AmB was obtained from Ambalal Sarabhai Enterprises Ltd. (Vadodara, India). Acetonitrile and methanol were from Labscan Asia Co., Ltd., Bangkok, Thailand. Dimethylsulfoxide was from Riedel-de Haëan, Germany. Polyamide membranes with a pore size of 0.45 CPC, SCC and DCC were synthesized by the following methods as previously described ( The incorporation of AmB into LC was prepared by solvent evaporation. Briefly, a certain accurately weighed amount of CPC, SCC, DCC or cholesterol was dissolved in 100 A forced air-sieving technique was used to produce a uniform size of powder. Experimentally, an air blast was used to drive the powder through sieve holes (cut-off size <30 The bioactivity (potency) of antibiotics may be demonstrated under suitable conditions by their inhibitory effects on microorganisms ( The minimal inhibitory concentration (MIC) and minimal fungicidal concentration (MFC) values were determined using Lysis of human red blood cells (RBC) was evaluated as described by Small airway epithelial cells (SAEC) were maintained in small airway epithelial cells basal medium (SABM) supplemented with growth factors supplied in the SAGM SingleQuot® kit (Lonza™, Walkersville, Inc., USA). NR8383 (cell culture CRL-2192; ATCC, Rockville, MD) is an alveolar macrophage (AMs) cell line initiated by lung lavage of a normal Sprague–Dawley rat ( The MTT (3-(4,5-dimethylthiazolyl-2-yl)-2,5-diphenyl-tetrazolium bromide) colorimetric assay, as developed by Levels of tumor necrosis factor-alpha (TNF-α) and interleukin-1beta (IL-1β) generated from the AMs NR8383 cells in the culture supernatant of the control and stimulated cell cultures were measured using commercial ELISA kits according to the manufacturers instructions (Quantikine® RTA00 and Quantikine® RLB00 for rat TNF-α and IL-1β, respectively, R&D systems Inc., MN, USA). The TNF-α and IL-1β ELISA kits had detection limits of 5 AMs NR8383 cells were treated with AmB, AmB formulations or lipopolysaccharide (LPS), for 24 Data, when applicable, are presented as a mean The four AmB–LC powder mixtures each had a median particle size of 10–20 As shown in AmB has an amorphous halo and there are no sharp peaks (data not shown). The peaks of CPC, SCC, DCC and cholesterol were different from one another at room temperature (25 The potencies compared to the values for the same concentrations of standard pure AmB are shown in  The results show that AmB in liquid crystal formulations had much less toxicity to human RBC than pure AmB, which produced high hemolysis at a concentration of AmB The viability of SAEC and AMs NR8383 cell lines was estimated after being challenged with pure liquid crystals at different concentrations from 2.5 to 80 In the presence of pure AmB, the viability of the AMs NR8383 cells was less than that for the SAEC cells ( The viability of cells incubated with AmB in DCC (all formulations; 1:3, 1:6 and 1:12) is shown in  AMs are phagocytic cells that play important roles in pulmonary defense, undergo increased oxidative metabolism ( Despite the potential concerns, AMs NR8383 cells produced low levels of IL-1β, TNF-α and NO after responding to AmB in liquid crystal formulations as a pure liquid crystal form when compared to the response after incubation with LPS. After AMs NR8383 cells were incubated at different concentrations of AmB for 24 In summary, we have evaluated the efficacy and toxicity of cholesteryl carbonate ester formulations of AmB. AmB formulations retained the potent activity of AmB against fungal cells. In fact, incorporation of AmB into cholesteryl carbonate esters (CPC, DCC and SCC) was shown to enhance antifungal activity when compared to the free drug. The hemolysis of human erythrocytes by AmB formulations was significantly lower than that observed with pure AmB, and only high concentrations (far in excess of the MIC values) coupled with long incubation times were able to elicit a toxic response. In addition, AmB in cholestesteryl carbonate ester formulations were less toxic to cells associated with respiratory system, since they did not induce the toxicity or activate AMs NR8383 cells to produce inflammatory cytokines and NO whereas free AmB did induce cytotoxicity at an equivalent concentration. Therefore, cholesteryl carbonate ester formulations were shown to have enhanced efficacy and reduced toxicity None declared. This work financially supported by the