Combustion of biodiversity-rich semi-natural grassland biomass no longer needed for forage allows nature conservation to be combined with bioenergy production. Natural leaching by rainfall during the period between biomass harvest and collection can reduce the content of elements detrimental for the combustion of grassland biomass. This study assesses the influence of biomass characteristics on leaching efficiency and the potential effects of leaching on ash melting behaviour and elemental release. Grassland biomass harvested from five sites at two harvest dates was leached at two intensities. Low-temperature ash was heated to 700, 800, 900 and 1000 °C respectively and classified into four ash fusion classes. Ash mass loss was determined as a measure of high-temperature elemental release. Weather data were used to calculate the frequency of weather conditions favourable to on-field leaching. K and Cl were leached most strongly and were reduced by 30 and 45% respectively by a leaching treatment corresponding to 30–40 mm of rain. The effects of site and harvest date on leaching efficiency were significant but small. Ash melting behaviour and elemental release between 700 and 900 °C were favourably influenced by leaching. The K/(Ca + Mg) and Si/ash ratios were related to increased ash melting. In this respect, semi-natural grassland biomass differs from other, less Ca-rich, herbaceous biofuels. Even if suitable weather conditions are not occurring frequently at the study sites, on-field leaching can offer an additional low-cost, on-farm strategy option for farmers and nature conservation agencies to improve biomass quality of nature conservation grasslands for combustion.Semi-natural grasslands are ecosystems of high biodiversity created through and maintained by low-intensity agricultural management. In many parts of Europe, they are threatened by either intensification or abandonment of management. In comparison with more intensely managed grasslands, they are usually characterised by a higher number of plant and animal species. The conservation value of semi-natural grasslands is reflected in their inclusion as ‘habitat types of community interest’ in Annex I of the European Habitats Directive Semi-natural grasslands are multi-species systems with a botanical composition largely influenced by site conditions and management. They are often found at marginal sites characterised by environmental extremes that make arable or high-intensity grassland farming unprofitable and result in a wide range of grassland communities with distinct botanical compositions. Compared to high-intensity grassland, cutting frequencies are lower and the first cut is taken at later dates, for which there are site-specific optima best preserving the conservation status As semi-natural grassland biomass is often available regionally in small amounts from widely scattered sources and has comparatively high transport costs centralised facilities for conversion or pre-treatment will often not be appropriate. Combustion is particularly suitable as a conversion technology, as it is both well adapted to utilising lignocellulosic biomass, and can be operated in a small-scale, decentralised way While fuel composition of dedicated biofuel crops can often be influenced by management, this option is limited in the case of semi-natural grasslands. Here management must first and foremost be targeted to specific nature conservation objectives including protection of plant species and vegetation communities. Natural leaching by precipitation between mowing and collecting the herbage (field period) has the potential of offering an on-farm, low-cost quality optimisation strategy with minimum negative impact on grassland botanical composition. Leaching has been shown to strongly reduce the content of K and Cl, and to a lesser extent the content of other elements, in a wide variety of biomass, including rice ( The study aims (i) to quantify the influence of harvest date, botanical and chemical composition on the leachability of semi-natural grassland biomass; (ii) to assess the effect of biomass leaching on ash high-temperature behaviour; and (iii) to give a rough estimate on the frequency of occasions for effective on-field leaching at the experimental sites. Grassland biomass from five sites and two harvest dates was subjected to leaching treatments of two intensities. Low-temperature ash prepared from the biomass was heated to 700–1000 °C. Mass loss during heating was quantified as a measure of elemental release, and ash samples were classified according to their melting behaviour. The relationship between ash high-temperature behaviour and fuel chemical composition were analysed. Mean frequency of occurrence of weather conditions favourable to on-field leaching was estimated from 25-year weather data. The grassland biomass used in the experiments was harvested from five semi-natural grassland sites in southwest Germany. These sites cover a range of soil moisture conditions and a variety of physical and chemical soil characteristics resulting in grassland swards of distinctive botanical composition ( The first growth of each grassland site was harvested on two dates, 9/10 July and 10/11 September 2007. These two dates were chosen they are falling within the optimum cutting period of the various experimental sites according to expert opinion. At each date, herbage was cut to a stubble length of 5 cm from randomly selected plots of approximately 25 m², using handheld electric shears (Gardena Edging Accu Shears Accu 100; Gardena GmbH, Ulm, Germany). This procedure resulted in herbage samples of 0.5–2 kg per site and harvest date, which were dried in a circulating air drying oven at 60 °C for two days. The harvested dry biomass from each site and harvest date was cut to approximately 7 cm length and mixed thoroughly. Twelve 40 g samples were taken and randomly assigned to one of three treatments, with four replicates each: (1) no leaching (control), (2) leaching for 10 min, (3) leaching for 120 min. For the two leaching treatments, each biomass sample was filled into a 1 l plastic laboratory bottle. The bottles were filled with tap water with an electrical conductivity of approximately 280 μS cm Previous experiments have shown the leaching method described to be a simple and standardised laboratory method to estimate the effect of natural leaching on grassland biomass All dried biomass samples were ground to pass a 1 mm sieve and analysed for their N, S, Cl, P, Si, Na, K, Ca, Mg and ash content, using the methods listed in For the ash heating treatments, mixed samples of the four replicates of each experimental variant were prepared from the ground biomass. Low-temperature ash of these samples was produced in ceramic crucibles holding approximately 10 g of biomass each, by ashing in air in an electric laboratory muffle furnace. The furnace was heated to 550 °C with an average heating rate of 10 °C min Amounts of 200 mg low-temperature ash samples were heated in small ceramic crucibles in the muffle furnace with a heating rate of 10 °C min An analysis of variance was performed to assess the effect of the leaching treatments on grassland biomass chemical composition, using the procedure PROC MIXED of the software SAS 9.2 (SAS Institute Inc., Cary, NY, USA). The fitted model included ‘site’, ‘harvest date’, ‘leaching treatment’, ‘site’*‘harvest date’, ‘site’*‘leaching treatment’, ‘harvest date’*‘leaching treatment’ and ‘site’*‘harvest date’*‘leaching treatment’ as fixed effects. Elemental concentrations were log-transformed for the analysis. This allows direct calculation of the change in elemental concentration during leaching relative to the unleached control, as described in K and Cl contents before and after leaching were related to each other by simple linear regression. A preliminary analysis was run, using mixed models with initial elemental content and harvest date as effects explaining the elemental content after each leaching treatment. The results showed that the harvest date effect was significant only for Cl contents after 120 min of leaching. In all other cases, data for both harvest dates were combined in the regression analysis. Full models, including regression slope and intercept, were compared to simple models without an intercept. As the intercept was never significantly different from zero, the latter models were chosen for the final analysis. A 95% confidence interval was calculated for the regression coefficients. The effect of biomass chemical composition on the probability of an ash sample being classified into each of the four ash fusion classes following the 1000 °C heating treatment was assessed by logistic regression. Various proportional odds models were fitted, employing the procedure PROC LOGISTIC in SAS 9.2. Alternative models were compared using Akaike’s Information Criterion (AIC). Probability curves were calculated from the model with the lowest AIC. Mass loss during the heating treatments (loss Unless stated otherwise, a significance level of Precipitation data for the period 1986–2010 were available from the two weather stations closest to the two experimental sites (weather station I, 48.745 °N, 8.925 °W, situated about 4 km ENE of site 1 and about 6 km W of sites 3 and 5; weather station II, 48.469 °N, 9.274 °W, situated about 1 km WSW of sites 2 and 4). The data were used to calculate the long-term frequency of weather conditions suitable for on-field leaching of grassland biomass, using a simplified approach. Three weather constellations were defined that would have allowed on-field leaching with varying degrees of limitation. In defining these weather constellations, the first condition was that there should be no precipitation on the harvest day, and ideally on the day after ( The composition of the unleached grassland biomass varied between sites, with particularly wide ranges for the Cl, K and Mg contents. At the harvest date in September, contents of K, Cl, Mg and ash were lower than in July at most sites ( Leaching had a significant effect on the content of all the elements analysed and of the ash ( The influence of initial elemental content on the reduction by leaching is shown in After the 700 °C heating treatment all ash samples were loose with no visible sintering ( To illustrate the appearance of the ash samples after the 1000 °C heating treatment, The best logistic regression model (lowest AIC, Somer’s During the heating treatments, ash samples displayed an average mass loss of 13.8% at 700 °C, 16.4% at 800 °C and 18.7% at 900 and 1000 °C. This mass loss was strongly influenced by biomass chemical composition. Multiple linear regression showed that the mass loss at 700 and 800 °C was most strongly determined by the ratios K/ash and Ca/ash, while mass loss at 900 and 1000 °C was additionally influenced by the Cl/K ratio ( Ash samples from the leaching treatments were generally found to have lower mass losses than the corresponding unleached control samples, particularly in the 800 °C–1000 °C heating treatments. Over the three-month period from mid-June to mid-September the average yearly precipitation was 216 mm at weather station I and 298 mm at weather station II. The rainfall distribution between the months was fairly even, with 36, 35 and 29% of the total precipitation falling in each of the three months, respectively. The occurrence of precipitation events under the three investigated weather constellations ( Under weather constellation 3, with one day of initial drying and a final drying period of two days, precipitation events of at least 10 mm of rain occurred on average 4.9 times (weather station I) or 5.6 times (weather station II) per year during the specified period ( The observed effects of leaching on biomass chemical composition ( In the present study, under the 10 min leaching treatment only the K and Cl contents were reduced to an extent that may be assumed to have a relevant influence on the combustion process. Of these two elements, Cl was leached more strongly than K, even though the laboratory leaching method used has been shown to slightly underestimate Cl against K leaching when compared to the effects of natural precipitation Although there were significant site effects on leaching ( The results indicate that on-field leaching of grassland biomass affects ash high-temperature behaviour rather than gaseous emissions. With little change in N and total ash, no reduction of NO During combustion, difficulties with ash melting are to be expected for the ash fusion classes ‘molten’ and ‘strongly sintered’, while ‘loose’ or ‘slightly sintered’ ash should cause no or less problems. Molten or strongly sintered ash did not occur for any of the biomass samples at temperatures up to 900 °C ( Ash melting behaviour was found to be strongly influenced by the K/(Ca + Mg) ratio ( As leaching reduced K concentrations, it decreased the K/(Ca + Mg) ratio. The logistic regression model predicts that the effect of a decreasing K/(Ca + Mg) ratio on ash melting behaviour will vary depending on the initial fuel composition. This is illustrated in The second factor found to influence ash melting behaviour was the Si/ash ratio, lower values of this ratio reducing the probability of ash melting. A lower Si content has been found to be negatively related to slagging in woody fuels Grassland herbage used in this study had Si/ash ratios of 0.09–0.27 and Ca/ash ratios of 0.09–0.20. In this respect, its composition more closely resembles that of wood fuels than that of perennial energy grasses. This is due to the fact that besides grasses, semi-natural grasslands also contain a high proportion of dicots, which show a general tendency towards higher Ca contents Calculation of the molar charge ratio of cation-/anion-forming elements according to The strong influence of Ca/ash on the ash mass loss at 700 °C ( The role K and Cl/K played in this temperature range is reflected by the regression results for the difference in mass loss between 700 and 900 °C (loss No further mass loss occurred between 900 and 1000 °C, even though only a comparatively small proportion of K can have been volatilised up to this point, given an initial K/ash ratio of 0.13 and very low proportions of K release at temperatures up to 550 °C The weather data analysis ( Under weather constellation 3, precipitation events of 30–40 mm occurred on average 1.2 and 1.3 times per year during the three-month period under consideration. The optimum period for cutting the grassland sites encompasses only about one or two months, with a correspondingly smaller mean yearly number of precipitation events suitable for leaching of 0.4–0.9. Uncertainties in the weather forecast or organisational constraints on the farms might have further reduced the practical opportunities for on-field leaching. As a result, the possibility of on-field leaching with an intensity of the 10-min leaching treatment can only be expected in some years at the five experimental sites. However, precipitation events of just 10–20 mm under suitable weather constellations are far more frequent, so that it might be interesting to study the effect of lower leaching intensities on grassland biomass fuel quality. While weather constellation 3 occurred far more frequently than weather constellations 1 and 2, biomass might sometimes not have been sufficiently dry for effective leaching due to the restricted duration of the initial drying period. Under both weather constellation 2 and 3, the risk of not reaching moisture levels low enough for storage by the end of the final drying period would also have been higher. Possibilities for on-field leaching, like precipitation itself, must be expected to have high local variability. Higher average rainfall may increase the frequency of high precipitation during a short period, while decreasing the frequency of dry days necessary for the subsequent haymaking. A high frequency of heavy rain events would be most favourable for the purpose of on-field leaching. The approach used in this study gives a first estimate on the frequency of on-field leaching opportunities. To predict their probability at any given site with sufficiently high reliability for planning purposes would only be possible using more sophisticated hay drying models. Such a model would incorporate the important effect of air temperature, air humidity and wind on the speed of the drying process. Initial biomass dry matter content, the effect of re-wetting through rain as well as harvest and post-harvest machine operations would also have to be considered As the method used in the ash heating experiments does not exactly represent conditions during the combustion process, there are some limitations concerning the prediction of ash-related problems for different furnace types from the results discussed above. Even though exact predictions of ash behaviour during combustion require more extended ash analysis, measurements and/or thermodynamic equilibrium calculations Results from an ash fusion classification methods very similar to the one used in this study have been shown to successfully predict ash sintering in a bubbling fluidised bed combustor However, a low frequency of weather constellations suitable for leaching can present a serious impediment. As on-field leaching will not be possible every year, it should only form one element of a fuel quality management concept for semi-natural grassland biomass which also includes the selection of suitable grassland types depending on the intended combustion technology. In those years where on-field leaching is possible, it will allow the realisation of better fuel prices through the production of a higher-quality fuel. The findings of this study are also relevant for farmers whose hay has unintentionally become damaged by rainfall, as hay that has become unsuitable as a forage could be sold as a biofuel of good quality. As an alternative to on-field leaching, winter harvest, as practiced for miscanthus and reed canary grass, might also offer a solution. It involves a long leaching period of dead standing biomass and can reduce K and Cl contents considerably Technical leaching processes are another option, if suitable facilities exist in the vicinity. Washing of cereal straw has already been practised at combustion plants in Denmark. The energy losses caused by washing and drying the straw were deemed to be offset by the prolonged boiler life due to reduced corrosion K and Cl are the elements most strongly reduced by leaching of semi-natural grassland biomass, with only small site and harvest date effects. Both ash melting behaviour and K and Cl release can be considerably improved by leaching at an intensity that can occur naturally under field conditions. Regarding both Si/ash and Ca/ash ratios and the effect of Si on ash melting, the assessed semi-natural grassland biomass samples more closely resembled woody biomass than Si-rich, Ca-poor herbaceous biofuels such as straw or perennial energy grasses. Results obtained on the ash melting behaviour of herbaceous fuels may therefore be of limited applicability to semi-natural grassland biomass. In those years with suitable weather conditions, on-field leaching can be a way for farmers and nature conservation agencies to produce solid biofuels of improved quality from semi-natural grasslands, using a low-cost strategy independent of external facilities and with minimal negative effects on biodiversity. Additionally, the positive effects of leaching on the fuel quality of biomass also offers a utilization alternative for forage hay damaged by rain, thus helping to reduce farmers’ economic risks in haymaking. This work was partly supported by a PhD grant within the postgraduate scholarship programme of the federal state of Baden-Württemberg’. We are indebted to Karin Hartung and Ulrike Semmler-Busch for advice on the statistical analysis. The following are the Supplementary data related to this article: Chemical composition of biomass from all leaching and control treatments. Elemental and ash contents (mg g Supplementary data related to this article can be found online at