The iron-based catalysts derived from modified ZIF-8 were prepared, characterized, and applied to CO2 hydrogenation reaction. The addition of iron and iron/potassium evidently tuned the pyrolysis behavior by forming carbon encapsulated iron nanoparticles and metal nanoparticles inserted hollow sphere, respectively. FeZn-NC and FeZnK-NC exhibited high activity with 29.3% and 34.6% CO2 conversion, respectively. More importantly, the selectivity to value-added hydrocarbons (i.e., C2–C4 = and C5+), which are of great importance to chemical industry and energy, was prominent over these two catalysts, and higher than 54 C-mol%. The FeZn-NC with carbon-encapsulated iron nanoparticles showed a remarkable stability for 126 h on stream, suggesting a promising prospect for industrial application.CO Synthesis of hydrocarbons from CO Metal-organic frameworks (MOFs) are hybrid crystalline materials constructed from metal ions or clusters with organic ligands, which have a myriad of applications [ Herein, we report two novel Fe-based N-doped porous carbon materials which were prepared by the pyrolysis of Fe and Fe/K modified ZIF-8. The structure of Fe@C on carbon matrix was obtained by using the Fe modified ZIF-8 as precursor, while the addition of Fe and K promoted the sample to transform to the metal particles-inserted hollow sphere. With the opportune merits in terms of composition and structure, the two samples were evaluated as catalysts for hydrogenation of CO The preparation method is described elsewhere [ Incipient wetness impregnation (IWI) method was applied to prepare Fe/ZIF-8, K/ZIF-8, and FeK/ZIF-8. For Fe/ZIF-8, Fe(acac) Zn-NC, FeZn-NC, and FeZnK-NC were prepared by the pyrolysis of as-prepared ZIF-8, Fe/ZIF-8, and FeK/ZIF-8, respectively. Typically, 1 g as-prepared sample was heated up to 500 °C in N The carbon spheres (CS), synthesized according to the literature [ X-ray diffraction (XRD) patterns were recorded on a Rigaku SmartLab(9) diffractometer using a Cu Kα radiation (λ = 1.5406 Å) source at a step size of 0.02°. Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) images were obtained on a Hitachi SU8220 instrument with an acceleration voltage of 5 kV. Transmission electron microscopy (TEM) images were taken by using a Tecnai G2 20 S-twin instrument (FEI Company) with an acceleration voltage of 200 kV. The samples were ultrasonicated in ethanol, and a few droplets of ethanol suspension were dropped onto a copper grid, followed by drying at ambient temperature. Raman spectra were collected by using a Nicolet Almega XR Raman system with a 532 nm excitation laser from Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc. N The CO The products were analyzed on-line by using a gas chromatograph (FULI GC 97). Carbon monoxide, carbon dioxide, and methane were analyzed on a carbon molecular sieve column with TCD, while methane and C The fabrication process of the Fe-based catalysts is schematically illustrated in The morphology and structure of as-prepared Zn-NC, FeZn-NC, and FeZnK-NC were characterized by SEM and TEM, and resulting images are presented in TEM was conducted to further investigate the structures of FeZn-NC and FeZnK-NC, as depicted in To identify the crystalline structures, X-ray diffraction (XRD) was carried out on the FeZn-NC and FeZnK-NC, and resulting patterns are shown in Mössbauer spectra were applied to investigate the iron species in FeZn-NC and FeZnK-NC, and resultant spectra and parameters are shown in The Raman spectra of FeZn-NC and FeZnK-NC are presented in The X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy was measured to investigate the surface chemistry of Zn-NC, FeZn-NC, and FeZnK-NC. Compared with Zn-NC, the pyrolysis behaviors of Fe/ZIF-8 and FeK/ZIF-8 were affected by the addition of iron and iron/potassium. It is imperative to further understand the specific functions of iron and potassium in this regard. For this purpose, thermal gravimetric (TG) analysis was used to evaluate the thermal stability of ZIF-8 and iron- and/or potassium-modified ZIF-8 ( In the previous section, detailed characterization results corroborated the unique structural advantages and surface chemistry of FeZn-NC and FeZnK-NC. In the following step, the two samples were applied to CO We also compared the performances of ZIF-8 derived catalysts to other carbon-supported catalysts under the same reaction conditions for CO Considering the carbon-encapsulated structure of FeZn-NC, we investigated the stability of the catalyst. In summary, iron was introduced into ZIF-8 by impregnation method, which was used as precursor to prepare iron-based catalysts. The addition of iron and iron/potassium tuned the pyrolysis behavior of ZIF-8 to form the carbon encapsulated and hollow sphere structure, respectively. The obtained iron-based catalysts exhibited outstanding CO This work was financially supported by Supplementary material related to this article can be found, in the online version, at doi: The following is Supplementary data to this article: