The aim of the present study is to evaluate the abrasive wear resistance of some potential abrasion resistant steels exposed to different types of abrasive wear contact conditions typical of mining and transportation applications. The steels investigated, include a ferritic stainless steel, a medium alloyed ferritic carbon steel and a medium alloyed martensitic carbon steel.
                  The abrasive wear resistance of the steels was evaluated using two different laboratory test methods, i.e. pin-on-disc testing and paddle wear testing that expose the materials to sliding abrasion and impact abrasion, respectively. All tests were performed under dry conditions in air at room temperature. In order to evaluate the tribological response of the different steels post-test characterization of the worn surfaces were performed using optical surface profilometry, scanning electron microscopy and energy dispersive X-ray spectroscopy. Besides, characterization of the wear induced sub-surface microstructure was performed using optical microscopy.
                  The results show that depending on the abrasive conditions a combination of high hardness and toughness (fracture strain) is of importance in order to obtain a high wear resistance. In the pin-on-disc test (i.e. in sliding abrasion) these properties seem to be controlled by the as-rolled microstructure of the steels although a thin triboinduced sub-surface layer (5–10μm in thickness) may influence the results. In contrast, in the paddle wear test (i.e. in impact abrasion), resulting in higher forces acting perpendicular to the surface by impacting stones, these properties are definitely controlled by the properties of the active sub-surface layer which also contains small imbedded stone fragments.Abrasive wear is a costly and serious problem in the mining and mineral processing and transportation industry. In particular, the mining industry is consuming increasing amounts of abrasion resistant materials because minerals and rocks subject machinery and equipment to severe wear due to abrasion On the other hand, for developing new types of steels it is indispensable to understand the phenomena of abrasion and the damage caused by hard particles of an extensive range of sizes. Considerable effort has been done to understand the response of various materials exposed to abrasion Machinery and transport devices used in the mining and mineral industry experience intensive wear by abrasive particles and rocks of different sizes. When loading, the predominant wear mechanism is first of all Although laboratory tests may show problems to accurately simulate the abrasive contact conditions found in the field, these tests tend to dominate when it comes to evaluating the wear characteristics of different materials exposed to abrasion. This is mainly explained by the fact that field wear tests are notoriously expensive, time-consuming and difficult to control and/or quantify. The aim of the present study is to, in the laboratory, evaluate the wear resistance of some abrasion resistant low alloy steels exposed to abrasive wear contact conditions typical of mining and transport applications, namely: impact abrasion and sliding abrasion. Of special interest was to investigate the relation between material characteristics such as microstructure and mechanical properties (of the bulk as well as of the active wear layer) and the resulting wear resistance. Three different commercially available abrasion resistant steel grades denoted A, B and C were included in the study. Steel A is a low alloyed comparatively cheap stainless steel while steels B and C are two thermo mechanically rolled low alloyed carbon steels. The chemical compositions (in wt%) of the steel grades are given in The microstructure of the steel grades was characterized using light optical microscopy (LOM) of polished and etched metallographic samples. The mechanical properties of the steel grades were evaluated using three different techniques: tensile testing, hardness indentation and scratch testing. The yield stress (YS), ultimate tensile stress (UTS), strain to failure ( The abrasive wear resistance of the steel grades was evaluated using two different tests; a In the pin-on-disc tests the test pins (length 25 The paddle wear test equipment consists of a cylindrical drum that rotates around a horizontal axis. Inside the drum, with a separated axis there is a disc that also rotates but at higher velocity than the drum. The specimen to be tested is fixed in the disc in such a way that it partially comes out like a paddle and is hit by the small stones (quartzite) that constitutes the abrasive media. In the present study the specimens were first worn for 15 The scratch tested and worn specimens were characterized by scanning electron microscopy (SEM, ZEISS Supra 35) and energy dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDS, Oxford Instruments INCA) in order to evaluate the deformation and wear mechanisms. Polished and etched cross-sections of the worn specimens were analyzed using light optical microscopy (LOM, Olympus BV-1) and the hardness of the worn sub-surface layers was measured using a micro-Vickers indenter (Future-Tech FM-700). Also, the 3D topography of the scratched and worn surfaces was characterized using a 3D optical topometer (WYKO NT2000).   As can be seen, the three steels cover relatively wide hardness and toughness ranges. The somewhat higher hardness values obtained by scratch testing as compared with indentation testing is in agreement with earlier studies   As can be seen the contact conditions active in the paddle wear test, i.e. mainly impact abrasion and some sliding abrasion, generate heavily deformed surfaces with a relatively high amount of embedded fragments. In contrast, the contact conditions in the pin-on-disc test, i.e. two-body abrasion, generate relatively well defined worn surfaces without any embedded fragments. For both tests, no significant differences in wear behavior could be distinguished when analyzing the worn surface morphologies of the different steel grades in the SEM. Characterization of the worn surfaces using 3D surface profilometry illuminates the pronounced difference in surface morphology, i.e. the degree of surface plastic deformation, between specimens exposed to the two types of wear tests, see  As can be seen, specimens exposed to the pin-on-disc test show a relatively thin and less deformed sub-surface layer as compared to specimens exposed to the paddle wear test which show a heavily deformed microstructure to a depth about 100 Micro-Vickers hardness measurements within the tribolayer, using a normal load of 10 In the present study, three different commercial abrasion resistant steels frequently used in the mining and mineral industry have been investigated using two different types of laboratory wear tests, one simulating sliding abrasion and one simulating impact abrasion. As illustrated by the results, the two wear tests used in the present study show clear differences concerning the resulting deformation and wear damage of the abraded surfaces. This is in good agreement with earlier findings in the literature which illuminate the differences in wear response of surfaces exposed to sliding abrasion and impact abrasion/erosion, respectively In sliding abrasion controlled by plastic deformation, the wear mechanisms can be classified depending on the active deformation/wear process, i.e. degree of ploughing and cutting. As discussed by Hokkirigawa and Kato three different wear modes of abrasion can be distinguished, i.e. cutting, ploughing and wedge formation In the pin-on-disc test, being characterized by relatively well defined abrasive contact conditions through out the test, the wear rate can be expressed by a relatively simple wear model which consider both the deforming and fracture property of the wearing material, i.e. In the present study a good agreement with experimental data is obtained by the following equation: In the paddle wear test, being characterized by less well defined abrasive contact conditions, e.g. a wider abrasive particle range and a larger impact energy range, resulting in a pronounced and relatively thick sub-surface layer (tribolayer) of heavily deformed material with the presence of embedded abrasive particles as well as pores and cracks, it is believed that the wear rate is mainly controlled by this tribolayer. Since the microstructure of this tribolayer significantly differs from that of the bulk microstructure, bulk material properties obtained by standard test methods cannot be used to describe the wear rate. Also, the presence of embedded particles as well as pores and cracks makes the close to surface material susceptible to microfatigue. As a result, a relation between the material characteristics and the resulting wear rate is hard to find and consequently a simple wear model similar to Eq. In the present study the abrasion resistance of three commercial abrasion resistant steels has been evaluated using two different laboratory test methods, i.e. pin-on-disc testing simulating sliding abrasion, and paddle wear testing simulating impact abrasion. The main results are as follows: The most striking result of the present study is that hardness seems to have a subordinate role in controlling the wear rate of the steels and depending on the type of wear test different ranking with respect to wear resistance of the steel grades investigated is obtained. In the pin-on-disc test, resulting in two-body abrasion, the wear rate of the steels is to a large extent controlled by the hardness and toughness values of the steels and a wear model based on these values can be used to estimate the resulting wear rate, In the paddle wear test, resulting in impact abrasion and the generation of a pronounced and relatively thick sub-surface layer (tribolayer) of heavily deformed material with the presence of embedded abrasive particles, the wear rate is believed to be controlled by the properties of the above tribolayer. The complex properties of this tribolayer make it difficult to estimate the rate by a simple wear model. Mr Lars-Erik Bergström, Mr Nils Hägglund and Mr Folke Hansson at SSAB Tunnplåt are recognised for the help with the optical microscopy, microhardness measurements and scanning electron microscopy, respectively.