α-Aminoalkylphosphonic acids In addition, α-aminophosphonic acids and their monoalkyl esters are also of interest in hydrometallurgy in order to extract metals It is well known that the biological activity of α-aminophosphonic acids and derivatives depends on the absolute configuration of the stereogenic α-carbon to phosphorous. In view of the different biological and chemical applications of the α-aminophosphonic acids and derivatives, in the last 35 years the development of suitable synthetic methodologies for their preparation in optically pure form has been a topic of great interest in several research groups. In this context, several protocols for efficient asymmetric synthesis of α-aminophosphonic acids and derivatives have emerged in recent years and several reviews have been published. The nucleophilic addition of a dialkyl or diaryl phosphite to imines or oxoiminium derivatives, the Pudovik reaction, The first synthesis of enantiomerically pure α-aminophosphonic acids was described by Gilmore and McBride in 1972. Hydrogenolysis of ( This methodology has been used in the preparation of calix[4]arene α-aminophosphonic acids, which show inhibitory activity toward porcine kidney alkaline phosphatase. The inhibitory activity of α-aminophosphonic acids ( A molecular mechanics study on this type of reaction has revealed that the diastereoisomeric excess values and the induced direction are controlled by the conformation of the imine substrate. Petneházy et al. On the other hand, addition of diethyl phosphite to the imines ( The high diastereoselectivity has been explained as result of the coordination of the nucleophile with the corresponding imine ( A most effective diastereoselectivity in favor of diastereoisomer ( In order to explain the results obtained in The intramolecular version of nucleophilic addition of phosphites to imines was reported by Dimukhametov et al. To explain the stereochemistry of this reaction, the authors suggest that the nucleophilic attack by the phosphite group on the electrophilic C Recently, Chen et al. The chiral sulfinimides readily available The high diasteroselectivity obtained in the addition of the lithium salts of alkyl phosphites to the Removal of the On the other hand, addition of the lithium salt of the bis(diethylamido)phosphine borane complex to the enantiopure The diastereoselectivity obtained in the addition of the lithium salt of bis(diethylamido)phosphine to the Recently, Gallina et al. Recently, Chen and Yuan Acidic hydrolysis of diastereoisomerically pure ( Davis et al. The high diastereoselectivity obtained in the addition of lithium diethyl phosphite to the enantiopure Removal of the An aza-Darzens reaction of ( On the other hand, an aza-Darzens reaction of the imine ( The formation of ( Another important methodology used in the synthesis of α-aminophosphonates is the Kabachnik–Fields reaction, Nucleophilic addition of phosphites to imines catalyzed by base or acids under three-component conditions is the most convenient methodology for the synthesis of α-aminophosphonates. Lewis acids such as SnCl A one-pot reaction of methylcyclopropanone acetal (2 The diastereoselectivity obtained in the nucleophilic addition of triethyl phosphite to the iminium intermediate In a similar way, a one-pot reaction of methylcyclopropanone acetal (2 Recently, Fadel et al. Cleavage of the On the other hand, a three-component reaction of several aliphatic aldehydes with ( The high diasteroselectivity obtained using ( Very recently, Kapoor et al. Houghten et al. A three-component reaction of chiral amides On the other hand, the reaction of a chiral hypophosphorous acid salt In order to obtain diasteroisomerically pure phosphothreonine The high diasteroselectivity in the addition of trimethylsilyl diethyl phosphite to the imine ( Recently, Davis and Prasad reported Addition of trimethyl phosphite to the oxime Nucleophilic addition of lithium diethyl phosphite to the nucleosyl imines Addition of diethyl phosphite to The high diastereoselectivity obtained in the addition of diethyl phosphite to On the other hand, treatment of TBDMSOTf-precomplexed nitrones In a similar way, treatment of In order to explain the observed The chiral auxiliary can be attached not only to the imine fragment, but also to the phosphite residue. In this context, chiral Recently, Kolodiazhnyi et al. On the other hand, addition of tris[(1 It is noteworthy that the reactions of tri[(1 The reaction of chiral P–H spirophosphoranes Since the chiral auxiliary might be easily removed by hydrolysis of the phosphonic ester, Martens et al. Removal of the chiral auxiliary and cleavage of the Swamy et al. In a similar way, the reaction of ( On the other hand, treatment of diethyl ( Using this Mannich-type multicomponent reaction, Xu and Gao Catalytic enantioselective synthesis is one of the most important topics in modern synthetic chemistry, because it provides the most efficient methodology to approach in the preparation of enantiomerically pure compounds. Another approach for the synthesis of chiral α-aminophosphonates is the chiral Brønsted acid-catalyzed enantioselective hydrophosphonylation of non-chiral imines. For example, Akiyama et al. In order to explain the high chiral induction, the authors proposed a nine-membered transition-state ( On the other hand, Joly and Jacobsen Recently, Katsuki et al. One-pot hydrophosphonylation of aldehydes, 4-methoxy-3-methylaniline or diphenylmethylamine, and dimethyl phosphite, in the presence of the complex ( On the other hand, addition of diethyl phosphite to In order to explain the high chiral induction, the authors proposed that the imine is activated by hydrogen bonding with the acidic hydroxyl group in the quinine, and that the phosphite–phosphonate equilibrium toward the phosphite form could give rise to attack at the electrophilic azomethine carbon ( In 1998, Shibasaki et al. In a similar way, enantioselective hydrophosphonylation of cyclic imines The chiral Schiff bases formed from esters of glycine and chiral carbonyl compounds are one of the most popular approaches for the asymmetric synthesis of α-amino acids. In 1990, Hanessian and Bennani Recently, Cheng-Ye and Qian-Yi On the other hand, treatment of the bicyclic chloromethylphosphonoamide (2 Recently, Yokomatsu et al. Recently, we have reported the first stereochemical reversal in the benzylation reaction of the phosphonoamide Asymmetric Michael addition of diethyl (1-cyanoethyl)phosphonate On the other hand, asymmetric allylation of α-acetamido β-ketophosphonate Recently, Jászay et al. Catalytic enantioselective carbon–carbon bond-forming reactions have been used for the asymmetric synthesis of α-aminophosphonates. For example, the addition of silicon enolates Treatment of In a similar way, the reaction of α-iminophosphonate Kobayashi et al. Recently, Dodda and Zhao Carbon–carbon bond formation via a 1,3-dipolar cycloaddition reaction has been used for the synthesis of ( Another approach for the asymmetric synthesis of α-aminophosphonic acids is the stereoselective electrophilic amination of chiral α-phosphonate carbanions. In this context, several chiral oxazaphosphorinanes and oxazaphospholanes and diazophospholanes, derived from alkylphosphonic dichlorides and the appropriate chiral amino alcohols or diamines, have been used as key substrates in the electrophilic amination. For example, Denmark et al. Recently, Jørgensen et al. Recently, Ruiz et al. Mild acid hydrolysis of diastereoisomerically pure Palacios et al. The same authors reported that the Michael addition of benzylamine to 1,2-diaza-1,3-butadiene Phosphonyl nitrosoalkenes are reactive intermediates as Michael acceptors toward nucleophilic reagents such as ammonia, amines, and enantiomerically pure α-amino esters. For example, addition of Catalytic asymmetric hydrogenation of dehydroaminophosphonates In 2004, Imamoto et al. Recently, Hu et al. On the other hand, asymmetric hydrogenation of dehydroaminophosphonate 1-Amino-2,2,2-trifluoroethanephosphonic acid ( Optically active α-aminophosphonic acids can also be obtained by resolution. For example, the reaction of dibenzoyl On the other hand, resolution of (±)- The biocatalytic resolution of racemic molecules has attracted the interest of synthetic chemists for several decades. The hydroxy group in enantiomerically pure α-hydroxyalkylphosphonates can be replaced by an amino function using the Mitsunobu reaction. In a similar way, treatment of ( On the other hand, treatment of ( α-Amino-β-hydroxyphosphonic acids can be obtained from α,β-dihydroxyphosphonates via Mitsunobu azidation. For example, reaction of In a similar way, treatment of (1 On the other hand, reaction of ( Treatment of phosphoserine diethyl ester ( On the other hand, reaction of phosphoserinate ( Pousset and Larchevêque On the other hand, treatment of α-hydroxyphosphonate (1 Treatment of sulfate ( Azaheterocyclic phosphonates are considered to be one of the most biologically important classes of heterocyclic compounds. In this context, in 2004, Stevens et al. Palacios et al. The stereoselective synthesis of azetidin-2-ylphosphonates has been scarcely explored. The first asymmetric synthesis of azetidine-2-phosphonates of the type Reaction of 2,5-dimethoxytetrahydrofuran On the other hand, treatment of (3 Addition of trimethyl phosphite to the bicyclic lactam Treatment of the chiral sulfinyl imines Davies et al. Reaction of (2 Reduction of Decarboxylation–phosphorylation reactions of α-amino acids afford the α-aminophosphonates in good yield. A better result was obtained in the oxidative decarboxylation of On the other hand, reaction of (3 Addition of dimethyl or diethyl phosphite to the nitrone Davis et al. In a similar way, the cyclic α-aminophosphonate (2 In spite of the recognized relevance of the α-aminophosphonic acids, it is obvious that there is a very important gap between the possibilities that these compounds offer in relation to their corresponding counterparts, the α-amino acids. Nevertheless, during the last few years, these α-aminophosphonic acids have attracted considerable attention and, in this way, numerous papers have been published on their stereoselective synthesis. The authors of this report have covered all advances related to the synthesis of these important compounds and, although there is a long way to go, many of these procedures are already competitive and can be applied to the synthesis of these compounds in an enantiomerically pure form and on a multigram scale. The authors are convinced that all of these efforts will contribute to future advances in the understanding of these important compounds. This work was carried out with the financial support of CONACYT-MEXICO (Project 62271) and financial support from the Ministerio de Educación y Ciencia–FEDER (project CTQ2007-62245) and Gobierno de Aragón (group E40 and project MI041/2007) is gratefully acknowledged. This project has been funded as whole or in part with Federal funds from the National Cancer Institute, National Institutes of Health, under contract number N01-CO-12400. The content of this publication does not necessarily reflect the view or the policies of the Department of Health and Human Services, nor does the mention of trade names, commercial products, or organizations imply endorsement by the U.S. Government. This research was supported (in part) by the Intramural Research Program of the NIH, National Cancer Institute, Center for Cancer Research. We thank Dr. Ana Isabel Jiménez and Dr. Victoria Labastida for their valuable help.