Sulphuric acid pressure leaching of nickeliferous laterites has attracted considerable attention from the nickel industry during the past 5 years. The process is especially advantageous for limonitic laterites that mostly contain goethite, because iron precipitates releasing acid and thus rendering low acid consumption. It is also applicable to mixtures of limonites and saprolites, although at a higher acid consumption due to magnesium. Effective process design requires the solubility of metals that precipitate during the process to be known. In the present work, determination of metal solubilities is based on a simple speciation program that assumes the presence of only one dominant complex for each metal. The thermodynamic data for the precipitation reactions are extracted from high-temperature experiments with monometallic systems published previously. The validity of the approach is then tested against mixed bimetallic systems, and finally applied to calculate the solubility of aluminium, iron and magnesium in laterite leaching effluents “at temperature”. In both cases of limonitic feed and limonitic/saprolitic blends, the prediction closely follows metal solubilities measured experimentally at temperatures from 230 to 270°C and at terminal-free acidities ranging from 10 to 75 g/l.Direct sulphuric acid leaching is the process of choice to recover nickel and cobalt from limonitic laterites. Limonitic laterites are rich-in-iron oxide ores with iron content higher than 40 wt.%. Other elements found in limonites include aluminium, chromium, manganese and silicon. Aluminium in particular, is responsible for scale formation during leaching Saprolitic laterites are rich-in-magnesium oxide ores with magnesium content in the range of 10–20 wt.% and iron content between 10 and 25 wt.%. Although they are richer in nickel (up to 3 wt.%), the high magnesium content results in higher acid consumption, which renders the process less economical. However, an optimal mixture of limonites and saprolites may form a high-grade feed that at the same time yields an acceptable acid consumption. Previous experience demonstrated that a highly agitated continuous autoclave (or series of autoclaves) is the best choice for successful nickel and cobalt extraction Effective process design requires the solubility of metals that precipitate during the process to be known. Moreover, knowledge of the solubility of metals “at temperature” is essential for understanding the chemistry that governs the leaching process. For example, the leaching kinetics depend heavily on the concentration of hydrogen ion “at temperature”. However, in the absence of suitable sensors, this concentration cannot be monitored effectively. Instead, it may be calculated using a theoretical approach. Such an approach has to take into account all transient metal concentrations “at temperature”. The latter depend on metal solubilities “at temperature” since both dissolution and precipitation reactions occur simultaneously. Existing theoretical approaches to modelling the high-temperature ionic solution chemistry may be split into two major categories: (a) ion association (speciation), and (b) ion interaction. The former approach assumes that ions form stable complexes. The free energy of the complex formation reaction may then be evaluated at elevated temperatures by approximating the dependence of ionic heat capacities on temperature from regression (e.g., A speciation model developed previously for a pure Al–H On the other hand, applications of the ion interaction approach to extract the ion interaction parameters from monometallic systems Limonites contain Fe chiefly as goethite (α-FeOOH). During high-temperature sulphuric acid leaching, trivalent, ferric iron dissolves according to the following reaction: Saprolitic laterites may also contain as much as half of the iron as goethite. Contrary to limonites, a marked fraction of iron in saprolites is divalent iron that substitutes Mg in serpentine (Mg Previous work Most of the Ni in limonitic laterites is found in solid solution with goethite. Ni dissolution from goethite is described by the following equation: Mg concentration in limonites is relatively low, normally less than 1 wt.%. Acid balance based on previous experiments However, AMAX researchers observed Mg precipitation as mono-hydrate sulphate salt: Aluminium exists in laterites in several phases. It is chiefly found in the form of gibbsite, Al(OH) Laterite leaching experiments were conducted with a limonitic feed Leaching tests with laterites were performed in a 2-liter titanium autoclave, manufactured by the Parr Instrument. Temperature was controlled within ±2°C by a temperature control system, manipulating both an electrical heating mantle and a water-cooling stream. Agitation was provided by a titanium twin magnetically driven impeller. The autoclave was equipped with an acid injection device. It was also equipped with a dip tube to withdraw samples that were then cooled by a co-current heat exchanger. It is important to stress that After dilution, metals were analysed using flame atomic absorption spectroscopy (FAAS). A fully automated instrument (VARIAN SpectrAA. 250 Plus) was employed for this purpose. FAAS analysis was followed by complexiometric titration of the stoichiometric free acidity. The metal cations were first chelated in order to prevent them from reacting with NaOH used for titration. Calcium cyclohexane-1,2-diaminetetraacetate (Ca-CDTA) was used as the chelating agent In the present work, the thermodynamic properties of ions and complexes formed at autoclave temperatures were extracted from high-temperature experiments with A general speciation model was developed for a mix of metal sulphates typical for laterite leaching. Before applying it to lateritic solutions, it was used to verify the existence of assumed dominant complexes in monometallic solutions (containing only Al, Fe and Mg) and to evaluate equilibrium constants of precipitation reactions “at temperature”. A detailed description of the speciation program is given in the Thermodynamic data for aluminium were extracted from a series of experiments with a synthetic Al-sulphuric acid system conducted previously at the University of Toronto Data for the Fe(III)-sulphuric acid system have been published in the past Data on the solubility of magnesium sulphate for a wide range of temperatures and concentrations were collected three decades ago at the Oak Ridge Laboratory, USA The precipitation reaction is then written as: The extracted thermodynamic data and the developed speciation program were applied then to predict (and compare with measured) solubilities in real polymetallic systems, i.e., laterite leaching experiments. In order to test our speciation approach, the speciation program was first verified against a ternary Mg–Al–H The values of the acidity “at temperature” obtained from the speciation model were also calculated and plotted in After the verification, the speciation program was applied to laterite leaching experiments. Solubilities of Al and Fe were calculated for the three feed compositions given in Contrary to Al, predictions of iron concentration based on the data extracted from monometallic systems were more than an order of magnitude below the experimental results. Most probably, this discrepancy is due to the fact that monometallic experiments were conducted at the temperature below 200°C, whereas laterite leaching tests were at the temperature range of 230–270°C. It is not clear whether at higher temperatures Mean ratios of measured over predicted iron concentrations for the limonitic feed were 25.9 at 230°C, 31.3 at 250°C and 24.9 at 270°C. Since the above values do not show a temperature correlation, a mean value of 28.3 was used as a correction factor to switch from the thermodynamic data obtained from experiments at 150–200°C to those at autoclave temperatures, 230–270°C. This correction changes  Precipitation of Mg was observed experimentally for the limonitic/saprolitic blend I only. Therefore, the solubility of Mg was also calculated and plotted in A comparison of An interesting conclusion may be derived when comparing metal solubilities obtained in experiments with the limonitic feed and with the blends at the same temperature. For example, comparing The speciation program given in The comparison is given in It is seen in Finally, it should be noted that the solubility diagrams generated here show the metal concentrations inside the autoclave “at temperature”. Hence, these values will increase if the slurry is cooled down before and after liquid/solid separation due to re-dissolution of the precipitates. The solubilities of Al, Fe and Mg in simple monometallic systems were used to extract equilibrium constants for their precipitation reactions at temperatures relevant to the acid pressure leaching of laterites. This information was then applied to laterite leach experiments using a speciation analysis “at temperature”. The speciation approach employed was mostly simplified assuming that only one complex for each metal dominates in the solution. Extraction of thermodynamic data directly from high-temperature experiments allowed us to avoid errors associated with their extrapolation from the reference state (298 K). This approach demonstrated a good predictive ability for real process solutions resulting from sulphuric acid pressure leaching of limonitic laterites and limonitic/saprolitic ore blends. Al, Fe and Mg solubility diagrams were then generated for three lateritic feeds for the temperature range from 230°C to 270°C and acid/ore ratios of up to 0.5 that corresponded to free acidities of up to 75 g/l. Similar diagrams can also be constructed for laterites with other chemical compositions. These diagrams can be readily used to predict metal solubilities in leach liquors in batch reactors. Moreover, combined with leaching kinetics, they may also be used to predict metal concentrations in continuous autoclaves. At temperatures of 230°C to 270°C Al and Fe tend to form neutral sulphate complexes. Also, the formation of a new Mg-bearing neutral sulphate-bisulphate complex (Mg This work was financially supported by ITSL and the Natural Science and Engineering Research Council of Canada. The authors wish to thank the personnel of ITSL for the continuous support, vivid interest and fruitful discussions over the course of the project. This speciation program calculates [H The complexity and mathematical instability of speciation programs at elevated temperatures that involve multiple equilibria, has already been reported Before the calculated concentration of hydrogen and bisulphate ions can be used to predict the metal solubilities, they should be corrected for the value of the solution density. The density of the solution at autoclave temperatures is considerably lower than at ambient conditions. A widely used equation relating the solution density to the electrolyte molar concentration for a solution of a single electrolyte is as follows Here, The following extrapolation formula for the water density was used When the solution density is evaluated from