The effect of Ni addition to improve the sulfur tolerance of a Rh catalyst for CO dissociation was studied using density functional theory (DFT) methods. Adsorption and dissociation were considered over the (111) surfaces of binary Rh1Ni2 and Rh2Ni1 metals with comparison to pure Rh and Ni surfaces. Sulfur adsorption on the Rh1Ni2(111) surface is 0.21eV more endothermic than on the Rh(111) surface, suggesting that a Rh1Ni2 bimetallic catalyst has a higher sulfur tolerance than pure Rh catalysts due to a lower surface coverage of the sulfur poison. To compare catalytic activity in the presence of adsorbed sulfur, the CO dissociation rates over the binary and pure metals were calculated with 1/9 sulfur coverage. CO dissociation is fastest on the pure Rh surface under sulfur-free conditions, whereas among sulfur poisoned surfaces, the Rh1Ni2 surface shows the fastest CO dissociation rate. The CO dissociation barrier on Rh1Ni2 is destabilized less by a S coadsorbate than for the other metals. The addition of Ni atoms to a Rh catalyst improves the sulfur tolerance of the catalyst for CO dissociation by minimizing the repulsion between the adsorbed S atom and the CO dissociation transition state, as evidenced through a projected density of states analysis. The Rh1Ni2(221) stepped surface also shows a lower activation barrier and higher CO dissociation rate in the presence of sulfur than the Rh(221) stepped surface.Hydrocarbon reforming processes are used industrially to produce hydrogen gas, which may become an important alternative energy carrier Density functional theory (DFT) methods allow us to analyze individual elementary reactions and examine their mechanistic impact within the overall reforming reaction. Herein, we use DFT methods to examine the sulfur tolerance of bimetallic Rh–Ni catalysts by analyzing CO adsorption and dissociation in the presence of sulfur. Carbon monoxide (CO) dissociation is an important step in determining activity and selectivity Sulfur compounds in hydrocarbon fuels are converted into hydrogen sulfide (H Interestingly, the methane selectivity during reforming over Rh and Ni–Rh catalysts declines in advance of the fuel conversion decrease, implying that methane formation is most sensitive to sulfur poisoning The impact of S presence on CO adsorption has been previously considered using DFT methods. Zhang et al. reported the influence of a sulfur atom on the adsorption energy of CO on the Rh(1 The adsorption and dissociation of CO on a sulfur-free surface has been extensively investigated using DFT methods. On Rh(1 We examine CO adsorption and dissociation on Rh–Ni (1 Calculations were carried out using the Vienna Ab–Initio Simulation Program (VASP), an ab initio total-energy and molecular dynamics program developed at the Institute for Material Physics at the University of Vienna The optimized lattice parameters for Rh and Ni are 3.800 The climbing image nudged elastic band (CI-NEB) method was used to locate the transition states and calculate the activation barriers for CO dissociation on flat surfaces. To apply the CI-NEB, the interpolated four images between the initial and final states were optimized along the reaction coordinate. The image with a maximum energy value and an absolute tangential force below 0.05 The configurations for CO dissociation on pure and binary metal surfaces can be constructed based on the preferred adsorption sites for S and CO on those surfaces. The various high-symmetry adsorption sites on the binary metal surface that were considered for adsorption are illustrated in Hollow sites are assumed to be preferred for CO and S adsorption to the Rh The differences in S adsorption energies among Ni, Rh, and Ni–Rh bimetallics provide insight into the S tolerance of the bimetallic catalysts. The adsorption energy of S at the preferred fcc site on pure Ni(1 Sulfur has a short-range influence on CO molecules adsorbed to the catalyst surface In the presence of sulfur, adsorption energies at the initial and final states are destabilized. The extent of destabilization is described by the difference in adsorption energy with and without S present (Δ The extent of sulfur tolerance for CO dissociation can be compared across surface compositions by analyzing variations of the CO dissociation rate. Carbon monoxide dissociation occurs through the following two steps,  The rate constant ( Using Eq. The configurations for CO dissociation on each metal were constructed based on the stable adsorption sites of CO and S in The activation energy ( The most notable result in The difference in CO dissociation energetics between the pure Rh and bimetallic Rh For a further explanation of the PDOS shift in the initial states, we visualized the partial charge density associated with specific peaks in the C and O PDOS. The partial charge densities on pure Rh with S are visualized in We measured the electronic energy associated with occupation of these states by the integral energy ( Carbon monoxide (CO) dissociation was also considered on stepped surfaces, as step sites are known to be more active for this reaction than flat surfaces One of the advantages of the Rh Carbon monoxide (CO) dissociation energetics on bimetallic Rh–Ni surfaces were compared with pure Rh and Ni using DFT methods. Our results help explain experimental phenomena where the addition of Ni to a Rh catalyst improves its sulfur tolerance for steam reforming of S-containing liquid fuels. The adsorption energy of S is more endothermic on the Rh The conclusions noted above are based on the specific S coverage, alloy composition, and CO dissociation path chosen for study. Although the basis for each of these choices was discussed and comparisons are made across a constant set of parameters, it is plausible that another configuration could allow for qualitatively different behavior. The results from these models provide results consistent with the reported experimental trend for bimetallic Rh–Ni catalysts The authors gratefully acknowledge the support of this work by the Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at 