Purpose
                  To compare 2 methods of surgical treatment for displaced intra-articular fractures of the distal radius: open reduction and internal fixation with dorsal plating (Pi Plate; Synthes, Paoli, PA) versus mini open reduction with percutaneous K-wire and external fixation.
               
                  Methods
                  Patients with AO type C intra-articular distal radius fractures were randomized into 2 groups: open reduction and internal fixation and dorsal plating or external fixation and K-wires and mini-open reduction. Patients over the age of 70 years with any associated soft-tissue or skeletal injury to the same limb and pre-existing wrist arthrosis or disability were excluded from the study. Objective, subjective, and radiographic outcomes were assessed at 2 weeks, 4 to 6 weeks, 10 to 12 weeks, 6 months, and 1- and 2-year intervals. The minimum follow-up period was 6 months; the average follow-up period was 18 months. The principal outcome analyzed was the Disabilities of the Arm, Shoulder, and Hand score. Secondary outcomes included grip strength, range of motion, surgical procedure time, complications, and radiographic parameters. The groups were equal with respect to age, gender, fracture subtype, and number of workers’ compensation cases.
               
                  Results
                  No significant difference was found in the Disabilities of the Arm, Shoulder, and Hand scores, our primary outcome. The dorsal plate group, however, showed a higher complication rate when compared with the external fixator group. The plate group had significantly longer tourniquet times when compared with the external fixator group. The plate group also had higher levels of pain at 1 year when compared with the external fixator group; however, this equalized after hardware removal. The external fixator group showed an average grip strength of 97% compared with the normal side and 86% in the dorsal plate group.
               
                  Conclusions
                  At midterm analysis the dorsal plate group showed a significantly higher complication rate compared with the external fixator group; therefore enrollment in the study was terminated. The dorsal plate group also showed statistically significant higher levels of pain, weaker grip strength, and longer surgical and tourniquet times. Based on these results we cannot recommend the use of dorsal plates in treating complex intra-articular fractures of the distal radius.