Because of its importance in several engineering fields, there has been increased interest recently in the study of natural granular media subject to impact and penetration. Many new research tools have been developed, for measurements at all scales. New data and understanding are emerging. Many different behaviors are observed that are due to the relative values of inertial stress, friction stress, and grain strength. Nevertheless, many research issues remain to be elucidated, particularly at the smaller scales where new visualization techniques are most applicable. Thus, study of the dynamic response of granular materials in general, and penetration in particular, is likely to yield many exciting and valuable results in the coming years.Introduction General Aspects of Rapid Penetration into Granular Media Terminology Energy dissipation Shallow vs. deep penetration Cavity expansion Laboratory-scale vs. large-scale testing      Laboratory and Field Observations of Projectile Penetration Observations at the micro- and mesoscale Observations at the macroscale Multiscale phenomena Modeling of Projectile Penetration Phenomenological models Wholly empirical formulas Analytic predictions Numerical methods The Role of Projectile-Target Properties in Penetration into Soils Role of soil properties    Role of projectile properties    Transient Events Associated with Penetration Impact cratering Oblique impact and ricochet Projectile instability Other dynamic phenomena Closing Remarks Acknowledgments References The authors gratefully acknowledge the support of the Defense Threat Reduction Agency (DTRA) of the United States, Grant No. HDTRA1-10-1-0049. These activities were also supported by a seed grant from New York University. Penetration mechanics is a subfield of terminal ballistics that generally refers to impact-induced motion through a semi-infinite medium. It is concerned with transient phenomena associated with entry through a free surface into a bulk material, but not with breakout through an exit free surface. Penetration mechanics is a relatively mature field of study. However, the majority of the published work has focused on targets made of engineering materials—metals, ceramics, and masonry. We will see that penetration of granular materials, while containing some overlap with this body of work, also invokes new behavior regimes, which contributes great richness to research into this fascinating subject. Penetration into geomaterials in general, and natural granular materials in particular, spans many disciplines, several of which have evolved their own particular terminology. It is worth spending some time to review basic terms so as to avoid confusion later on. This chapter is mainly concerned with sand; in sand and other similar granular materials, there is no binder between particles to provide intergrain shear strength or cohesion. Such granular materials derive their strength from Granular materials are sometimes referred to as multi phase materials, that is, they consist of a solid phase, and interstices occupied by fluid (water) or gas (air). The relative distribution of solids and pore space are defined by means of index parameters including the voids ratio, porosity, and relative density. Voids ratio is defined as the volume of voids divided by the volume of solids. Porosity is defined as the volume of voids divide by the total volume. Relative density is a measure of compactness of a granular media, defined on a scale form 0 to 1, where 0 is the loosest packing and 1 is the densest achievable packing, at a given standard applied pressure. When strength is due to friction, it is usually proportional to pressure. Frictional materials are often described by a Mohr-Coulomb failure criterion ( Natural granular materials often contain interstitial fluid, usually water. The presence of liquid also profoundly affects mechanical behavior. Generally, the mechanical properties are a function of the The behavior of granular materials can be studied on a number of interrelated scales. Although the macro- or continuum scale is the scale of primary interest for practical engineering applications, behavior of the continuum is influenced by physical phenomena that occur at underlying scales. The structural properties of individual soil particles, as well as intergranular kinetics and kinematics, are studied at the microscale. Granular interactions such as rotation, translation, and comminution (crushing) of particles are significant phenomena at this scale. Collective behaviors, including rearrangement, dilation, strain localization, and formation of force chains, take place at an intermediate scale, referred to as the mesoscale. In order to relate penetration to underlying physical processes, one needs a framework for Penetration can take place over a wide range of velocities, and one or another physical process will dominate depending on the velocity regime. For example, pile driving, ballistic penetration, and planetary impact occur at different velocity scales. A useful term for characterizing velocity regimes is the Taylor number. There are two—a target Taylor number, defined as In most cases of soil penetrators, the consumption velocity of the projectile is quite small, so there is no velocity gradient within the projectile as it penetrates into the target. The extreme case of zero gradient is called Taylor numbers express the ratio of inertial stresses to strength. The inertial stresses refer to the stress required to accelerate target material out of the path of the projectile or the stress required to decelerate the projectile. Velocity penetration regimes may be generally described by a Taylor diagram sketched in Consider a numerical example—the case of a strong steel, Penetration phenomena may alternatively be classed as subsonic or supersonic. Subsonic penetration refers to velocities below the speed of propagation of acoustic waves in the medium, which commonly fall in the range of 250-550 Nose shape is usually a very important projectile parameter. Noses are classed as blunt or sharp. Blunt projectiles produce significant shock waves at impact, whereas shock effects are reduced for sharp noses. Probably the most common projectile nose shape is the ogive. The parameter used to describe ogive nose shapes is the caliber radius head (CRH) ratio, defined as the ratio of the radius of curvature of the nose to the projectile diameter. A blunt nose shape is equivalent to a CRH of zero, while increasing the CRH will result in a sharper nose with longer ballistic length. A conical nose is equivalent to a CRH approaching infinity and is therefore often described in terms of its apex angle. Nonnormal impact is defined in terms of the obliquity angle and the angle of attack (AoA). Projectiles are described as “long rods” when the length to diameter ( Another geometric variable is axial symmetry. Most penetrators are axially symmetrical, but some investigators have found low target resistance associated with Impact geometry is defined principally by obliquity and pitch. The obliquity angle is the angle made by the projectile velocity vector and the normal to the penetrated surface, while AoA refers to the angle between the projectile axis of symmetry and the instantaneous velocity vector. The angle made by the axis of the projectile in the plane that includes the target normal is called The impact of a projectile on a soil target generates stress waves that propagate through the soil as well as the projectile. Stress waves are attenuated through geometric dispersion because they deposit energy into the granular medium. The resistance of a granular medium to penetration is related to its ability to dissipate energy. Some of the kinetic energy of the projectile is dissipated upon impact on the soil surface, through which particles are set in motion and stress waves are generated. The remaining energy is dissipated in the form of work done as the projectile overcomes resisting forces, stemming largely from frictional and collisional dissipation. Kinetic energy is absorbed by the projectile itself if it deforms. The physical phenomena occurring as a result of energy transfer to the granular medium depend on the velocity regime and the associated strain rates imposed on the granular medium. For example, small projectiles impacting a granular medium at the lower end of the subsonic regime cause little change in the grain geometry, whereas supersonic impact produces a high-pressure shock wave, causing densification due to void collapse, comminution, and, at high enough pressures, phase changes in the crystal lattice. The compression and relaxation due to the shock wave propagation can be accompanied by heat dissipation and melting of individual grains that may occur at high enough pressures. It has been suggested that a short projectile penetrating dry sand loses most of its energy as it sets sand grains in motion in the initial stage of penetration ( Although energy dissipation is an important physical process, it is usually difficult to build penetration theories based on conservation of energy. The reason is that there are such a large number of different mechanisms, both within the target and within the projectile, by which the initial kinetic energy of the projectile may be transformed. Long rods constitute a very important class of penetrators. This is because long penetrators impact with more momentum or energy per unit frontal area. In long rod penetration, the penetration event can usually be separated into a relatively short entrance stage, in which embedment and shock waves play a major role, and a The conceptual framework for analysis of long rod penetration was established by This equation has several solutions, depending on the different penetration regions in For the case of long rod projectiles that are relatively dense, at high enough velocity, the hydrodynamic limit may be slightly exceeded due to “secondary penetration,” which refers to various transient phenomena that may occur after the penetrator is fully eroded. Causes of secondary penetration are discussed, for example, in This framework has been widely used for metals and even for brittle materials such as ceramics and glass. The response of granular materials to dynamic loading, however, is different and generally more complex than simply ductile or brittle ( There are a number of important solutions for the target resistance to penetration, Earth penetrators are usually designed for field applications, and their development ideally involves relatively large-scale field tests in which full-size projectiles penetrate into natural soil deposits. A large number of such tests have been performed, and an extensive database has been developed. The main outcome of these tests has been data for the terminal penetration depth and, in some cases, time histories of deceleration and resisting forces. However, large-scale tests are expensive to conduct, and soil profile variability makes it difficult to extrapolate results. Many researchers have therefore resorted to laboratory tests in which laboratory-scale model penetrators are studied, allowing more controlled soil conditions to be achieved. Moreover, similar scaling laws have been reported from laboratory-scale and full field tests in certain disciplines of impact and penetration in granular media, indicating the existence of “some universal physical processes” that can be captured at both scales (e.g., This chapter is concerned with Another technique sometimes used in small-scale experiments is Design of small-scale tests is based on the observation that if the equations of motion only include acceleration terms and stress gradients, then if lengths and times are scaled by a factor The presence of a stiff container at some distance from the penetrating projectile may introduce a confining effect in the soil. The forces exerted on soil particles at the projectile-soil interface are transferred through a network of granular contacts, known as force chains ( Results of two sets of laboratory-scale tests shown in Another challenge in small-scale testing is to duplicate the relative density of Relative density and penetrability are also affected by prior loading history of the soil deposit; a common example is when the soil has been unloaded from a previous state of high compression, referred to in geotechnical engineering as overconsolidation (e.g., Aging refers to the process of changes occurring in the properties of a soil deposit following deposition. This effect is also difficult to simulate in small-scale tests. Although time effects on the mechanical behavior of clays have long been accepted, aging effects on the mechanical properties of sands have been recognized only in the past two decades (e.g., Particle size influences penetration and is particularly important in laboratory-scale penetration tests, as the ratio of penetrator diameter to particle size is usually smaller than in field tests. Thus, scaling is violated unless particle size is reduced in the same proportion as penetrator diameter. In granular media such as sand, however, particle size has an absolute length scale, because (1) natural sand only occurs in a limited range of sizes, (2) larger particles are weaker since they contain more flaws ( Gravitational stress also does not follow replica scaling. It is well established that the shear resistance of granular media is a function of depth-dependent lithostatic stress. A geotechnical centrifuge may be employed in laboratory-scale tests to facilitate the scaling of depth-dependent soil resistance (e.g., Even limiting this review to sand penetration, there are such a large number of material and projectile variables that preparing a taxonomy of phenomena is a daunting challenge. Below, we start with observations at the grain scale. For dry sand, research using visualization techniques described elsewhere in this book substantiates several general observations: The transient stage of penetration at impact and initial penetration corresponds to significant energy loss of the projectile, as well as elevated resistance to penetration. Mesoscale studies suggest that this energy decay results from setting particles ahead of the projectile in motion, giving rise to a traveling compaction front within the target ( The detached compaction front, also known as a bow shock, travels ahead of the projectile, which compacts the particles into a denser arrangement. At intermediate subsonic impact velocities and beyond, a second wave front appears, which is characterized by particle crushing. The emerging picture is that particles ahead of the projectile are first compacted to a denser arrangement by the wave front traveling ahead of the projectile and are then crushed as the projectile further loads the contacts of these particles (as suggested in Generally, the material pushed out of the path of the penetrator does not fully rebound, which leaves a cavity behind the penetrator. The material pushed out of the path of the penetrator can acquire significant momentum. At high velocity, the momentum carries the soil grains beyond the diameter of the penetrator. Large craters that separate from the projectile are particularly favored in sand with high porosity (low relative density; Soil directly in front of the projectile tip moves in line with the projectile, while up to several projectile diameters ahead of the tip, soil movement is predominantly normal to the direction of penetration. Crushing of sand enables the formation of a As the penetration velocity decreases during penetration, sand particles pushed away by the projectile tip may be given enough time to rebound and contact the afterbody as it penetrates, thereby increasing skin friction. At the macroscale, deceleration time histories and resisting forces can give insight into the fundamental physics of penetration. Examination of deceleration and resistance to penetration into sand at subsonic and transonic penetration velocities has provided evidence for occurrence of various behaviors: The deceleration of spheres striking various granular targets was measured during penetration using a noncontacting optic technique ( Upon impact, a projectile experiences a rapid deceleration ( Following the initial peak deceleration, there is a period of oscillation in deceleration, with a relatively sustained mean magnitude over a wide duration of penetration ( The terminal portion of penetration is marked by an abrupt rise and fall in resistance to penetration ( Dynamic resistance to penetration is higher than quasi-static resistance in the initial impact and penetration phase. The difference between the quasi-static and initial dynamic penetration resistance increases as the impact velocity increases. During a penetration event, as penetration progresses, the dynamic penetration resistance reduces to a quasi-steady value for the majority of the penetration event, as mentioned above. Toward the end of the penetration, another transition occurs in the dynamic resistance. This transition zone is roughly associated with a penetration depth beyond which quasi-static resistance to penetration exceeds that of the dynamic resistance (marked by the crossing points of the dashed and solid lines in In a layered soil deposit (green line in As shown in A more comprehensive understanding of the complex projectile-granular interactions can be obtained from combining macro- and mesoscale observations. For example, despite the relatively monotonic deceleration observed at the macroscale in low impact velocities (red line in An emerging understanding of the behavior of penetrators into granular media results from combining the macro- and mesoscale observations ( As the penetrator loses velocity during a penetration event, the stress on grains recedes below the comminution threshold. As a result, further penetration requires particles to flow to accommodate the volume of the penetrator. The first transition zone in the velocity penetration curve (zone I in Toward the end of penetration, quasi-static resistance of the soil increases, stemming from pressure-dependent frictional forces. At a certain depth depending on the porosity of the granular media, the quasi-static and dynamic resistances approach a similar value. Beyond this depth, frictional resistance exceeds the hydrodynamic resistance to penetration, and a gradual transition in behavior occurs from inertia-induced hydrodynamic resistance to one of frictional resistance. This transition (zone II in Modeling of impact and penetration into granular media is needed as a design tool in practical applications of engineering interest. Moreover, advanced modeling techniques are often employed in research to address issues that are difficult to study experimentally. One of the parameters of central interest to practical applications of projectile penetration in granular media is the determination of the terminal penetration depth. Existing predictive models are discussed in this section. It is always desirable to base semiempirical models on a parameterization of underlying physical processes. The unknown parameters are determined from fitting experimental data. Such models of penetration into granular media, known broadly as phenomenological models, are largely based on Newton's second law of motion. The resistance to penetration offered by the granular medium, Several historically significant phenomenological penetration models based on Eq. Poncelet's solution of Eq. Equation In low-velocity impact analyzed using numerical discrete element modeling, it has been found that resisting forces are not significantly affected by projectile-granular interactions, but are dominated by the grain-grain interactions ( Comparison of the inertial drag terms of Eqs. The strength term It has been observed that when long rods impact at velocities of 20-40 One of the most widely employed empirical formulations was developed by Sandia National Laboratories to predict the terminal depth of penetration following over 160 field tests performed during the 1960s and 1970s ( The impact velocity dependence of the terminal penetration depth from various methods discussed above is compared in The cavity expansion framework discussed in Numerical models have increasingly been employed in the analysis of projectile penetration in soils to study issues that are difficult to address experimentally or analytically, some of which include the role of friction ( Numerical methods relevant to projectile impact and penetration in granular media may be broadly divided into continuum-scale and discrete methods. Continuum-scale methods solve the penetration event by discretizing the continuum into a mesh of elements. Either the projectile is modeled as a separate continuum, or its effect is applied to the model in the form of boundary conditions. Common methods include the finite element method (FEM) and finite difference method. Constitutive relations and, in the case of hydrocodes, the equations of state are then invoked to study the response of the continuum to the penetration event. Central to the ability of continuum level analysis are (1) appropriate mesh discretization and treatment of numerical issues and (2) selection of appropriate constitutive models. The former has been extensively studied, and several important reviews of the subject have appeared ( A more recent approach to numerical modeling of penetration into granular media is to combine the continuum approach and the discrete approach into a multiscale analysis. One way this is done is to model structural elements using FEM and to employ DEM to model the granular media (e.g., In addition to the abovementioned numerical methods, other intermediate methods have also been employed in the literature for the study of rapid penetration into granular media. Some of these methods include (1) implementation of a three-phase Navier-Stokes system ( Despite these advances, however, numerical modeling of rapid penetration in granular media still suffers from shortcomings in modeling important phenomena such as particle breakage and its consequences for energy dissipation, as well as realistic modeling of granular and projectile-granular interactions and two-phase flow in saturated media. Addressing these issues, along with the application of emerging multiscale modeling approaches, such as peridynamics ( At the outset, when considering effects of soil properties on penetration, it is important to realize that the response of soil to HSR loading differs from that of its quasi-static response. Strain rates during penetration are given approximately by The effects of particle properties are related to crushing, discussed in this section, as well as porosity, addressed in the following section. When grains crush, or comminute, strain energy is dissipated through the formation of new surfaces, as well as other processes including friction, sound emission, and release of elastic energy ( The mechanical properties of granular media are also affected by grain shape and mineralogy. For example, increasing angularity of grains increases strength and dilatant behavior. There is a “critical breakdown” stress, below which shear is accompanied by grain rearrangement and dilatancy and above which grain fracture enables shear displacement. Mineralogy affects sand behavior via the grain strength. For example, carbonate sand grains are weaker than silicate grains. Sands composed of weaker grains have significantly lower shear resistances at all but the lowest pressures ( The relationship between particle crushing and penetration depth is still an open question. However, insight can be gained from a few carefully performed high-velocity (upper subsonic/supersonic regime) laboratory-scale penetration tests. These studies report that during penetration, as the projectile slows down to penetration velocities below approximately 70-100 Under quasi-static shear deformation, loose sand mainly compresses while dense sand tends to dilate. In general, greater porosity (or lower relative density) results in less penetration resistance, as shown in As a projectile penetrates a soil target, material is forced to move away from the projectile nose, thus reducing void ratio in the vicinity of the projectile body. The combination of this decrease in void ratio and the high rate of volume displacement results in an increase in pore pressures adjacent to the projectile in saturated soils. It has been suggested that the resulting pore pressure gradient causes flow of water upward in the vertical direction for downward penetrating projectiles, the magnitude of which may correlate with instantaneous projectile velocity and fluid viscosity. The majority of penetration tests reported in the geotechnical literature have been performed in dry sand, and less is known on the penetration resistance of saturated sand. It has been observed that pore fluid decreases penetration resistance, as shown in Important projectile properties that determine penetration depth into sand, aside from impact velocity, are strength, mass (or density), and shape. Mass and shape combine to form what is often the most important projectile parameter: mass per unit frontal area (or density Increasing the projectile diameter decreases its penetration depth, assuming constant mass ( The shape of a projectile nose also determines the nature of the stress waves generated and the nature of projectile-soil interactions during penetration. Numerical and analytic studies suggest that in supersonic penetration of sharper-angled projectile nose in sand, an attached shock wave forms along the surface of the nose, which travels with the projectile if the projectile is traveling at high enough velocities. Blunter nose shapes, however, form a more curved, detached shock wave front that travels ahead of the projectile ( The mass-to-area ratio is proportional to length, which is a fundamental ballistic property of elongated, long rod, projectiles. Normalization of penetration by projectile length is almost universal for elongated projectiles. Strength of the projectile is expressed by flow stress (for ductile materials) and fracture toughness (for brittle materials). For any projectile-soil combination, there will exist a Material properties are particularly important at high impact velocities where thermal and mechanical deformations occur. For example, in impact tests in the range of 500-2000 Impact cratering refers to the formation of a crater immediately after impact of a projectile on the soil surface. For an important class of cratering events, asteroid impact on granular media, the process can be divided into three stages ( The above applies to simple crater forms. More complex craters may form in impact of very large projectiles into layered targets, with the formation of central peaks and multiple rings, as discussed by The term on the left describes the ratio of mass of displaced soil to projectile mass, termed cratering efficiency. The first term (Froude number) on the right is the ratio of lithostatic pressure, Data from several studies of penetration into sand are gathered in While some studies suggest that soil porosity has little effect on crater depth, diameter, and volume below subsonic impact velocities ( Ricochet, by definition, occurs when the projectile is deflected so much that it exits the impact face of the target. Ricochet is usually associated with shallow penetration. The threshold obliquity angle beyond which ricochet cannot occur is referred to as the critical impact angle, Ricochet for small AoA may be separated into three stages: the entry phase, the plow phase, and the exit phase. In the entry phase, the projectile produces a pileup of sand in front of it, with negligible loss in velocity. In the second stage, sand continuously piles up in front of the projectile, with significant change in trajectory. Finally, the exit stage is associated with trajectory reversal, at an angle approximately equal to the obliquity angle. Other studies of ricochet ( Crater dimensions are related to the initial impact characteristics. For example, volume of sand removed from the crater is directly proportional to impact momentum. Length of the plow formed in the target is related to the impact velocity and nose shape but is independent of the projectile length. Resisting forces acting on the projectile body during ricochet are proportional to its instantaneous velocity. Study of oblique impact has also been driven in recent years by interest in the origin of large-scale impact features on the Earth and extraterrestrial planets (e.g., Effects of pitch and obliquity are strongly coupled for the case of long rods striking metals ( Projectile instability is the consequential deviation of the projectile axis from its velocity vector or the development of a curvilinear trajectory during penetration, which limits the maximum penetration depth in many practical cases. As a projectile impacts and penetrates a soil body, the resisting forces introduced along the nose and length of the projectile may be nonsymmetrical due to the anisotropic, inhomogeneous nature of natural soils. The sum of resisting forces acts at the center of pressure of the projectile. If the center of pressure is located ahead of the center of gravity, any deviation of the center of pressure will produce a torque. Once the projectile develops an AoA within the soil, the stresses are higher on the windward side, which can lead to a curved trajectory. Projectile instability may initiate as a result of several phenomena: Asymmetrical loading of the projectile at impact and during penetration due to particulate nature of granular soils ( The presence of larger size grains in an otherwise uniform granular media ( Projectile failure and disintegration at high penetration velocities ( Increased frictional interactions in the granular media, as evidenced in Small deviations from axial symmetry of the projectile nose Instability is favored by increase in impact velocity ( The shape of the projectile nose may also contribute to instability, particularly at higher impact velocities, where the projectile-soil interaction is mainly along the projectile nose. Analytic predictions suggest that the formation of a standoff bow shock at high velocities improves projectile stability ( There are several other phenomena not considered above, which have yet to be treated in a systematic way with respect to penetration of granular materials and whose significance is almost entirely unknown. One is vaporization of pore fluid, which would be expected at a high enough penetration velocity and which might absorb energy. Another is cavity collapse. Researchers in Because of its importance in several engineering fields, there has been increased interest recently in the study of granular media subject to impact and penetration. Many new research tools have been developed, as documented elsewhere in this volume. New data and understanding are emerging. Nevertheless, many research issues remain to be elucidated, particularly at the smaller scales where new visualization techniques are most applicable. Thus, study of the dynamic response of granular materials in general, and penetration in particular, is likely to yield many exciting and valuable results in the coming years.