We describe folate receptor targeted thermosensitive magnetic liposomes, which are designed to combine features of biological and physical (magnetic) drug targeting for use in magnetic hyperthermia-triggered drug release. The optimized liposome formulation DPPC:cholesterol:DSPE-PEG2000:DSPE-PEG2000-Folate at 80:20:4.5:0.5 molar ratio showed calcein release of about 70% both in PBS and in 50% FBS (fetal bovine serum) at 43°C and less than 5% release at 37°C following 1h incubation. Folate-targeted doxorubicin-containing magnetic liposomes of the above lipid composition (MagFolDox) showed encapsulation efficiencies of about 85% and 24% for doxorubicin and magnetic nanoparticles (mean crystallite size 10nm), respectively. This magnetic formulation displayed the desired temperature sensitivity with 52% doxorubicin release in 50% fetal bovine serum (FBS) following 1h incubation at 43°C. MagFolDox, when physically targeted to tumor cells in culture by a permanent magnetic field yielded a substantial increase in cellular uptake of doxorubicin as compared to Caelyx® (a commercially available liposomal doxorubicin preparation), non-magnetic folate-targeted liposomes (FolDox) and free doxorubicin in folate receptor expressing tumor cell lines (KB and HeLa cells). This resulted in a parallel increase in cytotoxicity over Caelyx® and FolDox. Magnetic hyperthermia at 42.5°C and 43.5°C synergistically increased the cytotoxicity of MagFolDox. The results suggest that an integrated concept of biological and physical drug targeting, triggered drug release and hyperthermia based on magnetic field influence can be used advantageously for thermo-chemotherapy of cancers.With the advent of nanotechnology, research in drug delivery systems has got a new pace and dimension. Following decades of research, nanometer sized liposomal formulations count among the most advanced delivery systems for cytotoxic drugs. A liposome based doxorubicin formulation (Caelyx®, Schering-Plough; DOXIL Folate receptor targeting has been found to be promising in liposomal drug delivery to cancers Magnetic nanoparticles are known for their immense potential in the field of drug and gene delivery, cancer diagnostics and therapeutics Phospholipids were purchased from Avanti Polar Lipids, USA. All other chemicals, unless otherwise mentioned, were from Sigma-Aldrich. All chemicals were analytical grade and were used without further purification. The conjugate 1, 2-distearoyl- Different compositions of phospholipids [1,2-dipalmitoyl- The calcein release assay Liposomes of different compositions without calcein were prepared in PBS following a similar procedure as described for calcein loaded liposomes preparation. DSC was performed to know the phase transition temperature of the different liposome compositions using a VP-DSC calorimeter (MicroCal, GE Healthcare, Freiburg, Germany) at a heating rate of 20 FluidMag-HS is a commercially available aqueous suspension of iron oxide magnetic nanoparticles (Chemicell GmbH, Berlin, Germany) synthesized by the aqueous route. In a screening of several particle types from Chemicell, FluidMag-HS was found to be stable against aggregation in 250 The heating ability of the FluidMag-HS and magnetic liposomes (MagFolLip, composition — DPPC:Chol:DSPE-PEG Co-encapsulation of magnetic nanoparticles and doxorubicin within DPPC:Chol:DSPE-PEG The doxorubicin encapsulation efficiency was calculated using the following formula: The magnetic liposomes containing doxorubicin (Sample code — MagFolDox) were characterized by transmission electron microscopy with an accelerating voltage of 80 Cryo-TEM was performed to visualize the morphology of MagFolDox liposomes. For this purpose, a drop of diluted sample was put on holey carbon grids and then the excess sample was removed by blotting with filter paper. Thereafter, the grids were plunged into liquid ethane using an automated plunger and transferred into a grid holder kept in liquid nitrogen. The samples were mounted in a cryo specimen holder and observed in a Cryo-TEM instrument (Tecnai F30 G2 Polara, FEI Company, Eindhoven, The Netherlands). The assay was carried out in analogy to the calcein release assay described above, based on the fact that doxorubicin displays self-quenching properties within liposomes and fluorescence increase when released into the surrounding medium KB (human epidermoid carcinoma) and HeLa (human cervical carcinoma) cell lines were purchased from DSMZ, Germany. The cells were cultivated in folic acid-deficient RPMI medium (Sigma-Aldrich) supplemented with 10% fetal calf serum and penicillin/streptomycin (Biochrom, Germany) at 37 The expression of α-folate receptor in KB and HeLa cells was evaluated by FACS using an anti-α-folate-receptor antibody (Alexis Biochemicals, Switzerland) KB/HeLa cells were seeded in 24-well plates at 3 KB/HeLa cells were seeded in 24-well plates at 4 Photographs of the cells (following 2 Cytotoxicity was determined by MTS assay (The Promega CellTiter 96 The cytotoxic effects (single or combined) of magnetic hyperthermia and chemotherapy were evaluated with KB cells. Controls were untreated cells and treatments with magnetically targeted magnetic liposomes (without doxorubicin; MagFolLip) only, with AC magnetic field only and untreated cells. Treatment groups were magnetic hyperthermia mediated by MagFolLip (magnetically targeted magnetic liposomes without doxorubicin) only, magnetically targeted MagFolDox liposomes (applied at a concentration of 20 Then, for the untreated control group, cells were trypsinized, washed with PBS, resuspended in medium and seeded in a 96-well plate at a density of 20,000 cells per well for another 48 For the MagFolDox only treatment, the cells in the 24-well plate were incubated for a total of 2 For the MagFolDox treatment combined with magnetic hyperthermia, the cells were treated in the same as described above for the MagFolDox only treatment. After trypsinization, the cells were resuspended in 500 For all treatment groups, the cell viability was determined by the MTS assay as described before (The Promega Cell Titer 96 DSPE-PEG For optimizing lipid compositions in terms of temperature sensitivity, calcein loaded liposomes were prepared. All calcein-containing liposome samples had hydrodynamic diameters below 200 From the DSC thermogram ( XRD analysis of the FluidMag-HS, a magnetic nanoparticle preparation obtained from Chemicell GmbH, Berlin, Germany, confirmed the presence of pure phase of Fe  The doxorubicin encapsulation efficiency in folate-targeted doxorubicin-containing liposomes (FolDox) was 94   First, we characterized the α-folate receptor (FR) status of KB and HeLa cells cultivated in folate-deficient medium by FACS analysis following incubation with a monoclonal anti-FR-α antibody. Both cell lines were 100% FR-α positive and KB cells displayed higher FR expression levels than HeLa cells (data not shown).  As shown in From fluorescence micrographs of different liposomes and free doxorubicin treated KB cells (   A major challenge in chemotherapy of cancer is achieving therapeutic drug levels in tumor tissue while avoiding side-effect causing drug concentrations in non-target tissues. An optimized delivery system for cytotoxic drugs would have biophysical properties (stealth properties) such as Caelyx®/DOXIL The first step was optimizing a lipid composition for temperature sensitivity using a calcein release assay. This was achieved with DPPC as the main lipid component, which shows a transition from gel to liquid crystalline phase at around 41–42 FluidMag-HS, an aqueous magnetic fluid containing particles of 10 Doxorubicin and magnetic particles were successfully co-encapsulated with the optimized lipid composition yielding the liposome formulations listed in Cellular association/uptake experiments were carried out in KB and HeLa cells to evaluate the contributions of targeting options implemented in the liposomes (folate receptor targeting and magnetic targeting). HeLa cells were found to express lower levels of folate receptor than KB cells, in agreement with the literature MagFolDox under magnetic targeting displayed the highest cytotoxicity at 37 Taken together, our findings demonstrate the feasibility of generating a multifunctional delivery system that integrates modules for biological targeting, gradient magnetic field targeting, temperature triggered drug release and synergism of pharmacological drug action with AC magnetic field hyperthermia. Other researchers have shown that the accumulation of PEG-shielded liposomes in tumor tissue upon intravenous administration in mice is to a large extent governed by the enhanced permeability and retention (EPR) effect A temperature sensitive folate-targeted doxorubicin-containing magnetic liposome has been developed for thermo-chemotherapy of cancer. The liposome consists of DPPC Cholesterol DSPE-PEG Financial supports from the  Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at