Gas dispersion is one of the key factors in the mineral flotation process articulated by many variables such as bubble size, gas hold-up, gas superficial velocity and bubble surface area flux (Sb). In this work, experiments were carried out on column flotation (5.08cm in diameter and 180cm height) with different types of reagents to evaluate the gas hold-up. The gas hold-up was measured using pressure difference technique. The parameters were optimized for enhanced gas hold-up for better flotation performance. The influence of operating parameters comprising different reagents' dosage/type and their mixture combination on gas hold-up was discussed in detail. Based on the experimental data, the dimensionless correlations were developed to predict the gas hold-up within the range of parameters studied. The correlations are found to be able to predict gas hold-up with acceptable accuracy.Gas dispersion is one of the key factors in the mineral flotation process. Flotation requires the formation of a stable bubble-particle aggregate which helps the particle to be carried out from the pulp. The stability of the aggregate depends on the interfacial free energies or the corresponding interfacial tensions of the solid/liquid, solid/vapor and liquid/vapor interfaces, which are responsible for attachment process. The tendency of replacement of solid/liquid by solid/vapor interface depends on the hydrophobicity of the floated particles. Recent publications In general, a variety of organic and inorganic reagents are used in the flotation process, such as frothers, collectors, pH regulator and depressant. Collector adsorbs on the surface of the particle to make the surface hydrophobic. The interactions between frothers and collectors have been widely reported The previous communication Previous researchers have raised the possibility that different frothers give different gas hold-up and bubble size dependence In the present study, an attempt is made to develop the correlations for gas hold-up in flotation column based on the reagent characteristics such as collectors like kerosene and diesel oil, frothers such as pine oil, methyl-isobutyl carbinol, Nalco-9840, eucalyptus oil and ethyl alcohol, sodium carbonate as modifier, sodium silicate as depressant and process variables such as air rate, water rate. Summary of the reagents properties used is given in The measurement of gas hold-up in column flotation is carried out with commercial grade frothers such as pine oil, MIBC, Nalco-9840, eucalyptus oil and ethyl alcohol and collectors namely kerosene and diesel oil are selected for the measurement. The measurement of gas hold-up is also carried out with 10% sodium carbonate as pH regulator and depressant as sodium silicate solution according to the plant conditions. The compressed air to sparger is obtained from air compressor through the air filter. The air flow rate was measured by using rotameter. The required quantity of water with and without mixing of reagent dosage was added to the flotation column. The mechanical stirring facilitates the reagents to become homogenized before sending to the column. Air was supplied at different volumetric flow rates to the sparger to generate the bubbles in the water phase. The schematic of the laboratory column flotation experimental setup was used for the present work and shown in Internal sparger is used in the present work, because with internal sparger material has a modest effect on bubble size. Flexible sparger is preferred over rigid sparger as they are less prone to the plugging by particles. The metallurgical performance in ceramic type diffuser is better in comparison with filter cloth. It has been noted that irrespective of sparger type, as the superficial sparger area decreases, the bubble size increases and vice-versa. In external sparger, the air and the liquid are contacted outside the column, and the mixture is carried through a pipe into the column from which it is expelled through holes about 1 The experiments were carried out with water at different air flow rates with different reagents by varying their dosage. The column was thoroughly washed after each experimental run. All the experiments were carried out at ambient temperature. The mechanical stirring facilitates the reagents to become homogenized before sending to the column. The requisite volume of water without/with mixing of required reagent dosage was added to the flotation column through funnel fitted on the column top. Air at pressure 2 The experiments were also carried out without adding reagents. The water volume was varied from 1 to 3 The initial height of water at different volumes without passing air is shown in The gas is introduced into the column, a liquid or slurry is displaced. The volumetric fraction displaced is called the gas hold-up, ε The air flow rate increased in arithmetic progression from 1 to 10l/min with a step interval of 1 Previous studies The full factorial designs of experiments were conducted before the selection of reagents, reagent mixture and their dosages. The results of individual frothers and mixture of frothers are shown in From the figure, it is observed that the individual MIBC frother is more effective than other individual frothers at a concentration of 0.04 Similar observations The effect of frother dosage on gas hold-up is shown in The experiments were carried out with two different collectors such as kerosene and diesel oil individually. The results are shown in With the same conditions, the full factorial designs of experiments were conducted to assess the effect of different frothers and collectors and their combinations at various proportions. The effect of collectors such as kerosene and diesel oil with the selected frother of MIBC and ethyl alcohol of 90:10 ratios on gas hold-up was studied. It is observed that the mixture of frother MIBC and ethyl alcohol of 90:10 with kerosene (ratio at 10:90) as collector gives better results compared to the diesel oil and the comparative results are shown in Experiments were carried out with sodium carbonate modifier and sodium silicate at varying dosages according to the plant conditions to know the gas hold-up effect. The modifier and depressant did not improve the volume of gas hold-up due to the increase in surface tension. It is evidenced from the results that the percentage of gas hold-up is very minimal compared to the water. This may be due to the increase in surface tension that leads to the reduction of the froth formation. Sodium silicate is used as a depressant and measured the gas hold-up. 10% sodium silicate solution was prepared from its pure compound as mentioned in In summary, the results indicated that the volume of gas hold-up is increasing steadily with an increase in the volume of water. It is also observed that the gas hold-up volume increases significantly with the addition of dipolar surfactants like frothers. The increase in gas hold-up is due to the decrease in surface tension thereby the generation of micro bubbles in column. The gas hold-up was determined from the data obtained from all the experiments. The data generated were used to develop a correlation in terms of process parameters, such as volume of water, air rate and concentration of different reagents. It was found that data with different reagents could be combined using regression analysis. The dimensionless groups involved in the correlation are the ratio of volume of water to the optimum volume of water, air rate to the optimum air rate and frother concentration to the optimum frother concentration. Similarly, the data from different particle size groups could be brought together by including individual effects as well as combined effect in the correlation. The regression analysis of the present data consisting of 250 data points of individual MIBC resulted in the following dimensionless correlation: The regression analysis of the present data consisting of 1500 data points of mixture of frothers resulted in the following dimensionless correlation: In the correlation, it is not shown as a separate entity, however, the effect of proportion of the mixture of frother data points has been considered while developing correlation The regression analysis of the present data consisting of 250 data points of mixture of frother and collector at optimum conditions resulted in the following dimensionless correlation: The effect of the proportion of mixture of frother and in the presence of collector was studied and the corresponding data points have been considered while developing the above correlation. In all the correlations, the values of V In this work, the volume of water, air flow rate, reagent concentration and reagent dosage were optimized for the better gas hold-up. The mixture of MIBC and ethyl alcohol with 90:10 ratio frothers was found to have better performance compared to the individual performance of MIBC and ethyl alcohol. However, MIBC yields better efficiency compared to individual ethyl alcohol. A dimensionless model has been developed to predict the gas hold-up using the experimental data. The correlations can be used to predict the gas hold-up for a given set of operating conditions within the parameters range studied. The model can predict the gas hold-up with reasonable accuracy.  methyl-isobutyl carbinol flottec-150 dowfroths-250 critical coalescence concentration sparger air rotameter gas hold-up volume of water, liter optimum volume of water, liter air rate, l/min optimum air rate, l/min frother concentration, ml optimum frother concentration, ml root means square error The authors express their thanks to the Chairman and Managing Director, TAMIN, Chennai and Scientists, CSIR-IMMT, Bhubaneswar for providing relevant support and encouragement in preparing the manuscript.