In this study, a novel harvesting emulsion (HEM) consisting of cooking oil in an aqueous solution of cetyltrimethylammonium bromide (CTAB) was tested for the harvesting of a technologically important microalga, Chlorella vulgaris. The influence of HEM dose, biomass and bovine serum albumin (BSA) (model interferer compound) on harvesting efficiency (E) were studied. The HEM E was over 90% at pH 10 (0.33% (v/v) cooking oil, 6.7 mg/L of CTAB) and 12 (0.13% (v/v) cooking oil, 2.7 mg/L of CTAB). Harvesting efficiencies at pH 4 and 7 were < 73.5% due to the absence of precipitate formation. Bovine serum albumin (10 mg/L) increased the HEM dose necessary to achieve E ˃ 90% by 1.2 (pH 10), and 3 fold (pH 12). By manipulating the dose of HEM and pH, the method of harvesting (flocculation/sedimentation or flotation) was adjustable depending on the technological requirements.Microalgae can be used for food, feed, biofuels and high value-added products. However, their large-scale production is often not economically viable. One of the key bottlenecks in microalgal production is harvesting because of the dilute character of the biomass suspension (0.5 to 5.0 g/L), small cell size (5 to 50 μm in diameter) and stability in suspension due to surface charge ( Methods with the potential for microalgal pre-concentration prior to harvesting include various flocculation and flotation techniques ( Flotation is also a promising method, with high efficiency and rapid recovery ( An alternative flotation approach is partitioning of microalgae at an oil–water interface, created by droplets of waste cooking oil. Oil flotation was applied to the oleaginous phagotrophic microalga, In this work, a new oil-surfactant-based flocculation/flotation agent was developed using food grade cooking oil (rapeseed) and a cationic surfactant, CTAB, for harvesting of The microalga After 7 days of cultivation, the cells were centrifuged (4000 rpm, 10 min) and washed twice with distilled water to remove metabolites and residues of the culture medium.The biomass was then used for contact angle (CA), zeta potential (ZP) measurements, and harvesting tests. The surface properties of The zeta potential measurements of The pH 4–12 of FMM was adjusted with H The novel HEM was prepared using a cooking oil (rapeseed oil, Tesco, Czech Republic) and CTAB (Sigma, United Kingdom) solution in water (1 g/L) at a ratio of 1:2 (v/v), and maintained under agitation at 1000 rpm for 10 min prior to use. HEM doses of 2, 4, 7 and 10 mL The emulsion droplets were characterized by size distribution using laser diffraction (Mastersizer 2000, Malvern, UK). Samples were diluted in distilled water and tests were performed in triplicate according to Microalgal harvesting with HEM was tested in FMM using a set concentration of The absorbance of each microalgal suspension was measured at 680 nm (A The collected samples were also characterized by chlorophyll content. Each cell suspension (5 mL) was centrifuged (10 min, 6000 rpm) and the cell pellet was vortexed (90 s) with glass beads (3 mL, 1 mm) and 1 mL methanol. Four mL of methanol was then added and the samples were incubated for 50 min at 55 °C. The suspension was centrifuged (10 min, 6000 rpm) and the supernatant was filtered (0.22 µm) and used to determine the chlorophyll content by absorbance at 666 nm (A The harvesting efficiency (E, %) was calculated using the following equation:  A post hoc Scheffe's test was used to assess significant differences between the results. All statements of significance were based on a probability of Solubility equilibria of inorganic species in model solutions were calculated with Visual MINTEQ, version 3.1. (KHT, Sweden). The thermodynamic model of interaction energies is capable of predicting the final energy efficiency of cell–cell interactions in water. The total surface tension (γ Zeta potential measurements of The effect of CTAB on an oil–water emulsion is known to promote the reduction of oil–water interfacial tension, which can be observed by the decreasing size distribution of droplets in the emulsion ( The novel harvesting agent was tested at 5 doses and 4 pH values (4, 7, 10 and 12) ( The visually identifiable harvesting method is indicated in For high E of microalgae harvested by flotation, a high ZP difference between the cells and surfactant is required ( It has been reported that inorganic precipitates (e.g. Mg The fact that the precipitates formed at pH 10 and 12 played a role in harvesting is also supported by the observed E at zero HEM dose. When no HEM was added, E = 35.8% and 64.6% was observed at pH 10 and 12, respectively, while at pH 4 and 7, close to zero E was obtained ( Proteins and polysaccharides are the major compounds found in organic matter released during microalgal cultivation, called algal organic matter (AOM) ( The results were reported as HEM dose (HEM90) necessary to achieve E = 90% as a function of BSA concentration ( Concentrations of SHEM90 was the highest at the lowest X, remaining almost constant at X ˃ 0.5 g When comparing several methods applied to In addition, the dose of cooking oil used in this work (0.33% vol.) was 30 times lower and the process time was 6 times shorter (5 min) than required for waste cooking oil flotation (10% vol.), with 30 min process time ( The cost analysis of DAF using glass microspheres showed significantly lower electricity consumption when the process did not require bubble generation ( A novel harvesting agent for the separation of microalgae using a cooking oil emulsion in CTAB solution was developed and tested for the green alga  The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. Authors Tomáš Potočár and Luan de Souza Leite contributed equally. This research was supported by the Supplementary data to this article can be found online at The following are the Supplementary data to this article: