The effect of the addition of various additives on the kinetics of cobalt removal and zinc-dust dissolution in an industrial zinc electrolyte solution during cementation was investigated. Optimum cobalt removal with minimal zinc-dust dissolution occurs at 85°C with the addition of 15 mg/L copper, 10 mg/L cadmium and 2 mg/L antimony, using 3.5 g/L zinc dust. It was determined that tin could substitute antimony, but a substantially greater concentration of tin is required for adequate cobalt removal. At temperatures 85–90°C, the amount of dissolved zinc dust was always less than 10% of the initially-added zinc dust, but increased up to 80% at 95°C. For different additive combinations, there was no effect on zinc-dust dissolution.
                  The initial rate of cobalt removal was satisfactorily fitted to a first-order rate equation. The apparent rate constant was determined to be 1.6±0.2×10−3 s−1 at 85°C and initial conditions of [Cu]=[Cd]=30 mg/L, [Sb]=2 mg/L, [Co]=8–30 mg/L and Zn dust=3.5 g/L. Under similar initial conditions, it was found that the initial rate constant was dependent on the surface area of zinc dust available, up to approximately 6 m2/L (3.5 g/L zinc dust), after which a plateau was observed. The apparent activation energy for the process was estimated equal to 51 kJ/mol. This high value suggests that the cobalt removal process is controlled by a surface chemical reaction.The presence of impurities in a zinc electrolyte solution is problematic for the electrowinning process. Impurities act as catalysts for hydrogen evolution, which leads to a large drop in current efficiency. Therefore, adequate purification of the zinc electrolyte before electrowinning is essential. The most critical part of the purification process is the removal of cobalt by cementation with zinc dust. The extremely slow kinetics of the cementation reaction of cobalt on zinc means that “activators” are required, that is elements which enhance the rate of cobalt cementation and render the cementation process viable. The two main activation methods used in industry to affect cobalt cementation are the addition of arsenic and copper, or antimony and copper, the latter being the focus of this work A recent study at McGill University, in collaboration with Noranda/CEZinc, looked into the role of chloride, cadmium, and lead ions on the efficiency of the cobalt cementation process in conjunction with the antimony–copper activation process. In addition, many other elements were investigated as substitutes for antimony. As a result of this previous work Batch cementation tests were conducted at the desired temperature in a sealed, baffled, water-jacketed glass vessel. Agitation was achieved using an axial-mixing type impeller with six flat blades inclined at 45° rotating at 1000 min The zinc dust, which was water atomised and contained 0.7–1% lead, and purified zinc sulphate electrolyte solution were obtained from Noranda/CEZinc (Valleyfield, Québec, Canada). The purified zinc electrolyte contained 145 g/L Zn(II) and only very low levels of metal impurities Tests were performed to determine the optimum operating conditions for cobalt cementation using a purified industrial zinc sulphate solution spiked with cobalt. The target cobalt concentration was 0.1 mg/L. Initial tests were performed to determine the best operating temperature and set of additives. The pH was maintained at 4 to prevent the precipitation of zinc salts. The reproducibility of the cobalt removal kinetics experiments was not very good. As illustrated in The cobalt removal results at temperatures of 95, 90 and 85°C are given in  The percentage of dissolved zinc dust is given in As greater cobalt removal was obtained at 85°C with little zinc-dust dissolution, further tests were conducted at this temperature. From an industrial point of view, the lower temperature is beneficial not only because it decreases energy consumption in the purification stage, but also decreases the amount of cooling necessary before electrowinning. At the three temperatures, it is also obvious that the addition of cadmium to the Cu/Sb system has a beneficial effect on cobalt removal, as was also found in previous work conducted at 95°C and using a synthetic electrolyte Further optimisation, at 85°C, was performed for the additive systems Cu/Cd/Sb and Cu/Cd/Sn. The addition of lead was not further pursued because its addition to the Cu/Cd/Sb system did not show substantial improvement at this temperature. For the additive system Cu/Cd/Sb, the initial cadmium and copper concentrations were optimised. The results are given in Tin was investigated as an additive to see if it could be used to replace antimony, as previous data showed some promising results The effect of initial cobalt concentration, between 1.5 and 30 mg/L, on the initial rate of cobalt removal was investigated, with the results shown in The effect of the initial concentration of zinc dust added was investigated with the results given in From Following the same procedure as in The rate of cobalt cementation is dependent on the rates of diffusion of impurity ions to the zinc particle, and of diffusion of zinc ions away from the particle, and also on the rates of the oxidation–reduction reactions The optimum conditions for the removal of cobalt from an industrial zinc sulphate electrolyte solution were determined to be the addition of 15 mg/L Cu, 10 mg/L Cd, and 2 mg/L Sb at 85°C. At these conditions, the zinc-dust dissolution was less than 10%. It was found that tin could be used to replace antimony in this system, but a concentration of at least one order of magnitude higher was required to obtain similar cobalt removal, which renders the process uneconomical. It was found that zinc-dust dissolution was much higher at 95°C than at 90°C or 85°C. At the lower temperatures, the zinc-dust dissolution was always less than 10%, but increased up to 80% at the higher temperature. For different additive combinations, there was no effect on zinc-dust dissolution. The value of the apparent rate constant for the initial rate of cobalt removal was determined to be 1.6±0.2×10 Provision of funding, zinc dust, and zinc electrolyte solution by Noranda/CEZinc is gratefully acknowledged. Additional funding from the Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council of Canada (NSERC) is also appreciated.