In this paper the results from simulations performed using a hydrodynamic model proposed by Artoni et al. [Chem. Eng. Sci. 64 (2009a) 4040–4050] have been compared with published data of an extensive experimental investigation carried out at the Tel-Tek Research Institute in Porsgrunn, Norway. The experiments collected several data and observations on the wall stresses and the flow patterns observed during discharge of a full-scale funnel flow silo with and without inserts. The comparison between simulation and experiments showed the ability of the model to capture quantitatively the main features of both the flow and of the wall stress profiles when flow corrective inserts are put in the hopper of the silo in order to convert the discharge regime to a mass flow regime. Moreover information such as the stresses on the internals, which are difficult or impossible to get experimentally, have been collected from the simulations and discussed.mean particle diameter gravity coefficient of diffusion of the fluctuating energy parameter in the diffusion coefficient of fluctuating energy fluctuating energy diffusivity tensor dimensionless slip length parameter isotropic part of the stress tensor (pressure) energy flux average velocity field fluctuating velocity field dissipation rate of mechanical energy shear rate non-Newtonian viscosity coefficient parameter in the viscosity coefficient granular temperature granular temperature scale in the viscosity coefficient slip length effective friction coefficient deviatoric stress tensor bulk density shear stress angle of internal friction Industrial granular flows in confined geometries as those present in silos can present important issues with respect to both the velocity and the stress fields. The discharge flow regime might need to be improved in order to keep residence times of the material sufficiently uniform, to avoid the formation of stagnant zones or to reduce segregation. This corresponds working in the mass flow regime instead of the funnel or core flow regimes. Also the understanding and prediction of stresses is crucial because of the need to prevent problems such as particles comminution, arching or even silo collapse ( Most of the published experiments on the use of inserts are performed in small model silos ( Simulations can be carried out with two approaches: discrete and continuum. The first one, known as DEM (discrete element method), models the dynamics of the medium at the particle scale, applying force balances on each particle. Simulations of silos with inserts have been carried out for example by In this work, we use a phenomenological hydrodynamic model that was developed in a previous work ( The aim of this work is to go further by comparing the simulations obtained using the same hydrodynamic model to full-scale data obtained from an independent source in relatively complicated geometries such those represented by the flow corrective inserts in the hopper of a funnel flow silo. In the following the assumptions of the model and its equations will be very briefly summarized. The reader interested in the details and in the full derivation of the model should refer to the previously cited work ( The flowing granular material can be modeled as a continuum pseudofluid through the conservation equations for mass, linear momentum and translational kinetic energy. The effect of the interstitial fluid have been neglected, the pseudofluid has been considered incompressible and the stress tensor assumed symmetric. With these assumptions the conservation equations can be written as: The effective viscosity has been formulated to depend on granular temperature in such a way to contain the phenomenology of the relationship between bulk fluidity and local mobility analogous to that of glassy systems ( The system of conservation equations, can be conveniently solved through any general purpose PDE solver. Simulations were carried out with the commercial code Comsol Multiphysics 4.3a. A triangular mesh was used. Mesh size inside the silo was 0.2 The experiments ( The material used in the experiments was dry and cohesionless crushed quartz sand. The properties of the sand are resumed in The wall loads were measured with the aid of 10 pressure cells mounted along the walls, 7 in the hopper (H1–H3, T4–T7) and 3 in the cylindrical part (C8–C10). In the following the procedure for calculations will be first described together with the estimation of model parameters, and finally a comparison between modeling and experimental results will be performed. As explained in Section The silo without inserts discharged in funnel flow regime with a considerable stagnant zone at the hopper wall. Here only a qualitative comparison with experiments can be given since tracer experiments identified the presence of the funnel but could not give the exact description of the flow. In the simulations, for sake of visualization, three different zones have been identified in the silo during discharge: a central rapidly flowing channel which was surrounded by a slowly flowing zone and a stagnant zone near the silo wall. The transition between the zone was smooth and the boundary values reported in For the stress profiles the comparisons have been possible on a more quantitative ground. It was found a nice agreement between the simulated normal and tangential stresses at the wall and the experimental ones as shown in In the tangential stress profile two peaks were observed: the lower corresponded to the transition from the cylindrical section to the hopper; the upper corresponded to the transition from the flowing granular material to the stagnant zone. These observations will be discussed with greater details also in a dedicated section in the following. Simulations with inserts in the silo showed the expected modification of the flow channel. In particular, with the double cone insert (DC I, The simulated results for the double cone and the cone in cone gave very similar stress profiles with some difference at the transition between the cylindrical and converging part of the silo. The cone in cone stress peak was lower than the one predicted for the double cone. Also in the experiments the same decrease was observed ( In general there was agreement between the Tel-Tek experiments and the model predictions even though the simulated stress peaks tended to slightly underestimate the experimental ones. It is however remarkable that the difference (shift) of the stress peaks between the two silo configurations is the same in the experiments and in the simulations suggesting that a separate calibration of the parameters for the case with inserts would improve further the result. In the silo with inverted cone (IC I) the central rapidly flowing channel widened and the stagnant zone decreased with respect to the configuration without insert. However the flow did not convert completely from funnel flow to mass flow ( The simulated normal wall stress profiles with IC I are reported in Cone in cone inserts (CC I and CC III) both widened the flow channel but did not remove the stagnant zone completely ( As already discussed the inserts CC I gave slightly smaller stress peaks than experiments. For CC III there was a good fitting along all the silo wall ( The possibility of simulating the flow gives the possibility of performing observations which can be difficult or impossible to collect from the experiments. In the following tangential wall stresses will be related to the mobility of the material using the granular temperature maps and the stress profile on the internal inserts will be briefly discussed. Tangential stresses at the wall can give information on the internal flow patterns. In In Information on the stresses exerted by the moving sand on the inserts were not available from the experiments since pressure cells were placed only on the external walls of the silo. The simulations however allowed us to obtain stress information also on the inserts wall. In The double cone geometry, DC I, in particular was characterized by fast decreasing stresses on the upper cone wall followed by an abrupt decrease at the transition with the lower cone and then by a slow decrease to zero at the outlet of the silo. In this work a continuum model was used to simulate the dense flow of dry sand in a full-scale silo with a shallow hopper operating in funnel flow. The effect of flow corrective inserts was studied. The results of the simulations have been presented in terms of flow patterns and wall stresses during the emptying of the silo with and without inserts. The simulations have been compared with experimental data from literature. The model was first calibrated on data without inserts and then used to predict the flow and stress profiles for the case with inserts. The results showed that model can capture qualitatively and quantitatively several aspects of the flow and the stress profiles. The model, once accurate calibration of the parameters is provided, demonstrated the potential of being used as a predictive tool. Furthermore the model allowed to obtain information on the internal stresses (on the inserts for example) and on the material mobility which are difficult to obtain by experiments and can be relevant for design purposes. However several aspects remains to be explored. On the model side further experimental and numerical work (for example DEM simulations) are required in order to better define the physics which underlies some of the parameters of the model. On the simulation side since the model has demonstrated the ability of simulating steady state flow conditions in relatively complicated silo geometries a future improvement will be the simulation also of the non-steady condition created by the presence of a moving interface between solid and air while the silo is emptying.