Procedures for 3D mineral liberation analysis by X-ray micro CT (XMT) are presented and discussed including the construction of liberation-limited grade/recovery curves for specific feed materials. In this way, actual separation efficiencies can be compared to what might be expected for a perfect separation limited only by the extent of liberation. It is shown that 3D mineral liberation analysis based on XMT is preferred to 2D section analysis which overestimates the extent of liberation. By way of example, procedures and experimental results are presented and discussed for feed material in the case of phosphate rock flotation.Characterization of feed material with respect to expected concentrate grade and recovery is fundamental to the design of improved separation efficiencies and to achieve sustainable development in the utilization of our mineral resources. An important reference point for this characterization is the liberation-limited grade/recovery curve which represents the perfect separation, the best separation which can be achieved for a given feed material limited only by the extent of liberation. Now, liberation-limited grade/recovery curves can be determined based on 3D mineral liberation analysis of feed material. Grade/recovery curves are determined by equipment design, operating conditions (magnetic field, reagent addition, percent solids, etc.), and particle properties (size, shape, and composition). All these factors can influence the shape of the grade/recovery curve or the efficiency of separation. At the end of the day, however, with the best equipment and the best operating conditions, the separation efficiency is limited by the liberation state of the particle population and this liberation state is reflected in the general characteristics of liberation-limited grade/recovery curves as illustrated in In principle such liberation-limited grade/recovery curves can be calculated from mineral liberation analysis of the feed material. Traditionally the mineral liberation analysis has been done qualitatively by microscopic examination of polished sections and it has long been recognized that in so doing the extent of liberation is overestimated ( The object of this research is to describe the utility of XMT with respect to 3D mineral liberation analysis and demonstrate how the liberation-limited grade/recovery curve can be calculated from XMT mineral liberation spectra. Results from phosphate flotation separations are used to illustrate this point and show why 3D liberation analysis is preferred to 2D section analysis. Modern 3D image-acquisition techniques, such as X-ray micro CT (XMT), offer a unique imaging capability to produce high-resolution (a few micrometers) three-dimensional images of the internal structure of multiphase particulate samples. In this regard, XMT can be used for the direct examination and analysis of multiphase packed particle beds. X-ray tomographic reconstruction produces a three-dimensional map of X-ray attenuation coefficients of the irradiated cross-section of the multiphase particles. Differentiation of features within the packed particle bed is possible because the linear attenuation coefficient ( Typically the particulate sample is simply packed in a cylindrical plastic container up to 40 mm in diameter and mounted on the XMT stage. Special sample preparation procedures are not necessary. A complete scan at 20-micron resolution can be achieved within 40 min. Based on the reconstructed XMT data, several additional algorithms are needed to properly implement the three-dimensional mineral compositional distribution analysis for the particle population. It is not a trivial exercise to automatically separate connected objects (both particles and dispersed mineral grains inside each particle) in a 3-D digital image if the surfaces of the objects are not smooth, which is frequently the situation encountered in mineral processing systems. Furthermore, large amounts of computer memory are required to manipulate the reconstructed 3-D array of XMT image data. 3D image processing algorithms have been developed to provide not only the mineral composition distribution, but also a very detailed accounting for each of the multiphase particles in the particle population including grain size distribution, interfacial area, shape features, and textural information ( The major data processing steps and corresponding algorithms for mineral composition distribution have been discussed in the literature ( For example, The four phosphate samples used for the present study are classified into two good feed samples and two bad feed samples according to recovery using fatty acid flotation. These samples come from Florida phosphate operations and are composed essentially of quartz and phosphate mineral in variable percentages. In addition subordinate amounts of clay minerals (kaolinite, illite, and montmorillonite), gypsum and carbonate minerals (mainly dolomite) are found in minor quantities. For the good feed samples most of the phosphate mineral particles are transferred into the concentrate and the phosphate mineral percentage in the good tails does not exceed 1.5%. In contrast, for the bad feed samples there is not so much difference between the grades of the concentrate and tailing products. The feed and concentrate grades and recovery are given in The phosphate feed and flotation products (concentrate, and tailings) were studied for each sample by XMT at a resolution of 20 µm. Sliced sections in 2D were obtained at 800 µm intervals of the packed particle bed for feed, concentrate, and tailing for each phosphate sample. In order to establish the 2D liberation spectra, the area of phosphate and gangue phases of each particle section for a given sample was determined. In this way, particles were classified into twelve classes based on phosphate areal grade. The grade classes are as follows; 0%, 5%, 15%, 25%, 35%, 45%, 55%, 65%, 75%, 85%, 95% and 100% phosphate. Thus for each stream (feed, concentrate and tailings) the 2D liberation spectrum of phosphate was prepared. 3D liberation analyses of the phosphate feed and flotation products were obtained using the same XMT system. In this regard, the three dimensional XMT image data of multiphase mineral particles was post-processed in order to determine the characteristic relationship between mineral phases and liberation for individual particles from a packed particle bed. First, a 3D watershed algorithm was used to separate individual particles in the packed particle bed, and then compositional information for each individual particle was analyzed using a finite mixture distribution model ( Each sample has been analyzed and from the X-ray attenuation coefficient histogram (3D liberation spectrum), the particles were classified into twelve classes based on phosphate volume grade. The grade classes are as follows; 0%, 5%, 15%, 25%, 35%, 45%, 55%, 65%, 75%, 85%, 95% and 100% phosphate. The 3D liberation spectrum of phosphate was obtained for feed and flotation products from each sample. The CT data defines the volume fraction of each mineral phase that can be distinguished by XMT and these volume fractions correlate with the corresponding mass fractions from chemical analysis. In fact the relationship between mass fraction and volume fraction for a given mineral phase A in a binary system consisting of mineral phases A and B is defined by: mass fraction A volume fraction A density of phase A density of phase B In this way, the relationship for a given system can be established if the densities of mineral phases are known and are constant from one particle to another. Usually such is not the case and verification of experimental data is difficult. A number of samples from different Florida phosphate deposits have been analyzed by chemical analysis (wt.% BPL) and by XMT at 50 kV and 20 µm resolution (vol.% phosphate mineral). The samples are characterized by a phosphate mineral phase of varying microporosity. The density of nonporous apatite (single crystal) is reported to be 3.1–3.3 g/cm As mentioned before, the mineral liberation analyses were carried out using XMT data to classify the sample constituent particles into twelve grade classes based on phosphate areal grade percent (2D liberation analysis) and phosphate volume grade percent (3D liberation analysis). The grade classes are as follows; 0%, 5%, 15%, 25%, 35%, 45%, 55%, 65%, 75%, 85%, 95% and 100% phosphate. These analyses were carried out for the feed and flotation products of samples from different Florida phosphate locations. Four samples are given by way of example and the results are presented in The histograms for liberation analysis (2D and 3D) of the CF East feed sample are given in According to the liberation analysis data, CF Combined feed contains a very small percentage of phosphate as inclusions in quartz particles ( The liberation analyses of the feed for the Hole 1862 Split 2 sample are presented as histograms in For the Hole 464 Split 1 sample a rather poor flotation separation efficiency was achieved ( The liberation-limited grade/recovery curve is established from CT analysis of the feed and this curve represents the best separation to be achieved for a particular feed material. The liberation-limited grade/recovery curve is calculated from the liberation spectrum, the histogram showing the amount of phosphate mineral or any other mineral component of interest, in each grade class. The same twelve grade classes 0%, 5%, 15%, 25%, 35%, 45%, 55%, 65%, 75%, 85%, 95% and 100% phosphate mineral are used. Basically, the phosphate mineral content for all phosphate-containing particles in each grade class is calculated and represented as a volume fraction of the total phosphate mineral in the feed. The phosphate contribution from each grade class beginning with the richest grade class is then accumulated as more and more grade classes are considered until the final grade class, with the least amount of phosphate is considered. The liberation-limited grade/recovery curve represents a boundary for separation efficiency. The grade and recovery for any actual separation cannot exceed the limit imposed by this curve. In the best case the actual grade and recovery would fall on the curve and under these circumstances improved separation can only be achieved with further liberation by size reduction. If the grade and recovery for an actual separation falls below the curve then the separation efficiency is limited by other factors (mineral types, surface composition, slime coating, operating conditions, etc.) in addition to liberation limitations. The liberation-limited grade/recovery curves for the Florida phosphate samples considered in this study, are presented in The 2D and 3D liberation-limited grade/recovery curves for CF Combined Feed are very close to each other. See A recovery of less than 50% at a low concentrate grade (40%) is reported for the Hole 1862 Split 2 sample apparently due to slime coating (see As mentioned before, poor separation efficiency was obtained for the Hole 464 Split 1 sample with a low concentrate grade of only 28.5% at a recovery of about 60% (see The interesting finding from the liberation-limited grade/recovery curves ( Using 3D mineral liberation data of feed material, as obtained by X-ray micro CT (XMT) analysis of packed particle beds, procedures for the construction of liberation-limited grade/recovery curves were developed and demonstrated for samples of flotation feed from Florida operations. These liberation-limited grade/recovery curves define the limits of separation efficiency. For some samples the flotation separation was, in fact, limited by the liberation state while for other samples additional factors were found to limit the separation efficiency. Also, as expected, the results reveal that 2D liberation analysis overestimates the extent of liberation and confirms the utility of 3D mineral liberation analysis by XMT for the construction of liberation-limited grade recovery curves. The financial support of this work was provided by the Florida Institute for Phosphate Research (FIPR). The authors acknowledge H. El-Shall, University of Florida, Gainesville, Florida and G. Wang; Arr Mazz Custom Chemicals, Winter Haven, Florida for their participation in, and support of, this research program. In addition, the algorithm development has been supported by the Center for Advanced Separation Technologies (CAST).