Erodibility strongly affects both detachment and transport processes of soil erosion, and probability functions are commonly used to characterize empirically estimated point data of soil erodibility with a spatial distribution on a map. The aim of this study is to assess spatial uncertainty of soil erodibility factor resulting from differences of soil properties influenced by land uses, using kriging and Direct Sequential Simulation (DSIM). The study was implemented in Asartepe Dam Basin located in İlhan Çayi sub-catchment of the Sakarya Basin, Ankara, Turkey. Soil surface samples were collected using grid sampling method from five different lands uses, fallow-crop, oak forest, grassland, alluvial cropland, and colluvial cropland. The soil erodibility values (K factor) were calculated for soils of the sites by the Nomograph equation of Revised Universal Soil Loss Equation (RUSLE). The findings demonstrated that kriging provided the best K estimates at unknown locations while DSIM successfully allowed K simulation without any transformation unlike other simulation methods. Kriged estimates falling inside a 95 % probability interval of the simulated values were studied to assess the uncertainty of the soil erodibility factor. The simulation results showed that 99.4 % of the estimated values fell in the probability interval, implying a very low spatial uncertainty level.Soil erosion is, as one of the main drivers of land degradation globally and of indicators of Sustainable Soil Management (SSM) ( Soil erodibility is significantly affected by land use, topography, tillage practices and soil properties especially in fragile semi-arid zones. In this respect, soil erodibility parameter of the Nomograph (Wishmeier & Smith 1978) offers a chance to monitor variability in soil structure and soil permeability in close link to changes in soil organic matter by Land Use and Land Cover Change (LULCC) (LDN Conceptual Framework, The spatial variability of soil erodibility has also a great importance because of having an ability to represent different terrain conditions along with different soil properties, spatial pattern of which changes depending upon climate, topography, soil types, biota and land management. Spatial statistical methods can be satisfyingly used to determine spatial distribution of soil erodibility and its variation in a given land unit or land use type ( Statistically, the spatial method of kriging interpolation is a generalized least squares algorithm ( To assess the uncertainty of K values at estimation locations, the multiple realizations of fields is required. For this purpose, simulation methods are used ( The study area is the Asartepe Dam basin, within the Ilhan River sub basin of Sakarya basin, located in the central part of Turkey within the boundaries of Ankara province and distances 47 km to Ankara, and between 40° 8′59.05″ N latitude and 32°23′43.71″ E longitude ( The dam has been used for irrigation and partly flood control since 1984. The basin extends over an area of 22.894 ha with maximum slope steepness of 47.87 % and average slope of 8.47 %. Elevation changes between 880 m and 1652 m having an average elevation of 1163 m in the basin. The Asartepe dam basin is located within A4 square according to the grid system of P.H. Soil surface samples were collected using grid sampling method from five different land use types, which were fallow-crop, oak forest, grassland, alluvial cropland, and colluvial cropland in the basin. A total of 1280 soil surface samples were taken by several field visits as soon as plot-based grids were set out in the experimental site between August 2007 and April 2009 from homogenous areas identified within each land use type of the basin ( In this study, the nomograph of Wishmeier & Smith (1978) was used to assess soil erodibility, being a function of organic matter, soil structure, particle size distribution and permeability. The soil samples were air-dried and passed through a 2-mm sieve for laboratory analysis. The fine earth fraction was analyzed for particle size distribution (PSD) (silt, 0.02−0.002 mm; sand, 2−0.02 mm; clay, <0.002 mm) by the hydrometer method ( The nomograph equation ( The Eq. The variance analysis technique (ANOVA) was used to evaluate whether differences between soil erodibility values of different land use types for the study area were statistically significant, using the Duncan test. In spatial distribution modeling kriging and simulation algorithms are generally used together. While kriging used to determine an estimation of the variable under study, simulation is generally performed to assess the uncertainty associated with the estimation of the mean value of the K-factor. The SgeMS software was used for estimation and simulation purposes. Different grids were produced for each different land uses, and estimations and simulations were performed for these grids. To estimate the underlying variogram models of K factor for each land use, experimental variograms were calculated in four directions (0°, 45°, 90° and 135°) with omni-directional variogram. Angular tolerance of ± 22.5° was used for each direction with a tolerance of ± 90° for omni-directional variogram. These experimental variograms were used in model variogram fitting. Experimental variograms at different directions were compared with each other, and when experimental variograms did not show different behavior in different directions, omni- directional experimental variograms were then used for variogram modeling. Otherwise, directional experimental variograms were used in variogram modeling when anisotropy existed. The spatial distribution of the factor (K) was estimated using ordinary kriging by minimizing the estimation error variance, and variogram model was estimated using experimental variogram model. For a univariate data Z, experimental variogram Define a random path which visits all grid of nodes xu = 1, 2,…,Ns (number of simulated nodes) to be simulated. Estimate the local mean and variance with estimation value using simple kriging and estimation variance conditioned by the samples and previously simulated values, if exists. Define the interval of Draw a random value iv. a) Generate a random value form a uniform distribution bounded with 0 and 1 iv. b) Generate a value iv. c) Return to the simulated values taking inverse of the normal transform Loop until all nodes are visited. By applying the steps above only single realization of the target variable can be generated. But in order to characterize uncertainty of the variable multiple realizations have to be generated. For this reason, in this study, five target variables are simulated for one-hundred times. Structure class was determined by taking photo and of field observation as fine granular soil for alluvial cropland while medium or coarse granular soil class was assigned for grassland and colluvial cropland. Summary statistics of soil erodibilities and properties for five different land uses is given in The highest mean clay content was found in colluvial cropland (41.43 %), while lowest mean clay content was determined in grassland (12.91 %). The grassland and alluvial cropland had highest and lowest sand contents (39.39 % and 11.54 %, respectively). On the one hand, the highest mean silt content (52.84 %) was determined in alluvial cropland in the study area. Soils having a high silt content are relatively highly erodible because silt particles can be easily broken down and transported, can form crust on the surface of the land, and generate large amount of runoff ( The colluvial cropland K factor values had the highest variation of coefficient (CV = 38.43), kurtosis (5.85) and skewness (2.47) values. The data distribution, when compared to the normal curve, showed that K factors of fallow crop, grassland, alluvial and colluvial croplands were positively skewed while that of oak forest area was negatively skewed. In terms of kurtosis results, the oak forest K factors had a lower peak while those of other land uses had higher peaks than that of the normal distribution (negative and positive kurtosis, respectively) ( The Duncan multiple range test revealed that K factor significantly changed depending on land use (p < 0.01) ( To spatially assess the estimation values of the K factors, estimation and simulation results were used together. First, a K factor distribution all over the grid was estimated using ordinary kriging, and then estimation using K factor data by one hundred realizations of the grid was performed by means of DSIM. For the measured K factors, different semivariogram models were produced for each land use type and the best fitted model to represent spatial K factor variability was specified by the minimum errors and R Simulation results of two realizations among one hundred realizations for all land uses are given in Land use and soil management practices can influence soil physical properties and SOM both positively and negatively. Conversion of grassland to cultivated areas leads to decreases in SOM ( The ranges of semivariograms showed that maximum distances of spatial correlation for soil erodibility values in fallow-crop, alluvial and colluvial land uses were 25, 16 and 12 m, respectively, without showing any directional differences (  The modeling of soil erodibility is a complex process since it depends on many soil properties and it needs uncertainty analysis by geostatistical simulation. We investigated spatial variability and uncertainty of the global mean of the soil erodibility by kriging combined Direct Sequential Gaussian Simulation Method (DSIM) for five land use types, grassland, oak forest, fallow-crop area, alluvial cropland and colluvial cropland in Asartepe dam Basin of semi-arid Turkey. The study demonstrated that soil erodibility is strongly affected by land use type associated with soil properties. To determine spatial variability of soil erodibility, we further performed kriging interpolations for five land uses. Then, simulation procedure was applied to estimated soil erodibility values for uncertainty analysis. Regarding simulation results, the spatial variability structures of K factor were greatly varied in five different land use types in the semi-arid basin. We found that the variability of soil erodibility was dependent on land use type and had a high certainty of simulation in all land uses. Realizations are used to assess the uncertainty of the variable soil erodibility. The study results indicated that kriged estimates falling inside a 95 % probability interval of the simulated values are studied to assess the uncertainty of the factor (K). The simulation results showed that 99.4 % of the estimated values fell in the 95 % probability interval. This indicated that precision associated with the mean of the estimates are high. The spatial uncertainty analysis indicated that the prediction accuracy of soil erodibility highly depends on the uncertainties of the dataset used in estimation. For this reason, uncertainty analysis is a crucial step when used estimated values of soil erodibility is one of the key component of soil erosion modelling. Producing accurate and reliable estimation or maps for soil erodibility will allow better planning of conservation practices and risk assessment of soil erosion. Authors gratefully acknowledge Supplementary material related to this article can be found, in the online version, at doi: The following is Supplementary data to this article: