An on-chip micro-supercapacitor (μ-SC) based on Silicon nanowires (SiNWs) has been developed by Hot-wire chemical vapor process. First, finger patterned electrodes of Al were made on a silicon nitride coated Si wafer and SiNWs were then grown selectively on the Al electrodes. μ-SC performance has been tested in an ionic electrolyte and a capacitance of 13 μF/cm2 has been obtained by the μ-SC. The resulted μ-SC can be exploited to store the harvesting energy in micro-electro-mechanical-systems and coupled with battery for peak power leveling. Low temperature growth of SiNWs at 350°C makes it suitable for prospective flexible electronics applications.Efficient energy storage and its delivery is always a necessity for operating gadgets remotely. Energy in form of electrical energy is the most suitable one and hence batteries and supercapacitors are in great demand. The future development towards making mobile or remote devices more efficient and smaller by reducing their size and weight has increased the need of an energy storage scheme on a chip Recently, SiNWs with high surface area have been envisioned to be a well-suited electrode material for μ-SC A Si wafer (n-type with 〈1    Cross-sectional study of the different layers deposited on Si wafer to fabricate the μ-SC was performed in FIB-SEM. In this technique, the material from the surface is removed by using the high energy Gallium (Ga After successful fabrication of on-chip SiNWs μ-SC, its electrochemical properties were evaluated by Cyclic Voltammetry (CV). For CV measurement the contact was made with the help of two crocodile pins as shown in  SiNWs based μ-SC has been integrated on a chip by HWCVP, which may be exploited to store the harvesting energy and powering several miniaturized electronic devices. Since SiNWs are synthesized at a temperature of ∼350 Crompton Greaves, Mumbai is gratefully acknowledged for providing financial support. The author also thanks SAIF, IIT Bombay to provide SEM characterization facilities. FIST facility (Dual beam FIB, Carl Zeiss Microscopy) in ME & MS department was also used for this work. I would also like to thank Prof. V. S. Raja, Dept. of ME & MS, IIT Bombay for providing the electrochemical characterization facility.