The extraction of Ni(II) by dialysis through a porous polysulfone membrane is enhanced by using an hydrosoluble polycarboxylate polymer diluted in the receipt compartment. The flux of Ni(II) depends on both the Ni(II) and the polymer concentrations. In an acidic solution, the extraction rate also depends on the pH of the receipt phase which contains the chelating polymer. Due to the absence of water–solvent interface, the overall mass transfer coefficients of Ni(II) are more important than for water–solvent liquid extraction systems.The liquid–liquid extraction by an acid extractant diluted in organic solvent is an industrial process widely used in hydrometallurgy for separating or concentrating metallic cations In a previous work The Ni(II) salt was NiCl The membrane, supplied by TechSep, was an ultrafiltration IRIS 3026 membrane, the characteristics of which are given in The transfer of Ni(II) was followed by measuring the concentrations of Ni(II) in both aqueous phases by atomic absorption spectrometry measurements. All the dilutions were done with de-ionised water. The transport of the metallic species through the porous membrane consists in the following steps: transport of the metallic species through the non-agitated layer in the feed solution. partition of the metallic species between the solution and the membrane phase. transport of the metallic species through the porous membrane. partition of the metallic species between the membrane phase and the receipt phase. transport of the metallic species through the non-agitated layer in the receipt solution. In the case of transport involving several steps, the global rate of the transport should be controlled by the kinetic limiting steps. If we assume that the transport of the metallic species through the porous membrane is the limiting step and that the electric contribution to transport may be omitted in a first approximation, then the transport rate should be explained by the Fick’s law: The remaining Ni(II) concentration in the feed will be obtained after integration of When the equilibria are reached, the concentrations in both compartments should be C As we will see in Dialysis is a diffusion phenomenon which is governed by the difference of concentration of Ni(II) on the two sides of the membrane. The solute flux is stopped when the concentrations are equal in the two compartments. The amount of Ni(II) crossing the membrane can be increased by modifying the chemical potential of the Ni(II) in one of the two compartments of the dialysis cell. If some complexing polymer was added in the Ni(II) feed compartment, a decrease of the free Ni(II) concentration would lead to a decrease of the transfer rate of Ni(II). To the contrary if the complexing polymer is added in the receipt compartment, the complexing of the Ni(II) should be responsible for an increase of the amount transferred. In the case a very stable complex formed, it should be possible to recover the total amount of Ni(II) in the receipt compartment. At equilibrium, when the polymer is present in the receipt compartment, it can be observed that the remaining concentration of Ni(II) is lower than in the absence of the polymer. That is the consequence of the displacement of the equilibria by the complexing of the Ni(II). Nevertheless, the lonely withdrawing effect is not able to explain the cell behavior, since it should not modify the initial transfer rate. It can be seen from The increase of the Ni(II) fluxes observed in the presence of the polymer can be interpreted if we assume that the total Ni(II) flux has two origins. The first one is the diffusion of the free Ni(II) cation and the second one concerns the diffusion of the metal linked to the polymer. In this case we suppose that the polymer can penetrate inside the pores of the membrane. This assumption was verified by studying the transport of the polymer through the ultrafiltration membrane. The concentration of polymer was obtained by total carbon determination and checked by sodium determination with very good agreement. The dialysis of a solution which contains a polycarboxylate polymer with a MW of 60 Assuming that Ni where We conclude that the apparent mass transfer In fact, for a 10 The variation of the remaining Ni(II) concentration for different pHs of the receipt phase shows that the rate of concentration decrease depends mainly on the pH of the solution ( The experimental results are in a good agreement with the theoretical variation since at pH over the p An estimation of The comparison of the results obtained in a former work for the dialysis of Ni(II) enhanced by using D2EHPA diluted in hexane as an extractant agent with those presented in that work shows some important differences. In the case of the use of extractant D2EHPA diluted in the organic phase to enhance Ni(II) dialysis, no transport of the cation was obtained at pH below 4 whereas a transport of Ni(II) by direct dialysis was observed in the presence of the polymer diluted in the receipt water phase. This important difference of behavior is due to the nature of the two interfaces. For the water–solvent interface , the hydrophobic solvent prevents the transfer of the Ni(II) cation. This is not the case when the water phase which contains the diluted carboxylate polymer replaces the organic phase. The second difference observed concerns the experimental values of the overall mass transfer coefficient The dialysis of metallic cations through an ultrafiltration membrane can be enhanced by means of a hydrosoluble chelating polymer which is able to complex the cation. Some chelating polymer is trapped inside the membrane pores by size effect. For Ni(II), the observed fluxes depend on the polymer and the cation concentrations, and on the pH of the receipt phase. The main results obtained suggest that possible applications occur, for example, to concentrate great volumes of heavy metal diluted solutions. Nevertheless, the selectivity of the hydrosoluble polymer must be improved in order to employ the process to separate mixtures of different cations.  partition coefficient of nickel between membrane and solution initial concentration of nickel in the feed bulk nickel concentration in the feed compartment bulk nickel concentration in the receipt compartment thickness of the water diffusion layer thickness of the membrane filled with the polymer membrane area diffusion coefficient of the X species flux density of the X species volume of the cell compartment subscript related to the feed solution subscript related to the receipt solution subscript related to the feed membrane interface subscript related to the receipt membrane interface concentration of the X species concentration of the X species in the membrane mass transfer coefficient mass transfer coefficient in complexing medium acidity constant stability constant of the nickel polymer complex Overlined symbols refer to the membrane phase. We acknowledge the Coatex company for the supply of the polycarboxylate ligand.