A new resin has been prepared through a reaction between the vinylbenzyl chloride–divinylbenzene copolymer and the 1,4,8,11-tetraazacyclotetradecane (cyclam). This resin has been investigated after the characterization of the FTIR, batch and the dynamic sorption behavior of Au(III), Pt(IV) and Pd(II) ions took place. The sorption has been optimized with respect to HCl solutions. The maximum sorption properties were achieved from the solution of 0.1M HCl. The sorption of Au(III), Pt(IV) and Pd(II) ions during a dynamic procedure in the presence of the 20-fold excess metals i.e. Cu, Fe, Ni resulted in an outcome of up to 400mg of noble metals per gram of dry resin. The study of the noble metal loading was carried out over a wide range of the HCl concentration and in media of various multicomponent solutions of common metals.The demand for precious metals in a car catalytic converter industry and jewellery sectors has been increasing for many years. Therefore, the recovery of the precious metals from the waste solutions and any secondary sources with low content of the desired metals became a very important economical and ecological issue. This has resulted in a great interest of many researchers However, there seems to be a very promising approach to overcome the problem of recovering precious metals. According to it the ion exchange and chelating resins should be used to separate and to recover selectively these metals from the multicomponent solutions Many laboratories have used the polymeric materials, the ion exchange resins containing selective functional groups and the chelating resins. In most cases they were employed for an application in the hydrometallurgy processes. A survey of the literature shows a great number of resins being designed and synthesised for their application in metal recovery. The recent research on the selective metal ion removal has been widely carried out by using a specific ligand modified polymers in order to pre-concentrate the precious metal ions. The precious metals were loaded and recovered by the: chitosan derivatives This paper is to present a research on a new resin based on the vinylbenzyl chloride–divinylbezene copolymer. Our group started in 1992 to develop an innovative approach to the synthesis of the novel resins bearing different ligands: amidooxime, hydroxime, biguanidine, guanidine and different amino ligands, suitable for the metal sorption The innovation in this paper is the new resin bearing 1,4,8,11-tetraazacyclotetradecane (cyclam) functionality and their sorption properties towards the noble metals. This paper is a continuation of the previous work concentrating on preparing the most suitable resin for the metal sorption, especially the noble ones. In this context one of our aims was to immobilize cyclam ligand on the polymer beads surface. This paper reports the synthesis, characterization and the sorption properties of the new resin bearing the cyclam functionality. Cyclam is one of the most extensively investigated ligands in the coordination chemistry, for it can coordinate a variety of metal ions A few papers have dealt with functionalising the resins by cyclam and its other tetraazamacrocycles. One of the first reports concerning the macrocyclic ligands functionalised on the polymer matrix is the Egawa’s paper from 1996. It presents poly(glycidyl methacrylate)s copolymer crosslinked with oligoethylene glycol dimethacrylates investigated to Cu(II) adsorption The selective metal-complexing nanoparticles were prepared through the microemulsion copolymerization in oil-in-water solution of a polymerizable tetraaza macrocycle, vinylbenzylcyclam (cyclam: 1,4,8,11-tetraazacyclotetradecane). They have shown a very high selectivity for Cu This paper is to present the possibility of the noble metal sorption from a single and the multicomponent solutions on the vinylbenzyl chloride–divinylbenzyl copolymer functionalized by the 1,4,8,11-tetraaza-cyclotetradecane (cyclam). The starting vinylbenzyl chloride/divinylbenzene, (VBC/DVB), copolymer containing 2 The 2 In this process vinylbenzyl chloride (VBC) (60% The centrifugation technique was used to measure the water regain. 1 g of swollen in water polymer was placed in a glass vial with a fritted glass bottom and centrifuged for 5 Nitrogen content was determined by the Kiejdahl’s method employed to the polymers. The nitrogen content was determined after the mineralization of the resin sample (about 250 The chlorine content was measured by burning about 30 The affinity of the resins towards the noble metals (presented as chlorocomplexes anions) was determined by a contact of the resin samples with the 0.24 One-component solution in 0.1 The multicomponent solution in 0.1 The kinetic study was done by mixing 0.1 The distribution of the coefficient metal (D) was calculated as the ratio of the amount of metal sorbed by 1 The multicomponent solution in 0.1 A PP small-calibrated syringe with an internal diameter of 4 and 60 Having carried out the sorption process, the desorption procedure was investigated. The solution of 5 The synthetic route to A7C resin bearing 1,4,8,11-tetraazacyclotetradecane (cyclam) ligand can be described schematically and is presented in The conversion of VBC/DVB copolymer to A7C resin was analyzed by FTIR. Sorption studies were performed under static conditions with a mixture of precious and base metals. It was done to study the selectivity of the resin and thus to judge their application in hydrometallurgical, or separation procedures. The sorption ability of the investigated resin A7C, bearing cyclam groups, towards precious metals, i.e. gold, platinum and palladium was investigated. It was done in single noble metal solution, S0, and in the multicomponent solution of the noble metals (namely, S1, S2 and S3.) The multicomponent solutions containing Au(III), Pt(IV), Pd(II) (0.24 The sorption kinetics of the precious metals from the multicomponent solutions S2 was investigated. The results are presented in The linearity of the plots pointed at pseudo-first-order kinetic mechanism of sorption. The correlation coefficients of pseudo-first-order kinetics ( The kinetic data were also used to calculate and determine the process governing the sorption. According to the linear diffusion models The effect of the HCl concentration on the isotherm sorption of Au(III) was determined from the gold solution in the range of 50–1000 The effect of the HCl concentration on the metal sorption was investigated in solutions S1, S3, S4 and S6 in the range of 0.1–6 During the dynamic sorption 0.9 The column filled with the investigated resin, A7C, was washed with 20 The incorporation of 1,4,8,11-tetraazacyclotetradecane (cyclam) moieties on the crosslinked vinylbenzylchloride/divinylbenzene copolymer beads yields an effective and selective resin for gold, platinum and palladium sorption (as tetrachloroaurate, tertachloropalladate and hexachloroplatinate anions) from the HCl solutions. The best sorption efficiency of the noble metals were determined from the 0.1