An element has been developed for the analysis of laminated composite plates. The element is capable of representing high orders of displacement using very few degrees of freedom. The respective orders of deflection, rotation, moment and shear have been preserved through scrupulous choice of field variables. The element is found to have a correct rank and is free from shear locking. Performance of the element has been tested in a wide range of problems which indicate that combining all these features can help to achieve great accuracy at reduced computation cost.Composite laminates are being increasingly used in a number of areas including aerospace, automobile, nuclear, marine, civil and biomedical engineering. This is mainly due to their high stiffness and strength-to-weight ratios and other superior material characteristics such as long fatigue life and ability to manipulate fibre orientations to meet design requirements. However, composite laminates are at the same time significantly weak in shear, which demand special attention on the part of designers. A clear understanding of the structural behaviour of laminated plates is thus needed to fully utilise their potential in the design of various engineering components. Finite Element is one of the most successful analytical tools used in the analysis of laminated composite plates. The research on simple, accurate and efficient finite elements for the analysis of laminated composite plates has been receiving much attention in recent years. A large number of finite element models have been developed for the analysis of laminated composite plates in the last two decades The classical laminated plate theory (CLPT) does not account for the transverse shear deformation, and is therefore inadequate for modelling composite plates. Moreover, a CLPT model requires The major research work presented in this paper is centred on the development of a new element for the analysis of laminated composite plates. In a previous article by Sheikh and Dey A comprehensive summary of the finite element models that have been developed for the analysis of laminated composite plates in the past few decades may be found in some of the survey articles Reddy The formulation of the element is based on Reissner–Mindlin's theory, where the effect of shear deformation has been taken into consideration. The middle plane of the plate is taken as the reference plane which is considered to be the The material of the plate follows Hooke's Law. The transverse displacement of the plate is small compared to its thickness. The transverse normal stress is negligible compared to the in-plane normal stress. The five field variables are displacement components taken at the reference plane. Among them the in-plane displacements Though Thus the nodal variables may be expressed as Differentiation of area coordinate terms in [P As mentioned earlier and depicted in This may be easily inverted to get the unknown coefficients Now, Eqs. The generalised strain vector The constitutive relation for laminated composites may be expressed as The field variables as defined in Eqs. The element load vector is derived similarly. For a transverse load of intensity The integration in the above Eqs. To eliminate the degrees of freedom associated with the internal node of an element, the stiffness matrix Eq. It is quite interesting that the results on bending of composite plates available in the literature are mostly for rectangular plates and simply supported boundary conditions. The variation of load is also taken as sinusoidal, which, though not usually encountered in practice, simplifies the integrals involved in an analytical solution. However, to assess the performance of an element, it is necessary to solve examples involving different shapes and boundary conditions, load distribution and ply orientation. The following examples include composite plates of different shapes, with symmetric and anti-symmetric laminates having cross-ply and angle-ply arrangements. The section triggers with a preliminary test for spurious modes, and patch tests for uniform moment, shear and twist in Examples 0–3. The loading is taken to be uniformly distributed in most cases, though there are results with a point load Example 3 and sinusoidal distribution Example 4. A convergence study is made in Example 5 with a wide range of mesh sizes and an extensive variation of thickness ratio. A gradually refining mesh illustrates monotonic convergence of the results, and a 12×12 mesh may be recommended for a general problem. An extremely low thickness ratio ( For each example, deflection and/or moments are calculated at suitable points on the plate, and the results are compared with published results to check the accuracy of obtained solutions. A quarter plate is analysed wherever possible, though in order to maintain consistency in the results equivalent mesh sizes for a full plate are reported in all the tables. The shear correction factor is taken as 5/6 unless specified in some specific case. Though the individual layers have different fibre orientations (see   Test of spurious modes. As one of the preliminary tests for an element, the eigen values of an element stiffness matrix have been computed, taking different configurations of the element and by varying the material properties. In every case the correct number of zero eigen values have been found, each corresponding to a rigid body mode. This ensures that the element is free from spurious modes. Patch test for uniform moment. A plate as shown in Patch test for uniform edge shear. The same plate ( Patch test for uniform twist. A square plate as shown in Cross-ply square laminated plate subjected to sinusoidal load. The problem of a cross-ply (0/90/0) square laminated plate as shown in Cross-ply square laminated plate subjected to uniformly distributed load. A cross-ply square laminated plate, simply supported at its four sides and subjected to uniformly distributed load (u.d.l.), is analysed by the proposed element. Material 1 has been used in this example, and the analysis is done with five different mesh sizes. The study is made for anti-symmetric (0/90) and symmetric Angle-ply square laminate plate subjected to uniformly distributed load. An angle-ply Square laminated plate with different boundary conditions subjected to uniformly distributed load. A square laminated plate, subjected to uniformly distributed load, is analysed by taking different boundary conditions at its four edges. Three combination of boundary conditions, Simply supported skew laminated plated subjected to uniformly distributed load. A skew laminated plate is analysed with the proposed element using the mesh arrangement as shown in Triangular laminated plate clamped at its three sides. A triangular laminated plate as shown in An element has been developed for the analysis of laminated composite plates. The underlying concept of the element may be traced back to an earlier work The research work reported here was primarily carried out in a phase supported by the