A procedure has been developed for determining the chemical composition and relative abundance of the amorphous or glassy material, as well as crystalline phases, present in coarse coal gasification ash, in order to assist in predicting the behaviour of the material in cement/brick/concrete applications. The procedure is based on a combination of quantitative X-ray diffraction (XRD), chemical analysis and electron microprobe studies.
                  XRD analysis indicates that the clinker samples contain a number of crystalline high temperature phases, including anorthite, mullite, cristobalite, quartz and diopside. Quantitative evaluation using Rietveld-based techniques has been used to determine the percentages of both the individual crystalline phases and the glass component. These data were then combined with the chemistry of the crystalline phases and the overall chemical composition of the ash to estimate the chemical composition of the glass phase, which is typically the most abundant component present in the different materials.
                  Although there is some degree of scatter, comparison between the inferred glass composition from XRD and bulk chemistry and actual data on the glass composition using electron microprobe techniques suggest that the two approaches are broadly consistent. The microprobe further indicates that a range of compositions are present in the glassy and crystalline components of the ashes, including Si–Al-rich glass, metakaolin and Fe–Ca–Mg–Ti phases, as well as quartz, anorthite and an aluminophosphate material. Electron microprobe and XRD studies also show that pyrrhotite (FeS), representing a high temperature transformation product of pyrite, is present in some clinker and partially burnt carbonaceous shale samples.The feed to the Sasol–Lurgi fixed-bed dry-bottom (FBDB) gasifiers used by Sasol in South Africa for coal gasification ( Coal consists of organic matter (macerals) together with different types of inorganic constituents; the latter consisting of both minerals and non-mineral inorganic elements Sintering refers to a process of softening and surface flow of particles; this occurs due to partial melting of the particle surface, causing particles to cling together. In most cases, sintered clinker particles are formed when fluxing elements such as Ca, Fe Bryers Briggs and Lindsay Many researchers have indicated that the proportion of glass in coal fly ash, as well as the glass composition, may play an important role in initiating pozzolanic reactions in the production of slag-portland cement concrete and bricks The main objective of the present study was to use recently-developed analytical techniques to investigate the nature and abundance of the mineral and glass phases present in coarse gasification ash (hand-picked clinkers and heated stone particles) from the Sasol process, as well as to evaluate the chemical composition of the different components, including both the minerals and the glass, and if possible to identify their relation to the mineral matter in the feed coal. The principal technique used was quantitative X-ray diffraction, including procedures to evaluate amorphous components in coal ash described by Ward and French Samples of “turnout” test material were taken from Sasol–Lurgi fixed-bed dry-bottom (FBDB) Gasifier Number 41, using the sampling procedure developed by Bunt On a hand-specimen scale many of the samples contained partly burnt carbonaceous shale and other rock fragments, set in a fine-grained glassy matrix ( The off-cuts from the sections, representing duplicates of the clinker and coal ash particles studied under the microscope, were pulverized, and the respective powders analysed by X-ray diffraction (XRD) using a Philips X’pert PW1830 diffractometer system. The percentages of the individual crystalline phases (minerals) in each sample were determined using the Rietveld-based Siroquant software system The chemical composition of each powdered sample was also determined by X-ray fluorescence (XRF) spectrometry, based on the sample preparation procedures of Norrish and Chappell The mineral matter in the feed coal for the gasifier was also evaluated, to provide information on the sources of the different ash components. A sample made up of −1 As indicated in Data on the different size and density fractions, also summarised in Chemical analysis ( The composition of the bulk ash from the gasifier is similar to the ash chemistry expected from the mineral matter of the feed coal, calculated from the percentages and stoichiometric compositions of the minerals listed in As discussed more fully below, the wide variations in chemical composition of the clinker samples are also reflected in the mineralogical composition of the materials, as well as the nature of the glasses occurring in the respective sample types. Each sample typically represents an individual fragment of either coal or carbonaceous shale (stone) that occurred within the coarse feed coal, after being been subjected to the high temperatures and pressures of the gasification process. For example, the results given in In most cases the white clinker particles (e.g. 4, 6) contain higher proportions of SiO XRD analysis ( Samples of the partially burned carbonaceous shale taken from the gasification ash (heated stones 1 and 2), as well as partly burned siltstone and sandstone (heated stones 3 and 4), have higher proportions of quartz, but little if any anorthite, cristobalite or diopside. Dynamic high temperature XRD studies on other materials  Negative percentage values are noted in some instances. These may reflect over-estimation of the abundance of particular crystalline phases (e.g. anorthite), or possibly under-estimation of glass content, by the XRD technique. As pointed out by Ward and French Electron microprobe analysis was used to determine the chemical composition of the principal crystalline and glassy phases in polished sections and polished thin sections of selected lump clinker samples. Images illustrating the textures in a typical sample, showing the modes of occurrence of quartz, feldspar and glassy phases, are provided in The quartz grains in the bulk gasification ash, heated stone and clinker samples are typically irregular, broadly equidimensional particles, and probably represent unreacted fragments inherited from the coal and non-coal (sandstone, siltstone, carbonaceous shale) components in the feedstock to the gasification process. The data indicate that the quartz grains, which might otherwise react to form feldspar or glass, especially above the quartz melting point of 1710 Although both potassium feldspar and anorthite (Ca-feldspar) were noted in the bulk coal gasification ash sample ( According to Matjie et al. Potassium feldspar, in the form of microcline, is commonly present in the non-coal rocks associated with South African coal seams Because of its high melting point, anorthite is the first feldspar mineral to form during crystallisation of igneous rocks, crystallising from silicate magmas at around 1550 The aluminosilicate glass in the coal gasification ash and clinker samples, as determined by electron microprobe analysis (  A range of other particles and glassy phases is also present in the samples, and the composition of some of these is indicated in An aluminophosphate phase is also indicated by the microprobe data. Although departing from the stoichiometric composition of crandallite (13.6% CaO, 37.1% Al A range of phases rich in iron and magnesium are also indicated in Phases consisting of iron and sulphur are also present, with a composition close to that of pyrrhotite (FeS, 63.6% Fe, 36.3% S) rather than pyrite (FeS Integration of XRD, chemical analysis, optical microscopy and electron microprobe studies has provided an improved basis for understanding the nature and origin of the bulk gasification ash and clinker components produced by fixed-bed gasification, including the links between the mineral matter in the feed coal and the various gasification ash and clinker constituents. The bulk gasification ash, heated stone and clinker samples produced by the gasification process contain fragments of heat-altered rock materials, set in an often vesicular, partly crystalline glassy matrix. Quartz and possibly K-feldspar in the feed coal or admixed non-coal rocks may pass unaltered into the bulk gasification ash, along perhaps with titanium or iron–titanium oxides and aluminophosphate minerals. Pyrite also reacts to form pyrrhotite as part of the gasification process. Although products of solid-state reactions may be preserved in some of the heat-altered fragments, anorthite that has crystallised from molten aluminosilicate material is contained within a glassy matrix in a manner analogous to the formation of igneous rocks. Rietveld-based X-ray diffraction can be used to quantify the proportions of the different minerals, and also the amorphous glass, in coal gasification ash and clinkers, and relate these to the minerals in the feed coal as determined by similar analysis of the oxygen-plasma ash residues. The chemical composition of the amorphous or glassy phase in each material can also be estimated by proportioning techniques from the XRD results and bulk chemical analysis data. Comparison to the results of electron microprobe analysis indicates that, although some scatter is involved, the relative proportions of the main elements in the aluminosilicate glass are broadly similar to those estimated from the XRD data and the bulk chemical composition. The XRD and electron microprobe results indicate that coal gasification ash analysed in this study contains a significant proportion of non-crystalline glass. The reactive Si species in the glass may react with excess CaO from cement phases and water to further enhance strength development of cement-bonded products such as ash-bricks and concrete. This paper was developed from a collaborative research program between Sasol Technology Research and Development, the University of New South Wales and CSIRO Energy Technology. Barry Searle and Irene Wainwright, of UNSW, are thanked for assistance with different aspects of the analysis program. Assistance provided by the personnel of Sasol Technology’s Syngas and Coal Technologies group and Sasol Synfuels gasification group is also gratefully acknowledged.