In the present investigation, Aspergillus niger isolated from pistachio shell was applied to remove iron impurities from an Iranian kaolin sample. In order to study the effects of initial pH, sucrose and spore concentration on oxalic and citric acid production, and consequently iron dissolution, response surface methodology based on a five-level, three-variable central composite design of experiments was employed. Three models were suggested to predict response values based on the mentioned variables. The most important variables on iron dissolution were initial pH, sucrose and spore concentration, respectively. Also, the highest iron concentration, 311.30mg/l, was obtained when initial pH was 2, sucrose concentration, 70g/l, and spore concentration, 35×107
                     spore/l, and represented the removal of 67.4% of the total iron contents of the clay.Organic acids have been found to have the capacity to remove metals from contaminated soils without seriously deteriorating the soil properties. They are much less toxic, and therefore much easier to dispose. In addition, they do not remain in the soil after treatment like other chemical agents Because chemically produced organic acids are very expensive and may impose significant costs to the process, some species of fungus like Organic acids from fermentations by The most commonly used organic acids are oxalic and citric. The dissolution mechanism comprises three steps In the present research work, effects of initial pH, amount of carbon source, and spore concentration on oxalic and citric acid generation, and iron removal extent were investigated in a leaching process using Kaolin sample with the particle size of 90% under 5.74 The fungus strain originally isolated from pistachio shell on potato dextrose agar (PDA) and Czapek Dox agar (CZ) by streak method. It was later identified as A solid media (malt extract, 30 Fungal spores were suspended from a 7-day agar slant in a sterile solution (0.1% Tween80, and 0.9% NaCl) and enumerated by a microscope. Bioleaching experiments were carried out in 500-ml Erlenmeyer flasks containing 100 In order to determine the kaolin composition, and specially its iron contents, XRF analysis was done by ARL 8410 instrument, tube anode: Rh, and 60 To register the changes in pH value, dissolved iron, sucrose, and oxalic and citric acid concentrations, sampling was done in determined intervals. Then the solid phase containing kaolin and biomass was separated from leaching medium by centrifuging at 1000 The pH value of the liquor was measured by Metrohm pH meter model 744. Dissolved iron concentration was measured by the Response surface methodology (RSM) is a collection of mathematical and statistical techniques useful for the modeling and analysis of problems in which a response of interest is influenced by several variables and the objective is to optimize the response A CCD consists of The behavior of the system is explained by the following empirical second-order polynomial: The polynomial equations for the three responses were validated by the statistical test called ANOVA (analysis of variance), for determination of the significance of each term in equations and also to estimate the goodness or fit in each case. Response surfaces were drown for the experimental results obtained from the effect of different variables on the iron, oxalic and citric acid concentration in order to determine the individual and cumulative effects of these variables, and the mutual interactions between them. The coded values of the test variables, namely initial pH (A), sucrose concentration in g/l (B), and spore concentration in spores/l (C) and the experimental results of iron, oxalic and citric acid concentration in each case are presented in In the Design Expert software, the response data were analyzed by default. Some raw data might not be fitted and needs the transformation of data. This transformation applies a mathematical function to all the response data to meet the assumptions that makes the ANOVA to be valid. Data transformations were needed for all three responses. Therefore, a power function was applied for these responses. In the next step, the effects for all model terms were calculated, and statistics such as Furthermore, For iron, oxalic acid is five times more effective than citric acid, and is capable of complexing and reducing iron Taking the produced oxalic acid concentration to the account, effects of the three mentioned variables on oxalic acid generation in the Oxalic acid formation depends on the pH value  The regression models made to predict oxalic acid formation by The three-dimensional and contour plots in In terms of tonnage, citric acid is one of the world's major microbial metabolites that is produced on a commercial scale Effects of initial pH, sucrose and spore concentration were also investigated on citric acid production. Referring to The highest citric acid concentration was 16.14 The regression models made to predict citric acid formation by The response surface and contour plots in Both the type of carbon source and its concentration are critical to citric acid fermentation Also, in terms of spore concentration, it can be said that the higher the spore concentration, the greater the citric acid generation. As stated earlier, the main purpose of this research is to optimize the leaching of iron in kaolin by It has been agreed by several workers The highest iron concentration was 311.30 To predict the dissolved iron concentration in the kaolin bleaching experiments by The response surface and contour plots in The response surface methodology based on a three-variable central composite design was used to determine the effect of initial pH, sucrose and spore concentration on oxalic and citric acid generation, and iron dissolution from kaolin by This research work is financially supported by grants from Iranian National Science Foundation (INSF), under contract number 84.5374.