Graphene oxide (GO) was firstly employed as nanoscale reinforcement fillers in hydroxyapatite (HA) coatings by a cathodic electrophoretic deposition process, and GO/HA coatings were fabricated on pure Ti substrate. The transmission electron microscopy observation and particle size analysis of the suspensions indicated that HA nanoparticles were uniformly decorated on GO sheets, forming a large GO/HA particle group. The addition of GO into HA coatings could reduce the surface cracks and increase the coating adhesion strength from 1.55±0.39MPa (pure HA) to 2.75±0.38MPa (2 wt.% GO/HA) and 3.3±0.25MPa (5 wt.% GO/HA), respectively. Potentiodynamic polarization and electrochemical impedance spectroscopy studies indicated that the GO/HA composite coatings exhibited higher corrosion resistance in comparison with pure HA coatings in simulated body fluid. In addition, superior (around 95% cell viability for 2 wt.% GO/HA) or comparable (80–90% cell viability for 5 wt.% GO/HA) in vitro biocompatibility were observed in comparison with HA coated and uncoated Ti substrate.Graphene oxide (GO), the oxygenated counterpart of one-atom thick graphene sheet, has been applied in various biotechnologies such as biosensor HA is a bioactive calcium phosphate ceramic [Ca Recently, more and more research works have been devoted to the fabrication of graphene or its derivatives reinforced HA biocomposites In the present study, GO is chosen as a credible and superior alternative to CNT as nanofillers in HA matrix Despite the attractive advantages and progress in preparation of this novel HA composites, the employment of graphene/GO/rGO as nano reinforcements in bioactive HA coatings, to our knowledge, has not been reported. Therefore, a pilot and preliminary work was conducted on the fabrication of GO/HA composite coatings by electrophoretic deposition (EPD). EPD is a well developed, economical and versatile coating technique to deposit charged micro/nano particles in suspension on conductive substrates under an electrical field. Its application for producing HA coatings in orthopedic and dental implant has been widely explored Herein, a homogeneous GO/HA composite coating was prepared on commercial pure Ti (cp Ti) using EPD process. Ethanol was employed as solvent in the present study to minimize the evolution of gases at the electrodes which could have adverse effects on the quality of the deposited coatings. Compared with pure EPD-HA coating, this novel coating could effectively enhance its adhesion strength on the substrate and prevent the formation of cracks, increase the corrosion resistance of Ti. The Nano GO platelets were obtained from Angstron Material LLC, USA. HA nanoparticles were purchased from Nanjing Emperor Nano Material Co., Ltd., China. All other reagents and solvents of analytical grade were provided by Sinopharm Chemical Reagent Co., Ltd. and used as received without further purification unless otherwise noted. Three kinds of suspension (with a constant solid loading of 5 The cp Ti plate was cut into 10 The suspension was characterized by transmission electron microscope (TEM, H-9000NAR, Hitachi). The particle size distribution and the zeta potential of the suspension were evaluated by Zetasizer Nano ZS90 (Malvern Instruments, UK) using dynamic light scattering. The coating morphology was investigated by environmental scanning electron microscopy (ESEM, AMRY 1-1910FE). The phase of the coatings was evaluated by X-ray diffraction (XRD) using a Rigaku DMAX 2400 diffractometer with a step size of 4°/min. Raman measurement was performed using a Raman Imaging Microscope System (Renishaw 1000). The coatings were peeled off the substrate and subjected to thermo-gravimetric analysis (TGA, TA instrument, Q50) at a heating rate of 10 Adhesion strength of the sintered samples were tested according to ASTM F1044-99 Electrochemical experiment was performed by a computer-controlled Auto lab CHI 650C in SBF at 37 The The typical cellular attachment and spread morphologies on the coated cp Ti were evaluated by SEM after Au sputtering. Basically, after 3 All quantitative data are expressed as mean During the deposition process, the particle size and the stability of the suspension play a significant role in the uniformity of the coatings, and thus we first characterized the suspension The particle size of GO, HA and GO/HA groups, as well as the zeta potential of the suspensions, were further studied by Zetasizer Nano ZS90 using dynamic light scattering. After being ultrasonically treatment, the pristine GO platelets were well exfoliated and dispersed in ethanol with an average particle size of 521.7 The deposition rate was measured using weight method. During the coating process, a constant solid concentration of 5 The weight of the deposited coatings per unit area (w) of Ti substrate can be approximately interpreted by Hamaker equation It is expected from Eq.  Several factors have been proposed for the formation and propagation of cracks in EPD coatings such as drying stresses within the coatings, the mismatch of thermal expansion between coatings and substrate, or the weak particle binding strength as the coating thickens The effect of GO sheets on the bonding strength of the coatings to the Ti substrate was measured according to ASTM F1044-99 The HA powders, pristine GO platelets and GO/HA composite coatings were subjected to TGA analysis before sintering treatment (see The XRD patterns of the resulting samples are shown in The corrosion resistance of the coated Ti in SBF was evaluated by open circuit potential (OCP)-time measurements, anodic polarization experiments and electrochemical impedance analysis. Compared with that of the bare Ti, the OCP-time curves of all the coated (HA, 2GO/HA and 5GO/HA) specimens shifted upwards (the noble direction) with initial minor fluctuations and reached to the average potentials of −0.19, −0.15 and −0.14 In order to study the stability and corrosion resistance of the GO/HA composite coatings, impedance spectra of the samples at The electrochemical analysis results above suggest that all the coatings could effectively increase the corrosion resistance of Ti in SBF. And the addition of GO into the HA coating could further inhibit the corrosion process of the Ti substrate. This could be ascribed to the uniform and compact coating morphology, and the strong binding strength of the GO/HA coatings to Ti substrate. Combined with the SEM observation, as it can be seen in  The number of cells attached on each sample increased with the extension of culture time. And the typical overview of the L929 and MG63 cells morphologies on Ti and GO/HA coated samples for 3 It has been demonstrated that the novel GO reinforced HA composite coatings were firstly successfully prepared on Ti sheet using EPD method and the GO nanofillers therein could be further partially reduced in the post sintering of the samples. During the coating process in ethanol at pH value of 3–4, the addition of GO could reduce the deposition rate of the HA nanoparticles. Microstructural analysis indicated that GO sheets within the sintered HA layer was benefit to reduce the coating cracks and prevented the coating detachment effectively. Compared with pure HA coatings, the GO/HA coatings had enhanced adhesion strength and corrosion resistance, and the 5GO/HA coating provided the most satisfactory protection upon Ti among other samples. This work was supported by