Objective and methodology
                  A retrospective review of the outcome of patients who had proximal humeral fracture treated with T2 Proximal Humeral Nail from January 2007 to March 2011 was conducted. The demographics, union rate, and complications were reviewed. The patient outcome was assessed with the American Shoulder and Elbow Surgeons (ASES) score and Constant-Murley score.
               
                  Results
                  Thirty-two cases of traumatic proximal humeral fractures were included. The average follow-up period was 14.7 months. All fractures healed with an average of 3.97 months. The average forward flexion and lateral abduction of shoulder was 132° and 123°, respectively. The postoperative average Constant-Murley score was 67 (48-80) and ASES score was 82.9 (73-100). There was one case of avascular necrosis of humeral head. Six cases of minor screw complications required removal of screws later. No wound infection or neurovascular injury was found.
               
                  Discussion and conclusion
                  With the proper surgical technique high union rate, good functional recovery, and low complication rate can be achieved by using T2 Proximal Humeral Nail in managing traumatic proximal humeral fracture.Proximal humeral fracture is a common injury, which accounts for 5% of all fractures and 45% of all humeral fractures. Intramedullary nailing, either antegrade or retrograde, in treating the humeral fractures is not popularised owing to its associated complications such as cuff damage, impingement or iatrogenic fractures. The newly designed locking nail for the proximal humeral fracture is a fixed angle device providing multiple locking options, threaded proximal locking holes, and washers for the greater and lesser tuberosity fragments. It has been shown to be biomechanically stronger than the locking plate for unstable fractures. Between January 2007 and March 2011, all patients having traumatic proximal humeral fractures treated with T2 Proximal Humeral Nail at our hospital were studied. The fracture pattern is classified according to the AO = The T2 proximal humeral nail (T2-PHN; Stryker Corporation, USA) was used for treating two-part to four-part proximal humeral fractures. It is a titanium nail with variable length (150 mm, 220-300 mm). The standard version is a solid nail, and the long version is a cannulated one. It is a tapered device with a proximal 6° lateral bend and has left and right versions. There are four divergent proximal threaded locking holes for holding fracture fragments. The standard version has two distal locking holes for static or dynamic locking options, whereas the long version has three distal locking holes. Different sizes of end caps are available for fine adjustment of the length of the nail and increasing stability by optimising the purchase of the nail in the entry hole. All surgeries were performed by the specialists from our trauma service team, and all patients underwent a standardised rehabilitation program. Radiological assessment by means of radiographs (anteroposterior and scapular lateral view) was performed immediately after the surgery and on every clinic visit upon discharge. Bony union, implant position, and possible complications were also assessed. The functional outcome was assessed by using Constant-Murley score and American Shoulder and Elbow Surgeons (ASES) score. Active forward flexion and abduction range of motion were recorded by a single physiotherapist. Between January 2007 and March 2011, 32 patients with traumatic proximal humeral fractures were treated with T2-PHN (Stryker) in our hospital. Demographics and fracture pattern are summarised in All fractures achieved bony union radiologically in an average time of 3.97 months (range, 2-6 months). For functional outcome, the average range of shoulder motion of active forward flexion and active lateral abduction was 132° (range, 105°-150°) and 123° (range, 100°-165°), respectively. The mean Constant-Murley score was 67 (range, 48-80), and the mean ASES score was 82.9 (range, 73-100). There was one delayed union, in which the fracture healed at 6 The use of intramedullary nailing in treating proximal humeral fracture is always challenging, especially for those three-part or four-part fractures. This study demonstrated satisfactory results with the use of T2-PHN (Stryker) for various types of proximal humeral fractures, resulting in good active range of motion, a mean Constant-Murley score of 67 and ASES score of 82.9. Our results were satisfactory and comparable to other studies in the literature. Füchtmeier et al Rotator cuff problems and nail impingement are major concerns in using intramedullary nail in humeral fractures. These are commonly caused by cuff injury during nail entry, insecure repair of cuff, and improper nail insertion technique. In our study, none of our patients developed additional symptoms of rotator cuff problems compared to the preoperative status. For all our patients, we adopted a deltoid-splitting approach with careful longitudinal splitting of the supraspinatus tendon along the direction of its fibres at the more proximal vascular zone rather than around the insertion site. The cuff was well protected during reaming procedures. All bony debris that might cause irritation was thoroughly washed out, and the cuff was securely repaired with Ethibond-O, Ethicon, Johnson and Johnson, USA. The entry site of the nail was located in the articular cartilage. This could ensure adequate reduction with correct alignment and improve the final stability after the fixation. In the literature, Managing three-part or four-part fractures of the proximal humerus by locked intramedullary nail is technically demanding and should be performed only by experienced surgeons. Van den Broek et al The low incidence of avascular necrosis of the humeral head was due to the preservation of the blood supply by the minimal invasive technique and the minimal disturbance of the fracture pattern by periosteal stripping and manipulation as in open reduction. Uncommon complications, such as wound or deep infection or axillary nerve injury, during insertion of proximal locking screws were reported in another study. There are limitations in this retrospective study including the small sample size. Further randomised controlled trials should be carried out to compare the other fixation devices for proximal humeral fractures. In conclusion, by using proper refined surgical technique of T2-PHN for the management of proximal humeral fractures, one could achieve high union rate, good functional recovery, and low complications rate. Owing to the improved mechanical properties of the nail, it is a good choice for the treatment of these fractures, especially in the elderly with osteoporotic bone and with metaphyseal and diaphyseal extension.