The effects of amendment with municipal solid waste compost (MSWC) and sewage sludge (SS) on acid–base properties of soil humic acids (HAs) were investigated. For this purpose, HAs were isolated from MSWC and SS and two different Portuguese soils, one sandy and the other clay loam, either unamended or amended with MSWC or SS at a rate of 60tha−1, and analysed by potentiometric titrations at various ionic strengths (0.01, 0.05, 0.1 and 0.3M) over the pH range from 3.5 to 10.5. All titration data were fitted with the NICA–Donnan model and the variations of model parameters between the various HA samples were discussed. The HAs from MSWC and SS had lower acidic functional group contents and higher proton binding affinities than the control soil HAs. Amending soils with MSWC and SS determined a decrease of acidic functional group contents and an increase on proton binding affinities of soil HAs. These effects were more evident in SS-amended soil HAs than in MSWC-amended soil HAs, and in clay loam soil HA than in sandy soil HA.The application of organic amendments to soils, such as municipal solid waste compost (MSWC) or urban sewage sludge (SS), is a current environmental and agricultural practice to maintain and/or increase soil organic matter (OM) contents, thus reclaiming degraded soils and supplying plant nutrients ( The ion-binding behavior of HAs are difficult to describe and model because of their intrinsic heterogeneity and also due to the ion-binding dependency upon many environmental variables (e.g., pH, ionic strength, metal–ion concentration and speciation, presence of competing ions) ( The main objectives of this work were to determine and discuss comparatively the acid–base properties of MSWC–HA and SS–HA, and to investigate the effects of amendment with MSWC and SS on proton binding behavior of HAs from sandy and clay loam Portuguese soils. Two soil samples were collected from the surface horizons (0–20 Two organic amendments were used for the experiment: an urban sewage sludge (SS) and a municipal solid waste compost (MSWC). The SS was sampled after the anaerobic digestion treatment at Frielas Wastewater Treatment Plant, near Lisbon (Portugal). The MSWC was produced at Amarsul MSW Composting Plant (Setúbal, Portugal), where the OM bio-oxidation was carried out during approximately 8 weeks. This process was conducted in an enclosure kept under controlled aerobic conditions. Both amendments were air-dried, homogenized and sieved to <5 Soils amended with 60 The HAs were isolated from the composite samples of MSWC and SS and unamended soils and amended soils according to conventional procedures ( Fully automated potentiometric titrations were carried out using a Mettler Toledo (Highstown, NJ) DL77 titrator equipped with a pH electrode Mettler DG-111-SC (Highstown, NJ) that was previously calibrated with standard buffers at pH 4.00, 7.00, and 10.00. The HAs were prepared for titration by dispersing 25 The theory of the NICA–Donnan model has been discussed in detail elsewhere ( Using the NICA–Donnan equation for a bimodal distribution of proton binding sites in the absence of other specific cation binding, the amount of protons bound, The relative net charge on HAs at a given proton concentration and ionic strength, which equals the relative amount of protons bound to HAs (Δ The chemical properties of the HAs examined in this study were investigated by use of chemical and spectroscopic methods, including elemental and functional group analyses, and ultraviolet–visible (  At any given pH and ionic strength, the negative charge of VRcc–HA was slightly smaller than that of PZha–HA. The higher negative charge on PZha–HA, being more sandy than VRcc soil, could be related with their higher aerated conditions, which may favor oxidation reactions leading to the formation of acidic oxygenated functional groups. These results are in agreement with the higher O and acidic functional group contents of PZha–HA described previously Regarding the organic amendment HAs, MSWC–HA had a higher charge density than SS–HA, which may be related to the aerobic conditions in which the MSWC sample was formed. In contrast, the SS was stabilized by anaerobic digestion, which could inhibit the oxidation reactions, and consequently, the formation of acidic oxygenated functional groups. At any given pH and ionic strength, the negative charge of PZha–HA and VRcc–HA was higher than that MSWC–HA and SS–HA.  The parameter The MSWC–HA showed higher total acidity and carboxyl and phenolic OH group contents than SS–HA. Similar results were presented by The median values of affinity distributions for proton binding by carboxylic and phenolic-type groups In agreement with previous findings ( The The HAs of MSWC and SS are characterized by lower acidic functional group contents and higher proton binding affinities than the control soils HAs. Amending soils with MSWC and SS determined a number of modifications in soils HAs, including a decrease of acidic functional group contents and an increase on proton binding affinities. These effects, which are more evident with SS than with MSWC application, and in clay loam soil HA than in sandy soil HA, suggest a partial incorporation of the small molecular weight structural components with low aromatic character and humification degree of MSWC–HA and especially SS–HA into native soils HA.