Laboratory observations have shown that coal permeability under the influence of gas adsorption can change instantaneously from reduction to enhancement. It is commonly believed that this instantaneous switching of permeability is due to the fact that the matrix swelling ultimately ceases at higher pressures and the influence of effective stresses take over. In this study, our previously-developed poroelastic model is used to uncover the true reason why coal permeability switches from reduction to enhancement. This goal is achieved through explicit simulations of the dynamic interactions between coal matrix swelling/shrinking and fracture aperture alteration, and translations of these interactions to perrmeability evolution under unconstrained swellings. Our results of this study have revealed the transition of coal matrix swelling from local swelling to macro-swelling as a novel mechanism for this switching. Our specific findings include: (1) at the initial stage of CO2 injection, matrix swelling is localized within the vicinity of the fracture compartment. As the injection continues, the swelling zone is extending further into the matrix and becomes macro-swelling. Matrix properties control the swelling transition from local swelling to macro swelling; (2) matrix swelling processes control the evolution of coal permeability. When the swelling is localized, coal permeability is controlled by the internal fracture boundary condition and behaves volumetrically; when the swelling becomes macro-swelling, coal permeability is controlled by the external boundary condition and behaves non-volumetrically; and (3) matrix properties control the switch from local swelling to macro swelling and the associated switch in permeability behavior from reduction to recovery. Based on these findings, a permeability switching model has been proposed to represent the evolution of coal permeability under variable stress conditions. This model is verified against our experimental data. It is found that the model predictions are consistent with typical laboratory and in-situ observations available in lietratures.Gas transport in coal seams is significantly different from that in other types of rocks because of the phenomena of gas adsorption/desorption and coal swelling/shrinkage. The relative roles of stress level, gas pressure, gas composition, fracture geometry of coal, and water content are intimately connected to the processes of gas adsorption/desorption, diffusion, transport, and coal swelling/ shrinkage. As a direct consequence of these complex coal–gas interactions, coal permeability changes in both space and time. Significant experimental efforts have been made to investigate gas permeability and its evolution in coal. Laboratory measured coal permeabilities to adsorbing gasses such as CH Based on field and laboratory experimental results, various coal permeability models have been proposed based on the fundamental principles of poroelasticity. These models could have different forms after imposing specific conditions. When total stress has no change, both coal porosity and permeability are independent of the total stress. Under this condition, they can be expressed as a function of gas pressure and temperature only. If coal sample is in uniaxial strain and under no-changing overburden load, they can also be expressed as a function of gas pressure and temperature only. When the impact of coal fractures and gas compositions is considered, coal porosity and permeability models can be linked to fracture parameters and gas concentrations. Permeability models were proposed for some idealized coal structures as well as specific boundary conditions. For example,  When laboratory experimental results are interpreted, a matchstick or cubic coal model is typically assumed with the matrix blocks completely separated from each other in a stacked structure. In such a model, the permeability should not change under conditions of constant confining (total) stress due to through-going fracutres ( As reviewed above, a large variety of coal permeability models have been proposed. These span conditions representing constant stress through variable stress conditions. All of these coal permeability models were derived based on the theory of poroelasticity or equivalent continuum approach. Current experimental studies have been focusing on the overall behaviors of coal samples and only a few of them focus on the impact of fractures ( Gas transport in coal seams is commonly represented as a dual porosity system accommodating two serial transport mechanisms: diffusion through the coal matrix then laminar flow through the cleat system ( Over the past few years, a series of advanced modeling tools has been developed to quantify the complex coal–gas interactions ( It is clear that there is a relationship between porosity, permeability and the grain-size distribution in porous media. Based on this equation, one obtains When the porosity is much smaller than 1.0 (normally less than 10%), the second factor of the right-hand side asymptotes to unity. This yields the cubic relationship between permeability and porosity for the coal matrix Further, the coal porosity ratio evolves with the effective strain increment as Therefore, the permeability ratio is evolved by Eqs. Coal is a typical dual porosity/permeability system ( In this study, we consider the interactions of the fractured coal mass where cleats do not create a full separation between adjacent matrix blocks but where solid rock bridges are present, as illustrated in  When CO This inbalance diminishes as the gas diffuses into the coal matrix. The pore pressure in the matrix increases and in turn reduces the effective stress in matrix. As an outcome of the diffusion, coal matrix swells due to both the matrix pore pressure increase and the gas sorption. Initially, this matrix swelling is confined in the vicinity of the fracture voids. This localized swelling reduces the fracture aperture. This reduction in aperture reduces the fracture permeability. As the gas diffusion progresses, the swelling zone extends further into the coal matrix. As the swelling zone front moves away from the fracture void, the influence of matrix swelling on the fracture aperture weekens. As a result of the widening of the swelling zone, the fracture permeability recovers while the local swelling has become the macro-swelling. When the inbalace between fracture pressure and matrix pressure vanishes completely, the final equilibrium state is achieved. At the final equilibrium state, the matrix pressure is equal to the fracture pressure, i.e., Coal permeability at this state is defined as the final equilibrium permeability in which a uniform matrix swelling is achieved for a homogeneous coal sample.  Based on the above analysis, the final equilibrium permeability is always higher than the initial equilibrium permeability if a uniform swelling state is achieved within coal sample. However, laboratory measurements indicate that the coal equilibrium permeability is much lower than the initial equilibrium permeability at lower pore pressures. It may recover but rarely exceeds the initial equilibrium permeability even at higher pore pressures. This distinct discrepancy points that a uniform matrix swelling state has rarely been achieved in real coal samples. This implies that the transient characteristics of coal permeability are likely controlled by the localized swelling near the vicinity of coal fracture voids rather than the outside boundaries. The pressure transient method (  The lower part of In order to recover important non-linear responses due to effective stress effects, mechanical influence must be rigorously coupled with the gas transport system. This can be achieved through a full coupling approach. For this approach, a single set of equations (generally a large system of non-linear coupled partial differential equations) incorporating all of the relevant physics is solved simultaneously. Full coupling is often the preferred method for simulating multiple types of physics simultaneously since it should theoretically produce the most realistic results. In the following section, a simulation model was constructed to investigate the permeability change under stress controlled conditions. The selected geometry is for a regular array of interacting cracks as shown in Input parameters for simulations were listed in The loading speed is It is difficult to keep the constant If  In this modeling example, the initial condition and the final condition are known. They are defined by Eqs. Modeling results for the case of The evolution of coal permeablity against the injection pressure is shown in Based on the above analysis, the permeability switch from reduction to recovery is corresponding to the matrix swelling switch from local swelling, controlled by the internal fracture boundaries, to macro swelling, controlled by the external boundaries. The switch behaviors of coal permeability and the matrix swelling are controlled by the same set of parameters including the initial coal permeability and the fracture spacing. For the same spacing, the switching behavior is primarily controlled by intial coal permeability. This is confirmed by our model results for the case of Based on the above numerical analysis, a critical time is defined as For the stress controlled experiments, Eq. In order to verify Eq. There is a large variety of coal permeability models. These span conditions representing constant stress through variable stress conditions. A matchstick or cubic coal model is typically assumed with matrix blocks completely separated from each other in a coal sample. In this arrangement matrix swelling will not affect coal fracture permeability under the constant confining (total) stress conditions, because, for a given pore pressure, the coal matrix swelling will result in swelling of the blocks alone, rather than changes in fracture aperture. The ambient effective stress also exerts no influence on matrix swelling, due to the complete separation between matrix blocks caused by through-going fractures. Therefore, the permeability should not change. In other words, 0% of the swelling/shrinkage strain contributes to the coal permeability change. However, when the coal sample is completely constrained from all directions, the coal matrix swelling will be completely transferred to the reduction in fracture apertures. In this situation, 100% of the swelling/shrinkage strain contributes to the coal permeability change provided the fractures are much more compliant than the coal matrix. Relations between theoretical solutions for these two extreme cases and the critical pressure are defined as Eqs. A full coupling approach was applied to recover important non-linear responses due to the effective stress effects during the mechanically unconstrained (stress-controlled) swelling. Based on our model results, the following major conclusions were drawn: At the initial stage of CO Matrix swelling processes control the evolution of coal permeability. When the swelling is localized, coal permeability is controlled by the internal fracture boundary condition and behaves volumetrically; when the swelling becomes macro-swelling, coal permeability is controlled by the external boundary condition and behaves non-volumetrically. Matrix properties control the switch in swelling behavior from local swelling to macro swelling and the associated switch in permeability behavior from reduction to recovery. A coal permeability model has been developed to represent this switching behavior in coal permeability under variable stress conditions. Model predictions are consistent with typical laboratory and in-situ observations available in the lietrature. This work is a partial result of support from CSIRO Flagship top-up scholarship,