Emulsion liquid membranes (ELMs) can contribute to process intensification of copper extraction, by significantly reducing the solvent and carrier requirements in comparison with conventional solvent extraction. This investigation reports the extraction of copper into emulsion liquid membranes using LIX 84 as carrier. The influence of four emulsion composition variables, namely the internal phase volume fraction (ϕ), surfactant concentration (W
                     surf), internal phase stripping acid concentration (C
                     io) and the carrier concentration (C
                     c) as well as three process parameters pH, initial solute concentration (C
                     eo) and treat ratio (TR) on the rates of extraction of copper, was studied. The emulsions used were characterized on the basis of internal drop size distribution and viscosity to set a benchmark for the commercial application of this technology.
                  It was found that extraction was favorable above pH 2, extraction rates pass through maxima with increase in carrier concentration and treat ratio. Increase in stripping capacities either by increase of ϕ or increase in C
                     io enhanced the extraction rates. Effect of variables on emulsion swelling were investigated; data suggest that entrainment swelling of emulsion was predominant. Swelling was observed to be serious only after 30 min of contact between the emulsion and the feed phases. Optimal conditions for the successful implementation of ELM extraction of copper on commercial scale are suggested.The global demand for refined copper is approximately 13 million tons per annum. International Copper Study Group estimates that 13% of the refined copper production from ores is by Solvent Extraction Electro-Winning (SX-EW) Technology. This technology accounts for an even larger market share of refined copper production from scrap and tailings. Copper solvent extraction is well known and has been in commercial practice since 1968. General Mills Chemicals pioneered the solvent extraction technique for copper recovery in 1960s, with the identification of oxime copper solvent extraction reagents. This led to the introduction of the extractant LIX 63® and, subsequently, the family of LIX reagents (now produced by Cognis), SME® reagents (Shell) and Acorga® (ICI). The versatility of solvent extraction of copper stems from the ability to manipulate operating parameters to handle a wide range of leach solution concentrations. ELMs invented by The copper ions present in the feed phase react with the extractant (HR The resulting copper complex (CuR The stripped ion is effectively encapsulated within the emulsion globules, while the extractant stripped of copper shuttles back to scavenge more copper ions from the feed phase to deposit in the internal stripping phase of the emulsion. Due to its role as a facilitating agent for the transport of copper from the feed phase to the internal stripping phase of the emulsion, the extractant is also called ‘carrier’. ELM extraction processes are extremely rapid due to the large interfacial area produced by the dispersion of emulsion globules in the feed phase and also because extraction and stripping takes place simultaneously. In addition to these features, the extraction can be made very selective with appropriate choice of extractants. Furthermore, the encapsulation of copper within the internal stripping phase of the emulsion results in large volume reduction and concentration of copper. This makes ELM process particularly suitable when the concentration of the copper in the feed stream is quite low, since under such conditions conventional solvent extraction being an equilibrium limited process becomes uneconomical. Realizing the potential for commercialization of copper extraction from acidic streams using ELMs considerable attention has been focused towards development of this technique for copper extraction. Most of these extractants are now phased out and new types of copper extractants are available. In recent past,  Previous investigators have usually reported the influence of two or three variables on the extraction behavior, from which it is difficult to infer about the overall dynamics of the extraction process. Furthermore, very few investigators have reported the characteristics of emulsions used that could serve as benchmark to arrive at appropriate emulsion formulations that is necessary to ensure reproducibility of results. The second aspect is particularly important in view of the fact that emulsions are transient entities. The scope of the present work was to study the effect of various emulsion preparation parameters and process variables on extraction of copper into ELMs using LIX 84 as carrier. The ELMs used were appropriately characterized to set a benchmark for commercial applications. Experiments were carried out to search the optimal combination of emulsion and process parameters that yield the best results and factors affecting emulsion swelling were also investigated. The copper extractant LIX 84 (Cognis Inc.) a mixture of predominantly 2-hydroxy-5-nonyl-acetophenone oxime with a small amount of 5-dodecyl salicylaldoxime in a high flash point diluent was used as the carrier. Kerosene (Indian Oil Corp. Ltd.) having boiling range 152°C–271°C containing The W/O emulsions were formulated by blending kerosene, containing the requisite amount of carrier (LIX 84) and emulsifier (Span 80), with the internal stripping phase, sulfuric acid, using a high-speed blender at 12,000 rpm. The resulting milky white W/O emulsion was cured for 30 min prior to dispersion in the feed phase. Extraction was carried out at 30 °C in a four baffled batch extractor 0.105 m in diameter equipped with a six bladed disk turbine agitator having disk diameter 0.038 m. The copper feed solutions were prepared synthetically by dissolving CuSO The nature of the W/O emulsion has an important bearing on the overall extraction performance hence it is necessary to characterize the emulsion used. The emulsions were characterized by measurement of viscosity, interfacial tension and internal drop size distribution. Brookfield cone and plate Rheometer model (LVDV III The internal drop sizes of the emulsion were measured microscopically using Olympus microscope model BH-2 attached with an Olympus photo micrographic system model PM-10 AD at a magnification of 1500 ×. The emulsion was diluted with kerosene and more than 500 droplets were counted per slide. In order to ensure greater accuracy, two slides were prepared for each emulsion. Based on the total data of more than 1000 droplets, the Sauter mean diameter was calculated for each case. Dispersed emulsion globule sizes were determined by photographing the dispersion using a Nikon F60 camera fitted with a 35–105 mm microlens and a Nikon SB-80 DX digital flash synchronized up to 125 frames/s. Exposures were taken using an aperture of 11 and a shutter speed of 90 frames/s at definite intervals of time covering the entire history from initial dispersion to final settling of emulsion globules. The emulsion globule sizes were measured using image analysis techniques. A number of variables affect the extraction behaviour of copper into ELMs. These variables may be broadly classified as emulsion composition variables and process variables. Emulsion composition variables influence the inherent nature of the extracting emulsion and can also change the morphology of the emulsion. These variables include the internal phase volume fraction ( In order to assess the influence of different variables on extraction, it is necessary to ensure that the emulsion is adequately dispersed in the feed by agitation. Preliminary investigations to establish the stirring speed were made by dispersing an emulsion (having It is well known that the rate of stirring affects the emulsion globule size distribution. Higher stirring speeds lead to formation of smaller sized emulsion globules, increasing the interfacial area between the emulsion globules and feed, resulting in increased extraction rates. But at the same time, this also causes the emulsion to swell rapidly due to an increase in the rate of water transport into the emulsion. Since emulsion swelling is detrimental to the extraction process and could rupture the emulsion globules, it is all the more important to select an optimal stirring speed wherein the swelling is less while the extraction rates are large. Pilot experiments revealed that up to stirring speed of 150 rpm the emulsion was not properly dispersed in the feed phase and a thin film of emulsion covered the surface of the continuous feed phase. Increasing the stirring speed to 160 rpm resulted in a fine dispersion of the emulsion; further increasing the stirring speed to 190 rpm resulted in a very fine dispersion of the emulsion. Although the copper extraction rates were more at 190 rpm but the extent of emulsion swelling was also much larger, hence all other experimental runs were carried out at 160 rpm. The internal phase volume fraction of the emulsion has a profound influence on extraction using ELMs. Change in  The initial higher rate of extraction (up to 15 min) observed for the case of emulsion having Extraction rates into ELMs could be enhanced by either increasing Influence of surfactant concentration in the oil phase of the emulsion on the extraction rates was investigated at two concentration levels with 3% (wt) and 4.7% (wt) Span80. Emulsion with 2% (wt) Span 80 was not stable for the total duration of run time (60 min). Increasing the surfactant concentration from 3% to 4.7% resulted in a decrease in the amount of copper extracted as shown in The capacity of the emulsion to extract solute is limited by the internal phase stripping acid concentration. The difference in the observed rates of extraction is attributed to a difference in the rates of stripping using different acid concentration in the inner stripping phase of the W/O emulsion. Another reason for decrease in extraction rates at lower stripping acid concentration stems from the fact that when the stripping acid concentration in the emulsion is low, the diffusing oxime copper complex requires to penetrate deeper within the emulsion globule to get stripped, since the inner stripping phase droplets close to the surface of the globule get quickly exhausted. Such enhancement of the diffusion path length causes a decline in the extraction rates. Carrier concentration plays a vital role in the overall extraction behaviour of an ELM system. This extraction behavior is attributed to the surface-active nature of oximes and the rheological behavior of the emulsion. Oximes have a tendency to aggregate at high concentrations. Consequently, the extraction pattern is influenced by this tendency. Increase in emulsion viscosity affects the dispersion behavior of the emulsion. It results in the formation of large sized globules that causes a decline in the interfacial areas. The pH of the feed phase has profound influence on the extraction behaviour. It is well known that ketoximes, which is the principal constituent of LIX 84, are moderately strong copper extractants. Reported pH isotherms of LIX 84 ( The effect of feed phase copper concentration is complementary to the internal phase stripping acid concentration. When ELMs are usually designed to operate with feed concentrations that are generally less than 1000 mg/L. The efficacy of ELMs to handle widely varying feed concentrations using emulsions having the same extraction capacities was investigated by changing the initial feed concentration in the range of 497 mg/L to 1900 mg/L. Stripping acid concentration of 2 M was used to formulate these emulsions and higher  Treat ratio (TR) is the ratio of the emulsion phase to the feed phase; it is a measure of the emulsion holdup in the system. Increase in treat ratio results in an increase of the emulsion phase holdup and simultaneously an increase in the extraction capacity of the emulsion. It also results in an increase in the amount of carrier and overall surface area for mass transfer in the system. An increase in treat ratio is expected to increase both the rate and extent of extraction.  Issues concerning stability of emulsions have always been a matter of concern and it has hindered the prospects of commercialization of ELMs for long. Retaining the integrity of the emulsion globule during operation is the key to the success of ELM technology. Rupture of emulsion globules leads to dumping of the entrapped solute in the feed phase and changes the operating conditions by changing the pH of the feed phase. The main cause for emulsion rupture is excessive emulsion swelling. Swelling is detrimental for ELM extractions not only because it dilutes the internal stripping phase and the solute that has concentrated in the internal droplets within the globules, but also because it changes the rheological behavior of the emulsion. Increase of internal droplet size of the W/O emulsion caused by swelling modifies the emulsion morphology and triggers a chain of sequence (enhanced mobility, coalescence, Ostwald ripening, etc.) that ultimately cause globule rupture. Increase in Swelling is driven by the osmotic pressure difference between the feed phase and the internal droplet phase. Two mechanisms are suggested for osmotic swelling ( Measurement of the volume of the emulsion at the end of the experimental run gave a measure of swelling. The ratio of change in emulsion volume (Δ It is evident from the data that maximum swelling occurred in situations involving intense drop–drop interactions such as high stirring speed and high treat ratio. Both these situations warrant comparatively larger number density of emulsion globules in the feed phase. Low swelling observed when It was observed that, in the first 30 min of the run, just 5% swelling took place. In this time span, over 80% of the copper gets extracted. This behavior has an important bearing on deciding the contact time of emulsion with the feed phase in plant scale operations. The influence of contact time on globule size distribution is shown in The optimal operating conditions that can be suggested from the results of this investigation are the following: Process intensification using ELMs is an effective alternative to handle situations when copper concentration in the feed is low, like low copper tenor leach liquors or mine run waters. This investigation reveals that the rates of extraction increased with an increase in the feed copper concentration, the volume fraction of internal phase and the internal phase stripping acid concentration. It was found that, with an increase in treat ratio of emulsion to feed, the extraction rate increases and then declines, suggesting a maxima at a treat ratio (1:6). LIX 84 (10% v/v) in the membrane phase was found optimal for use in ELMs. A feed phase around pH 2 was congenial for extraction while extraction performance was poor at pH 1. Commercialization of ELM technique for copper extraction has not taken place because the stability of the ELMs has been suspect. In these experiments, the emulsions used were very stable throughout the duration of the experimental run. Emulsion swelling was about 40% in most cases. High stirring speed (190 rpm) and high treat ratio (1:4) caused large swelling 58% and 68%, respectively, while high value of  We would like to thank AICTE, R&D Scheme F. No. 8021/RID/NPROJ/R&D-2/2002-03 for support to carry out this work, Indian Oil Corporation Limited for supply of kerosene and Cognis Inc. (Ireland) for supply of samples of LIX reagents.