Soil is the habitat of plant roots and the home of numerous microflora, including viruses, bacteria, fungi and blue-green algae, and a host of animals from unicellular protozoans to small vertebrates. Simple communities of soil organisms, present from the earliest stages of forest soil genesis, become more complex and grow to astronomical numbers in mature forest soils. Here, they are essential for the maintenance and productivity of these soils, which unlike agricultural systems, generally receive less mechanical treatments and chemical inputs. The soil microflora and fauna complement each other in the comminution of litter, mineralization of essential plant nutrients, and conservation of these nutrients within the soil system. Harvesting directly affects these processes through the reduction and redistribution of organic matter, compaction, changes in plant cover, and modification of microclimate, all of which affect the distribution, composition and activity of the soil biological communities. Although most information is available for clearcut forests, the limited data from other systems indicate that severity of impacts of forest harvesting practices generally follow the sequence: clearcuts>shelterwood systems>extended rotation systems. However, all practices generally affect soil organisms over the short term. Changes over the longer-term are less obvious because of gradual recovery of most biological components with canopy closure. Long-term impacts are more difficult to interpret because these are often influenced by natural changes in population dynamics of soil organisms with forest succession, drought, and the invasion of exotic species. Responses are complex, with various groups being affected differently. Even within a taxon, individual species may behave differently. Although the relationships among floral composition, faunal diversity and sustained soil fertility are not always clear, there are indications that a simplified soil biological system will adversely affect nutrient cycling, tree growth, and forest health. Decomposition rate is generally positively correlated with faunal biomass, and a diverse fauna is required for interacting with microorganisms to enhance microbial diversity. Also, feeding on microflora by the fauna concurrently controls certain plant pathogens. Destruction of mycorrhizae, essential for the establishment of coniferous seedlings, can lead to serious reforestation problems. It is therefore prudent to discourage any qualitative or quantitative changes in the soil biota. Concepts in ‘new forestry’ attempt to mitigate against adverse affects of conventional forest harvesting practices on soil organisms by maintaining plant biodiversity, minimizing soil compaction, avoiding extreme microclimatic conditions, providing refugia for re-colonization by the biota, and directly introducing desirable microflora and fauna.The traditional method of forest harvesting by clearcutting has led to serious concerns for long-term sustainability. Forest managers are expected not only to ensure a sustainable timber supply, but also to consider a wide array of non-timber values, including biodiversity, wildlife habitat, recreational opportunities and spiritual values ( Soil is made up of two main components: inorganic material derived from the weathering of parent bedrock and organic material from plants. Weathering is mainly a physico-chemical process, whereas the transformation of organic matter and its incorporation into the mineral component of the soil is predominantly a biological process. During the earliest stages of soil genesis, microflora, lichens, and mosses extract nutrients from rock and synthesize new organic materials ( Estimates of the sizes of these assemblages suggest that their numbers and biomasses are substantial. A square meter of productive forest soil may encompass over two million metazoans and many millions of unicellular protozoans ( This paper has four objectives: (1) briefly review two major biological processes in forest soils, nitrogen fixation and nutrient cycling; (2) examine how forestry practices impact on the biota responsible for these processes; (3) discuss implications of the biological responses; and (4) suggest measures that might mitigate potential adverse impacts of harvesting on the soil biota. Northern forests are considered here as those that occur north of 45° latitude. Two main types of forest stands occur in a managed forest: even-aged stands, each of which is of a similar stage of the stand cycle, and uneven-aged stands, which contain trees of different ages, i.e., there is no clear series of stages making up the stand cycle. Variations of harvesting in even-aged forests often grade one into the other with the major difference between them being the degree of ecological change that is caused by tree removal ( For purposes of our discussion, these various harvesting systems are grouped into three major categories and in order of decreasing tree removal, i.e., clearcutting, shelterwood, and a modified group selection system, sometimes called ‘extended rotation.’ Where data are available, these are compared with ‘old-growth’ or uncut stands of similar history as a ‘control’. Traditionally, clearcutting has been practiced most widely. In 1988–1989 in British Columbia, 91% (about 246,876 Of the many biological processes that occur in natural forests, two have particular relevance to harvesting: nutrient cycling, which involves most of the soil biota, and nitrogen fixation because nitrogen is in short supply in most northern temperate forests. Nitrogen fixation occurs both symbiotically and asymbiotically. Most of the biologically-fixed nitrogen is produced by symbiotic bacteria in specialized root nodules found in many plants ( Nitrogen is fixed asymbiotically in forest soils by many bacterial genera including Nitrogen is also fixed by endophytic bacteria such as Apart from elements derived directly from mineral weathering, most of the nutrients taken up by plants come from the decomposition of organic matter. The latter has been dealt with in detail by B. Berg (this volume); the brief description that follows is intended to provide a basis for examining harvesting impacts on nutrient cycling. Decomposition is carried out by a host of soil organisms ranging in size from microscopic bacteria, to supercolonies of fungi, to small vertebrates such as squirrels ( Most soil bacteria utilize organic compounds as both energy and carbon sources, and plant nutrients become available as a by-product of microbial respiration ( The ammonium ions derived from mineralization of organic matter is subject to further changes. High oxygen level near the soil surface allows bacteria to nitrify the ammonium ion in a two-stage process, first converting it to nitrite and then to nitrate. The nitrate ion can also be changed by denitriying bacteria to produce nitrous oxide or molecular nitrogen, which diffuses out of the soil and is lost to the atmosphere. Common genera of bacteria involved in denitrification are Viruses influence bacterial populations through mortality, but it is not known to what extent bacteriophages regulate bacterial populations in the soil ( Compared to the prominence of bacteria in agricultural soils, fungi predominate in forest soils. Like bacteria, fungi possess a suite of enzymes that allow them to extract nutrients from organic matter. Fungi differ from bacteria especially in the mode of growth. Whereas bacteria are restricted to single cells and small colonies, fungi produce long strands of hyphae that enable them to explore soil pores, decompose materials there, and transfer dissolved substances through a fungal network. Ascomycetes, imperfect fungi, phycomycetes, and various basidiomycetes are widespread in soil ( Most plants form mycorrhizal associations that provide numerous benefits to the host plant ( At least seven major groups of mycorrhizal associations are now recognized ( The feeding of soil animals aids in nutrient release in several ways ( Predation and omnivory also influence the direct release of plant nutrients. Although some faunal groups feed almost exclusively on other soil animals, many others are unspecialized feeders and switch to different types of food, depending upon availability ( Nutrients are also released through faunal-microfloral interaction. Microflora are able to extract inorganic ions both from organic substrates and from the soil solution, resulting in a higher concentration of nutrients in their biomass than in the external substrate. The C Soil organisms store substantial quantities of nutrients in their biomass as can be seen with nitrogen. Using data from Bacteria promote aggregate soil structure, but to a lesser extent than do fungi ( Mycorrhizal fungi are important in maintaining soil structure by accelerating the decomposition of primary minerals, producing humic compounds and secreting extracellular polysaccharides that bind soil particles into stable aggregates ( The macrofauna, especially rodents, earthworms, mollusks, millipedes and isopods, translocate organic matter through their feeding, and are active in mixing the organic and inorganic components of the soil, thereby forming stable aggregate structure ( The clearing of trees creates conditions that affect the soil biota. These include restructuring of vegetation, modification in quality and quantity of litter, alteration of root exudates, leaching of some plant nutrients, and changes in the microclimate. Temperature and moisture conditions become more extreme (  Greater genetic diversity in the soil bacterium, Most of the post-harvesting impacts on bacteria have been measured as products of bacterial action, which may lead to an increase or decrease in nitrogen depending on the impact on the bacteria involved. Asymbiotic nitrogen fixation can decrease after clearcutting and especially with burning, which may greatly reduce the amount of organic substrate ( These nitrogen losses may exceed total ecosystem inputs that might be expected over the length of the rotation period ( Ectomycorrhizal colonization of roots is often reduced in soils of clearcuts ( Ectomycorrhizal colonization of roots is not always reduced by clearcutting. It may be unaffected ( Numbers of soil animals are generally reduced by clearcutting. Reductions have been observed for nematodes ( Other groups are unaffected or may increase following clearcutting. Collembolans ( Reductions in the soil fauna following clearcutting are likely caused by different factors. Increases in the soil fauna following clearcutting are also related to different factors. In some clearcuts, better moisture conditions favor the survival of fly larvae, and abundant algal growth may attract small staphylinid beetles ( Although numbers of animals within a broad taxon may be unaffected by harvesting, species-related effects may be detected. Changes in species richness, species diversity, and the relative contribution of individual species to their respective communities may change ( In shelterwoods, the negative impact on abundance of dipteran larvae, mites and nematodes seem to be lower than in clearcuts ( Few studies have been made on the long-term effects of harvesting on soil biological processes, but we may glean some potential effects from population changes that have occurred in chronosequences ( Sometimes harvesting is followed by site preparation, including broadcast burning, soil cultivation, and herbicide application. Broadcast burning has been used to reduce fire hazard, improve access for tree planting, create favorable microsites for tree seeds or seedlings, control competing vegetation, and reduce plant diseases. However, burning also alters the physical, chemical and biological properties of the soil. Intense fires may modify soil colloids, and can cause increased absorption of solar radiation by the blackened soil surface and increased water repellency ( Site preparation techniques such as disking, harrowing, mounding, ploughing, scarifying (blading), scalping, screefing, and tilling redistribute the organic matter in the soil and in turn influence the composition and activity of the faunal ( Herbicides are sometimes used to control competing vegetation following clearcutting. Release Compaction generally reduces soil fauna ( Northern temperate forests have evolved to accommodate major disturbances ( Many stands in northern forests are of fire origin. Fire frequency varies from about 300 to 1,000 years in coastal British Columbia ( Drought may also cause great reductions in the soil fauna. The impact on some members of the soil fauna during a drought could be greater than that caused by harvesting. Fly larvae and collembolans are especially susceptible to drought ( Different species of fungi may infect roots of a single tree and the associations may change over time, with season and with age of the forest stand ( Quarantine interceptions indicate that many species of soil fauna are transported into temperate North America. However, documentation on the establishment of such species has been restricted to some agricultural pests and earthworms. Native North American earthworms that have survived the last glaciation include a small remnant of nine species from Vancouver Island, the Queen Charlotte Islands, Washington and Oregon ( The present complex biota that has evolved in northern temperate forests provides useful redundancy for promoting nutrient cycling and maintaining forest health. Although, not everyone agrees that a full complement of soil organisms is required for sustained agricultural crop production ( Apart from nutritional considerations, the elimination of some fauna can potentially lead to pest problems ( Both mycorrhizal and nonmycorrhizal fungi protect conifers from pathogens ( All harvesting practices may lead to a decline in soil microfloral and faunal communities. Short-term declines give way to gradual recovery as exemplified by most soil organisms that have been studied over many years. This recovery is slow and seems to mimic the phases of ecosystem development for the aboveground component of the forest. Thus, managers should plan to: Minimize the impact of fire, compaction and erosion from harvesting and site preparation: Fire generally reduces the quantity of organic matter and the soil biota. Since the organic matter stores most of the nutrient capital of soil and provides the habitat for soil organisms, fire intensity should be kept to a minimum in coastal forests and on poor sites. In fire-dominated boreal ecosystems, burning intensity should be kept to the minimum that is required to meet management objectives. Compaction, a major factor in the decline of forest productivity ( Conserve organic matter, including woody debris, on the harvested site: Soluble tannins in logging slash inhibit nitrifying bacteria and probably reduce leaching of nitrates and accompanying cations ( Encourage rapid re-establishment of plant diversity: The deciduous shrub and broadleaf stage of succession, and mixed mature stands with broadleaf plants may have substantial benefits. These include improved soil fertility ( Avoid creating situations of microclimatic extremes: Many soil organisms are sensitive to temperature and moisture extremes. Minimizing the size of clearcuts, or using partial cuts where appropriate, will reduce microclimatic extremes ( Provide refugia from where re-colonization of harvested area can occur: On a microsite scale, coarse woody debris (slash, stumps) and other areas of intact organic soil horizons will provide centers of inoculation. In addition, tracts of uncut forest should be strategically located to allow movement of species with low dispersal capabilities ( Establish desirable microfloral and faunal populations in degraded sites: The deliberate introduction of bacterial symbionts ( The above suggestions are supportive of ecosystem management that has as its basic premise the protection and maintenance of ecological systems. It uses ecological processes of the natural old-growth forest as a model to guide the design of managed forests ( Clearcut harvesting generally reduces the organisms involved in biological processes, but they gradually recover to pre-harvest levels. This might require a period longer than the expected crop rotation length. There are not sufficient data yet to fully evaluate other harvesting systems such as shelterwood and extended rotations, but the impacts in these systems seem to be less drastic. Also, data are not available for many geographical regions, and different ecosystems within regions, for which different responses are to be expected ( Soil organisms work continually in mediating carbon cycling, nutrient transfers, water availability, vegetation vigor and soil formation itself ( Finally, to fully understand the consequences of different harvesting practices on soil biological processes, many disciplines must cooperate to interpret the complex interactions that occur among the above-and below-ground components of forest ecosystems. As I thank my colleagues, Drs. Janet Addison and Tochi Panesar, for their comments on an earlier draft of this manuscript.