Dissolution of mechanically activated Panzhihua ilmenite was carried out at 100°C with a 50% sulfuric acid solution. The particle size, specific surface area, crystallite size, lattice strain and mechano-chemical reaction of milled ilmenite were measured. The cleavage induced by energetic milling occurred more preferentially along the a-axis of ilmenite unit cell. It was found that the defects formed in milling process, especially the lattice strain in the c-axis of ilmenite unit cell, greatly enhanced the leaching reaction. At low temperatures, the leaching reaction is likely to start along the direction of the basal plane (0001) of milled ilmenite. With the mechanically activated ilmenite, leaching conversion at 100°C reached 82.1%. However, the leaching kinetic tests revealed that the ball milling only partially activated the ilmenite. The initial rapid dissolution is due to the leaching of both the fine powders and highly reactive crystal faces. In the later stage, the dissolution exhibited essentially the same behavior as non-activated ilmenite.Panzhihua ilmenite accounts for more than 90% of titanium reserves of China. After the removal of vanadium and iron, the ilmenite concentrate contains TiO More than 90% of TiO Leaching ilmenite with dilute acid can ease the flue gas pollution due to low reaction temperature, and also reduce the waste acid release by partially recycling the dilute acid. However, the reaction rate is very slow. NL corporation ( Mechanical activation, usually carried out by energetic milling, was reported to significantly accelerate the dissolution rate of solid minerals by increasing their chemical reactivity ( The leaching process of mechanically activated ilmenite, as reported by In this work, we studied the leaching of the Panzhihua ilmenite of rock-type origin by dilute sulfuric acid with mechanical activation. The objective was to examine the effect of mechanical activation on leaching performance. Structure and morphology of the ore were also characterized. The ilmenite was obtained from Titanium Company of Panzhihua Steel & Iron (Group) Corporation, Sichuan, China. It is in a size range of −150 A vertical planetary ball mill (QM-1SP2, Nanjing, China) with a rotation speed of 200 Milled samples were leached in a 500 The slurry was sampled during the leaching process to measure the titanium conversion. The sampled slurry was filtered and washed before titrated with a reduction–oxidation titration method ( The ilmenite ore, milled powder and leaching residue were characterized by XRD, infrared (Fourier transform) spectroscopy, thermal analysis, particle size analysis and surface area measurement. XRD experiments were performed using XRD (X’Pert Pro MPD, Philips, Netherlands). The voltage and anode current used were 40 Measurement of vibration spectra was performed using a Nicolet MX-1E FTIR spectrometer. Thermal analysis experiments were carried out on a simultaneous TG/DTA analyzer (Seiko, Japan, EXSTAR6000), with a heating rate of 10 From the XRF results, the 6.23% MgO was detected in the concentrate. The XRD experiment verified that 6.23% MgO mechanically mixed with the ore was detectable. However, the MgO of the unmilled and milled ores was not detected in all XRD experiments. Thus, the Mg atoms in the concentrate must have replaced the Fe atoms in the crystal structure of FeTiO  From the XRD patterns, the crystallite size (  The particle size distributions of the unmilled sample and samples milled for various times are illustrated in The BET surface area of the samples, as shown in The change in the surface area agreed well with that in the  In this study thermogravimetric method was used to characterize the mechanochemical oxidation of samples. Mass increase may be observed in the TG experiments because the Fe According to the iron content in ilmenite (see Compared with the original ilmenite sample, the milled samples showed less mass increase in the TG process. Thus, part of the iron contained in the milled samples was pre-oxidized in the milling operation. From the TG mass change, the percentages of pre-oxidation are estimated to be 24.3% and 63.5% for 60 and 600 Leaching curves in 50% sulfuric acid at 80  Leaching the milled ilmenite at ambient temperature, as showed in From these figures, one can find the most significant change in leaching conversion occurred in the initial stage. In the later stage, the slopes of leaching curves for milled samples are very close, which means they had the same reaction rate. Particle size of leaching residue during leaching process was measured at different reaction times. The mean particles size ( The iso-conversion model ( As described above, the specific surface area of milled samples reduced with increasing milling time after 30 To describe the leaching kinetics in the later stage, the variation of surface area with leaching conversion must be considered. The mass loss and the specific surface area of the sample milled for 1 Comparing the leaching data in Assume the dissolution in the late stage was chemically limited, kinetic equation can be written as: Substitution of Eq. Let parameter Fitting the experimental data in the temperature range of 50–80 In the model, To roughly estimate the initial activation energy, the average leaching rate was calculated from the conversion at 10 The 60 A comparison experiment was conducted as leaching the 60 Both IR and XRD analyses demonstrated that milling operation can change the crystalline structure of ilmenite. The breakage of ilmenite crystal may cause defects on the crystal faces, and increase in the reactivity of ilmenite. Based on the surface area measurements and the leaching results of the milled ilmenite, one can infer that the leaching rate increased monotonically with milling time although the surface area decreased when the sample was milled for a time over 30 The thermogravimetric experiments confirmed the occurrence of oxidation during the mechanical activation of ilmenite, even though the XRD analysis failed to directly detect Fe Welham and Llewellyn inferred that the pressure generated during the impact of balls onto the powder would tend to break the ilmenite along the (0 The leaching kinetic curves showed that the leaching process included two stages. The initial dissolution stage was rapid and had a low activation energy (28.4 The structural defects induced by energetic ball milling include both effective and ineffective defects. The effective defects, i.e., the strain in the Mechanical activation significantly accelerated the dissolution of Panzhihua ilmenite in a 50% sulfuric acid solution. As high as 82.1% of conversion was obtained by leaching the 60 Mechanical milling prior to leaching only partially activated the ilmenite. In the initial period, the activated part [i.e., the fine particles and highly reactive crystal faces] of ilmenite rapidly dissolved and the apparent activation energy was 28.4