Changes were induced in the characteristics of poultry meat protein using specific chemical modifiers to investigate the effect of pressurization, prior to heating, on gelation, texture and thermal behaviour of meat batters. Values of hardness and chewiness were higher in cooked meat batters treated with urea than in a salt-only sample, but cohesiveness was similar. The β-mercaptoethanol treatment produced a heat-induced gel with very similar properties to the salt-only gel. The rheological behaviours of salt-only and β-mercaptoethanol samples were very similar, but storage modulus values were higher in samples with urea, which accelerated gelation. The pressure-induced reduction of differences in the textural properties of meat batters suggests that hydrophobic interactions play an important role in heat-induced gelation. Differential scanning calorimetry showed that urea clearly destabilized chicken meat batters, while β-mercaptoethanol had very little influence on their thermal behaviour. Pressurization tended to equalize batters and final cooking definitively equalized them.Several kinds of molecular interaction are involved in thermal gelation of meat proteins, influencing the properties of the matrix ( There is growing interest in the application of high pressure to meat systems, among other reasons because of its effect on protein functional properties. Such behaviour is connected with conformational changes induced in pressurized meat proteins, which affect the type of molecular associations that take place during thermal gelation ( There have been many studies aimed at understanding the molecular forces implicated in the formation and properties of gel networks. Many of these approach such analysis on the basis of selective destruction of protein interactions in gels to investigate different parameters associated with environmental conditions, composition or processing ( The objective of this paper was to analyse how the changes in the characteristics of the meat raw material, induced by the use of specific chemical modifiers, influence the effect of pressurization on thermal gelation of meat batters. This study should add to the existing information about conformational changes in protein resulting from pressurization prior to heating, the influence on the formation of gel protein structures, and their consequences for the characteristics of final cooked meat products. Fresh chicken breast was obtained from a local meat market. The meat was trimmed to remove visible fat and connective tissue, preground through a 3 mm plate (FTS111, Van Dall SRL. Milano, Italy) to obtain a homogeneous mass, vacuum-packaged and kept frozen at (−20 °C) prior to use, which took place within 2 weeks. Prior to each experiment, the meat was thawed overnight at 0–2 °C. Sufficient amounts of meat and water and 1.5% NaCl were combined to obtain three different meat batters. One of the NaCl batters was used as a control (sample S) and the other two were treated with two different chemical agents: one with 4.5% urea (sample U) and the other with 0.25% β-mercaptoethanol (sample M). Meat protein content was adjusted to 15% in all formulations; the concentrations of chemical agents were chosen according to The meat batters were placed in flexible plastic jars (diam.=3.3 cm, ht.=6.7 cm) containing 60±1 g sample. Each jar was filled, taking special care to avoid air trapping, hermetically sealed and placed in a 8×30 cm Ultra-Cover™ latex bag (Amevisa S.A., Madrid, Spain). Each meat batter was divided into two parts, each of which was subjected to a different treatment. Half of the jars were pressurized (325 MPa, 30 min) using water at 10°C as the pressurizing medium. Pressurizing was performed in an ACB model AGIP N° 665 high pressure pilot unit (GEC, Alsthom, Nantes, France) as described by Moisture and ash of the raw meat and unheated samples were determined ( Texture profile analysis (TPA) of processed samples was performed in a Universal Testing Machine (Model 4501 Instron Engineering Corp., Canton, MA) as described by Rheological changes in unheated meat batters (non-pressurized and pressurized samples) during thermal gelation were analysed using a Bohlin CSR rheometer (Bohlin Instruments, Inc., Cranbury, NJ) operating in the small-amplitude oscillatory mode. After equilibration at the initial temperature (10°C), thermal gelation was induced by heating samples from 10 to 70°C at 1°C/min using a Bohlin temperature control unit. Samples were sheared at a fixed frequency of 1.0 Hz with a strain of 0.02. The gap between the plates was set at 1 mm. The sample perimeter was covered with a thin layer of silicon oil to prevent dehydration. The storage modulus (G′) data were collected every minute during shearing measurements. Each measurement was the mean of two replicates. Thermal behaviour of the different batters, raw and processed, was determined by differential scanning calorimetry as described elsewhere ( One-way analysis of variance by an Protein content of meat batters (14.3–14.9%) was similar in all samples and very close to the target. Like other authors ( The presence of chemical agents in raw meat batters produces some changes in specific residues in meat protein structures, which may influence the type of interactions that take place during thermal gelation, and hence the characteristics of the end product. Chemical agents affected all TPA parameters except for Sp ( The β-mercaptoethanol treatment resulted in a heat-induced gel with very similar textural properties to the salt-only sample (   Addition of urea produced further instability (curve U), particularly in relation to the myosin transitions, which shifted downwards in temperature (2.5 and 5° C for the first and second peaks) with a considerable reduction in total enthalpy (8.2 J/g). The decrease in temperatures is consistent with the onset for G′ at a lower temperature in U batter than in control batter S ( β-Mercaptoethanol, on the other hand, caused very small changes in the original batter (curve M); temperatures fell by very little (around 1°C) and the enthalpy remained practically unvaried (11.5 J/g). It is therefore not surprising that the dynamic rheological behaviours of batters with (M) and without (S) mercaptoethanol were very similar ( Pressure induces some changes in raw meat batter proteins which affect intra and intermolecular interactions ( With pressurization, the gels presented greater ( The presence of chemical agents did not substantially alter the pattern of the pressure action, but there were some important aspects. The effect induced by pressure was greatest in the β-mercaptoethanol treatment, which presented the greatest increases of Ch and Cw ( Pressurization induced some changes in the storage modulus Regarding thermal behaviour, curves S/P, U/P, and M/P in From the standpoint of DSC, we may conclude that, as far as hydrogen-bonding is concerned, urea produced considerable destabilization of chicken breast muscle proteins in the presence of salt. On the other hand, β-mercaptoethanol was practically neutral. Pressurization, in thermally non-denaturing conditions, induced considerable denaturation in all cases, thus reducing the differences among the batters. Urea-treated batters, however, were still the most unstable in terms of thermal transition temperatures and denaturation enthalpy. These patterns of thermal behaviour were consistent with the rheo-dynamics exhibited by the respective batters. Ordinary cooking of non-pressurized batters yielded slightly different functional gels. Where the same thermal treatment was applied to previously pressurized batters, the products were wholly analogous. This research was supported by the Comisión Interministerial de Ciencia y Tecnologı́a (CICYT) under project ALI99-1105.