Objective
                  To compare proteomics and biological function of human dentin matrix molecules (hDMMs) and bovine dentin matrix molecules (bDMMs).
               
                  Design
                  Dentin powder from human or bovine teeth (n = 4) was demineralized in 10% (v/v) ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid for 7 days. The extracts were dialyzed, lyophilized and proteins were characterized using liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry and shotgun proteomic analysis. To study biological function, mouse-derived undifferentiated dental pulp cells (OD21) were treated with 0.01, 0.1 or 1 μg/mL of hDMMs or bDMMs and proliferation was measured after 24 hours and 48 hours using 3-(4,5-Dimethylthiazol-2-yl)-2,5-diphenyltetrazolium bromide (MTT) assay. Cell migration was assessed after 24 hours using a Boyden chamber. Alizarin Red S staining was used to evaluate mineral formation.
               
                  Results
                  There were 307 proteins identified, of which 93 proteins were common to both species. Gene Ontology functional analysis demonstrated similar pattern of biological process in both species which consisted mainly of tissue development and biomineralization. hDMMs and bDMMs both enhanced cell proliferation. After 24 hours, all concentrations of bDMMs promoted cell proliferation (p ≤ 0.05), while hDMMs did not affect proliferation. After 48 hours, groups with 1μg/mL of bDMMs and 0.01μg/mL of hDMMs had increased cell proliferation compared to control (p ≤ 0.0001). All concentrations of hDMMs and bDMMs enhanced cell migration and mineralization (p ≤ 0.0001).
               
                  Conclusion
                  bDMMs has similar biological functions as hDMMs. Moreover, bDMMs stimulated cell proliferation, migration and differentiation similar to hDMMs.The structure and composition of dentin matrix play an important role in the regeneration and function of the dental pulp. Harmful stimuli to dentinal tissue, such as caries and some dental materials stimulate progenitor cells in the pulp to proliferate, migrate and differentiate into odontoblast-like cells to produce reparative dentin ( The human dentin ECM is composed of collagenous and non-collagenous organic components, such as dentin sialoproteins, phophoproteins and proteoglycans ( While the applicability of DMMs for dental pulp regeneration has been well documented, methods of processing and scaling up the isolation of DMMs for their use as tooth-derived bioactive materials have been limited. One important aspect to be considered in the use of these bioactive molecules for the development of dentin-derived biomaterials for pulp regeneration in the clinic, is the fact that not only are human teeth difficult to procure in large quantities, but also there are important ethical concerns with using allogeneic human teeth for regeneration of dental pulp in patients. For these reasons, an easily sourced, well-characterized and established source of animal teeth for large scale isolation and processing of DMM for dental pulp regeneration may be useful for the future development of dental materials for regenerative therapies. Bovine teeth are a suitable source of DMMs for dental pulp regeneration given the size, availability and well-regulated sourcing of bovine tissues for biomedical use by the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) and the United States Department of Agriculture (USDA). However, studies characterizing the biological equivalence of human and bovine DMMs with respect to their composition and odontogenic potential are not available, but are required before recommending the use of bovine teeth for isolation of bioactive DMMs. To address these goals, here we aimed to (i) investigate and compare the proteomes of human and bovine dentin matrix molecules (hDMMs and bDMMs, respectively), and (ii) to identify potential similarities regarding their key biological functions, such as their comparative effect on dental pulp cell proliferation, migration and odontogenic differentiation. We hypothesized that bDMMs have similar composition and biological function as those derived from human teeth and can be used as an alternative to hDMMs for pulp regeneration. Bovine incisors were extracted from 30-month-old slaughtered heifers from an establishment inspected by the (USDA #M9233/P9223). Human third molars, used as a control, were extracted at the Oregon Health & Science University dental clinics from donors with informed consent and after institutional ethics approval. The teeth were kept in a 0.5% chloramine T solution (Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO, US) at 4 °C for no more than one week before processing. For processing, as previously described by The amount of matrix obtained from human and bovine dentin were evaluated by using bicinchoninic acid (BCA) assay (Pierce Biotechnology, Rockford, IL, USA). Human and bovine teeth sizes are different, so to avoid a potential bias on the final amount of protein concentration, the total pulverized powder from the each tooth was weighted before DMM extraction. Next, for the BCA assay, same amounts of bovine and human DMM extracts were dissolved in deionized water, mixed with BCA working reagent and incubated for 30 minutes. The absorbance was then measured at 562 nm using a microplate reader (BioTek, Vermont, USA) and the protein concentrations were the calculated based on the albumin standard curve, as recommended by the manufacturer’s protocol. To obtain an estimate of dentin matrix molecules yielded by each tooth, the protein concentration data was normalized by the original weight of the tooth and volume of the DMM extracts. Human and bovine lyophilized extracts were digested via enhanced filter-aided sample preparation (eFASP) ( Peptides were identified from the tandem mass spectrometry data using MaxQuant (version 1.6.5.0) ( An undifferentiated murine dental pulp cell (OD-21) line ( 3-(4,5-dimethylthiazol-2-yl)-2,5-diphenyltetrazolium bromide (MTT) Assay was used to assess the metabolic activity of the OD21 cells. Cells were seeded in 96-well plates at a density of 4 × 10 Cell migration illustrates the chemotactic effect of dentin matrix molecules on dental pulp cells ( Cells were seeded in 24-well plates at a density of 5 × 10 All experiments were performed in quadruplicate and values are expressed as mean ± standard deviation. Statistical analysis was performed using Graphpad Prism software. The differences between three or more groups were analyzed by One/Two-way Analysis of variance (ANOVA) followed by Tukey's post hoc test (α = 0.05), and differences between two groups were analyzed by independent samples t-test (α = 0.05). The normalized data comparing DMMs concentration from human and bovine dentin showed that after 7 days of extraction, bovine dentin extracts yielded an average of 21.61 mg of total protein per tooth, while the human extracts yielded only 10.79 mg (n = 3, Student’s t-test, Proteomic profiles obtained from pooled dentin sample (n = 4) for each group. A total of 307 proteins were identified through liquid chromatography with tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) analysis. Of these identified proteins, 93 proteins were present in both human and bovine dentin extracellular matrix ( Of the 93 proteins found in human and bovine samples, collagenous proteins are the major component in both species (Fig. S1). From the large set of non-collagenous proteins present in both tissues, we selected matrix molecules that are known to regulate dentin formation and mineral matrix deposition. Comparison of the selected molecules found in both species is shown in Although, the amount of individual proteins found in each species were different, the functional enrichment analysis of dentin samples using Gene Ontology annotation database ( When cells were cultured in hDMMs for at least 24 hours, no effects on cell proliferation were observed. In contrast, bDMMat concentrations of 0.01, 0.1, or 1 μg/mL significantly increased the number of the cells in comparison to controls ( All concentrations of both bovine and human dentin matrix molecules elicited significantly greater migration of OD21 cells ( The Alizarin red S stain assay showed that both human and bovine dentin matrix molecules promoted cell mineralization ( Dentin matrix molecules have been shown to play an important role in the formation, healing, and regeneration of the dentin-pulp complex, and are considered a promising component of dental biomaterials which are intended to induce pulp regeneration ( Therefore, we propose to use bDMMas a substitute for hDMMs. We hypothesized that bovine teeth, which are inherently larger and easier to procure, would yield more dentin matrix molecules than human teeth and would have similar protein composition and biological functions. We found that the total weight of proteins that bovine teeth yielded was 2 times higher than human teeth ( Current proteomic tools allow large-scale, high-throughput analyses for the detection, identification, and functional investigation of proteome ( For a deeper comparison, from the 93 proteins common to human and bovine extracts, we selected the set of non-collagenous proteins and proteoglycans for deeper comparison, because these molecules are known to play a significant role in dental tissue regeneration. The selected proteins were categorized into 4 groups: 1) phosphorylated proteins, 2) non-phosphorylated proteins, 3) Small Leucine-rich Repeat Proteoglycans and 4) growth factor superfamilies. The phosphorylated proteins found in both species, consisted primarily of dentin sialophosphoprotein and dentin matrix protein-1. Both dentin sialophosphoprotein and dentin matrix protein-1 are secreted by odontoblasts and commonly found in dentin ( The growth factor superfamily was the last DMM component studied. Some of these growth factors are sequestrated and bound within the dentin extracellular matrix, playing an important role during dental tissue repair. Even though transforming growth factor β and insulin-like growth factor (IGF) were the most abundant growth factors common to both species, human dentin matrix molecules presented higher levels of transforming growth factor β, whereas bovine dentin matrix molecule extracts had more insulin-like growth factor ( Regardless of the differences among identified proteins and their compositions between the two species, gene oncology functional analysis demonstrated similar patterns of biological function, regarding healing process, tissue regeneration, and formation of mineral tissue ( Previous studies showed that dentin matrix molecules contained bioactive molecules that regulate dental pulp regeneration and dentin formation and can potentially be used as a biomedical material for dental pulp regeneration ( No effects on cell proliferation were observed after OD21 cells were exposed to human dentin matrix molecules for 24 hours ( Cell migration plays an essential role in tissue repair and regeneration ( Lastly, we investigated the effects of dentin matrix molecules on dental pulp cell (OD21) differentiation and mineral secretion. Cells were exposed to different concentrations of human or bovine DMMs in the presence of odontogenic medium containing ascorbic acid and β-glycerophosphate. Higher alizarin red staining was observed in cells that were treated with dentin matrix molecules from both species, when compared to controls (odontogenic medium without DMMs). However, different from other studies ( Dentin matrix molecules was proven to successfully stimulate healing and regeneration in dentin-pulp complex. Tertiary dentin was reported to be induced by DMMs. Due to the limitation of acquiring human teeth as a source for dental materials, bovine teeth were considered to be more practical source for scaling-up the manufacture of DMM-based biomaterials. Dentin matrix molecules from both species showed similar protein composition and biological function, favoring the use of bDMMs. However, biocompatibility between species and immunological reaction when using bovine dentin matrix molecules on patients still need further investigation. In summary, the concentration of dentin matrix molecules extracted from bovine dentin was greater than that of human dentin, while the general composition of proteins and bioactive molecules and their correlation to biological processes appeared to be highly comparable. Each concentration of dentin matrix molecules from both human and bovine sources significantly enhanced migration and mineralization of OD21 cells with the similar results, while some concentrations of bovine and human dentin matrix molecules can promote cell proliferation. Therefore, we suggest the possible use of bDMMs as a substitute for hDMMs for pulp regeneration therapy, with the abundance of ease of scalability and sourcing.  The authors report no declarations of interest. This project was supported by funding from the Supplementary material related to this article can be found, in the online version, at doi: The following are Supplementary data to this article: