The purpose of the present retrospective study was to describe the single oblique posterolateral approach for open reduction and internal fixation of large, displaced, posterior malleolar fractures with an associated lateral malleolar fracture. A single oblique posterolateral approach was used for osteosynthesis of the posterior and lateral malleolus in 50 consecutive patients (23 females [46%], 27 males [54%]; mean age, 47.44 ± 16.13 years; mean follow-up duration, 26.32 ± 5.15 months). The mean interval to surgery was 4.3 ± 1.9 days after the inciting trauma. During the follow-up period, the surgery was complicated by skin necrosis around the incision in 2 (4%) patients and sural nerve damage in 2 (4%) patients. We found that the single oblique posterolateral approach to large, displaced, posterior malleolar fractures with an associated lateral malleolar fracture provided easy exposure of the posterior and lateral malleoli and had the potential to decrease the incidence of sural nerve injury because of the smaller incision size.Reduction of a posterior malleolar fracture with an associated lateral malleolar fracture can be achieved using either an indirect or a percutaneous method In previous studies, the posteromedial and the straight longitudinal posterolateral approaches to open reduction and internal fixation of malleolar fractures were introduced The purpose of the present study was to describe the use of a single oblique posterolateral approach for open reduction and internal fixation of large displaced posterior malleolar fractures with an associated lateral malleolar fracture, emphasizing the associated reduction in the risk of sural nerve damage by the smaller incision required compared with the established posterolateral approach. The medical records of 50 patients (23 females [46%], 27 males [54%]; mean age, 47.5 [range 25 to 75] years) who had been treated in our surgical unit from January 2010 to September 2012, for ankle fractures involving the posterior and lateral malleolus were retrospectively reviewed. None of the patients had experienced bilateral ankle fractures. Our institution's ethical review committee approved the study. Patients were included if a minimum of 12 months of follow-up data were available. Consecutive patients from the senior author's (J.S.S.) practice were included in the cohort if they had undergone open reduction and internal fixation of a malleolar fracture using the single oblique posterolateral incisional approach. Patients with accompanying injury of the ipsilateral limb that could have affected the outcome score, patients with an open fracture, and pediatric fractures were excluded from the present study. The most frequent cause of injury was slipping (n = 40 [80%]), followed by sports injuries (n = 6 [12%]) and traffic accidents (n = 4 [8%]), which are known as high-energy trauma. The fractures were classified using the AO Foundation and Orthopaedic Trauma Association Radiographs and computed tomography (CT) scans were obtained to assess the severity and nature of the posterior malleolar fracture. The ratio of the posterior malleolar fragment to the articular surface using the most confirmable sagittal CT scan image was measured by a single, trained orthopedic surgeon (J.Y.C.). The mean area of the posterior malleolar fragment on the CT images and radiographs was 31.7% and 27.9%, respectively. The severity of the posterior malleolar fracture on the CT scans was classified as posterolateral oblique (type I), medial extension (type II), or small shell (type III) using Haraguchi's classification The indications for surgical fixation using a single oblique posterolateral extensile exposure included involvement of <25% of the articular surface of the posterior malleolus or evidence of posterior subluxation of the posterior ankle. Carr Radiographs and 3-dimensional CT scans were obtained to closely evaluate the location and nature of the fracture fragment. The surgical approach was determined according to the accompanying medial and lateral malleolar fractures. A single oblique incision was chosen, especially if a comminuted or impacted posterior malleolar fracture was present that was thought would be difficult to stabilize with the commonly used percutaneous anteroposterior screw fixation technique. The procedure was performed with the patient in the prone position, except for 4 patients (8%), for whom the lateral position was necessary because of comorbidity such as flail chest or the presence of pre-existing external fixators, which made the prone position impossible. A pneumatic tourniquet was applied to prevent bleeding. The procedure was performed with the patient under general anesthesia in 32 patients (64%) and spinal anesthesia in 18 (36%). A single oblique posterolateral incision for Danis-Weber type B fractures was made over the posterior fibular margin. The incision curved obliquely at the point of the fracture site, resulting in a 10-cm curved incision that reached the Achilles tendon ( After examining the reduction using a C-arm, the wound was irrigated and repaired in the usual manner. Next, the simple fracture on the medial malleolus was fixed using a screw and Kirschner wire, while the assistant internally rotated the lower limb after placing a pillow under the knee at 70° of flexion. The patient was changed to the supine position when the medial malleolar fracture was highly comminuted or displaced. All patients received below-the-knee immobilization with a cast for 4 to 6 weeks. Partial weightbearing was allowed on the basis of the need for syndesmotic fixation, the size of the posterior malleolar fracture fragment, and the degree of comminution. Full weightbearing was allowed at 3 months postoperatively after confirmation of bone union on the radiographs. Of the 50 patients, 34 (68%) had an accompanying medial malleolar fracture. Of these, 2 patients (4%) had to be repositioned supine during the procedure because of a severe comminuted medial malleolar fracture. The mean operative time was 54 (range 43 to 58) minutes for bimalleolar fractures and 68 (range 62 to 75) minutes for trimalleolar fractures, except for the 2 patients (4%) who had required repositioning on the surgical table. Of the 50 posterior malleolar fractures, 48 (96%) had an accurate reduction (<1 mm of displacement) of the tibial joint surface on the follow-up radiographs ( The functional outcome was evaluated using the American Orthopaedic Foot and Ankle Society ankle-hindfoot score A statistical description of the cohort is given in In the treatment of ankle injuries associated with large displaced posterior malleolar fractures, stability of fixation, articular congruity, and alignment are essential for restoration of normal joint function and prevention of post-traumatic arthritis Talbot et al Solomon et al In some cases, reduction of the posterior malleolus was masked by the plate used to fix the lateral malleolar fracture. Despite the requirement for an antiglide technique, we overcame this issue with temporary fixation of the lateral malleolar using Kirschner wires before posterior malleolar reduction and fixation. Definite lateral malleolar fixation with a plate and screws was performed after the posterior malleolus had been firmly fixed. It has generally been believed that wide exposure of the anterior aspect of the lateral malleolus is necessary to fit the locking compression distal fibular plate to the anterior aspect of the lateral malleolus because of the plate design ( Our study was limited by its small sample size, the retrospective design of our investigation, and the biases related to surgeons measuring the outcomes of their own patients. Overall, our aim was to observe the outcomes in a cohort of patients who had undergone ankle fracture repair using a posterolateral extensile exposure. We did not make any comparisons; thus, we have not made any claims related to the potential benefits or disadvantages of the intervention. It was also our aim that the information provided in our report could be used in the development of future prospective cohort studies and randomized controlled clinical trials. We believe this technique is applicable in situations in which clear visualization and a shorter incision could lower the complication rate. Additional research is needed to compare our method to others and to gain a better understanding of its applicability in surgical practice in general. In conclusion, we have shown that the single oblique posterolateral approach to large displaced posterior malleolar fractures with an associated lateral malleolar fracture provides easy exposure of the posterior and lateral malleolus and has the potential to decrease the incidence of sural nerve injury because of the smaller incision size.