Significance of morphological properties of minerals in flotation has been recognized for several decades but sufficient research efforts have not been devoted to this problem. In this study, a special design laboratory scale blasting equipment was used to produce quartz particles with different shapes and roughness values, and develop a new method by which flotation characteristics of quartz particles could be enhanced. For this purpose, micro-flotation experiments were carried out with un-blasted and blasted quartz particles, and the results were correlated with their shape and roughness values analyzed with SEM, BET, and Image analysis methods. The results indicated that the blasted quartz particles with more angular and rougher surfaces gave better floatability compared to the un-blasted quartz particles.A new approach was developed to study the morphological properties of particles. Effect of nozzle pressures on morphological and flotation recoveries of particles. A correlation with the morphology and flotation recoveries of the particles. Significance of shape factors and roughness on flotation recoveries. Sand blasting treatment is an abrasive machining process which is widely used for surface strengthening ( The behavior of particle systems is primarily affected by the physical characteristics of particles such as size, shape, surface area, roughness, pore size, and structure ( Roughness is another important parameter which is most likely formed due to the fluctuations around a smooth and sharp interface ( Flotation is a well-known physico-chemical process exploiting differences in surface properties of minerals which depend on wettability or hydrophobicity of particles. Additionally, there are several parameters acting on the efficiency of flotation processes besides other parameters such as collector type, pH, particle size, shape, and other morphological properties of particles. There are several studies on flotation behavior of a liquid partially wetting smooth and rough surfaces ( In this study, sand blasting equipment was developed and used as a novel approach for producing rough quartz particles at different nozzle pressures. Then, the flotation experiments were carried out with un-blasted and blasted quartz particles in order to investigate the effect of morphology of quartz particles on their flotation behavior. The quartz sample used in this study was provided by ESAN mining company, Istanbul, Turkey. The chemical and mineralogical analyses of the sample were carried out by X-ray Fluorescence (XRF) and X-ray Diffraction (XRD) methods, respectively. The results presented in The quartz sample was first comminuted by a series of crushers involving jaw, cone, and roll crushers to obtain the particles less than 2 A series of tests were adopted with the uniquely designed sand blasting machine ( In this study, a numerical calculation method based on the relation between air pressure ( Based on the literature data, the power exponent After the sand blasting, the same screening procedure was applied on the blasted sample to obtain 150 The ground (un-blasted) and blasted samples of 150 The image analysis for each representative sample was also performed with Leica QWin Image Analyze Program ( Roughness is characterized as the ratio of real surface area to the surface area of a sphere of the equivalent diameter as seen in Eq. The micro-flotation tests were carried out with 150 The flotation tests were carried out with 1 Many papers have been devoted to the effect of different parameters on quartz flotation. However, the most prominent ones are pH and collector concentration. In this concept, several micro-flotation tests were carried out with the un-blasted quartz particles as a function of EDA concentration at pH 9.5. The reason for selecting this pH is that the solution pH mainly determines the surfactant dissociation or the formation of colloidal amine precipitates in alkaline solutions, hence flotation recoveries can change depending on pH ( The flotation results seen in On the other hand, in this study, an incipient collector concentration at 10 After determining the flotation behavior of the un-blasted quartz particles in terms of collector concentration, a series of micro-flotation tests were performed with the blasted quartz particles as a function of nozzle pressure from 1 to 6 bars in order to show its effect on particle morphologies. Other parameters such as feed speed, and the distance between shot gun and plate were kept constant as 0.94 As seen from Image Analysis, BET, and SEM techniques were used to analyze the effect of nozzle pressure on the particle morphology of the samples and correlated with the flotation recoveries. The results are presented in The results presented in Interestingly, the same trend was also obtained with the particle roughness values seen in The results are consistent with other observations of faster liquids at rough surfaces ( The degree of wettability was found to be inversely proportional to the roughness of material and consequently to the critical surface tension ( Furthermore, a recent study ( A new approach was developed for the first time to study the roughness and shape factors of mineral particles produced through a sand blasting machine. Towards this aim, fine quartz particles of 150 There appears to be a strong correlation between the morphological properties of minerals and the flotation recoveries. While floatability of particles increased with increasing flatness and elongation ratios, the surface roughness of particles proportionally increased with the blasting pressure leading to the enhanced floatability of particles. Further research is underway to model the contribution of shape and roughness on adhesion of quartz particles to the bubble.