Corrosion plays a significant role in wear of mills used to grind acidic phosphate slurry at pH 2–4 in Florida fertilizer plants. Approximately half of the grinding media wear results from corrosion or oxidation dissolution of metal surfaces in grinding. Cathodic protection using impressed current was investigated to reduce the wear rate. The effect of polarization potential on corrosion rate and required current density were studied using a specially designed ball mill whose electrochemical potential can be controlled. Experimental results indicate that the total wear rate was reduced by 42–46% for 1018 carbon steel when a potential of −1.0 V was applied. The required current density to effectively reduce the wear rate was 210 mA/m2 in pH 3.1 solution, 180 mA/m2 in pH 6.8 solution, and 160 mA/m2 in pH 9.2 solution. Scanning electron microscopy (SEM), and X-ray diffraction (XRD) methods were used to investigate the surface morphology, corrosion products, and composition of metals during phosphate grinding with and without cathodic protection. SEM results indicated that pitting corrosion was the main corrosion type. XRD images suggested that Fe2O3 was the main corrosion product in pH 3.1 solution without cathodic protection, and the corrosion was significantly reduced when potential of −1.0 V was applied.The United States is the largest phosphate rock producer in the world. About 30% of the world production was produced by the United States ( Grinding mills are commonly used in the Florida phosphate industry to reduce particle size. The corrosion of metallic grinding media and mill liner is a very serious problem, particularly in acidic conditions as encountered in the Florida phosphate fertilizer industry (pH 2–4). At acidic pHs, protective passivation films of metal oxides and/or hydroxides do not exist on the surface of balls and liners, exposing fresh metal surface that is more susceptible to corrosion. It is known that the corrosive wear of grinding mill leads to an increase in operating cost and plant downtime, a loss of process efficiency, and product contamination. The direct operating costs in grinding are mainly the energy consumed and the metal lost through wear and corrosion ( Metal corrosion reactions are electrochemical in nature and their reaction rates are controlled by the electrochemical potential at the surface. A reduction in potential with excess electrons (e Unlike earlier mill corrosion studies that used devices that merely simulated mill motion, the present study utilized a specially designed ball mill whose electrochemical potential can be controlled under operating conditions ( The coupons used to represent the grinding balls and mill shell were made of 1018 carbon steel acquired from McMaster-Carr Supply Company, Cleveland, OH. The compositions of 1018 carbon steel are shown in The phosphate samples and pond water used in this study were acquired from Florida CF Industries, Plant City, FL. The phosphate sample was thoroughly mixed and wet screened into seven different size fractions for size distribution analysis and results are shown in In all grinding tests, the rotation speed of the grinding mill was fixed at 70 RPM which was 75% of the critical speed. The solid percentage was chosen to be at 64% which was close to the industrial value. The load percentage was kept at 50% which was the middle level of this factor, unless specified otherwise. The wear rate in mills penetration per year (MPY) was calculated from Eq. The polarization diagram gives a fundamental and quantitative assessment of the change in corrosion rate caused by cathodic polarization. It was established using a standard three-electrode electrochemical cell controlled by a potentiostat which applies a sweeping potential to the working electrode made of the same metal as the mill or grinding medium ( Since phosphate grinding takes place in solution mixture of gypsum pond water and fresh water, polarization studies were carried out in simulation solution made of gypsum pond water and distilled water. The pH of undiluted gypsum pond water has been measured to be 1.31. The pond water and NaOH were used to make solutions of pH 4.6, 6.8, and 9.2. The potentiodynamic cathodic polarization curves of 1018 steel specimen in oxygenated pond water solutions at these pHs are shown in Additional potentiodynamic polarization studies of 1018 steel were also carried out in nitrogenated pond water solution. Comparing Anodic polarization represents a driving force for corrosion by the anodic half cell reaction. When surface potential measures more positive, the oxidizing (or corrosive) power of the solution increases. To investigate effects of polarized potential on corrosion rate of the ball mill and grinding media, 3-h grinding tests were conducted using the experimental setup described earlier under controlled electrochemical conditions. The effects of polarization potential on wear rate of 1018 carbon steel in different solutions were carried out and the results at pH 3.1 are shown in The total wear rate of metal determined from the weight loss measurement has three components, which are abrasive wear, corrosive wear and synergistic effect of abrasive and corrosive wear. The polarization potential was mainly used to reduce the corrosive wear. The corrosive wear rate was determined using the approach described elsewhere ( The ball mill can be protected from corrosive wear using the impressed current technique which utilizes an external power source to force current out of the DSA, into the electrolyte, and eventually onto the ball mill. The impressed current cathodically polarizes the ball mill and reduces its corrosion rate. The magnitude of impressed current determines the effectiveness of corrosive wear rate reduction. Previous work ( To investigate effects of impressed current density on corrosion rate of the ball mill and grinding media, 3-h grinding tests were conducted using the experimental setup described elsewhere ( The effects of impressed current density on wear rate of 1018 carbon steel in pH 3.1 solution are shown in As described earlier, the impressed current density was mainly used to reduce the corrosive wear. The corrosive wear rate was determined using the same approach and the results are also shown in Comparing these results reveals that the required current density for effective protection was higher for acidic solutions than for neutral or alkaline solutions. For example, an impressed current density of 210 mA/m The microstructures of the corroded surfaces of the coupons obtained at different pH values under different impressed currents were investigated by SEM. The structure of the corrosion product of the coupons obtained after 3-h grinding at different pH value was investigated by X-ray spectrometer. Similar results were obtained with 1018 carbon steel in pH 6.8 and pH 9.2 solutions, except that the corrosion products were ferric oxide (Fe Based on the above results, the following conclusions can be drawn: Polarization diagrams indicated that the current density was higher in nitrogenated solution than in oxygenated solution at the same pH value. Polarization potential of −1.0 V was sufficient to effectively reduce the wear rate of 1018 carbon steel. The total wear rate was reduced by 42–46% and corrosive wear rate was reduced by 84–86% for 1018 carbon steel when potential of −1.0 V was applied at pHs of 3.1–9.2. The required current density to effectively reduce the wear rate of 1018 carbon steel was 210 mA/m SEM analysis indicated that pitting corrosion was the main corrosion mechanism. SEM photographs suggested that corrosion was significantly reduced after polarization potential −1.0 V was applied. XRD images suggested that Fe The authors gratefully acknowledge the financial support of Florida Institute of Phosphate Research (FIPR) under Project Number 00-01-170 which made this work possible.