In this paper, the physicochemical properties of natural, pillared and porous nano bentonite heterostructure in the points of view of surface protonation–deprotonation behaviors were studied. Moreover, the structural heterogeneity in each sample based on three-dimensional field-emission scanning electron microscopy (FESEM) plots were investigated to obtain its effect on the formation of surface active sites. To better understand the surface protonation properties and adsorptive capability of natural, pillared and porous clays, it is essential to investigate the surface charge, surface active sites, pH at point of zero charge (pHzpc), and surface acid-base equilibrium constants. Since the information about amphoteric acid-base groups especially in porous clays is still lacking, our main purpose is to obtain the best estimates to compare the surface properties of natural, pillared and porous clays by means of Gran method and surface complexation model from titration data. The 2 pK-diffusion layer model (DLM) was applied to evaluate the contribution and concentration of the various surface site species (such as SOH, SOH2
                     +, and SO−) in the different pH and ionic strengths. This paper indicates considerable new information about surface acid-base reactions, total surface site concentrations, pHzpc measurement, which provides basic knowledge of the underlying adsorption mechanisms. The maximum value of total surface sites concentration (8.84 mmol/L) in ionic strengths of 0.05 M NaCl belonged to porous nano bentonite heterostructure (PBH) with the highest pHzpc at 9.73.The acid-base properties of adsorbents play an important role in their performance on the adsorption processes. Moreover, many physical and chemical properties of adsorbents are affected by the nature of the surface charges [ The external surface and internal surface (interlayer space) in smectite clay minerals (e.g. bentonite and montmorillonite) are attractive regions for adsorption [ There are many experimental and computational studies focused on the structure of interlayer space in clay mineral [ There are some studies in which the SCM was used to investigate the surface of natural and pillared clays. Avena et al. (1990) [ In this research, for a better understanding of the surface heterogeneity effect in the increase of surface site concentration, the three-dimensional FESEM images of NB, Al, Fe-PILB, and PBH samples were investigated for the first time. The pH NB as the starting material was obtained from Schomburg Co., Germany. The Al, Fe-PILB, and PBH were prepared initially by the pillaring method and then the formation of silica mesoporous structure between pillared nano bentonite clay as reported by Barakan and Aghazadeh (2019) [ In this study, the adsorption properties of the NB, Al, Fe-PILB, and PBH were investigated by using X-ray diffraction (XRD), N In this research, three-dimensional FESEM image of each sample was produced to investigate the effect of structural heterogeneity (based on porosity, specific surface area, surface defects, and surface topography) on the formation of surface active sites. The three-dimensional surface plots were generated by ImageJ as an image processing program. FESEM operated by MIRA3 TESCAN at high emission current of 20 μA, an accelerating voltage of 15 kV, a scan time of 40 s, and a working distance of 15–17 mm. The suspensions of NB, Al, Fe-PIL, and PBH in the ratio of S:L = 1:20 were prepared in the NaCl electrolyte solution in different concentrations of 0.05, 0.1 and 0.5 M. Then, all suspensions titrated with a standard NaOH and HCl solution (0.05 M) to pH = 3–11 and pH = 11–3. The titrations were done in a glass vessel on a Metrohm Titrino 848 with a DET (Dynamic equivalence point titration) method. For the total active acid site concentration determination, the Gran plot method was carried out [ In this research, the potentiometric titration and drift methods were applied for pH In the pH To determine pH Since, there is no direct way to measure Ψ, therefore, to determine K At pH < pH At pH > pHzrc, [ = Meo-]> [ = MeOH]; [ = Meo-] = - Q and [ = MeOH] = Hs + Q The main adsorption properties of the NB, Al, Fe-PILB, and PBH were determined by XRD and N These results showed that the different modification methods create different surface and structural properties. According to XRD results ( Moreover, as shown in In this research, NH As shown in NH The acidity in PBH was observed with four desorption peaks in the weak (at 232 °C), and strong (at 475, 552 and 870 °C) acidic regions. In Al, Fe-PILB, three peaks could be seen in weak and strong acidic regions at 199 °C, and at 592 & 672 °C, respectively. In NB sample, three peaks could be observed, the first peak at 195 °C, and the second peak at 548 °C belonged to the weak and strong acid sites, respectively. However, in NB which was not calcined, the third peak at 725 °C with high intensity of acidity belonged to the water desorption from the condensation of bentonite layers. Therefore, As shown in The results of pH In the drift method, the pH The results of the Gran plots illustrated in The intrinsic surface acidity constants ( In this research, the surface complexation models were used to investigate the pH effect on the surface site concentration. The sweep option of Visual MINTEQA 3.1 in 2 pK-DLM was carried out to evaluate the contribution of the various surface site species such as SOH, SOH Titration data for each sample was used to characterize the surface acid-base groups and adsorption properties of natural and modified bentonite. The modified bentonite showed more adsorption properties than natural bentonite, which was synthesized as the new kind of Al, Fe pillared nano bentonite and it is derivated in the form of porous nano bentonite heterostructure. Depending on the FESEM 3D images of the NB, Al, Fe-PILB and PBH surfaces, more active sites created on the heterogeneous surfaces with different heights. The unique S To describe the discrepancy about the failure of titration method for clay minerals to measure pH The total surface site concentration and surface acidity constants were measured by Gran plot, and PBH showed highest Hs value. The surface complexation model by means of 2 pK-DLM in visual MINTEQ 3.1 software was investigated the pH and ionic strength effects on the surface site concentration. In this way, the PBH samples showed higher ≡SOH The results of this research can be useful for the investigation of clay mineral behavior in acidic or alkaline conditions. The results showed that the modification of natural clay significantly increased the positive surface charge and the total surface site concentration. Therefore, these compounds can be applied as an adsorbent for anionic pollutant removal at a wide range of pH in the environmental protection plans. Valeh Aghazadeh: Supervisor, contributed data or analysis tools and co-wrote the paper.Shima Barakan: Designed and performed experiments, analyzed data, collected the data and wrote the paper.Ehsan Bidari.Performed experiments, analyzed data and co-wrote the paper. The authors acknowledge the support of