This work presents chemical modeling of solubilities of metal sulfates in aqueous solutions of sulfuric acid at high temperatures. Calculations were compared with experimental solubility measurements of hematite (Fe2O3) in aqueous ternary and quaternary systems of H2SO4, MgSO4 and Al2(SO4)3 at high temperatures. A hybrid model of ion-association and electrolyte non-random two liquid (ENRTL) theory was employed to fit solubility data in three ternary systems H2SO4–MgSO4–H2O, H2SO4–Al2(SO4)3–H2O at 235–270°C and H2SO4–Fe2(SO4)3–H2O at 150–270°C. Employing the Aspen Plus™ property program, the electrolyte NRTL local composition model was used for calculating activity coefficients of the ions Al3+, Mg2+ Fe3+ and SO4
                     2−, HSO4
                     −, OH−, H3O+, respectively, as well as molecular species. The solid phases were hydronium alunite (H3O)Al3(SO4)2(OH)6, hematite Fe2O3 and magnesium sulfate monohydrate (MgSO4)·H2O which were employed as constraint precipitation solids in calculating the metal sulfate solubilities. A correlation for the equilibrium constants of the association reactions of complex species versus temperature was implemented. Based on the maximum-likelihood principle, the binary interaction energy parameters for the ionic species as well as the coefficients for equilibrium constants of the reactions were obtained simultaneously using the solubility data of the ternary systems. Following that, the solubilities of metal sulfates in the quaternary systems H2SO4–Fe2(SO4)3–MgSO4–H2O, H2SO4–Fe2(SO4)3–Al2(SO4)3–H2O at 250°C and H2SO4–Al2(SO4)3–MgSO4–H2O at 230–270°C were predicted. The calculated results were in excellent agreement with the experimental data.High temperature and pressure acid leaching (PAL) is a technique, which is used in hydrometallurgy for selective dissolution of nickel and cobalt from lateritic ores. Laterites are surface oxide ores with complex and variable mineralogy ranging from iron oxy-hydroxide-rich minerals (FeOOH) at the top, to hydrated magnesium silicate minerals at the bottom of the ore zone. The economically useful metals Ni and Co exist in concentrations ranging from 0.7 to 1.35 The conditions under which high pressure acid leaching occurs, that is, the temperature, time and the concentration of the free stoichiometric acid determine the composition of the final leach solution. The iron and aluminum, which are the main components of the ore, are fixed by a dissolution-precipitation reaction sequence as hematite Fe Modeling the solubility of metals in aqueous solutions particularly at high temperature is a difficult task because of lack of thermodynamic data and a strongly non-ideal solution behavior due to the high concentration and temperature. It seems that a hybrid modeling approach of ion-association (i.e., speciation using various complexes) and ion-interaction models, is the best approach to modeling such difficult aqueous processing systems. Indeed, Baghalha and Papangelakis In this work, the electrolyte NRTL (ENRTL) model embedded in the Aspen Plus™ software together with a speciation approach was applied to the PAL process. Experimental solubility data of metal sulfates in aqueous sulfuric acid at high temperatures were used to model the following ternary systems: (1) H The regressed parameters obtained on the above ternary systems were then used to predict and describe the behavior of quaternary systems, specifically H Mathias et al. The following chemistry model combined with the ENRTL model In electrolyte systems, three classes of reactions take place: partial or complete dissociation, precipitation reactions, and association of ionic species through equilibrium reactions. The dissociation of electrolytes results in the formation of ionic species. Ionic species associate with other ions or solvent molecules forming complexes. The precipitation reactions can be viewed as the thermodynamic constraints producing new solid compounds directly from chemical reactions or the association of ionic and complex species. The particular speciation used to calculate the solubility of Al, Mg, and Fe sulfates in aqueous sulfuric acid solution at 250  The speciation of aluminum sulfate and magnesium sulfate in sulfuric acid solution are given by Baghalha and Papangelakis  The speciation of ferric sulfate in sulfuric acid solution at high temperature was given by Diakonov et al. After identifying the complex species and determining the precipitation, dissociation and association reactions, one needs to calculate the concentration of each species. Each reaction has an equilibrium constant that depends on the temperature of the solution as Furthermore, the equilibrium constants of complex reactions are evaluated by the following equation: A wide variety of electrolyte activity coefficient models have been proposed The advantages of the ENRTL model include the general temperature dependence of ion interaction parameters that render it applicable to a wide range of temperatures of interest to hydrometallurgy: from room temperature to 270 The electrolyte NRTL activity coefficient model consists of three contributions. The long-range force contribution is a Pitzer–Debye–Hückel model, which takes into account the electrostatic interactions of ions, especially at low concentrations. The second part of the model is the Born contribution that is applicable to mixed aqueous–nonaqueous electrolyte solvents. The third part is the local composition NRTL contribution, which is employed for short-range forces effective at higher concentrations of ions. In this work, we use only the Pitzer–Debye–Hückel and NRTL expressions for aqueous electrolyte systems. The complete form of the model can be found in literature The main mathematical expression of the model is: The ENRTL model is based on the nonrandom two liquid theory Thus, for an apparent binary electrolyte system with a fixed nonrandomness parameter, for each interaction energy parameter There are two groups of data available. These are ternary systems of aqueous sulfuric acid with one metal sulfate, and quaternary systems of aqueous sulfuric acid with two metal sulfates. The data for the solubility of Al Recently, Liu et al. The data of activity and osmotic coefficients of metal sulfates in sulfuric acid solutions at high temperatures are not available, so, in this work to obtain the binary interaction parameters, the solubility of aluminum, magnesium and ferric sulfates in ternary aqueous solution of sulfuric acid at high temperature are correlated. The binary parameters of interaction were used for prediction of solubility of metal sulfates in the quaternary systems. The solubility data available in literature are in terms of molality. In order to use the Aspen regression property analysis, molality should be transformed to mole fraction. Therefore, the following relation for aqueous multicomponent solutions was used for conversion of molality to mole fraction: The experimental solubility data of metal sulfates are usually reported in terms of free sulfuric acid, which is measured by complexiometric titration using NaOH and Ca-CDTA    Baghalha and Papangelakis Furthermore, in the ternary system H The advantages of the ENRTL model, however, are its versatility within the whole temperature range and its very good performance in scaling up from ternary to quaternary (and hopefully to multicomponent) systems without additional parameters. The solubility of Fe The solubility of ferric oxide (hematite) in the quaternary system H Finally, the solubility data for the quaternary system H Using the free energies of formation extrapolated for temperature to calculate the equilibrium constants for the hematite reaction, In this work, a hybrid approach based on speciation and ion interaction was implemented on high temperature and high concentration process solutions relevant to the Pressure Acid Leach process for nickel recovery from lateritic ores. A model based on the partial or complete dissociation of electrolytes, salt precipitation and association of ionic species was developed and a correlation for the equilibrium constants of the precipitating salts was used. The electrolyte local composition model, namely ENRTL, was employed for calculating the activity coefficients of metal ions and complex species. The electrolyte NRTL model was used because it demonstrated very good prediction of pH in aqueous sulfuric acid solution at 250 The ENRTL interaction energy parameters and equilibrium constants of solid–aqueous reactions were adjusted by fitting experimental solubilities of metal sulfates MgSO Thus, new experimental data for the solubility of ferric sulphate were also presented for the ternary system H For the above ternary systems, magnesium sulfate monohydrate, hydronium alunite and hematite were used as the precipitation salts, respectively. Default interaction parameters in the Aspen Plus™ databank were used for aqueous solutions of sulfuric acid and new interaction energy parameters were regressed for metal ions using experimental solubility data. Moreover, for some association reactions in iron speciation, the default equilibrium constants of Aspen Plus™ were used, however, for the reactions relevant to the solids (H It was shown that the speciation employed in ternary systems, as well as the interaction parameters obtained by fitting solubilities in ternary systems are sufficient to represent the solubilities in quaternary systems very well. This lends credit to the ENRTL as a “scale-up” tool, which allows extrapolation of data obtained in simple electrolytes to multicomponent systems. Specifically, comparison of experimental data with calculations showed that the predicted solubility of Fe activity of component Debye–Hückel constant the parameters of NRTL energy parameter interaction energy Gibbs free energy ionic strength parameters of equilibrium constant equilibrium constant of reaction molality molecular weight Aspen nonrandomness in NRTL model objective function gas constant absolute temperature weighting factor mole fraction of component effective mole fraction local composition charge number nonrandomness activity coefficient stoichiometric coefficient density of solvent standard deviation NRTL parameter product reference unsymmetrical calculated electrolyte experiment local composition Pitzer–Debye–Hückel anion cation electrolyte components reaction water mole fraction The Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council of Canada (NSERC) is gratefully acknowledged for their financial support. One of the authors (A.H.) extends his acknowledgment to Tarbiat Modarres University (Iran) for providing partial financial support during his sabbatical leave as visiting professor in Department of Chemical Engineering and Applied Chemistry, University of Toronto. The Pitzer–Debye–Hückel equation is given as The local composition activity coefficients of cation and anion in a binary electrolyte solution were given as