This retrospective, multicentre study aimed to evaluate reamed intramedullary nailing (IMN) for the treatment of 30 cases of aseptic femoral shaft non-union after plating failure. Following nailing, 29 non-unions had healed by a mean 7.93 months. In one case a hypertrophic non-union required renailing after 8 months, using a nail of greater diameter, and united within five further months. Healing times were not related to whether the fracture was open or closed, the type non-union or the type of fracture. The delay from the initial plating to intramedullary nailing had a statistically significant effect on healing time and final outcome. This treatment is cost effective and should be implemented as soon as the non-union is diagnosed.Intramedullary nailing (IMN) is now considered the gold standard of treatment for femoral shaft fractures, with a low incidence of complications. A variety of surgical techniques are available in the surgeon's armamentarium for the treatment of femoral shaft non-unions, including internal fixation (compressive re-plating, IMN) or external fixation procedures (using different types of device), The aim of the present study was to evaluate the effectiveness of IMN for the treatment of aseptic femoral non-unions after plate fixation, and to identify the effects of the timing of the definitive procedure on final outcome. Between January 1990 and December 2003, any person treated at our institutions for femoral shaft non-union was eligible for inclusion in this study. Inclusion criteria comprised initial treatment of the femoral fracture with open reduction and internal plate fixation, and absence of intervention during the subsequent 6 months. Established non-unions, where the fracture had undergone revision after initial stabilisation with nailing or external fixation, were excluded. Non-union was defined as the cessation of radiological progression of the fracture to union within a period of 6 months from injury, and the presence of pain at the non-union site. Non-unions were classified according to the AO Scheme The hospital records and radiographs of cases that met the inclusion criteria were reviewed in a retrospective manner, and the data collected were entered into a computerised database. Details recorded included patient demographics, AO classification of the fracture, whether the original injury was closed or open, associated injuries, the implantation or not of bone graft at the time of surgery, smoking habits, use of non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs, failure of metal implants, leg-length discrepancy and any incidence of perioperative complications (infection, deep vein thrombosis). Preoperative evaluation included plain radiography (anteroposterior and lateral views) and measurement of infection markers (white blood cells, erythrocyte sedimentation rate and C-reactive protein) in order to detect septic non-union. At operation, skeletal traction (through the femoral condyles) was applied with the patient supine on the traction table. The femoral plate was removed through a lateral approach. A prophylactic antibiotic (cefuroxime) was administered after tissue samples had been harvested for culture and histopathology, and was continued until the microbiology report indicated absence of underlying infection. The first priority of the surgeon was to handle the soft tissues carefully, in order to minimise further damage. The skin incision was as short as possible, the fibrous tissue from the non-union area was removed and bony ends were freshened. The marrow cavity was opened with an awl or a drill as far as necessary to allow easy passage of the guide wire, just before wound closure, which was performed at this stage. A Grosse–Kempf or AO nail was inserted in an antegrade manner (through the piriformis fossa) after appropriate reaming (1.5 Partial weight-bearing started on the second day after nailing, with encouragement to achieve a full range of motion of the hip and knee of the affected limb. Bony union was considered accomplished when pain at the fracture site was absent and evidence was present of bridging callus on two radiological views on all four cortices. All cases were followed up at 4-week intervals for at least 1 year after the revision surgery. In the 22 of 25 cases of atrophic non-union without shortening, dynamic nailing was performed. Of 78 people treated at our institutions during the study period for femoral shaft non-union, 30 (20 men and 10 women) met the inclusion criteria; of these, 20 (67%) had been referred from other institutions. The mean age of the study population was 33.7 These fractures resulted from a road traffic accident in 24 cases, a work accident in 4 cases and a fall from height in 2 cases. According to the AO classification, 15 fractures were type A, 10 were type B and the remaining 5 were type C. In four cases the fracture was open (three type I and one type II, according to the Gustilo–Anderson classification); 5 non-unions were of the hypertrophic type and 25 were atrophic. In 15 cases, implant loosening or breakage accompanied the non-union. In the three cases of atrophic non-union with shortening, the bone defect was filled with autogenous bone graft harvested from the ipsilateral anterior iliac crest. Mean operation time was 110 (72–220) min and mean volume of blood transfused was 1.8 units. Of these 30 non-unions, 29 healed within a mean time of 7.93 One woman (case 20) developed a hypertrophic non-union 8 months after revision surgery. She underwent re-operation, receiving a reamed nail of larger diameter, and healing was achieved 5 months later ( For the 24 healed atrophic non-unions, the mean healing time was 8 Time from initial plating to IMN significantly affected healing time and final outcome. The mean healing time for people treated within the first 8 months after plating (16 cases) was 6.625 There was no evidence of deep infection in any case. One person developed a superficial infection around the skin incision for nail entry, and received oral antibiotic treatment for 8 days. Two people developed a deep vein thrombosis and, of these, one experienced a non-fatal pulmonary embolism, 8 days after nailing. In one case the non-union site healed in 10 One man had restricted range of motion of the hip due to heterotopic ossification grade III (according to Brooker's classification), Fracture healing is a complex process involving many interactions between different cells and growth factors such as cytokines and morphogenetic proteins. Several techniques have been described for treating non-union. Other solutions such as electrical or ultrasound stimulation have recently been reported. Primary internal fixation of femoral shaft fractures by plating is a historical and, in selected cases, still reliable fixation technique. However, it is associated with a high complication rate approaching 24%, In atrophic non-unions with bone defects (up to 2 In the remaining atrophic non-unions without bone defect or shortening, dynamic nailing was performed after adequate reaming to provide stability. As 29/30 of non-unions in our series healed in a mean 7.93 Restricted knee motion, observed in three of our cases of distal femoral non-union, is another indication for early intervention. In two of these cases, the initial trauma damaged the quadriceps femoris muscle, which probably led to partial fibrosis. In the third case, fibrous bands were discovered during arthroscopy. The affected knee was stable and all the intra-articular structures were intact, so the main cause was possibly an excessive joint haematoma. In one case, a hypertrophic non-union developed 8 months postoperatively and the IMN had to be exchanged for a nail of larger diameter after reaming, which led to healing 5 months later. This confirms that stability is of great importance in hypertrophic non-unions, and the appropriate size of nail is also crucial for the final outcome. In conclusion, IMN can be an ideal and cost-effective method of treating aseptic femoral shaft non-unions after failed plating. IMN provides mechanical and physiological stability and should be performed as soon as the non-union is diagnosed, in order to avoid bone atrophy, delay to final healing and extended absence from work. The authors have no conflict of interest to declare.