The remediation of contaminated sites is recognized as a means towards the sustainable development of an expanding urban space on the global scale. However, it is often hindered by financial and environmental risks caused by undetected contamination or unreliable site characterization. Uncertainty in site characterization studies is suspected to be a cause of this problem. Therefore, there is a need for formally defining and quantifying the uncertainty linked to estimates of the spatial distribution of contamination and the volume of contaminated soils at polluted sites. The objective of this study was to develop a geostatistical procedure for the 3-D analysis of a multi-element contamination in order to: 1) optimize the location and the number of sampling stations during a complementary sampling campaign, 2) estimate the volume of contaminated soil for a given data set and 3) quantify the uncertainty of this estimate. This procedure is innovative because it takes into account, by a transformation in pollution indices, the presence of a multi-element contamination and applies to a set of 3-D data. Furthermore, this procedure offers a formal framework that adapts the decisional bounds to the study site to help the decision-maker. The proposed procedure was applied to an urban site characterized by the presence of a strongly heterogeneous fill. From a subset initially constituted of 8 sampling stations, supplemental sampling stations were selected within a complementary data set and added one by one to the iterative geostatistical simulations. The completeness of the sampling plan was determined upon reaching stability in the relative differences of both global uncertainty and global variance between two successive steps of the optimization. According to the procedure presented, a sampling plan could be considered optimized and complete with 19 sampling stations for this study site (comparatively to 38 sampling stations for the total set obtained by systematic sampling). For 19 sampling stations, the global uncertainty was determined to be 20% (comparatively to 16% for the total set).The remediation of contaminated sites is recognized as a means towards the sustainable development of an expanding urban space on the global scale ( Geostatistics allow both the estimation of quantities and uncertainty linked to these estimations. In contaminated site characterization, geostatistical methods have been used to estimate the volumes of soils whose concentration exceeds a regulatory criterion, to calculate the probabilities of exceeding regulatory criteria and to evaluate the uncertainty of these estimations ( In recent years, geostatistical simulation methods have been used increasingly in contaminated site characterization ( In contaminated site characterization, the quantification and minimization of uncertainty relies strongly on the quality, the quantity and the location of concentration measurements. The latter is a key to the optimization of sampling plans. Initially, the choice of supplemental sampling stations was based on the estimation variance resulting from kriging ( Geostatistical methods, whether they were based on kriging or simulations, have generally been used in two-dimensional applications on a surface layer of soil and for the analysis of the spatial distribution of a single contaminant. However, on most contaminated sites, several metals and organic contaminants are found simultaneously ( The objective of this study was to develop a geostatistical procedure for the 3-D analysis of a multi-element contamination in order to: 1) optimize the location and the number of sampling stations during a complementary sampling campaign, 2) estimate the volume of contaminated soil for a given data set and 3) quantify the uncertainty of this estimate. Moreover, the developed geostatistical procedure aims to categorize the soil according to the probability of exceeding regulatory thresholds using a formal framework that adapts the bounds of soil categories to site-specific characteristics of the contamination. The study site was located in downtown Montreal (Canada) and consisted of a surface layer of heterogeneous fill, 2 to 3 Only the heterogeneous fill layer was sampled for the present study. Thirty-two sampling stations were established on a systematic grid in an area of 28 Hence, each primary field sample of soil was reduced to a 1-g sample for chemical analysis, following a procedure involving successive mass reduction and grinding stages ( Furthermore, 10% of the primary samples were taken in duplicate and subjected to the same sampling and analysis procedures to control the quality of the data. All measured concentrations were above the quantification limit of the analytical method. Before proceeding with the geostatistical analysis, a descriptive statistical analysis was performed on the data. A 3-D representation, without interpolation, was also performed to spatially schematize the data. The general geostatistical procedure consisted in five phases: Transform data; Model the horizontal and vertical variograms on the anamorphosed Maximum Pollution Indices (MPI); Perform geostatistical simulations; Calculate the local and global uncertainty and the global variance; Optimize the sampling plan by adding a supplemental sampling station; Repeat steps 3 and 4 until stability for both global uncertainty and global variance values was obtained. To account for multi-element contamination (i.e. nine elements in this case) and several legal threshold concentrations, a transformation procedure was developed. It consisted in transforming contaminant concentration into dimensionless pollution indices (PI) according to Eq. where In this study, the legal thresholds were the following: Threshold concentrations in appendix II of the Politique de protection des sols et de réhabilitation des terrains contaminés ( Threshold concentrations in appendices I and II of the Règlement sur la protection et la réhabilitation des terrains in Threshold concentrations in appendix I of the Règlement sur l'enfouissement des sols contaminés in Pollution indices from 1 to 4 were assigned respectively to the four thresholds (A, B, C and D). After this transformation in PI, a maximum pollution index (MPI) is attributed to a given sampling point from the maximum PI value among the nine elements. A gaussian anamorphosis of the set of all MPIs was then performed as described in A theoretical 3-D variogram was calculated from the anamorphic MPIs as in In order to assess the impact on the variogram of transforming data into MPIs, a variographic analysis was conducted using the predominant contaminant (i.e. the one having the largest proportion of measured concentrations larger than the C threshold). For this contaminant, the horizontal and vertical variograms were determined from the concentrations in mg/kg and from the MPIs. The impact of data transformation was thus assessed by comparing the nugget-to-sill ratios and the range of the fitted variogram models. Conditional simulations, more specifically the LU simulation algorithm, were used in this study. The LU algorithm was preferred to other simulation methods for its efficiency and the simplicity of its programming ( A total of 100 realizations were performed from the anamorphic MPIs of the 38 sampling stations. Subsequently, an inverse transformation of the simulated values was done in order to convert the data in non-anamorphic pollution indices. For each simulated unit (or unit volume, V The exceedance probability was obtained by calculating, for each unit, the proportion of simulated values larger than each threshold as: where  The simulation variance was obtained at each unit by calculating the variance of the 100 pollution indices simulated at that unit (obtained from the 100 realizations). where For each simulation, the volume of contaminated soil was calculated by multiplying the number of units corresponding to each threshold by the unit volume V where and To determine the optimal number of sampling stations and to quantify and minimize the uncertainty, an optimization procedure similar to that of In order to simulate the optimization of a sampling plan by an adaptive process, the initial set of 38 sampling stations was divided into two subsets: the initial subset corresponded to a preliminary characterization and the second subset included the data from complementary sampling (i.e. the results of the sampling stations not used in the initial subset). The initial subset of sampling stations was chosen based on the results of the geophysical characterization performed on this site ( A first geostatistical estimation of the contaminated volume and the uncertainty was performed by conditional simulations on the anamorphic MPIs of all observations from this initial subset. Thereafter, with the optimization procedure, the sampling station with the largest score according to Eq. In this study, the horizontal and vertical variograms obtained with the 38 sampling stations were considered constant during the optimization of the sampling plan and the same fitted variogram models were used in all conditional simulations. This hypothesis was assumed for simplicity. In an ongoing characterization study, the variogram model will be continuously updated as new data are obtained. Moreover, other techniques of estimation like cross-validation ( A categorization of the soil according to the exceedance probability The volume of soil categorized as low-risk ( where The volume to be treated ( where Finally, the uncertain volume ( where These categories of soil volumes were determined for each legal threshold. The final decision (low-risk, uncertain or to be treated) for each unit can take all thresholds into account. For the study site and for simplification purposes, only threshold C was selected to calculate the exceedance probabilities. A formal procedure was developed to quantify bounds where An interval of possible values for bound where ω is fixed at 5%, therefore corresponding to a 95% confidence interval on the volume V of contaminated soils over a given threshold (obtained from the distribution of the In this study, a sensitivity analysis was also conducted on The selection of a supplementary sampling station in the complementary subset was based on the following equation: where The three selection parameters chosen for the selection of the supplementary stations were inspired by the procedures of Parameter 1 was calculated with Eq. Parameter 2 was calculated based on the variance where Parameter 3 was calculated based on the distance separating the sampling stations according to the following equation: where Note that In this study, two types of uncertainty were considered: local and global uncertainty. The local uncertainty is the uncertainty at a given point, while the global uncertainty is a measure of the uncertainty at the site scale. The global uncertainty can be also considered as a measure of the completeness of a sampling plan at the site scale. The local uncertainty is determined by bounds The global uncertainty was defined in this study as being equal to the ratio between the uncertain volume ( Moreover, the median variance of the MPI values for all The choice of the optimal number of sampling stations was based on the evolution of both the global uncertainty and the global variance. This evolution was calculated for each step of the optimization by determining the relative difference between two successive optimization steps. The optimal number of sampling stations was determined when stability for both global uncertainty and global variance values was obtained. Stability was achieved when the relative difference between two successive steps was below 10% three times in a row. The final estimated volume of contaminated soil and its associated global uncertainty were determined for the optimal set of sampling stations.  Tin (Sn) was the only metal having concentrations below the quantification limit (QL). However, these qualitative observations (< Lead (Pb) had the largest mean PI with 1.62, the largest PI with 3.37 and the largest proportion of data greater than threshold C with 12%, which make it the predominant contaminant on the study site. The last line of   The horizontal and vertical variograms were inferred for Pb before and after the transformation of concentrations into PIs. They are shown in The experimental Pb variograms showed slight differences after the transformation of concentrations into PIs. The nugget, the sill, the range, and the nugget-to-sill ratio of each of the fitted variogram models are shown in After data transformation of all metal concentrations into MPIs, a Gaussian anamorphosis was performed on the latter. The variogram model inferred from the experimental variogram of anamorphosed MPIs is shown in where The range in the horizontal direction (i.e. 60 The Gaussian anamorphosis ensures normality of the marginal distribution. Bivariate normality was checked by computing the ratio of the variogram to the square of the madogram ( Conditional simulations were performed on all the data, taking into account all 38 sampling stations. The maps of local variance and of the probability of exceeding threshold C obtained from 100 realizations are shown in When taking into account all 38 sampling stations, the local variance was relatively small. Only two sections on the edges of the site showed large local variances (in red). Moreover, intermediate values of local variance were obtained in the central portion of the site. Similar observations were made from the map of exceedance probability. In general, sectors presenting the largest values of variance and exceedance probability were characterized by the proximity of strong MPI values (red dots, see At some locations on the site, the probability of exceeding threshold C was 0.4 (i.e. at that location, the simulated MPI values for 40% of the 100 realizations were larger than 3), while observed concentrations exceeding threshold C (red dots) were in the vicinity. Such local discrepancies between the exceedance probability of a threshold and the data observed were explained by strong local variances, even at distances smaller than 0.3     Interestingly, the method developed to determine bounds Conditional simulations were first performed with the initial subset (i.e. with 8 sampling stations). In the initial subset of 8 sampling stations, concentrations at 27 sampling points were available. Of the 27 MPI values, only three exceeded threshold C. The simulation variance was also larger in the vicinity of these three sampling points (see bottom left of In order to determine the optimal number of sampling stations, the global uncertainty was calculated at each step of the optimization. The evolution of the global uncertainty was monitored as presented in blue in The relative difference was also calculated between each step of the optimization for the global uncertainty and the global variance. Its evolution for both parameters is presented in Fifteen (15) sampling stations was the first local minimum of relative differences in the global uncertainty and the global variance. In the context of a real environmental site assessment, determining the stability of a sampling plan may be done according to a convergence (or stability) criteria. In this study, stability was defined by three successive optimization steps having relative differences smaller than 10%. In the present case, the relative differences for sampling plans with 17, 18 and 19 sampling stations were under 5%. It should be noted that some relative differences are greater than 10% for sampling plans with 25 sampling stations or more. These variations are related to random fluctuations in the distribution of data caused by the additional sampling points. For example, the station chosen on the 25th step adds an isolated contaminated point located deep in the field. This additional point has a strong local impact on the threshold exceedance probability, hence on the uncertain volume ( Even if these relative differences for the global uncertainty were greater than 10% for sampling plans with more than 19 samplings stations, the first three successive optimization steps having relative differences smaller than 10% was used to report the achievement of stability. It should be noted that the global uncertainty for 19 sampling stations was very similar to the maximum global uncertainty calculated for the sampling plan with more than 20 sampling stations (see The maps of exceedance probability of threshold C and the simulation variances are presented in First, in order to comment on the choice of bounds The map of exceedance probability obtained from 8 sampling stations showed a considerable gap with the one obtained with all of the sampling stations (i.e. 38 sampling stations). This map presented a significant volume in blue (uncertain volume) and a volume in red at only one extremity of the study site. In addition, the map of simulation variances for the initial subset showed several locations with a very large variance (i.e. in red, values larger than 0.5). For the optimal set with 19 sampling stations, both maps of exceedance probability and simulation variances were similar to the one obtained with all the data (i.e. total set). Finally, according to the procedure proposed, a sampling plan could be considered optimized and complete at 19 sampling stations for this study site. For this number of sampling stations, the In this study, a geostatistical procedure based on conditional simulations was developed to optimize the location and the number of sampling stations during a complementary sampling campaign, to estimate the volume of contaminated soil for a given data set and to quantify the uncertainty of this estimate. The developed geostatistical procedure is novel because 1) it takes into account the presence of multi-element contamination by a transformation of concentrations into pollution indices, 2) it optimizes 3-D sampling plans, and 3) it categorizes the soil according to the probability of exceeding regulatory thresholds using a formal framework that adapts the bounds of soil categories to site-specific characteristics of the contamination. Moreover, in the context of the optimization of a sampling plan, the developed procedure allows to determine the location of the supplemental sampling stations in the uncertain volume with three predetermined criteria: the probability of exceeding regulatory thresholds, the simulation variances and the closest distance to a sampling station. The developed procedure was applied to an urban site characterized by the presence of a strongly heterogeneous fill. For this study site, the procedure indicated that the sampling plan was complete and the global uncertainty and global variance were stable at 19 sampling stations, compared to the 38 stations of the total sampling plan obtained from systematic sampling. Moreover, the 11 sampling stations, added to the initial 8 stations to reach a complete sampling plan, were located in zone of larger uncertainty and variability, instead of along a fixed grid, which helped in efficiently stabilizing the global uncertainty and variance. The developed geostatistical procedure does not only optimize the resources (time and money) invested for the characterization of a contaminated site but it quantifies the global uncertainty tied to a specific sampling plan, which is a crucial information for the decision-making process leading the remediation of a site. Supplemental research will be done to apply the developed geostatistical procedure on other sites that present different characteristics, especially with a larger dataset that allows to determine a constant variogram with an initial subset. Also, complementary studies will be necessary to integrate other contaminants, such as polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons, which are common on urban sites. Moreover, a sensitivity analysis should be integrated to the developed procedure to take into account the uncertainty on the fitted variogram models and its influence on the soil categorization. The authors would like to acknowledge the financial support of the