High performance polymer matrix composites based on poly(ether–ether–ketone) (PEEK) as matrix and aluminum nitride particle (AlNp) as filler were prepared. The effect of AlNp on the storage modulus, loss modulus, mechanical loss factor, and glass transition were investigated. The AlNp reinforcement is more pronounced above glass transition temperature (T
                     g). Composite containing 70wt.% AlNp exhibit about 100% increase in storage modulus at 50°C and about 500% increase at 250°C, and 19°C increase in glass transition temperature as compared to pure PEEK. Peak height of tan
                     δ for composites was decreased to one sixth of the pure PEEK. It is probably due to improved crystallinity of PEEK and strong interaction between the AlNp and PEEK matrix. SEM reveals excellent distribution of AlNp in PEEK matrix and good interaction between AlNp and PEEK matrix.High performance polymers based composites have been in increasing demand for the last few decades, for their application in high-speed aircraft structures, electronic/microelectronics substrates, and space structural components of space research vehicles due to its high strength, modulus and retention of mechanical properties over a wide temperature range and extreme environmental conditions. PEEK has advantages over the epoxy resin based composites because of its high fracture toughness and excellent resistance to moisture. PEEK is a high performance semi-crystalline polymer due to its outstanding thermal stability, wear resistance, mechanical properties, and excellent resistance to chemicals. It has high melting ( Carbon fiber and glass fiber reinforced PEEK composites have been reported extensively for high performance aerospace applications Recently, nano-Al DMA is a widely used technique to detect weak glass transitions easily and precisely due to its higher sensitivity as compared to DSC. Hence, it is widely used to investigate relaxation of polymer segments The objective of this study is to investigate the effect of AlN A high quality PEEK (grade 5300PF) donated by Gharda Chemicals Ltd. Panoli, Gujarat, India under the trade name GATONE Various compositions of PEEK reinforced with 0–70 For SEM study, small pieces were cut parallel to the axial direction of the molded disks and mounted in a block of denture base polymer resin (DPI-RR cold cure). The obtained sample surfaces were manually ground and polished with successive finer grades of sand papers followed by cloth (mounted on wheel) polishing using water/alumina suspension to remove scratches developed during sand polishing. Thus, obtained samples were called as polished samples in the present study. Selected polished samples were also etched for 5 Morphology of AlN Experimental density of the pure PEEK and PEEK composites was measured by a method adopted in earlier paper The thermal stability and the wt.% of char yield for pure PEEK and AlN DMA was carried out in three point bending mode using a Perkin–Elmer DMA 7 Various compositions of high performance PEEK reinforced with varying weight % of AlN The morphological and particles distribution in PEEK matrix was studied using SEM. Moreover, polished samples of PKAN-30, PKAN-60 and PKAN-70 were also examined at a magnification of 500 and are shown in As shown in The interfacial interaction between AlN  The thermal stability and the % char yield of the pure PEEK and AlN It can be seen from the The dynamic mechanical properties such as storage modulus and mechanical loss factor (tan    It is well known that in particulate polymer composites, particles are surrounded by two regions; first by tightly bounded polymer or constrained polymer chain also called mesophase, and second, by loosely bounded polymer chains or unconstrained polymer chain i.e., regions of a continuous phase of polymer having restricted mobility. As the average interparticle distance decreases with the incorporation of more filler particles, the loosely bound polymer gradually transformed to the tightly bound polymer. Hence, the volume fraction of loosely bound polymer decreases, thus lead to an increase in The peak height of the tan  We have prepared the high performance PEEK composites incorporating AlN RKG greatly acknowledges to the Executive Director of C-MET for permitting him for Ph.D. from IIT Bombay/C-MET, Pune. We thanks to Dr. P.D. Trivedi, Polymer Division, Gharda Chemicals, India for providing good quality PEEK powder. We would also like to thank to Dr. D.P. Amalnerkar and Dr. T. Seth for their help. We also acknowledge with thanks to Professor (Mrs.) I.K. Varma for giving fruitful suggestions and encouragement in this research area.