In hydrocyclone separation optimal results regarding solids recovery and solids content in the underflow can be expected at the transition point rope/spray discharge. It is calculated under which conditions this transition between the two discharge types appears. Furthermore, a control system has been developed, which enables a forced transition from rope to spray discharge even at high feed solids concentrations. Applying this control system, which is focused on the hydrocyclone operation at the transition point, remarkably good separation effects could be achieved.Hydrocyclone separation is strongly determined by the shape of the underflow dependent upon the feed conditions. Rope discharge at high feed solids concentration normally results in higher solids contents and less fines in the coarse product. On the other hand, spray discharge at low feed solids concentration presents higher solids recovery and lower cut sizes. Consequently, one can expect optimal overall conditions at the transition point rope/spray discharge. The discharge shape of the underflow has been subject of the investigations by In this paper it is examined under which operating conditions this transition between the two discharge shapes appears. Furthermore, a control system is demonstrated, which enables both a forced transition from rope to spray discharge and consequently operating the hydrocyclone in the transition range. Applying this control system, remarkably good separation effects could be reached even for high feed solids concentrations. The discharge shape of the underflow can be described with the discharge angle First, the real viscosity of the underflow at the apex decisively influences the damping of the tangential velocity and consequently the discharge shape, too.  On the basis of the above calculations and Eq. Under practical conditions, the shape of the hydrocyclone underflow appears more or less unstable, influenced by varying feed conditions (solids concentration and particle size distribution). Therefore, the stabilization of the separation by varying the volume split is the subject of hydrocyclone control. Appropriate control systems have so far been restricted to single, large hydrocyclones. According to Eq. A new control concept developed by The control concept was first applied in a hydrocyclone separation plant for tunnel driving with hydroshields, where the feed solids content can vary over a wide range between 50 and 500 g/l ( As can be seen in Obviously, the instationarities and pulsations at this point cause a positive effect. Further, the displacement of the curve for smaller apex diameters to higher pressure values shown in A remarkable decrease of the cut size from 115 μm without throttling until ∼40 μm at the transition point is observed ( The transition point rope/spray of the hydrocyclone underflow shows for special operating conditions an optimal separation concerning solids recovery and solids content. Therefore, hydrocyclone performance at this point can be advantageous for special tasks. This necessitates a control system using an overflow throttling for volume split regulation. This control system improved the solids discharge in such a manner, that in a separation plant for tunnelling a two-stage separation with 500 and 150 mm hydrocyclones could be replaced by a one-stage separation with 150 mm hydrocyclones.