A comprehensive study of long-term ammonia removal in a biofilter packed with coconut fiber is presented under both steady-state and transient conditions. Low and high ammonia loads were applied to the reactor by varying the inlet ammonia concentration from 90 to 260ppmv and gas contact times ranging from 20 to 36s. Gas samples and leachate measurements were periodically analyzed and used for characterizing biofilter performance in terms of removal efficiency (RE) and elimination capacity (EC). Also, N fractions in the leachate were quantified to both identify the experimental rates of nitritation and nitratation and to determine the N leachate distribution. Results showed stratification in the biofilter activity and, thus, most of the NH3 removal was performed in the lower part of the reactor. An average EC of 0.5kgN-NH3
                     m−3
                     d−1 was obtained for the whole reactor with a maximum local average EC of 1.7kgN-NH3
                     m−3
                     d−1. Leachate analyses showed that a ratio of 1:1 of ammonium and nitrate ions in the leachate was obtained throughout steady-state operation at low ammonia loads with similar values for nitritation and nitratation rates. Low nitratation rates during high ammonia load periods occurred because large amounts of ammonium and nitrite accumulated in the packed bed, thus causing inhibition episodes on nitrite-oxidizing bacteria due to free ammonia accumulation. Mass balances showed that 50% of the ammonia fed to the reactor was oxidized to either nitrite or nitrate and the rest was recovered as ammonium indicating that sorption processes play a fundamental role in the treatment of ammonia by biofiltration.Ammonia is a colourless, toxic, reactive, and corrosive gas, emitted in several industrial and agricultural processes such as petrochemical refining, livestock farming or composting facilities ( Ammonia-treating biofilters are generally packed with organic carriers, which act as a natural source of nutrients for microorganisms. In particular, coconut fiber is one of the most used packing materials in full-scale biofilters in Europe ( A broad range of operating conditions has been applied in biofilters treating air streams contaminated with ammonia. The empty bed residence time (EBRT) is normally lower than 1 Despite of high ECs reported in the literature, some studies have questioned the efficiency of ammonia biofiltration at relatively high inlet concentration (above 50 In this study ammonia removal in a biofilter packed with coconut fiber was investigated in a continuous operation period larger than two years. The biofilter performance was studied under low and high ammonia loads. Biofilter response to transient operation varying both ammonia inlet concentration and EBRT was also investigated. A reliable and deep characterization of nitrogen fractions in the leachate is performed and used for identifying the experimental rates of nitrification as well as to assess the mass balance and to determine the degree of ammonia oxidation in the biofilter. Ammonia biofiltration was conducted in a laboratory-scale reactor as shown in The gaseous inlet stream was obtained by mixing air and pure ammonia ( Inlet gas relative humidity was kept in the range of 95–100% along the entire operation period, while the biofilter was operated at 24 During the first 100 days of operation, ammonia in the gas phase was determined by bubbling gaseous samples through an acid solution (pH 4) in which ammonia was absorbed. Thereafter, ammonia gas was measured on-line by using an ammonia electrochemical sensor (Vaisala AMT102). During routine operation, the leachate volume collected after watering was drained on a daily basis even if not daily leachate samples were analyzed. Ammonium in both the leachate and that absorbed in the acid trap were determined in a continuous flow analyzer ( Nitrification can be described as a two-step process: oxidation from ammonium to nitrite ( It is worth mentioning that Measurements of the different N species collected in the leachate were used for calculating the degree of ammonia oxidation occurring in the biofilter as well as for assessing nitrogen mass balances. The nitrogen mass balance was carried out for the gas and the liquid phases according to Equation  Almost complete NH The influence of the loading rate on the EC for both the total reactor volume and the module 1 section was calculated by averaging the EC calculated for several pseudo steady-state periods ( Monitoring results for nitrogen species in the leachate and nitrification rates for the entire operation period are depicted in Almost identical values for In the HALO period, leachate ammonium concentrations varied from 3000 to 6000 The mass distribution percentage in the leachate was assessed for both periods ( It should be stressed that inhibition of AOB and NOB are due to both free ammonia (FA) and free nitrous acid (FNA) rather than to ammonium and nitrite. Thus, the impact on nitrification rates must be assessed in terms of the former species. On average, concentrations of FA and FNA in the leachate were 26 A nitrogen mass balance performed in both periods showed errors of 6% during the LALO period and 5% during the HALO period. Mass balance errors of about 30% are often found in biofiltration of ammonia ( Clearly, the amount of ammonium collected in the leachate and/or accumulated in the packed bed must be reduced to improve the effective ammonia removal in the biofilter. In this sense, a balance between nitritation and nitratation rates should be attained to avoid inhibitory effects due to the accumulation of nitrogen species and to achieve both large nitrification rates. Even if not tested in the present work, such accumulation of FA and FNA may be reduced by changing the amount of water added to the reactor, which is the sole manipulated variable to control the inhibitory by-products wash-out. Although reduced EC and RE are obtained as a consequence of a deficient water supply ( The transition period from LALO to HALO periods in the biofilter (  Results obtained herein suggest that the pH regulation may be the key factor to improve the nitrification rates by reducing the amount of FA and, in consequence, reducing the large ammonium fractions that generally accumulate in biofilters. Operation and long-term stability of biofilters treating high ammonia inlet concentrations seem to be restricted to the application of a continuous watering load, which needs to be optimized, to remove the excess of inhibitory species as well as to maximize the nitrification rates. Additionally, if no enough biological activity is found in the biofilter or FA is already accumulated, as for example during the start-up of the bioreactor, an acidification agent could be an alternative to reduce the possible impact of large amounts of FA. Due to their configuration and controllability, biotrickling filters appear as a better alternative to biofilters when ammonia is the main pollutant to be treated ( Long-term stable and continuous operation under low and high ammonia loads of a biofilter treating ammonia in waste gases has been presented. Results showed that analyses of the drain are needed to explain the nitrogen cycle and sink of the NH Vinicius Cunha Machado has received a pre-doctoral scholarship of the AGAUR (Agència de Gestió d'Ajuts Universitaris i Recerca - Catalonia, Spain), inside programs of the European Community Social Fund. Juan Pedro Maestre has received a pre-doctoral scholarship of the MEC (Ministerio de Educación y Ciencia, Spain). Authors acknowledge the financial support provided by the “Comisión Interministerial de Ciencia y Tecnología” (CICYT), project CTQ 2006-14997-C02-01. The Department of Chemical Engineering at UAB is a unit of Biochemical Engineering of the Xarxa de Referència en Biotecnologia de Catalunya (XRB), Generalitat de Catalunya.