Amphibolites from the Ryoke metamorphic belt, SW Japan were deformed initially by cataclasis and subsequently by dissolution–precipitation creep. Initial cataclastic deformation produced a rather weak shape-preferred orientation (SPO) of brown amphibole grains with small aspect ratios as well as a poorly developed amphibole lattice-preferred orientation (LPO) with nα (≈a[100]) axes scattered subnormal to the foliation and nγ or c[001] axes scattered around the lineation. During later deformation by dissolution–precipitation creep, preferential dissolution at grain boundaries subparallel to the foliation and simultaneous compaction normal to the foliation have likely produced a distinct SPO of elongate brown amphibole grains subparallel to the foliation as well as their LPO such that their nγ or c axes are scattered around the lineation, while nα (≈a) and nβ (=b[010]) are spread along a girdle normal to the lineation. Also during this deformation green amphibole precipitated as isolated grains or in pressure shadow regions around brown amphibole grains. Nucleation and anisotropic growth of isolated green amphibole grains according to the orientations of the principal stress directions produced an LPO of these grains such that their nα (≈a) are oriented normal to foliation, nβ (=b) within the foliation normal to the lineation and nγ (or c) axes are parallel to the lineation. In addition, there is an associated SPO. Growth of green amphibole in pressure shadow regions around brown amphibole grains occurs either syntaxially or anisotropically according to the orientations of the principal stress directions.Deformation of the continental crust is thought to be dominated by flow of quartz-rich rocks in the upper crust and flow of feldspar- or hornblende-rich rocks in the lower crust (e.g. Since amphibole may comprise a significant component of the lower crust, its rheological properties are important when considering lower crustal deformation. Lattice-preferred orientations (LPOs) and shape-preferred orientations (SPOs) of amphibole grains hold much information on the kinematics and dynamics of deformed lower crustal rocks. Previous studies of experimentally and naturally deformed amphiboles have suggested that amphibole is one of the strongest minerals, behaving as a rigid inclusion or fracturing during deformation (e.g. Deformed amphibolites in a ductile shear zone in the Ryoke metamorphic belt, SW Japan, contain abundant amphibole grains. The deformed amphibolites occur as thin layers (several centimeters thick) within granitic mylonites. In the amphibolites, amphibole grains exhibit a strong shape-preferred orientation parallel to the foliation, which is parallel to the mylonitic foliation of the surrounding granitic mylonites, and to the lithologic contacts. In this study, the shape- and lattice-preferred orientations of amphibole grains are analyzed and discussed in terms of their likely deformation processes. The Cretaceous Ryoke metamorphic belt ( In the northern part of the Kishiwada district ( Deformed amphibolites occur as thin layers (several centimeters thick) within the granitic mylonites. These amphibolites have been observed throughout the study area from low-strain zones to high-strain zones within and near the Kawai mylonite zone. The deformed amphibolites do not exhibit well-developed compositional layering, yet do show foliation and lineation defined by alignment of plagioclase and amphibole grains, parallel to the foliation and lineation in the surrounding granitic rocks. The amphibolites do not exhibit pinch-and-swell or boudinage structures, even within the high-strain mylonite zone, suggesting that they were internally deformed to the same extent as the surrounding granitic rocks. They may have originally been mafic enclaves, as evidenced by the numerous ellipsoidal inclusions of gabbroic–dioritic composition with granoblastic microstructure in weakly deformed granitic rocks peripheral to the high-strain zone ( Amphibolite samples were collected from localities in and near the Kawai mylonite zone along the Tsuda-gawa river section, as shown in Application of the amphibole–plagioclase exchange thermometry of In the highly deformed zone, strongly foliated amphibolites contain elongated Ti-rich brown amphibole grains rimmed by Ti-poor green amphibole and chlorite ( Plagioclase in the strongly foliated amphibolites also consists of two components: a Ca-rich core and a Ca-poor rim. The anorthite-poor plagioclase rims developed in pressure shadow regions around the anorthite-rich cores. Based on these observations, the mass-balance reaction for the deformation event is defined ( As this reaction is a hydration reaction whose products are preferentially distributed in pressure shadow regions, the reaction is considered to have occurred under hydrous, non-hydrostatic conditions. In the weakly foliated amphibolites, the amphibole and plagioclase grains have angular outlines and straight boundaries ( The lengths of the long axis ( The SPOs of amphibole grains can be shown by their long-axis orientations with respect to the foliation direction ( Although amphibole grains with higher aspect ratios tend to be aligned parallel to the foliation in the weakly foliated amphibolites (samples H and I), the long-axis orientations in these samples are more scattered than in the strongly foliated samples. In addition, the maximum aspect ratios ( LPO analyses of amphibole were carried out in  In the weakly foliated amphibolites (samples H and I), the amphibole optical indicatrix axes exhibit rather weak preferred orientations such that n Amphibole LPO data of sample C were also obtained by the EBSD technique. This technique allows the complete crystallographic orientation of grains on the surface of a polished sample to be determined with spatial resolution of about 1 μm and an absolute angular resolution of 1° ( The relationship in each zoned grain of sample C between the brown core In the weakly foliated amphibolites, brown amphibole and plagioclase grains have angular outlines and straight boundaries ( In the strongly foliated amphibolites, amphibole grains do not show such cataclastic microstructures as observed in the weakly foliated amphibolites ( Green amphibole in the strongly foliated amphibolites is a product of the reaction Because characteristic microstructures of the deformed amphibolites change from cataclastic to ductile with increasing strain ( Thus fluid infiltration during the initial cataclastic deformation may have promoted subsequent deformation by dissolution–precipitation creep of the studied amphibolites at pressures below 300 MPa and temperatures of ca. 500 °C. The microstructural change from cataclastic to ductile in these amphibolites probably represents a transition in dominant deformation mechanism from cataclasis to dissolution–precipitation creep. Although brittle–ductile transition from cataclasis to dislocation creep is generally accepted (e.g. In the weakly foliated amphibolites predominantly deformed by cataclasis, cataclastic deformation has probably produced a rather weak SPO and a poorly developed LPO of brown amphibole grains ( The unzoned green amphibole grains in the strongly foliated amphibolites have nucleated and grown by the reaction The In principle, anisotropic growth should also apply to the green amphibole rims of zoned grains, because they also have grown by the reaction The brown amphibole cores in the strongly foliated amphibolites probably have been inherited from cataclastically deformed amphibole grains such as those in the weakly deformed amphibolites, as discussed above. The brown amphibole cores in sample C have relatively small aspect ratios and exhibit a weak SPO similar to those of brown amphibole grains in the weakly foliated amphibolites ( In contrast, the brown amphibole cores with large aspect ratios ( Alternatively, the SPO and LPO of the elongate brown amphibole cores may have been produced during later deformation by dissolution–precipitation creep. Preferential dissolution of brown amphibole clasts along high normal-stress boundaries, i.e. along grain boundaries subparallel to the foliation, possibly produced elongate brown amphibole grains with their SPO subparallel to the foliation, which may have been further enhanced by compaction associated with dissolution–precipitation creep. Although preferential dissolution alone does not necessarily produce an LPO, the pre-existing weak LPO with N. Aikawa and K. Ishii are appreciated for comments and encouragement. The paper benefited substantially from detailed reviews by T.E. La Tour and D. Shelley. J. Hippertt is thanked for the editorial handling of the paper. This study was financially supported by the Grants-in-Aid for Scientific Research (14740305) from the Japan Society for the Promotion of Science to T. Okudaira.