Weathered crust elution-deposited rare earth ores are rich in the middle and heavy rare earths. The present study investigated the content of exchangeable aluminum and the exchangeable rare earth in the different layer of orebody and the partitioning of rare earth was determined as well to understand the mode of occurrence of rare earth. Furthermore, the swelling of clay minerals from different layers was investigated. The results shown that, in completely weathered layer and partly weathered layer, the content of exchangeable rare earth was more than 0.06% and the content of exchangeable aluminum was below 0.02%. However, in humic layer, the content of exchangeable rare earth was below 0.015% and the exchangeable aluminum was more than 0.03%. In the weathered crust elution deposited rare earth ore, the exchangeable aluminum is mainly found in the humic layer, whereas the rare earth elements are abundant in the completely weathered layer and partly weathered layer and the rare earth in humic layer belong to light rare earth group. Additionally, the swelling of clay minerals in humic layer was ranged between 2.5% and 2.7%, which were higher than the swelling of clay minerals in completely weathered layer and partly weathered layer. Based on these findings, a novel in-situ leaching technology of weathered crust elution-deposited rare earth ores is proposed. The leaching agents were directly injected into the completely weathered layer without infiltrating through the humic layer. Avoiding the humic layer, only the completely weathered layer and partly weathered layer were leached. According to this method, the exchangeable aluminum in the rare earth leaching solution can be decreased and the purity of rare earth product can be improved. Meanwhile, the ammonium chloride was alternatively applied to leach rare earth and the choices of available leaching reagents were broadened.Weathered crust elution-deposited rare earth ore is a special rare earth resource in the world, which is rich in the middle and heavy rare earths ( The other is higher impurities in leaching solution ( The rare earth ores sample was collected from Dingnan (DN) in Jiangxi province, China. Chemical composition of the rare earth ore was analyzed by X-ray fluorescence (Axios advanced, Panalytical B.V.) and the results was shown in All chemicals in this study were purchased from Sinopharm Chemical Reagent Co., Ltd (Shanghai, China) with analytical grade and deionized water was used. In the column leaching experiments, the rare earth ore samples from different layers including humic layer, completely weathered layer and partly weathered layer was dried at 80 The weathered crust elution-deposited rare earth ores were collected by different areas in Dingnan country, which were marked ores 1#, ores 2# and ores 3#. The ores 1# was chosen as representative ore sample to simulate the column leaching experiments. And the rare earth ore sample from 2 The ores samples need to be dried in a vacuum oven at 105 The total content of RE in the leachate was determined using EDTA titration by using xylenol orange as the indicator and hexamethylene tetramine as the buffer. After that, excess EDTA solution was added into the studied solution sample and placed in a water bath at 90 The weathered crust elution-deposited rare earth ores were collected by different area in Dingnan country, which were marked ores 1#, ores 2# and ores 3#. The occurrence of rare earth elements in minerals include aqueous soluble state, ion-exchangeable state, colloid sediment state and mineral state, but only the aqueous soluble state and the ion-exchangeable state can be eluted into the solution by lixiviant ( The According to the From the In order to investigate the content of exchangeable rare earth in different layer from the weathered elution-deposited ore body, the exchangeable rare earth from different layer of orebody at different areas were detected and the results were shown in The In order to investigate the content of exchangeable aluminum in humic layer, completely weathered layer and partly weathered layer. The content of exchangeable aluminum from different layer of orebody in different areas was determined and the results have been shown in From the In order to understand the swelling of clay mineral in humic layer, completely weathered layer and partly weathered layer. The swelling of clay mineral from different layer were detected by PCY intelligent dilatometer and the results were shown in The results, presented in In order to investigate the rare earth partition in different layers from weathered crust elution-deposited rare earth ores, the partitioning of rare earth was detected by ICP-MS and the results were shown in The results, presented in Note: LREE is light rare earth element that includes La, Ce, Pr and Nd; HREE is middle and heavy rare earth element that includes Sm, Eu, Gd, Tb, Dy, Ho, Er, Tm, Yb, Lu and Y. Due to the fact that the content of rare earth in humic layer was lower than the content of rare earth in completely weathered layer and partly weathered layer. And the rare earth in humic layer belong to light rare earth group and the economic value of these portion rare earth is lower than the middle and heavy rare earth. Consequently, the portion of rare earth in humic layer could be considered not worth to process. Based on the results above, in order to decrease the content of exchangeable aluminum in leaching solution, a novel in-situ leaching technology of weathered crust elution-deposited rare earth ores is proposed from the results in this study. The leaching agents was directly injected into the completely weathered layer without infiltrating through the humic layer. The leaching solution of rare earth could be collected via diversion channels which installed on and around the bedrock. The schematic diagram of liquid injection process by in-situ leaching in weathered crust elution-deposited rare earth ores is shown in In order to compare the content of rare earth and exchangeable aluminum, the ammonium chloride was used as leaching agents in traditional in-situ leaching technology and novel in-situ leaching technology. The difference between two technologies have been shown in In traditional in-situ leaching technology, the ammonium sulfate used as leaching agents have some advantages, such as less impurities in leaching solution. Comparing with ammonium sulfate, the ammonium chloride has been dropped out due to the fact that the rare earth leaching solution with high content of impurities. In order to obtain the rare earth leaching solution with less impurities, the ammonium sulfate was preferred to use as leaching agents in traditional in-situ leaching solution. Therefore, the choice of leaching agents was limited. However, when use ammonium chloride as leaching agents, the rare earth leaching efficiency was higher than the ammonium sulfate used as leaching agent. According to the novel in-situ leaching technology, the content of exchangeable aluminum was significantly decreased. The results were shown in From the The present study investigated the content of exchangeable aluminum and the exchangeable rare earth in humic layer, completely weathered layer and partly weathered layer. The partitioning of rare earth was determined as well to understand the mode of occurrence of rare earth. Furthermore, the swelling of clay minerals from different layers were investigated. The results have shown that, in completely weathered layer and partly weathered layer, the content of exchangeable rare earth was more than 0.06% and the content of exchangeable aluminum was below 0.02%. However, in humic layer, the content of exchangeable rare earth was below 0.015% and the exchangeable aluminum was more than 0.03%. The exchangeable aluminum is mainly found in the humic layer, whereas the rare earths are abundant in the completely weathered layer and partly weathered layer in the weathered crust elution-deposited rare earth ore. The rare earth in humic layer are mostly belong to light rare earth group, however, the middle and heavy rare earth were abundant in completely weathered layer and partly weathered layer. Additionally, the swelling of clay minerals in humic layer were ranged between 2.5% and 2.7%, which were higher than the swelling of clay minerals in completely weathered layer and partly weathered layer. Based on these findings, a novel in-situ leaching technology of weathered crust elution-deposited rare earth ores is proposed. Avoiding the humic layer, only the completely weathered layer and partly weathered layer were leached by controlling the height of liquid level of leaching solution. In this way, the content of aluminum, as the primary impurities in rare earth leaching solution, can be decreased and the purity of rare earth product can be improved. Meanwhile, the ammonium chloride could be alternatively applied to leach rare earth and the choices of available leaching reagents were broadened and the possibility of landside disasters could be reduced. The work is financially supported by the grants from the