The influence of microwave pre-treatment on mineral ore breakage has been investigated. Samples of lead–zinc ore were microwave pre-treated prior to strength testing and change in strength with microwave exposure time determined. Comparisons of change in strength were made between microwave-treated and -untreated material. Using a multimode microwave cavity, it was found that strength could be significantly reduced in 0.5 s when using 15 kW of microwave power. Lower powers in this type of cavity were found to be less effective. Drop weight tests were used to quantify the change in strength in terms of reduction in required comminution energy. Reductions of up to 40% were achieved for particles of mean size 14.53 mm. Preliminary tests in a single-mode microwave cavity gave strength reductions of 50% at 10 kW of microwave power with a residence time of only 0.1 s, indicating that high electric field strength is important in the failure of ore. A preliminary energy balance indicating the benefits of single-mode heating is presented.A relatively recent review Interest in the application of microwave radiation to minerals started in the mid-1980's Almost all the above test work was carried out at low microwave power levels (<2.6 kW) for small samples (<1 kg) and therefore at low power densities (kW/m The material used for this investigation was a lead–zinc ore obtained from a mine in Sweden. Representative samples of ore were supplied from the mine site. Upon receipt, the samples were air dried and crushed to 100% passing 63 mm. The ore was then characterised. A mineralogical investigation was carried out to determine the principle ore (valuable) and gangue (waste) minerals contained within the sample. Two representative samples were prepared for analysis. They were prepared using a diamond saw, with polished sections being produced from each sample. The sections were systematically examined using conventional reflected light microscopy techniques. The individual opaque phases were identified on the basis of their optical properties. A number of reflected light photomicrographs were also captured using a Buehler Omnimet ‘Enterprise’ image analysis system. Examples of the output from this system are shown in Microwaves were generated using a 3–15-kW variable power generator operating at 2.45 GHz. This was connected by rectangular WR 430 waveguide to an E–H plane automatic tuner and this in turn was connected to a resonant microwave applicator as shown in Multimode ovens are the most common type of microwave heating applicator. Mechanically, they are very simple, essentially comprising a closed metal box of which two dimensions are several wavelengths long . The metal box supports many (or multi) modes. A mode is a defined pattern of distribution of the electric and magnetic field components of an electromagnetic wave excited in a closed cavity. The performance of a multimode cavity has first order dependency on many variables including shape, dimensions, configuration of microwave feeds, dimensions and properties of the load. Indeed, even a small change in any of these variables can significantly affect the heating performance. For this reason, it is very difficult to achieve even heating (and optimised heating) in multimode cavities unless the samples are large with respect to the cavity volume. The power density (or volumetric absorption of microwave energy) is known to be proportional to the square of the electric field strength within the material For the multimode tests, the samples were placed in a 5-l capacity glass beaker and the generator set to the required forward power level. The sample was placed onto a rotating turntable within the a cavity of dimensions 460×430×640 mm, the door closed and the generator started. Ten specimens in the single size-range −37+31 mm were used per test and samples were treated at applied power levels of 5, 10 and 15 kW for 1, 5 and 10 s, respectively. For all tests, an attempt was made to keep the mass of sample (1 kg) in the cavity consistent and the position of the load identical. For the single-mode cavity tests, a TE The point load test For testing, the sample is placed between two shaped tips and a compressive force applied. From the dimensions of the particle and the force to failure, an index value, known as The point load test measures only the ultimate strength of the particle so that the associated energy requirement for failure cannot easily be deduced. However, the drop weight test In a point load test, samples of material are crushed as individual particles at a combination of energy inputs and size fractions using a drop weight test apparatus The fitting procedure generally yields a value of about 50 for To determine the influence of microwave treatment on the breakage behaviour of the material, two drop-weight tests were carried out. The first was on untreated, “as received” material, utilising the three different required energy levels detailed in Previous research The mineralogy of the microwave-transparent gangue of this sample was found to vary. Discrete, transparent, gangue-rich bands were clearly evident and were found to be typically rich in biotite (K     A comparison of These results are significant as they show that similar breakage behaviour can be achieved for the microwave-treated material as for the untreated material in the smaller size fractions but with only 60% of the comminution energy input. The results obtained in the multimode applicator have shown that microwave treatment can have a significant influence on the amount of energy required for breakage. It has also been shown the effectiveness of the treatment is related to the power level of the applied radiation. A recent paper  Tests were carried out to determine if increasing the electric field strength by using a single-mode applicator would cause more rapid failure or failure at lower power than in the multimode applicator. Tests were carried out at 5, 7.5 and 10 kW, and samples were treated for 0.1, 0.5 and 1 s, respectively. No test was carried out at 15 kW due to sample melting. As for the tests carried out in the multimode cavity, five tests were carried out for each treatment condition and the average is reported. The sample residence-time in the cavity was controlled using a pneumatic system, as shown in  It is clear, therefore, that power density or electric field strength does have a significant influence on the change in strength observed in exposed samples. This has important ramifications for the industrial development of the technology. The review discussed earlier in this paper The microwave energy requirement for samples treated in the single-mode cavity can be compared to those in the multimode cavity. Assuming a 1-kg load in each case: If the power level were to be increased to 15 kW and the residence time reduced to 0.05 s, as suggested above, this would mean only 0.21 kW h/t of microwave energy would be used. Typically, an ore may require a total of up to 20 kW h/t for the size reduction process or more if very fine grinding is required. Therefore, microwave energy inputs of this magnitude may be attractive economically. It should be stressed that the single-mode cavity used was not optimised. With further cavity development, higher powers and even shorter exposure times would become feasible and the microwave energy requirement reduced even further. The change in strength of samples exposed to microwaves in multimode cavities has been shown to be related to applied microwave power level. By using comparative drop weight tests, it has also been shown that material microwave-treated for 1 s at 15 kW is significantly weaker in the smaller size fractions. This would clearly alter the comminution behaviour in a continuous process plant particularly in terms of throughput and circulating load. The importance of electric field strength has also been demonstrated and it has been shown that significant reductions in ore strength can be achieved with cavity residence times of less than 0.5 s by treating material in high electric field strength single-mode cavities. It is also shown that the strengths of microwave-treated samples exhibit higher standard deviations relative to the mean than untreated samples. This is suggested to be a function of uneven electric field distribution within the cavity used for the test work. It is clear from this test work that if microwave treatment of ores is ever to be economic high values of electric field must be used that are evenly distributed across the feed ore stream.