The flotation of fluorite from ores by using acidized water glass (AWG) as depressant has been studied for the substitution of the commonly used depressant (soda ash plus sodium lignosulfonate). The experimental results have shown that the flotation with AWG could considerably improve the sedimentation rate of fine particles in tailing slurry and thus produce cleaner recycled water, compared with the actual depressant. Also, it improved fluorite recovery and flotation rate. In addition, it has been found that AWG could achieve higher selectivity between fluorite and gangue minerals (carbonate and silicate minerals) in fluorite flotation.Fluorite flotation is usually realized with sodium lignosulfonate as depressant and fatty acid as collector at a high pH ( The mechanism for the poor sedimentation of particles in the tailing slurry might be due to the strong ability of sodium lignosulfonate to effectively disperse fine particles at high slurry pH. Numerous reports have concerned the development of alternative depressants for improving fluorite flotation ( The objective of this work was to develop a better chemical scheme to improve the separation of gangue minerals in fluorite flotation and the clarity of the recycled water for the Las Cuervas concentration plant. The study included the comparisons of two different chemical schemes, the incumbent of sodium lignosulfonate and soda ash which is currently used and acidized water glass. The comparison examined the coagulation of tailing slurry, flotation rate and separation efficiency. The ore sample used in this work was collected from the feed ore of the fluorite flotation circuit in the Las Cuervas concentration plant. The ore sample consisted of fluorite, quartz, calcite and clay minerals. The head grade for the sample was determined to be 75.08% CaF Water glass from Silicatos y Derivados (Mexico) was used, which has the SiO The water used was the potable water in the San Luis Potosi city, Mexico. The AWG solution was prepared by mixing two solutions of 9% w/w of sulfuric acid and 10% w/w of water glass in a volume ratio of 1:1. After mixing the solution was conditioned for 1 Flotation tests were carried out using a Denver laboratory flotation cell. Tests were conducted at a solid content of 25%. The chemical reagents were added to the cell and condition for 10 The flowsheet of the flotation test is illustrated in Fluorite flotation tests were carried out with the actual and new schemes.  The two schemes could be also compared from the viewpoints of the selectivity between fluorite and the gangue minerals (CaCO The same observation was obtained from the graphs of CaF It is worthy to note that the AWG addition might increase the SiO The flotation kinetics of fluorite from the ore with the actual and new schemes was illustrated in  The experimental results have shown that acidized water glass was a better depressant for fluorite flotation from the Las Cuervas ore, compared to soda ash and sodium lignosulfonate. It considerably increased the sedimentation rate of fine particles in tailing slurry and thus produced cleaner recycled water. Also, it improved fluorite recovery and flotation rate. AWG was more selective between fluorite and gangue minerals (carbonate and silicate minerals) in fluorite flotation, compared to soda ash and sodium lignosulfonate.