The paper deals with a possible utilisation of wood ash as a reagent in treating acid mine drainage (AMD) from opencast mining of brown coal. Wood ash samples were obtained having combusted deciduous and coniferous tree wood in a household furnace. The dominant mineral phases in wood ash are calcite, quartz, lime and periclase. The used AMD is characteristic of high contents of sulphates, iron, manganese, heavy metals and low pH. The AMD treatment process included dosing of wood ash to adjust pH values about 8.3 (a dose of 0.5gl−1) or calcium hydroxide (a dose of 0.2gl−1) for comparison. The reaction time was 20min. Dosing of wood ash in AMD resulted in an increase of pH in solution from 3.5 to 8.3, which caused the removal of metal ions mainly by precipitation, co-precipitation and adsorption. Comparing the application of Ca(OH)2 in AMD treatment, at an almost identical pH value the concentrations fell in both cases for Fe, Mn, As, Co, Cu, Ni, Zn, Mg, Al and Mo. Applying wood ash the drop was even more distinct in Mn, Zn and Mg. The results of sedimentation tests in an Imhoff cone confirm that the settling capacities of sludge using wood ash are significantly better than when using calcium hydroxide in acid mine drainage treatment. According to classification proposed by The increasing use of wood as an energy-supply source and the difficulties in acquiring new disposal sites for wood ash (WA) produced have encouraged a search for alternative methods of its disposal, rather than landfill sites, lagoons and its use in brickworks ( The composition of biomass ash depends on various factors; however, it is directly related to the biomass used as feedstock because the original constituents in biomass are the precursors for the newly formed components in biomass ash (BA). The typical enrichment trends for chemical characteristics of wood and woody biomass are moisture, volatile matter, CaO, MgO and Mn. The wood and woody biomass is depleted in ash yield, Cl, N, P On the grounds of the above mentioned information on the chemical composition of wood ash, it may be stated that wood ash comprises effective substances suitable for AMD remediation, such as: Calcium compounds to adjust the pH values and precipitation. Carbonised and unburnt residues of organic substances and silicon compounds for sorption effects. Compounds of aluminium and iron, from which aluminium and iron in an ion form are released in contact with AMD thus producing hydrated oxides of aluminium and iron with a coagulating effect. Insoluble compounds of aluminosilicates and silicates functioning as a weighting material in clarification ( Major goals of the work are laboratory test of the effects of the wood ash components in treatment of AMD and comparing the effects of wood ash and calcium hydroxide in AMD treatment. The AMD comes from an open pit called Jiri, Sokolovska uhelna, Czech Republic. The used AMD samples were scooped from a holding reservoir in 10 For the initial testing of the effects of the plant biomass ash, wood ash from a local furnace was used. The wood ash comes from combusting a mixture of 60% fruit tree wood and 40% of oak wood. The wood was combusted in fireplace insert with secondary combustion technology. The combustion temperature was about 400 AMD treatment experiments were carried out using an overhead stirring column MK6 at a speed of 150 When in the laboratory, the ash samples were smeared in a mortar. The loss on ignition (LOI) was determined by heating a pre-weighed dry sample (at 105 The settling capacities of sludge using WA and of sludge using calcium hydroxide were assessed subject to From X-ray diffraction results it is obvious that wood ash mainly consists of an amorphous phase (45.00  The sample of treated AMD by WA and the sample of treated AMD by Ca(OH) The results ( Next, the settling capacities of the sludge having used WA (see It is apparent from The major goals of the work were to laboratory examine the effects of wood ash components in treatment of AMD generated during brown coal mining, to compare the effects of wood ash and calcium hydroxide in AMD treatment. The results of the analyses of the treated AMD with wood ash were comparable (pH value, Fe, As, Hg, Cr, Cd, Co, Cu, Ni, Pb, Al) and in certain parameters (Mn, Zn, Mg, Thanks to its composition and properties, an application of ash from biomass combustion appears very effective in AMD treatment. The subsequent research will focus on the application of plant biomass ash combusted in industrial boilers. The authors gratefully acknowledge support of this work to the National Agency for Research in Agriculture at the Ministry of the Agriculture of the CR (Project QI 112A132).