A sieve analysis showed the following results (  Rosin-Rammler plots can similarly be made either by calculations or using special log paper known as Weibull graph paper that save labourious calculations. Typical calculations using the data in This can now be plotted on normal graph paper ( The term Unless a particle is spherical or cubic its size determination is never an absolute process. Particles such as (a) and (b) in There are many ways the size of an irregular particle could be characterised, with none being absolutely right. For instance, the particle size can be characterized by determining the size of hole or aperture the particle will just pass through (sieve size), or the time the particle takes to settle in a fluid such as water and express the particle size as the size of a sphere that has the same settling rate (Stokes diameter). Particle size could also be expressed as the diameter of a circle that has the same cross sectional area or projected area as the particle, when placed either on its most stable position or randomly oriented positions. In three dimensions, the equivalent volume or surface area of a sphere have also been used to describe a particle size. Visual examination under the optical microscope or electron microscope or the diffraction of a laser beam have been used to derive statistical dimensions of particles. All of these methods do not necessarily give the same measure of size for the same sample of particles. Hence it is necessary to mention the measurement method when quoting particle size. The particle dimensions measured by optical methods are limited to sizes greater than 100  The use of a microscope to measure the size of irregularly shaped mineral particles can be a tedious and difficult process. A video camera linked to a computer can speed up the process of size recognition by the projected outline of a particle. Video systems are used to size large lumps of rock on conveyor belts and even on the back of dump trucks as the load is tipped into crusher feed bins. The obvious technique is to measure the average distance between two extremities of the particle and the arithmetic or geometric mean of a number of measurements taken. The extremities of the distance to be measured is standardised [ The relative size of particles may also be indicated by reference circles having an equal projected area or perimeter, ( In some cases the average estimations of diameters is expressed as the Mellor’s mean diameter (d This method gives a slightly higher average than the arithmetic mean size of a particle. Therefore when reporting particle size it is necessary to quote the method used. Due to the difficulty in measuring length, sometimes the particle size is described in terms of its volume or surface area, as a volume mean diameter or a surface mean diameter. In a sample consisting of several particles, this concept can only be used if it is assumed that all the particles have the same shape. Thus if d is the dimension of the particle and ρ In a mass of sample, Mp, containing N number of particles of characteristic size d Eq. (1.48) may be re-written as: If all the particles are assumed to have equal dimensions, which is expressed as the mean volume diameter, d Using  Gold nuggets were examined under a microscope and the following frequency distribution was obtained: Assuming the nuggets are of similar shape, determine the size distribution on a mass fraction basis. Data: density of gold nugget = 17580 Solution Step 1 Let M n is the number of size intervals, equal to 6, then: M k is a constant equivalent to the shape factor. In this example, k is taken as 1 Therefore, the mass fraction for each size interval would be: The calculations can now be made as follows to estimate M   The expression is not applicable for very small particles or conditions that lead to Brownian movement of particles. When applying Note: Stokes diameter  In practice, difficulty arises in determining the terminal velocity (V The expression It has been found that F The relation between the drag force and Reynolds number for streamline flow conditions is: For turbulent conditions, Newton derived the forces due to drag as: During the settling of a particle under streamline conditions, the force acting on the particle due to gravitational acceleration is given by: This would be equal to the force at the terminal velocity of the particle, given by  Even though the terminal velocities can be calculated from By multiplying both sides of Similarly we can arrive at an expression, which is independent of d by using the dimensionless factor [(F The right hand side of Similarly, the terminal velocity of the particle can be computed from knowledge of the left hand side of  As the tables are applicable for spherical particles, Heywood [ Other shape factors have been proposed, such as the sphericity factor, S, defined mathematically as [ The values of log [(F Specular haematite particles from Labrador were sampled to determine the size of individual particles. The average terminal velocity of the particles was determined to be 15 Data: μ (H For simplicity we may assume that the iron ore particles are spherical in shape, therefore Substituting in An irregular shaped mineral particle (shape factor, k = 0.3) had a projected area of 2.16 Step 1 Projected area of particle = π r then r= 0.000829 From And from Step 2 Let the projected diameter of particle be d The total drag force F Next dividing both sides of the equation by the term ρ  Then from log Re = 1.7143 or Re = 51.79 From That is, the corrected value of log Re for the non-spherical particle = 1.7143 − 0.0447 = 1.6696 and Re = 46.73 Now Re = d then Usually gravity segregation methods are used to determine particle sizes down to 0.02  For a spherical particle, obeying Stokes’ Law, the motion of the particle in the centrifuge can be expressed by the equation, for Re <  Assuming that the initial position of the particle in the centrifuge was r Thus from a knowledge of r In commercial centrifuges, the positions of a particle, r Whichever method of measuring particle size is used, the characterisation of a sample according to size is referred to as a size analysis. A size analysis in mineral processing is primarily used to obtain quantitative data about the individual size and size distribution of particles in the process stream. This is important in assessing the quality of grinding, optimum size of feed to a process for maximum efficiency etc. In most mineral processing applications an approximate size of particles is all that is required. Sieving through standard sieves of known apertures and determining the sieve size on which all the particles are retained can conveniently give the limiting size of a group of particles subjected to the operation. The closer the size of successive sieves the closer would be the estimation to the true size. Instead of individual measurements of sizes of particles, the mean size of a particle passing through and retained on sieves gives a good approximation of particle size within the sieve ranges. The sieve size analysis of a mineral sample giving the mass fraction of mineral retained between successive sieve sizes is usually recorded as in There are no particles larger than 3350 The mass of material on the 1680 The mass fraction retained on the 850 The total material retained on the 420 Similarly, the mass of mineral retained on the 210 Even though the subsequent sieve openings are related by a factor of Plotting the data in this form ( The distribution of sizes in a sample do not often follow a normal distribution, as in If this plot is linear (the size distribution is log-normal) then an approximation of the mean of the distribution is obtained from the d In some cases, curvature of the plot is observed in the coarse sizes because the maximum particle size is not equal to infinity. In some cases where the distribution is skewed, a linear plot can be obtained by plotting the log of the cumulative undersize against the log of the screen aperture, preferably on log-log paper ( It is not necessary to plot both the cumulative oversize and undersize as each is the mirror image of the other as seen in The Gaudin-Schuhmann distribution is given as: Taking the logs of both sides of this equation and rearranging it, then: This is the equation of a straight line if x and y are plotted on a log-log scale. The slope of the straight line will be the distribution parameter, a, and the intercept of the straight line, when y = 100   Alternatively, if the distance in mm between one log cycle on the Y-axis (say 10-100) is the same distance as one log cycle on the X-axis (10-100) then using a ruler, the slope can also be determined by; An alternative plot, especially suitable for finely ground particles, like that produced in tumbling mills, is to plot log [log 100/(100−y)], or log [log 100/R], against the log of sieve size, where y is the cumulative % passing and R is the cumulative % retained. Such plots are known as Rosin-Rammler plots, ( The Rosin-Rammler (or Weibull) distribution is expressed as: Rearranging and taking the logarithm of both sides of Taking logarithms a second time to remove the exponent gives:  Since sizing by different methods, (sieving, cyclosizer, laser sizing) covers different size ranges, size distributions from different methods may need to be combined to give a complete size distribution. Sizing of the same sample by different methods will generally produce different results because of the difference in measurement principle. The difference is related to particle shape. For spherical particles, the Stokes diameter calculated from the settling velocity is exact and the projected area of a sphere is that of a circle of the same diameter. Thus the closer particle shape is to a sphere, the closer the measured sizes will be. For elongated or flat particles the settling velocity will be lower than for spherical particles due to an increase in specific surface area leading to a greater drag force and hence lower terminal velocity. Thus, the Stokes diameter will be lower for elongated particles. On the other hand, these particles will be more stable when resting flatter on a viewing surface and hence will have a larger projected area and hence a larger projected area diameter. In general, the Stokes diameter is smaller or equal to the same particle’s sieve diameter.  For the screening samples, the +38  Since the sample that was cyclosized (−75 The same applies to the combination of the +75 When re-plotted, the data points line up with the +75 The dry screening results show a smaller percentage of material passing each screen below 75 The laser sizer results of the cyclosizer minus cone 5 fraction, normalised to the total sample mass using the procedure described above, is plotted in As there is no absolute measure of size for irregular shaped particles, different methods of size measurement will give different size distributions. Generally, it is expected that irregular shaped particles will yield different sizing results when measured by different techniques. The differences can be quantified in terms of a shape factor. For example, a conversion shape factor could be defined as: This factor is generally determined experimentally by selecting a number of cumulative % passing values and obtaining the ratio of d Data obtained on analysing a tumbling mill product is given below. Plot the data using the Gaudin-Schumann and Rosin-Rammler methods. From the plots estimate the mass fractions retained on 200 Using the following data, plot a Rosin-Rammler distribution curve and determine its equation. Samples of the feed to a ball mill and the product after 15 Estimate the rate of reduction of the 1000 The product from a grinding mill was sampled every 30  Two sets of size analysis results are available for a given material. From a Gaudin-Schuhmann plot determine the relations between size and mass distribution in these two cases. Using the equation for case B determine the fines fraction at −53 Gold nuggets were examined under a microscope and the following results were obtained. Data: density of gold nugget = 18500 A pond contains particles from a process tail stream. If the pond is 500 The diameter of 6 lots of particles from a sample were measured under an optical microscope and a sedimentation method. The number of particles of each lot were counted and tabulated as: The particles were all of similar shape, having a shape factor of 0.3. Estimate: the size of particles having the same specific surface as the mixture the surface area per unit volume of particles. A cylindrical glass tube of diameter 20 The diameter of particles that would settle if the movement of particles was under streamline conditions. The diameter of particles that would settle under turbulent conditions when the rotational speed was increased to 4280 A 1% suspension of hematite particles in methanol (1% solution in water) was filled in a cylindrical centrifuge tube 3 the size of particles that would settle every second for 5 If the number of particles settling every second were: 200, 120, 80, 60, 20, determine the mean specific surface of the hematite particles.