This research studied the effect of collectors and frothers on the double electric layer (specifically, the zeta potential) and on the time for the coalescence of bubbles. The collectors studied were potassium ethylic xanthate (anionic) and dodecylamine (cationic), and the studied frother was terpineol. The time of coalescence was considered as the time elapsed since the bubble had contact with the air–liquid interface at the level of liquid contained in the cell until the time in which it collapsed with it. Each test was repeated at least 10 times to obtain a database of 418 tests. It was concluded that, without considering the surface effect, the coalescence time increases, increasing the electrical conductivity of the aqueous solution, and that the zeta potential of the bubbles affects the coalescence time with a non-linearly form; this effect has not yet been addressed in the literature.Coalescence is the process by two bubbles that are present in a two-phase system (gas–liquid), begin an integration process to form a single bubble. It is believed that when two bubbles coalesce this only affects the average size and surface area of the bubble dispersion; however, this phenomenon has important repercussions in several bubbling processes. For example, in froth flotation processes bubble coalescence has a direct effect on the recovery of the concentrate. It is important to study coalescence in order to generate bubble dispersions with the desired characteristics of size and surface area. Currently, the role of typical flotation reagents in bubble coalescence is not completely understood. For example, it is known that frothers have a stabilizing role in the air–liquid interface, avoiding coalescence, but little is known about the role that collectors play in this stability. Given this lack of information, the objective of this work was to study the effect of frothers and ionic collectors on the induction time of coalescence. The first studies of coalescence date back to 1960s (  In a study by  In the context of the famous DLVO theory (for the name of their proponents, According to From the literature, it is possible to notice a certain discrepancy in their conclusions. In this context, it is worth mentioning that the experimental results of this article present evidence that the electric charge of the bubbles (specifically, their zeta potential) has a direct effect on the coalescence of the bubbles, and that this effect has not yet been addressed in the literature. The experimental tests were conducted in a small transparent cell made of acrylic material, provided with a syringe whose plunger was a stainless-steel micrometric screw, to control the size of the bubbles (see The acid and alkaline pH were modified by adding drops of concentrated solutions of hydrochloric acid or sodium hydroxide (1 M). Electrical conductivity was naturally modified when the surfactant salts (xanthate or dodecylamine) were added to the aqueous solutions and when the pH was modified with HCl or NaOH, therefore, its value was only measured and recorded. Once the aqueous solution was prepared with each of the reagents and the pH was adjusted, the surface tension was measured with a Fisher-Scientific model 20. Each value reported in this paper is the average of at least five measurements. The surface of the aqueous solution was enlarged forming of a liquid lamella with a Du Noüy ring, then the tensile force was measured, and the surface tension was calculated. Once 0.25 L of aqueous solution was prepared with the chemical reagents, it was poured into the cell until reaching all the time the same level of filling. Also, the bubble was liberated all the time from the same distance (0.5 cm under the liquid level) in order to prevent that different liberation distances affects the time of coalescence. Coalescence usually refers only to the fact that two interfaces of bubbles interact to form a single bubble; however, in this study coalescence was evaluated by crashing an air bubble with the air–liquid interface of the level of liquid contained in the cell. Also, the bubbles were approximately the same size, to prevent the diameter affecting the bubble velocity and, consequently, the time of coalescence. Special attention was made to liberate the bubble at the centre of the cell, since when the bubbles reached the filling level contacting three interfaces (including the cell wall), the results showed strong a standard deviation and poor reproducibility. In addition to the precautions already described, in all measurements care was taken to stabilize superficial bubble conditioning to give an “aging” time of two minutes, exposing the bubble in the aqueous solution conditioned with the chemical reagents. The time of coalescence was considered the time elapsed since the bubble had contact with the surface of liquid in the cell, until the time at which it collapses with it. Both times were determined from the images recorded by the video-camera. To obtain a representative average of the measurements of the time of coalescence, each test was repeated at least 10 times, recording the time that it took for the bubble to collapse after its arrival at the surface. The database includes more than 400 tests.  It is convenient to say that the bubble zeta potential data presented in this work and the experimental methodology to obtain them were described elsewhere in the literature ( The setup contained three major components: the high-pressure air-saturation container, the electrophoretic cell and the image-acquisition system. The bubbling cell (30 cm height, 10 cm length and 15 cm width) was fabricated out of transparent acrylic plaques. In the central section, the video camera was positioned against the electrophoretic cell, the configuration of which is illustrated in a magnified diagram in The electrophoretic cell was built out of five acrylic plaques (0.2 cm thick) separated by empty ducts (0.3 cm width and 0.2 cm depth), which were used to install the platinum electrodes (wires of 0.75 mm diameter and 5 cm length). The fifth plaque was semi-opaque (white) and was glued to the four transparent plaques, whose function was to enclose the channels and to prevent the visualization of bubbles passing behind the electrophoretic cell. A small white-light lamp (7 W) was placed near the semi-opaque plaque to illuminate the microbubbles. The two empty lateral channels (at angular positions with respect to the central channel) allowed the installation of the electrodes and the removal of the O Another important element of the experimental setup was the image-acquisition system, which was composed of a digital camera equipped with a macro lens (Navitar® 12X). The video camera (Toshiba 3-CCD RGB; resolution 1024 × 768 pixels; 90 frames/s) permitted the user to register the bubble displacement and the time through a MATLAB® library that linked the video camera to the computer. Each image was recorded in a file whose name included the time at which the image was taken. The file names used the following format, in which hours, minutes, seconds and milliseconds were recorded: HH_MM_SS_FFF. Bubble velocity was estimated from the recorded images by dividing the bubble displacement by the corresponding time. To obtain reliable images, it was necessary to follow several steps: (1) Selection of a reference length. It was used a thin Nylon® wire, 230 μm diameter, which was placed close to the front wall of the electrophoretic cell; (2) isolation of a single rising microbubble; and (3) quantification of the bubble displacement and the respective time elapsed. Once the aqueous solution (3.5 L) was prepared, the pH, electrical conductivity and temperature (25 °C) were recorded. The acid and alkaline pH were modified by adding drops of concentrated solutions of hydrochloric acid or sodium hydroxide (1 M). To provide electric strength, a enough quantity of NaCl was added to the aqueous solution to reach a concentration of 10–3 M. This aqueous solution was agitated for 5 min to stabilize the temperature and to homogenize the solution after reagent addition. The solution was fed into the electrophoretic cell and into the closed tank which was thereafter pressurized at 100 psi of air. To initiate bubble formation, the valve located at the output of the tank was opened, introducing the saturated solution at ~8 cm horizontal distance and 19 cm below from the observation cell. The image of the thin Nylon® wire was again focused to record the bubble trajectory upon application of the electric potential. It is important to take care that the visualized bubbles move in the stationary plane, for this, it was necessary to tilt slightly the wall (2.61°), with respect to the vertical plane on which the microbubbles slid. Another necessary action to locate the stationary plane was by focusing the image at approximately 20% of the distance between the walls of the electrophoretic cell (0.2 mm). This orientation also minimizes the effects of the electro-osmotic fluxes. It is worth mentioning that the precise detection of the stationary plane was complemented with an experimental identification, validating the zeta potential measurements with those reported in the literature. Two platinum electrodes were coupled to the direct-current power source and a rocker switch permitted the alternation of the electrode’s polarity (every 40 s) to prevent polarization. As mentioned, the electrophoretic cell was configured to remove O Zeta potential, ζ, was determined by measuring the horizontal velocity, v, of the micro-bubbles (electrophoretic velocity), and using the expression:  With the measurements of coalescence times, correlations were tested between the surface tension and the pH, electrical conductivity, and bubble zeta potential, but the results were unclear when using two variable correlations, which means that the coalescence time is a multivariable phenomenon.  The same results are presented in a three-dimensional graph ( It is interesting to note that the electrical conductivity of the aqueous solution increases the time of coalescence, which is already known and has been cited by some authors ( Another interesting observation from A scheme of the relationship between time of coalescence and zeta potential is represented with From the experimental results it is evident that coalescence time increases with zeta potentials close to zero, meanwhile with zeta potentials far to zero (positive or negative) the coalescence time of bubbles decreases. It is speculatively believed that, similarly to colloidal particles that flocculate forming aggregates when zeta potential is close to zero, bubbles can also form relatively stable aggregates without coalescence. Contrarily, with potential zeta far to zero it is apparently facilitated the thinning of the water layer that moisturizes the bubbles, facilitating the coalescence. It was found that the coalescence time increases with increasing electrical conductivity of the aqueous solution and that the zeta potential of the bubbles affects the coalescence time with non-linear effect, decreasing to positive and negative potentials, reaching a maximum at potentials close to the isoelectric point. It is important to say that in this study the effect of the surface tension was not considered. The coalescence time decreases with the bubbles conditioned with a cationic collector at acid pH. Similarly, the coalescence time decrease with bubbles conditioned with an anionic collector at alkaline pH.  The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. The authors are grateful to CONACYT for scholarships and funding and to Carmelita Yamamoto Chavarria for assistance with the data collection. This study was also funded by Supplementary data to this article can be found online at The following are the Supplementary data to this article: 