The effect of old laying hen (OLH) and commercial broiler (CB) meat on emulsion-type sausages produced with different lipid types (canola, olive, and sunflower oils) to replace pork backfat was studied. To determine the physicochemical, textural, and microstructural properties, the proximate composition, color, pH, emulsion stability, cooking yield, water holding capacity, collagen content, textural properties, and scanning electron microscopy images of sausage samples were analyzed. Although there were significant differences in pH and emulsion stability between breed types (OLH and CB, P < 0.05), no significant differences were found for cooking yield and water holding capacity. The utilization of OLH meat in sausages produced higher total and insoluble collagen content than that of the CB meat. The replacement of pork backfat with olive oil produced the most similar texture to that of pork backfat among the lipid types used. The results showed the applicability of OLH meat in emulsion-type sausages and the use of vegetable oils, especially olive oil, might also be feasible.The number of laying hens has been increasing worldwide with a steady increase in egg production, reaching 73,890 thousand metric tons globally in 2017 ( Pork backfat is used for the manufacture of sausages owing to its great functionality. However, it contains cholesterol and saturated fatty acids, which increase health risk concerns in humans ( Considering the quality of emulsion-type meat products, emulsifying is one of the most important processes, and it can be affected by the types of proteins and lipids used ( At 12 h postmortem, CB (Ross, 5-weeks-old) and OLH (Hy-Line, 92-weeks-old) were purchased from 2 slaughterhouses (Jayeonilga, Paju, Korea and Maniker, Namyangju, Korea, respectively) and frozen immediately at −40°C. The frozen chicken carcasses were thawed at 4 ± 1°C for 16 h, and then, the breast meat was manually deboned and used to manufacture the meat products. Pork backfat was supplied from a local butchery (Seoul, Korea), and the vegetable oils (canola, sunflower, and olive oils) were purchased from a local market (©Oleificio Sabo, Romania, Italy; 100% purity). In the present study, 3 batches of emulsion-type sausages were manufactured using CB and OLH meat and 4 different lipids (pork backfat, and canola, sunflower, and olive oils). The formulation of sausages was as follows: 60% ground chicken breast meat, 20% lipid, and 20% iced water with additives (1.2% salt and 0.2% sodium triphosphate). The meat was ground through a 5-mm plate and was then emulsified with each lipid, iced water, and additives in a silent cutter for 2 min (C4W, Sirman, Padova, Italy). During the procedure, the temperature of the mixture was maintained below 8°C and monitored using a digital thermometer (TM-747DU, Tenmars Electronics Co., Ltd., Taipei, Taiwan). After emulsification, each meat batter was stuffed in collagen casing (25-mm diameter; NDX, Viscofan, Ceske Budejovice, Czech Republic). These were cooked in a water bath (WB-22, Daihan Scientific, Wanju, Korea) at 80 ± 1°C until the core temperature reached 75 ± 1°C. The core temperature was monitored using a thermometer (TM-747DU, Tenmars Electronics Co., Ltd.). The moisture, protein, and ash contents of the sausage samples were determined using the official methods of the AOAC international ( The surface color of the sausages was measured using a colorimeter (CM-5, Konica Minolta Co., Ltd., Osaka, Japan) with an 8-mm measuring area, calibrated with standard black and white calibration plates (CM-A210, Konica Minolta Co., Ltd., Osaka, Japan). The color values were recorded and expressed as L∗ (+brightness, − darkness), a∗ (+redness, − greenness), and b∗ (+yellowness, − blueness). The pH values of the sausages were measured using a pH meter (SevenGo, Mettler-Toledo International Inc., Schwerzenbach, Switzerland). Briefly, 5 g of sample and 20 mL of distilled water were homogenized for 30 s (T10 basic, Ika Works, Staufen, Germany), and the pH value of the homogenate was measured. The emulsion stability of each meat batter was measured according to the methods described by All sausages were cooked in a water bath (WB-22, Daihan Scientific) at 80 ± 1°C until the core temperature reached 75 ± 1°C. The core temperature was monitored using a real-time mode thermometer with a probe-type thermocouple (TM-747DU, Tenmars Electronics Co., Ltd.). The cooking yields were then determined from the weight of the sausages before and after cooking: The moisture content of sausages was determined according to the AOAC method ( The content of total and insoluble collagen was determined according to the methodology described by Insoluble collagen was determined using 5 g of homogenized sample with 24 mL of Ringer's reagent (3-fold dilution of sodium chloride 8.6 g + potassium chloride 0.3 g + calcium chloride dihydrate 0.33 g in 1 L distilled water). The homogenate was heated in a 77°C water bath (WB-22, Daihan Scientific) for 70 min. After centrifugation at 1,331 × Sausage samples (Ø 2.5 cm) were cut into 2 cm height and were then analyzed using a TA1 texture analyzer (AMETEK Lloyd Instruments Ltd., Fareham, UK). A compression plate of Ø 70 mm was attached to the analyzer that compressed the samples twice to 60% of their original height (test speed of 2.0 mm/s, trigger force of 0.1 N). The data were analyzed using the NexygenPlus software program (AMETEK Lloyd instruments Ltd.). The hardness (Newton, Scanning electron microscopy was performed according to the methods described in the study by All experiments were performed in triplicate with 3 batches of sausages on different days. Statistical analysis for each single effect (type of chicken breed [n = 6] and lipid [n = 12], 5 observation numbers for each replication) was performed using one-way analysis of variance, and significant differences were identified using Student–Newman–Keuls multiple range test in the SAS statistical software program (SAS, Release 9.4; SAS Institute Inc., Cary, NC) with a significance level of The proximate composition of emulsion-type sausages prepared from different chicken breeds and lipid types revealed that the moisture content of the CB sausages was higher than that of the OLH sausages ( OLH meat (L* = 63.48 ± 4.67, a* = 5.58 ± 1.56, b* = 21.49 ± 1.71) had a brighter and yellower color than CB meat (L* = 58.61 ± 1.06, a* = 5.97 ± 0.41, b* = 19.08 ± 2.12). The use of OLH meat resulted in a higher L* value of the sausages compared with those prepared from CB meat owing to their original meat color ( The pH values of the emulsion-type sausages were significantly affected by both breed and lipid types ( In general, the cooking yield, WHC, and emulsion stability are highly affected by the pH value of meat products ( Although there were significant differences in pH values and protein characteristics between OLH and CB sausages, no significant differences were observed for cooking yield and WHC among the breed types. This phenomenon was not expected as Considering the various aspects of collagen, the amount of divalent crosslinking that is insoluble is highly correlated to tenderness. Collagen crosslinking is developed based on the maturity of the animal ( Among the different lipid types, sausages with pork backfat tended to have a higher total/insoluble collagen content than the other vegetable oils. This phenomenon may be caused because pork backfat is an aggregation of the adipose tissues itself containing cell structures including collagen ( There were no significant differences in texture profile (e.g., hardness, cohesiveness, springiness, chewiness, and gumminess) for the sausages prepared from the different chicken breeds ( Meanwhile, depending on the different lipid types, significantly different properties in hardness and gumminess were found in chicken sausages. In hardness, sausages with pork backfat exhibited a higher value than those with vegetable oils ( The results from the scanning electron microscopy exhibited characteristics of a gel-like compact structure of usual heated meat-emulsion systems ( Based on the results of the present study, no adverse effects were found by using the different breed types as these could be compensated in a system of emulsion-type sausage manufacture. When considering different lipid types, OLH meat could be effectively used in emulsion-type sausages with vegetable oils, especially olive oil, as it resulted in texture profile most similar to the pork backfat-used sausages. In future studies, the characteristics of OLH meat and each vegetable oil will be investigated to elucidate their linkages in the emulsion system. This research was supported by the Basic Science Research Program through the Conflicts of interest statement: The authors have declared no conflict of interest.