A cohesive grain based model is proposed to simulate the fracture behaviour of polycrystalline rocks. The model was employed to characterize the cracking response of both inter- and intra-grain contacts in the grain based model (GBM). The model was implemented in distinct element codes and its ability to mimic the mechanical and failure behaviour of polycrystalline rocks was demonstrated through calibration of several granitic rocks including Adelaide black granite, Eibenstock II granite, and Aue granite. The calibrated model of Aue granite was used to assess the effect of joint roughness coefficient (JRC) on asperity damage and shear mechanism of rock joints (i.e. grain crushing) under constant normal load (CNL) and constant normal stiffness (CNS) conditions. The bond-break in intra-grain contacts contributed to asperity damage in form of grain crushing. The numerical observations showed that under CNS condition asperity damage increased with increasing initial normal stress and JRC, and rough rock joints exhibited more dilative response.The focus of this study is on the brittle failure of polycrystalline rocks (i.e. granite) using cohesive based distinct element method (DEM). Various parameters control the mechanical and damage response of crystalline rocks, such as microstructural properties of grains (i.e. shape and size), mineral constituents, pre-existing defects, cavities, etc. The macroscopic fracture process is the dominant damage mechanism controlling the mechanical response and the integrity of crystalline rocks The presence of natural discontinuities around orebodies can have a profound influence on the stability and safety of mining structures As an alternative to experimental tests, the grain based model (GBM) employs DEM principles to produce numerical crystalline specimens with similar microstructural properties to the physical specimen, which can mimic the cracking behaviour of inter- and intra-grain contacts In our previous numerical research, we developed a DEM based cohesive contact model to study the influence of rock texture on the macroscopic damage and mechanical response of granitic rock using PFC-GBM approach To the best of author’s knowledge, there is no numerical study to examine the potential of PFC-GBM approach in the assessment of rock joint shear behaviour. In the present study, we employed the proposed cohesive GBM to numerically investigate the shear behaviour of rock joints with a focus on the micro-texture of asperities. To do so, we imported the geometrical characteristics of three different rock joints with different joint roughness coefficients (JRC) into the numerical models. After that, numerical direct shear tests under constant normal load (CNL), and constant normal stiffness (CNS) were conducted. In the present study, a cohesive, contact model (CCM) developed by Saadat and Taheri The relative displacement The contact normal and shear stresses are linked to their corresponding relative displacements and can be calculated by: The model features a yield function to account for mixed-mode failure: In Eq. A damage parameter ( The damage parameter introduced in Eq. In DEM, simulating microscopic dilation response requires incorporating the microstructural characteristics of the material in the model, which is a difficult task to achieve  The CCM and CSJM are separately solved in the simulations. In DEM modelling, the calculations alternate between the application of Newton’s second law to the DEM balls and a force-displacement constitutive model at the contacts. The motion of DEM particles is determined by Newton’s second law, while the constitutive model is used to update the contact forces arising from the relative motion of the balls at the contact locations In GBM approach, a random generation algorithm is required to construct the polygonal microstructure of the model. In this section, the microstructural properties of three different granitic rocks were incorporated into the GBM to generate different numerical specimens. We used an algorithm proposed by Potyondy According to the previous experimental and numerical investigations the polycrystalline rocks exhibit a gradual cohesive-frictional damage response during failure The thin section analysis of experimental specimen showed that Adelaide black granite consists of 45–50% plagioclase, 20–25% pyroxene, 10% biotite, 5% amphibole, 5% magnetite, and 1–2% quartz The CSJM was assigned to the contacts representing mineral interfaces such that the mechanical behaviour of grain boundary at the contact level is defined by contact strength (i.e. The peak strength envelop of the intra-grain contact (i.e. the contact inside a mineral) are defined by We employed the contact deformability method The details of the calibration procedure can be found in our previous GBM study The macroscopic Young’s modulus of the specimen was mainly controlled by The Poisson’s ratio of the model was calibrated by altering The macroscopic Brazilian tensile strength (BTS) of the model was calibrated by carrying out the Brazilian tensile test ( The uniaxial compressive strength (UCS) was calibrated by choosing appropriate intra-grain properties (i.e. Notice that the above mentioned steps were used to calibrate the deformability parameters of the model (e.g. Young’s modulus, UCS), but The calibrated micro-properties and a comparison between numerical and experimental macroscopic data are given in The comparison between experiment and GBM simulation for the applied load magnitude against the crack mouth opening displacement (CMOD) curves is illustrated in We simulated two more TPB test with different softening parameter ( Eibenstock II granite consists of 44% quartz, 24% plagioclase, 21% orthoclase, and 11% mica The red Aue granite from Blauenthal/Germany (syeno–monzo-granite) The experimental results from unconfined and confined compressive and Brazilian tensile tests of Aue granite were used for calibration purposes. The microproperties of calibrated Aue granite is listed in  To further validate the abilities of the proposed cohesive model, a series of uniaxial and triaxial asymmetric tests were simulated using the cohesive GBM framework. In In order to study the impact of surface roughness of rock joints and microstructural characteristic of polycrystalline rock on the overall shear behaviour GBM specimens, we selected three different natural rock joint profiles with known JRC values of 4.6 (smooth), 10.2 (rough), and 17.5 (very rough), which were measured by Bahaaddini  The SJM was applied to the DEM particles forming the rock joint interface. The macroscopic data for calibrating SJM microproperties were not available. However, it often the case in numerical investigations that one set of microproperties can be assumed to represent the mechanical behaviour of rock joint The results of the numerical direct shear test for JP2 under different initial normal stress magnitudes ( The shear stress-displacement graphs ( The macroscopic fracture behaviour of GBMs in In order to better analyse the asperity degradation of rock joints under CNS condition during the shear procedure, the fracture distribution pattern of GBM (JP2) with 2.0 and 14.0 MPa of In order to assess the influence of JRC on the shear mechanism and fracture behaviour of GBM specimen under CNS condition, the numerical direct shear tests were carried out using JP1, JP2, and JP3 ( We generated three distinct grain size scenarios given in You may see that at A cohesive GBM framework was proposed and implemented in PFC2D to simulate the fracture behaviour of polycrystalline rocks. The gradual softening response of inter- and intra-grain contacts was simulated by incorporating an exponential damage evolution function to the force-displacement laws. The damage response of the contacts could be controlled by a softening parameter, which defined as a microproperty in the constitutive relationships. The model was calibrated with the experimental results of uniaxial compression, and Brazilian tensile tests carried out on Aue granite. The model exhibited good capability in reproducing the macroscopic behaviour of granitic specimen. Thus, the proposed GBM framework can be used as an alternative tool to an experimental approach to obtain new insight regarding the fracture behaviour of polycrystalline rocks. The calibrated model was employed for investigating the asperity damage mechanism of rock joints with various surface roughness under both CNL and CNS conditions. Three rock joint profiles were digitized and imported into PFC2D to produce jointed polycrystalline specimens. The numerical results indicated that the response of rock joints under CNS was greatly controlled by asperity damage (i.e. grain crushing), the extent of which increased with increasing The cohesive model used in this study was formulated based on a generic framework by Giang D. Nguyen (