The electrocoagulation (EC) process was used to pretreat wastewater from the manufacture of wet-spun acrylic fibers, and the effects of varying the operating parameters, including the electrode area/wastewater volume (A/V) ratio, current density, interelectrode distance and pH, on the EC treatment process were investigated. About 44% of the total organic carbon was removed using the optimal conditions in a 100min procedure. The optimal conditions were a current density of 35.7mAcm−2, an A/V ratio of 0.28cm−1, a pH of 5, and an interelectrode distance of 0.8cm. The biodegradability of the contaminants in the treated water was improved by the EC treatment (using the optimal conditions), increasing the five-day biological oxygen demand/chemical oxygen demand ratio to 0.35, which could improve the effectiveness of subsequent biological treatments. The improvement in the biodegradability of the contaminants in the wastewater was attributed to the removal and degradation of aromatic organic compounds, straight-chain paraffins, and other organic compounds, which we identified using gas chromatography–mass spectrometry and Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy. The EC process was proven to be an effective alternative pretreatment for wastewater from the manufacture of wet-spun acrylic fibers, prior to biological treatments.Acrylic fiber is one of most important types of synthetic fibers, and it has been widely used in the manufacture of clothing. The production of wet-spun acrylic fiber (WAF) is very important in China because high quality fibers are produced, and because the costs and energy consumption involved are relatively low. Acrylic fiber is commonly produced by polymerizing acrylonitrile monomers, but cyanoethylene, sodium sulfocyanate, and acetone cyanohydrins are often added to control the polymerization reaction. The effluents from the polymerization, spinning, and recovery processes are sent to a wastewater treatment plant, and the wastewater has a complicated and varying composition. Effluents from WAF manufacturing contain various inorganic and organic contaminants and large quantities of polymers and colloids, which are toxic, biorefractory, and environmentally harmful. Approaches such as neutralization, coagulation–flocculation, biological, and even micro-electrolysis procedures have been used to decrease the amount of toxic contaminants in wastewater from the manufacture of WAF, and to improve the biodegradability of the contaminants in subsequent treatment processes Electrochemical methods revealed promising in the treatment of hard-to-treat wastewaters The most widely used materials for EC electrodes are currently aluminum and iron. In our previous work, the removal performances of iron electrode for COD and organic compounds by EC were better than that of aluminum electrode at the same experimental conditions. This reason probably could be explained by some results from investigations which indicated that the adsorption capacity of hydrous aluminum oxide for some organic molecules was lower than that of the hydrous ferric oxide Mechanism 1: Mechanism 2: The ferric ions formed by the oxidation processes shown in the reaction mechanisms above could also contribute to the generation of monomeric ions and other polymeric hydroxyl complexes, such as Fe(H The EC technique requires only simple equipment, is easy to perform, and produces relatively little sludge, so a great deal of attention has been paid to its potential for treating various types of wastewater Few studies have been conducted on WAF wastewater treatment using electrochemical processes, especially using EC. In the study presented here, the wastewater from the manufacture of WAF in a petrochemical plant in China was pretreated using EC. The five-day biological oxygen demand/chemical oxygen demand (BOD All experiments were performed using wastewater from the manufacture of acrylic fibers, 200 The experiments were performed in batch mode, at room temperature, in an open cuboid cell with a volume of 3600 The electrodes were cleaned with fresh water at the end of the experiment, to remove sediment from the surfaces. The treated water was transferred into a beaker to allow the sludge formed during the electrolysis process to be separated from the treated water. Each sample was filtered through a hydrophilic 0.45 The pH of each sample was measured using a Thermo Orin multi-parameter 310P instrument (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA). The COD was measured using a Chinese standard colorimetric method for analyzing wastewater, and it was measured by the colorimetric methods at 600 The Total Organic Carbon (TOC) was determined using an Elementar Liqui TOC II analyzer, and platinum catalysis was used in the combustion process. The carrier gas for analysis was oxygen with a flow rate of 200 The turbidity and color of wastewater samples were measured by Hach instrument (2100AN, Hach, USA). Conductivity was measured using a conductivity meter (DDSJ-318, Leici Corp., Shanghai, China). The total phosphorus and total nitrogen were measured by a UV spectrophotometer (Shimadzu 2550, Kyoto, Japan) according to the methods described by Valero et al. The main organic compounds in the raw and treated WAF wastewater were measured using a GC–MS system (ITQ 900, Thermo Fisher, USA). The samples for GC–MS analysis were prepared by the following procedure: a 500 The effect of the distance between electrodes on pollutant relative removal has been studied by many authors. It could be derived from these works that the EC efficiency as a function of interelectrode distance depends on the characteristics of pollutant, electrodes setup, and process hydrodynamic conditions, etc. The effect of the These results clearly show that increasing the number of electrodes used in the EC reactor steadily improved the TOC and COD relative removals. This can be attributed to more iron ions being formed when a larger electrode surface was present. It is clear that the EC process enhanced the rate of coagulation by generating coagulants, and that it greatly improved the efficiency of organic compound removal. An The current density is the most important operating parameter in EC process, in terms its effect on the contaminant removal performance and electrode consumption. Therefore, it controls the operating costs involved in using the EC treatment process The current density clearly had a strong effect on the removals of the contaminants in the WAF wastewater. The relative removals of TOC were similar for all three current densities for the first 60 The operating costs involved in the EC process are dominated by the electrical energy consumption, and an excessive current density would cause too many bubbles to form, negatively influencing the operating efficiency to some extent. Therefore, we considered the energy consumption, with the aim of optimizing the efficiency of the process. The cost with respect to electrical energy (kW It has been reported that the pH of treated water is an important EC operating factor that influences the organic matter relative removal The results, shown in Our results confirm that the WAF wastewater contained some hydrophobic highly aromatic organic compounds with high molecular masses, and that the concentrations of these can easily be decreased, which increases the TOC relative removal greatly in the early stages of EC treatment The improvements in the biodegradability of the contaminants in the WAF wastewater can be explained by the removals of biorefractory organic compounds during EC treatment. Under the optimal experimental conditions, the BOD The FTIR spectrum ( In this study, it is demonstrated that EC is an effective oxidizing process that can be used to remove organic pollutants in the wastewater from the manufacture of WAF. According to the results, the WAF wastewater mainly included aromatic organic compounds, straight-chain paraffins, and other organic compounds. After treating the WAF wastewater by EC process, the considerable amount of compounds can be removed. Even though the TOC relative removal showed different rates under varying experimental conditions, the EC process significantly enhanced the biodegradability of the pollutants in the treatments. Changing the operating parameters, such as the We are grateful for the financial support from the National Key Technology R&D Program (2011BAB02B03), the