Grouted rock bolts are widely used to reinforce rock slopes and the area surrounding underground open structures such as tunnels and mine workings. However, technology available for field-testing of the grout quality is very limited. Conventionally, grout quality is measured by pullout test and over-coring; both methods are destructive, time-consuming and expensive. As a result, research efforts dating back to the late 1970s have been directed towards developing non-destructive testing methods, for example, using ultrasonic waves to evaluate the grout quality and other parameters of rock bolts in situ. The development of the instrument known as the Boltometer From the previous researches, it is clear that the wave attenuation and energy dispersion pose major technical difficulties for the ultrasonic testing of grouted rock bolts. In a grouted bolt, wave attenuation is not only related to the grout quality but also to the wave frequency. In addition, good grout quality results in higher energy dispersion; a phenomenon called energy leakage. For a free bolt, where wave attenuation due to energy leakage does not occur, it is easy to pick up many clear echoes reflecting back and forth during tests. For a grouted bolt, however, wave attenuation and energy dispersion complicate the problem. It is therefore very important to identify suitable frequencies and wave modes, which would incur low attenuation and less energy dispersion in grouted rock bolts so as to increase the penetration range of the ultrasonic wave test. Numerical simulation has been used as a research tool for the ultrasonic study of grouted rock bolts. Pavlakovic et al. We believe that there is a minimal knowledge about the optimum excitation signal, the attenuation and dispersion mechanisms, and particularly the effects of frequency in grouted rock bolts. As a result, a comprehensive research program was launched recently at Dalhousie University to conduct a thorough study of the characteristics of guided waves in grouted rock bolts. As part of the research, finite element models based on LS-Dyna were used to simulate wave propagation in both free and grouted bolts using input signals with controlled frequency for excitation. Although the finite element method is widely used to simulate wave propagation, most of the work in previous years was for simulation of bulk waves Guided waves differ considerably from body waves. According to the wave theory To study the influence of element size, free bolts (non-grouted and non-tensioned) were first simulated. During simulation, the recorded wave signals from laboratory tests with frequencies from 50 to 100 As a means of evaluating the wave attenuation during propagation, a parameter of amplitude ratio, The effects of mesh density were evaluated by varying the element size, while keeping the model geometry and the material properties constant. However since the wavelength varies with the wave frequency, and the maximum tolerable element size is related to the wavelength, the mesh density is evaluated by the number of elements per wavelength (NEPW); this is considered separately in the radial and axial directions. Some typical waveforms from the simulations are shown in  Subsequently, a series of simulations were conducted with different element sizes in both radial and axial directions. The influence of the change in mesh density in the axial direction on the wave velocity and the amplitude ratio is shown in It is worth noting that the simulated wave velocity seems to fall into two groups. This is because that theoretical analysis The influence due to the change of mesh density in the radial direction is similar, as shown in The results in The results of amplitude ratio in With the suitable element size determined, the model was calibrated by modifying relevant input parameters and model configuration to verify that the model could reasonably reproduce the experimental results. Based on the above simulation results, a new model was created to simulate the guided waves in grouted rock bolts; this was done in parallel with laboratory experiments. Cylindrical concrete blocks were cast, with rock bolts installed in them by grouting in order to simulate the field conditions. The concrete blocks and rock bolts were both 80  Similarly, the simulation accuracy is estimated by comparing the errors in propagation velocities and amplitude ratios, as follows: Again, there is good agreement between the experimental and simulated results, and the errors are considered acceptable in simulation. One of the key issues in ultrasonic testing of rock bolts is to determine the optimum input signals. During our study, the input wave frequency is found to play an important role in wave propagation. In grouted bolts, wave propagation is much more complicated than in free bolts and the characteristics of guided waves may be different from those in free bolts as well. The biggest problem is that a significant proportion of the wave energy will be absorbed by the surrounding grout and rock mass because of energy dispersion (or leakage). This is more serious when the grout quality is good, where little energy is reflected from the embedded end of the bolt. One of the objectives in this research is to find suitable input signals and optimum wave frequencies for rock bolt testing. It should be noted that there is a dilemma in selecting frequencies; a lower frequency signal has a longer wave length and the input signal may overlap its echoes. Higher frequency signal will incur more material dumping and a greater possibility of exciting other modes then exists; both of these conditions may complicate the signal interpretation. A suitable signal frequency can only be selected based on the given conditions. During our simulation, the input signals were created from the recorded waveforms in experiments with frequency varying from 20 to 100 In It is also important to note from comparison of  It should be noted that research of grouted rock bolts in this manner is still in its infancy stage. The trend of amplitude ratio shown in The finite element method was investigated for simulation of the characteristics of guided waves in both free and grouted rock bolts. Through free bolt models of 20 The models were calibrated against the results from laboratory tests and the generated waveforms agreed well with the test results, showing less than 6% and 11% errors in simulation of wave velocities and amplitude ratios, respectively. The calibrated models were used to study the effects of wave frequency in grouted rock bolts in the range between 20 and 100 Overall, the behavior of guided waves in rock bolts was successfully simulated. The viability of using numerical models to estimate the attenuation and dispersion quantitatively and to study the effects of various factors on the wave characteristics in grouted rock bolts has been successfully demonstrated. This research was partially funded by a Discovery Grant from the Natural Science and Engineering Research Council of Canada (NSERC) and the Shanxi Scientific Research for returned overseas scholars (2005-17) and the SRF for ROCS, SEM of China.