Historically, the process of reagent selection and optimization has been rather informal, reductionistic and frequently based on extension of personal experience from one mineral system or plant to another, gut feeling, anecdotes, and myths. There is no recognized “standard” practice, and the informal process is fraught with pitfalls. The complexity and variability in mineralogy and the complex interactions between chemical, physical-mechanical and operational factors in the plant are invariably ignored in such an approach, and the selected reagent will have a narrow, un-optimized window of performance. Thus the chemical solution to a plant’s demand will not be robust. This approach is also very costly in the long run and adds little to our knowledgebase. In this paper an expanded holistic view of the flotation system is described, and a rational, holistic process is discussed for reagent selection, optimization, and profitable implementation in the plant, using base metal sulfide flotation system as an example. Although such an approach in the flotation system may, at first glance, imply impracticality, an attempt is made in this paper to show that a manageable holistic approach can be practiced and that it is necessary in order to develop robust solutions to metallurgical needs in the plant.The process of reagent selection and optimization in base metal sulfide flotation In all these cases, it is quite possible that fortuitously an alternative reagent may provide an apparent desired solution to the given problem. However, such a solution may not be sufficiently robust—i.e. the selected reagent will have a narrow, There are many reasons why such an informal or reductionistic process is used. Many of the processes in mineral processing are practiced simply because they evolved that way, not because they are the best or the most efficient (i.e. the process may be easy, but not necessarily the right one, to implement). Further, the complexity of the flotation system is frequently perceived to be so daunting as to force metallurgists to seek easy fixes by using extension of personal experience from one mineral system or plant to another, gut feeling, anecdotes, and myths. Metallurgists also face an unfortunate dearth of knowledge in published literature on the Problems in complex systems invariably have multiple solutions, each with its degree of desirability. The temptation may often be to accept Flotation is a physico-chemical process. This statement clearly implies that both physical (more accurately, physical-mechanical and operational) and chemical factors are equally important in flotation, and that flotation outcome is determined by complex interactions among all these factors. In other words, it would be naïve to proclaim that one set of factors is more important than the other set, which is sometimes done in research or practice. Thus the flotation system has been represented schematically in various published literature in the form of a triangle (see In theory, when all physical factors are optimized, a change in a chemical factor should clearly record a measurable change in flotation efficiency (either recovery or grade or both). In practice, however, this may not be immediately obvious because of operational constraints and variability, and metallurgists have to revert to statistical tools to demonstrate significant changes. A further complication is that neither physical nor chemical factors can always be fully or satisfactorily optimized since there can be significant changes occurring routinely in mineralogy, feed rates and particle size distribution, and some times such changes are discovered too late to intervene and take corrective actions. Nevertheless, flotation plant operators still achieve impressive separations and performance by managing controllable factors. A holistic approach that incorporates all of the controllable chemical and operational factors may appear on the surface to be still quite complex, daunting and time-consuming. However, “complex” need not connote “complicated”. By using a rational process, and applying appropriate filters at each stage, a An overview of such a rational, holistic approach is discussed in this paper, with particular emphasis on reagent selection and optimization. A conscious choice was made to develop the theme of this paper in free style and using a plant-practice perspective as the premise. Although the schematic representation (shown in Successful implementation of the holistic approach depicted in In this phase, a clear definition of the objectives and the needs of the plant and of the reagent suppliers is developed. Further, a clear understanding of the plant operation and constraints, ore types, mineralogy, and success criteria is obtained. This is done through plant surveys, questionnaires, and reviewing plant-specific information on mineralogy and ore types. The importance of this phase cannot be overstated. Solution to a problem is only as good as the definition of the problem. Financial returns are commensurate with the clarity of definition of objective and needs and setting of realistic goals and success criteria. Failure to develop a clear definition and understanding is perhaps one of the most expensive missteps in the overall process of reagent optimization. This phase begins with primarily thought experiments based on knowledgebase and expertise of the reagent developer to arrive at a subset of reagents that meet the requirements established in the discovery/definition phase. The selected reagents can then be screened in the laboratory by an iterative process. Historically, these thought experiments have been simplistic and arbitrary as they involved merely selecting representative candidates from several different families, and essentially ignoring other important reagents in the circuit and operational variables. Thus if the objective is to screen collectors for sulfide flotation, the candidate products might be a set of representative collectors selected from the families of thionocarbamates, dithiophosphates, xanthates, etc. and keeping all other reagents and conditions constant. The exercise may then be repeated in selecting a frother or a modifier, but this is seldom done. The assumption in this one-reagent-at-a-time approach is that reagents perform independently of one another. A holistic approach for reagent selection is based on considering more than just the Factors grouped under “constraints” in Technical factors (see The technical factors that require a combination of thought experiments and laboratory testing are those related to frothing, water chemistry and role of gangue minerals, performance compatibility with other reagents, and ore type/mineralogy. Obviously these will add to the complexity and length of the laboratory program. However, a holistic approach using highly efficient experimental designs and rigorous data analysis will greatly facilitate the reagent selection process and increase the probability of arriving at a robust solution rapidly. This is the critical phase in the overall process of reagent selection and optimization, where a holistic approach is most needed. The froth phase represents the confluence of all of these technical factors. The froth phase in flotation is probably the most neglected in flotation research Essentially, anything that is put into the flotation cell should affect froth characteristics, in addition to physical and operational factors. The identities that are ascribed to collectors, frothers and modifiers are necessarily blurred in the froth phase. Another implication of the holistic view of the froth phase on reagent selection can be understood by analyzing the reasons for an observed froth problem in the plant. The appearance of “froth (or frothing) problem (excessive or poor froth etc.)” in a flotation bank is not just related to the frother. A holistic view of the froth phase can also explain why predictions based on research on reduced components of the flotation (or froth phase) systems (for example, reagent–mineral interactions in isolation, or study of frothers and frothing in the absence of solids) are often not validated in plant practice. One important reason why studies of froths and frothers have been conducted in the absence of solids is that the solid phase is diverse and variable. Mines have many ore types, each with its characteristic complex and variable mineralogy. Typically plants may have only limited control, if any, in deciding what mineralogy or ore type is processed at any given time. Each mineral can influence the froth characteristics directly or indirectly by changing the interfacial chemistry of the three-phase system in the froth phase. At present there is insufficient understanding of the complete role of the solid phase on froth characteristics. Until such understanding is developed, recourse must be had to empirical testing that incorporates ore types in the test design. Obviously this will enlarge the test program, but there is little choice if a robust solution is sought. Using a composite ore is not a good option. Historically the tendency has been to obtain a “representative composite (or average)” ore type (or sample) for laboratory work. The immediate question here is what does representative (composite) mean? Representative (composite) of the whole mine with many blocks, a particular block with several ore types, or one ore type? Also, what does composite ore sample mean in terms of metallurgical performance when the plant does not necessarily process such uniform composites? So the terms representative and composite are highly ambiguous. Two important implications of the variability in ore type and mineralogy in the plant can be readily recognized for reagent selection and optimization. First, the size distribution changes routinely in the plant. The laboratory testing and plant testing phases of the process of reagent optimization were discussed earlier ( After the initial set of reagents is selected using the technical factors and constraints, the laboratory testing phase begins. The first task is to collect ore samples of important ore types. It is important to treat these ore samples separately, rather than attempting to combine them into a composite ore sample. Liberation characteristics (size distribution) and detailed mineralogy of the different ore types are established. The first stage of the laboratory testing phase involves conducting diagnostic tests to establish the The objective of the laboratory testing phase is to identify one or two reagent solutions, and a set of conditions, that can be tested in the plant, and to identify potential problems and/or benefits The process of reagent selection and optimization has traditionally been rather informal and reductionistic. Implicit in this approach is the assumption that somehow the function of each reagent is independent of all other reagents and of the physical and operational factors. Thus each reagent is selected, tested and “optimized” (if this process can be called optimization) one at a time, on a “composite” or “average” ore sample, keeping all other conditions and variables constant. It is quite possible that fortuitously such a reductionistic approach may provide an apparent desired solution to a metallurgical problem; however, such a solution may not be sufficiently robust and the selected solution may have a narrow, un-optimized window of performance that is not sustainable. A holistic approach to reagent selection and optimization is discussed in this paper. The premise of this approach is that reagents are only a small (albeit critical) part of the flotation process, the outcome of which is determined by complex interactions among physical, mechanical and chemical factors—all of which are equally important. These interactions occurring in the pulp phase eventually determine characteristics of the froth phase which is the ultimate separator. Identities that can be attributed to the function of each reagent—such as “collector”, “frother”, “modifier” which may be valid in the pulp phase become blurred in the froth phase. Consequently reagents cannot be treated as independent factors, and cannot be optimized one-at-a-time. In the rational, holistic process described in this paper, all of the factors and the three most important reagents—collectors, frothers and modifiers—are considered simultaneously from the beginning of the process, and every stage of the process serves to narrow reagent selection to a manageable set of candidates which are evaluated in the laboratory to identify the best one or two for subsequent plant trial. The same rational process is used at every stage to determine the most important variables to be used in laboratory testing phase. The four stages of the process—discovery–definition, reagent selection, laboratory testing and plant testing—are necessarily iterative. The various technical factors and constraints that dictate reagent selection described in this paper are used for all reagents in all four stages. In the initial selection phase, these serve as efficient filters to arrive at a small subset of most desirable reagents. A wider scope of ore samples and ore types is used instead of composite or average ore samples in order to capture plant variability. Similarly, particle size distribution becomes an important variable in laboratory testing. The holistic approach may appear to be daunting and time consuming. However, if a sustainable, robust solution and profitable implementation are the goals, a holistic approach is necessary. It is also the most cost-effective. Further, by using the rational process, applying appropriate filters at each stage, and using well-constructed experimental (factorial) designs, a manageable program can be developed and practiced.