The current forms of plurigaussian simulation have serious limitations for applications to large numbers of geological facies, or units, which have complex contact relations. In this paper the authors present a true plurigaussian simulation (PGS) method, which can be applied in a simple way to any number of geological facies by using any number of Gaussians. A recursive technique is used for multi-dimensional integration of the Gaussian functions, which forms the major part of the PGS computation. A binary, dynamic contact matrix (DCM) is used to specify the contact relations among the facies; this method has proved to be simple, flexible and capable of dealing with general, complex contact relations. A method for incorporating into PGS multivariate correlations among any number of random variables is also included. A simulated example is used to demonstrate the application of the generalised PGS. This example shows that PGS is more robust to under-sampling than traditional direct indicator simulation.The simulation of geological facies, lithological units or other structures is an important area of stochastic simulation in the earth and environmental sciences ( Plurigaussian simulation (PGS) was first introduced by For example, consider five facies; say This paper extends the work of PGS truncates a number (say The { Correlations among { As Once { Assume that facies As PGS can then be implemented by applying { Models to generate { Eq. Eq. The minimisation can also be expressed in terms of variograms and cross-variograms. Assuming constant facies proportions, Previous implementations of BGS all use a list of contact templates (represented by 2D drawings in which horizontal and vertical axes correspond to the two Gaussians) to define the contact relations among facies ( In the work reported here, a dynamic contact relation matrix (DCM) is used to define the contact relations among facies for each application. The DCM also allows sequential evaluation of the integration in (10). A 2D binary matrix is used, in which columns represent facies and rows represent partitions in one Gaussian. An example is given in Two sequential numbering rules (SNR) must be followed if the accompanying computer program is to be used without modification. The first is that the partitions Finally, The program is written in FORTRAN 90. As the number of Gaussians and the number of facies are dynamic, all integrations (cf. The PGS program comprises two separate modules. Module PGSim1 requires as input the facies proportions Note that the code published with this paper works in both 2D and 3D. In the current version the facies proportions are assumed to be constant, but a future release will include capabilities for specifying changing proportions in a specified directions. The structure of PGSim1 is shown in the flow chart in The search parameters, The first major operation in PGSim1 is the calculation of { Note the usage of the keyword “Recursive” in the declaration. T1 and T2 in this routine are the integration limits for Clearly the numerical integration is only possible if { The second major operation in PGSim1 is to find the optimal variogram models { The variogram model, {  The purpose of this module is to generate simulations using the parameters derived by PGSim1 and, when required, conditioning data { Most operations in this module do not require further explanation. The conditioning data {  As an example, 150 samples are taken from a simulated geological structure comprising four lithological units within an area of 64×64, as shown in Experimental indicator auto- and cross-variograms, PGSim2 then uses Two general observations can be made about PGS: PGS selects the optimal Gaussian models by minimising the mean squared difference between the theoretical indicator variograms (broken lines) and the experimental variograms (solid squares). As the same weight is given in the optimisation process to all sets (e.g., The optimal variogram models for the underlying Gaussians are derived from experimental indicator variograms, which are calculated directly from sample data. To examine further the influence of the data (number and locations of samples) on PGS variogram modelling, the same data set ( An obvious criterion for assessing how well the experimental indicator variograms are modelled is to calculate the un-weighted squared difference between the experimental and theoretical variograms, using, GFF The derived ranges of the underlying Gaussians for different sample sizes are given in The authors have described a true pluriGaussian simulation technique for an unlimited number of geological facies (lithological units) using an unlimited number of Gaussians. Recursive techniques are used for multi-dimensional integration of the Gaussian functions and this comprises the core of the PGS computation. A binary dynamic contact matrix (DCM) is used to specify the contact relations among the facies. DCM is a powerful tool that makes possible specification of high-dimensional contact relations whilst being simple to use and providing sufficient flexibility for adaptation to specific applications. In the code published in association with this paper, the entire PGS process is contained in two modules: PGSim1 for thresholds calculation and spatial covariance modelling, and PGSim2 for the plurigaussian simulations. PGS has the distinct advantage over the direct indicator simulation approach of being much more robust to under-sampling, which tends to produce experimental indicator variograms (or covariances) that are not well-structured. The implication of this advantage is significant as, in most practical applications, samples are sparse and limited. The work reported in this paper was funded by EPSRC (Engineering and Physical Sciences Research Council) Research Grant number GR/R94602/01. 