Here, the synergetic effect of coupling solar photoelectro-Fenton (SPEF) and solar heterogeneous photocatalysis (SPC) on the mineralization of 200mL of a 20mg L−1 atrazine solution, prepared from the commercial herbicide Gesaprim, at pH 3.0 was studied. Uniform, homogeneous and adherent anatase-TiO2 films onto glass spheres of 5mm diameter were prepared by the sol–gel dip-coating method and used as catalyst for SPC. However, this procedure yielded a poor removal of the substrate because of the low oxidation ability of positive holes and 
                        
                     OH formed at the catalyst surface to destroy it. Atrazine decay was improved using anodic oxidation (AO), electro-Fenton (EF), SPEF and coupled SPEF-SPC at 100mA. The electrolytic cell contained a boron-doped diamond (BDD) anode and H2O2 was generated at a BDD cathode fed with an air flow. The removal and mineralization of atrazine increased when more oxidizing agents were generated in the sequence AO<EF<SPEF<coupled SPEF-SPC. Organics were destroyed by 
                        
                     OH formed from water oxidation at the BDD anode in AO, along with 
                        
                     OH formed from Fenton’s reaction between added Fe2+ and generated H2O2 in EF. In SPEF, solar radiation produced higher amounts of 
                        
                     OH induced from the photolysis of Fe(III) species and photodecomposed intermediates like Fe(III)-carboxylate complexes. The synergistic action of sunlight in the most potent coupled SPEF-SPC was ascribed to the additional quick removal of several intermediates with the oxidizing agents formed at the TiO2 surface. After 300min of this treatment, 80% mineralization, 9% mineralization current efficiency and 1.93kWhg−1 TOC energy cost were obtained. The mineralization of atrazine was inhibited by the production of cyanuric acid, which was the main byproduct detected at the end of the coupled SPEF-SPC process.Advanced oxidation processes (AOPs) are environmentally friendly chemical, photochemical, photocatalytic, electrochemical and photoelectrochemical technologies based on the production of The simplest EAOP is anodic oxidation (AO), where organics are oxidized by hydroxyl radicals generated from water discharge at the surface of a high O EAOPs based on Fenton’s reaction chemistry such as electro-Fenton (EF) and photoelectro-Fenton (PEF) are being developed to treat acidic wastewaters ( Good efficiencies for H In EF, the oxidation power of H When an undivided cell with a BDD anode is used, organics are oxidized by both, BDD( The PEF process involves the UV irradiation of the contaminated solution under EF treatment. The main problem of this EAOP is the excessive economical cost of the artificial UV lamps used and for this reason, in our laboratories we have tested the alternative use of sunlight ( On the other hand, heterogeneous photocatalysis (PC) is considered one of the most promising AOPs for the destruction of low amounts of water-soluble organic pollutants ( The major loss of efficiency in PC is due to the recombination of electrons promoted to the conduction band either with unreacted holes by reaction When sunlight is used as energy source, the procedure is so-called solar PC (SPC) ( The coupling of different AOPs has been proposed for improving the oxidation ability of individual treatments. In this way, diverse emerging pollutants were mineralized by coupling of SPC and photo-Fenton ( This paper presents a study on the comparative mineralization of 20 The commercial formulation Gesaprim containing 90% atrazine was purchased from Syngent. Cyanuric acid (98% purity), sodium dihydrogenphosphate (99% purity), disodium hydrogenphosphate (99% purity), HPLC grade acetonitrile and titanium oxysulfate (99.99% purity) were supplied by Sigma–Aldrich. Standards of atrazine, and formic, oxalic and oxamic acids were of analytical grade purchased from Fermont. Anhydrous sodium sulfate was of analytical grade supplied by LeMont. Sulfuric acid was of analytical grade purchased from Baker. Ferrous sulfate heptahydrate (99% purity) was purchased from Jalmek. Titanium butoxide Ti (97% purity) and sec-butyl alcohol (99.5% purity) were supplied by Fluka and Tedia respectively. All the solutions were prepared with doubly distilled deionized water. TiO A solution with 20 The solution pH was measured with a Thermo Scientific Orion 3 Star pH meter. H Atrazine decay was followed by reversed-phase HPLC using a Perkin Elmer 200 LC fitted with a C18 Phenomenex Hyper-Clone ODS 5 The excellent deposit obtained for the synthesized TiO  The ability of the undivided BDD/BDD tank reactor to produce H The fact that the quasi-steady H The above findings evidence that the undivided BDD/BDD tank reactor is able to continuously produce H The reaction of atrazine with the oxidants generated in SPC and the EAOPs methods tested was followed by reversed-phase HPLC, where it displayed a well-defined peak at retention time (  The above concentration decays for the EAOPs were analyzed by means of kinetic equations related to several simple order reactions. It is well-known that the oxidation of atrazine involves dealkylation, deamination and/or hydroxylation reactions generating aromatic products like desethylatrazine, desisopropylatrazine, desethyldesisopropylatrazine, desethyldesisopropy-l,2-hydroxyatrazine and cyanuric acid (  Ion-exclusion chromatograms of the above electrolyzed solutions revealed the generation of short-linear carboxylic acids like oxalic ( All the treated solutions contained 20 The SPF process alone did not yield a significant TOC reduction of the 20 From the above TOC data, the mineralization current efficiency (MCE) at a time  Besides, to better analyze the viability of the more potent coupled SPEF-PC treatment, the energy cost per unit TOC mass (EC Uniform, homogeneous and adherent TiO The authors thank the financial support from the PAICYT program of the Universidad Autónoma de Nuevo León and Conacyt-Red (Project: 193883). B.R. Garza-Campos acknowledges the granted scholarship awarded by CONACyT (Consejo Nacional de Ciencia y Tecnología, Mexico).