Heat conduction within a heater of an arbitrary shape is investigated. A mathematical model is presented as a mixed boundary-value problem for the Poisson equation converted into a Fredholm boundary integral equation of the first kind which is solved numerically. A closed-form solution for the particular case of a rectangular heater is also found. Provided that the temperature and heat flux on the heater's boundary are given, the problem is treated as an inverse problem where the heat source distribution within the heater is the unknown function. The existence of the unique solution of this inverse problem is proved. Finally, the problem is solved numerically for a one-dimensional heat source.parameter which determines the elongation of the parabolic heater constants shown in values defined by unknown parameter in non-dimensional parameter in minimal magnitude of error function which quantifies the discrepancy between computed and desired heat fluxes function which defines the shape of the heaters working surface Green function space of functions which have the generalized derivative of the second order function which describes the heat source distribution along the line of symmetry of the heater heat source distribution function, heat sources distributed within the heater excluding the heat sources on the line of symmetry of the heater ratio of the heat conductivities of the heater and molten material Hilbert space constant in outward normal to the boundary of the heater number of the boundary elements partitioning the curve heat flux on mapping determined by Cartesian coordinates closed, bounded and convex set from the space such set of functions in which constant in relative error in the numerical computations temperature within the heater coordinates of the points on surface working surface of the heater heater's boundary which is not in contact with a melt boundary elements partitioning function determined in solution of function defined by domain of heater The analysis of the heat conduction within a heater is provided in this paper. This problem is treated as an inverse problem, where the heat source distribution within the heater is to be found. The following methods should be noted among the techniques developed for the solution of the inverse heat conduction problem (IHCP): function specification method, as proposed by Beck et al. In the present paper, a two-dimensional model is proposed. The heater is assumed to be symmetrical relative to its central line with a symmetrical heat source distribution. The latter assumption allows us to consider only half of the domain, and this approach makes it possible for us to construct the non-traditional Green's function for the direct heat conduction problem with mixed boundary conditions. The integral equation obtained is much more convenient than the traditional one for the numerical computation of the heat flux on the working surface of the heater since it does not contain unknown temperatures. Moreover, the calculation of the Green's function derivative is not required for its solution, and this is also another advantage over the traditional approach quoted in Although the theoretical analysis provided in the present paper is related to the general steady IHCP with an unknown heat source, the numerical calculations for the particular case of one-dimensional heat source are performed. This is because the tendency of the heat source distribution along the central line is of major concern for the practical design of the heaters. More complicated and exact solutions are not of immediate practical use since sometimes they cannot be readily implemented into practice due to the constructional limitations of the heater The relevant scale analysis of the heat and mass transfer equations governing the contact melting process, provided in Since, as it was proved theoretically by Fomin and co-workers The temperature field within the heater is described by the mixed boundary value problem for the Poisson equation ( By introducing the Cartesian coordinates as presented in  Before starting to deal with the numerical algorithm for Construction of the discrete analog of The computations of As mentioned earlier, if the melting velocity is given then the heat flux and the temperature on the working surface can be readily obtained from the solution of the external problem in the material surrounding the heater, see, for example, Until now, only the existence of this solution has been proved. The uniqueness is primarily affected by the proper choice of the set Let us define As for the concrete applications of the present approach, the set Noticeably better results are obtained ( The present study provides a mathematical model and theoretical analysis of the inverse problem associated with the optimal distribution of the heat source within a heater, and the existence of a unique solution of this inverse problem has been established. The direct heat conduction problem has been solved numerically by utilizing the boundary element technique. The boundary integral equation obtained is more convenient for computations of the unknown heat fluxes than traditional techniques since computations of the unknown temperatures on the boundaries with Neumann conditions are not required. The latter reduces the dimension of the matrix in the discrete model of the integral equation. An analytical solution for one particular case of a rectangular heater has been found. This solution is used to validate the accuracy of the numerical results which show that the relative error in the numerical computations is less than 0.5[percnt] of the full-scale deflection for smooth parts of the heater's boundary. Although the errors increase in the vicinity of the heater's corners, it is reasonable since the derivative does not exist at the corner points, relative error is still small and does not exceed 2[percnt] for the very crude mesh. In all the cases considered, the accuracy of the numerical solution sharply increases with mesh refinement and this illustrates the convergence of the numerical algorithm. The agreement between the analytical and the numerical solutions of the direct heat conduction problem is very good since the discrepancy occurs only in the third decimal place for the heat flux distributions on the working surface of the heater. The inverse problem has been solved numerically for a one-dimensional heat source. For short heaters, a linear distribution of the heat sources on the center line of the heater provides good agreement between the calculated required heat fluxes. In the case of elongated heaters, the linear distribution of heat sources does not provide the required heat fluxes. The larger deviations of the computed heat fluxes from their required values take place near the front edge of the heater. Noticeably better results are obtained if the heat source distribution function is chosen as parabolic. It should be noted that in the present study only one-parameter sets of admissible functions have been analyzed. In order to attain a better coincidence between the computed and required values of the heat flux, more complicated multi-parametrical distributions of the heat source should be chosen. However, from a practical point of view, the tendency of the heat source distributions only is of major concern. More complicated heat source distributions are not of primary interest since these distributions cannot be technologically exactly achieved in the heaters which are utilized in contact melting process.