Solar photocatalysis, which is part of the family of advanced oxidation processes (AOPs), is illustrative of an ecotechnology harnessing solar energy for remediation purposes. AOPs are able to treat what are dubbed persistent organic pollutants, as the core process is non-selective. Photocatalysis induces the mineralization of organic compounds by producing radical species. The aim is to develop photocatalytic media in a granule substrate of pores and fibers, but this comes at the cost of a major loss of substrate efficiency due to its relative inability to absorb enough UV irradiation. The authors have recently demonstrated the potential of innovative new media—aluminum foams defined in a way that optimizes the capture of incident radiation. However, their cost puts them out of reach of large-scale environmental water remediation applications. We propose a novel potential solution based on using recycled aluminum swarf machining waste as substrate media for photocatalytic material. These metal shavings offer a foam-like macroporous structure creating the potential to develop a large interface surface for exchange with incident light. Aluminum swarf developed a far higher mineralization capacity than cellulose fabric. This promising finding shows that foam and swarf are able to deliver good absorption of incident flux.EU environmental and human health protection policy, has prompted the EU legislature to bring in a regulatory framework designed to cap and control the impact of chemical contaminants and micropollutants. The Water Framework Directive Earlier research into two industrially-produced media, i.e. TiO The authors had previously studied the industrially-available media, i.e. TiO Using a sol–gel method to synthesize the catalyst makes it possible to lend photocatalytic properties to the surface of the substrate media under study. This method took its design cues from the literature and was refined and engineered through previous studies The work presented here aimed to develop efficient media capable of providing a high active specific surface, meaning the structure required to ensure the harnessing of the radiation received. To define and to compare the ability of the media to degrade a pollutant, theirs capacities to absorb the light flux density have to be determined. An optical method used in previous work is presented as a way of defining their ability to use the light flux density in relation with their structure. The optical properties of the supports and the suspensions have been ascertained using an experimental optical set-up ( According to the experiments done with catalyst in a powder form and the cellulosic tissue In a previous work, the catalysts P-25 and VP (two TiO Exploiting our prior research, three types of aluminum foam have been studied differing with their physical characteristic (mesh density) The metal shavings-sourced via recycled waste from aluminum parts machining, is the selected candidate ( From this point on, the media will be studied in their optimal configurations in order to define and to compare their photocatalytic performances. Once the optimal configuration of catalyst determined via the optical method, it is necessary to corroborate this results with the experimental kinetic data obtain in the photoreactor. The aim of this study was to benchmark the photocatalytic capacities of the media and compare them against the industrial-grade media currently available. Performance levels were established by measuring the mineralization kinetics of a target compound under different irradiation conditions. The literature has amply shown that the rapidity with which a pollutant is photomineralized depends on numerous factors (pH, concentration of oxygen,) The photomineralization experiments were carried out on a laboratory set up. The photoreactor, illustrated here in Recent research has found that photocatalytic efficiency remains lower in foams than in suspensions, which are thus defined as the benchmark media in terms of photocatalytic performance In an effort to optimize the media coating rates, we coated a series of foams at different catalyst concentrations (TiO  Once the synthesis conditions optimized, we then studied aluminum swarf machining waste, which came in the form of narrow-diameter spiral-shaped metal fibers ( Our ultimate endpoint was to establish efficiency performances of the media running under solar conditions. As demonstrated here, the catalysts integrated into a photoreactor developed performances that were proportional to flux across the whole irradiation range ( This research addressing the development of photocatalytic media for water pollution remediation applications focused on the optimization of powerful yet expensive foam media and the use of recycled material as alternative photocatalytic substrate. We established the conditions for synthesizing a surface-film catalyst using the foam as substrate media. We found that catalyst concentration used is a critical factor that dictates the ultimate photocatalytic performances of the media. This finding re-orients future optimization work towards cutting-edge deposition processes like chemical vapor deposition making it possible to produce a pure-catalyst film at the media surface. We also propose a novel potential solution based on using recycled aluminum swarf machining waste as substrate media for photocatalytic material. These metal shavings offer a foam-like macroporous structure creating the potential to develop a large interface surface for exchange and interaction with incident light. Nevertheless, the performances of these novel media still fall well short of the benchmark catalysts. Consequently, further development of this inexpensive media for water remediation applications will hinge on improving the core properties of the media. Moving forward to rate the performances of the media studied, we then compared the mineralization capacity of the media running in their optimized configurations. Our results, which are expressed according to amount of energy received and independently of type of irradiation, show that foam and suspension posted comparable photocatalytic performances. Macroporous materials demonstrate promising potential for engineering solar-powered photocatalytic remediation solutions. The authors thank Jean-Pierre Cambon, CNRS engineer (Promes, UPR 8521), for his participation in this study. This work was supported financially by the At the initial concentrations, a pseudo first order law is used. This expression is based on the reaction's twinned dependence of the kinetics of the reaction on the levels of the pollutant concentration and the intensity of radiation. In agreement with the previous works