Secondary desulphurization slag from integrated carbon steelmaking was investigated to attain information on respective utilization possibilities or effects upon final disposal. Pseudo-total element concentrations were determined during a six-week sampling period with EN 12457-2/12457-3 compliance test recoveries, scanning electron microscopy+X-ray microanalysis (SEM-EDS) and trace element fractionation with supportive X-ray diffraction (XRD) of parallel extraction residues. Only trace elements Cr and V showed significant pseudo-total recoveries with 210 and 1270mgkg−1 (d.w.), respectively. 88% of the respective Cr was attained in the residual fraction of the extraction procedure, as a labile H2O-extractable Cr(VI) concentration of 1.6mgkg−1 (d.w.) was attained during the EN 12457-2 test. The RSD value of Cr (32%) in the determined pseudo-total contents of weekly subsamples indicated that fluctuation in slag composition can have a significant effect on the trace element contents of the material. In the case of V, 28% (353mgkg−1, d.w.) of the respective pseudo-total concentration was recovered in the NH2OH∙HCl-extractable fraction, in which XRD suggested only the potential dissolution of larnite. A majority of V (i.e., 65%) was recovered in the residual fraction coupled with the potential dissolution of magnetite and merwinite, as recovery in the HOAc-extractable fraction remained below the limit of quantitation. Additional SEM-EDS investigations proved unsuccessful in exclusively identifying potential V association in the slag samples due to overlapping with additional peaks.Integrated carbon steelmaking from virgin ore, conventionally managed through the blast furnace (BF)/basic oxygen furnace (BOF)-process route ( Compared to primary BF and BOF slags which are generated ca. 230 and 70 As industrial residue utilization or disposal involves materials which have been willingly removed from a unit process to minimize the effect of so-called non-process elements to the properties of the main product or stability of production, the respective potential environmental impacts should be investigated in detail. Single extractions can be used for estimating available element fractions through desorption and possible dissolution of easily soluble solid phases ( However, as trace element speciation can primarily be regarded as a function of the mineralogy and solid fraction chemistry of a material ( A six-week sampling program was performed to attain representative desulphurization slag samples for chemical analyses. A weekly sample of approx. 9 All reagents used for pseudo-total and sequential chemical extractions were of analytical reagent grade and all standards, reagent solutions and samples were stored in high-density polyethylene (HDPE) containers. All glass and plastic ware were acid washed prior to use and reverse osmosis and ion-exchange purified water (resistivity 18 The revised four-stage BCR sequential extraction procedure outlined in Circa 0.5 The mineralogy of the combined slag sample during sequential extraction was monitored by performing a total of 10 parallel and identical extractions and identifying the mineralogy of the base sample and respective extraction residues by XRD analysis with a A Philips PW 3040 X'Pert MPD diffractometer (45 Based on the results presented in The analyzed step values of CRM BCR-701 were generally within the reported uncertainty limits with only four exceptions, i.e., Zn recovery during step 1, Cu recovery during step 2, Cr recovery during step 4 and the four step sum of Cr (see Table S1, Supplementary data). Similar difficulties regarding Zn recovery during step 1 and Cu recovery during step 2 with the certified precision have also been reported by previous authors ( Only trace elements Cr and V showed significant pseudo-total recoveries with 210 and 1270 As discussed by As proposed by The use of NH In the case of V, with respective step 2 recovery and pseudo-total concentration values of 353 and 1270 As discussed by In addition to the larnite and merwinite structures identified in the residues of parallel sequential extractions ( Ba (18%, 8.5 Based on the attained data, only trace elements Cr and V showed significant pseudo-total recoveries during the six-week sampling period with 210 and 1270 The authors would like to thank the staff at Suomen Ympäristöpalvelu Oy for kindly performing most of the chemical analyses, and the industrial partner for a successful cooperation.  Supplementary data to this article can be found online at