In this research, malachite particles with different roughness values were produced by grinding malachite sample together with quartz (mohs hardness: 7) and montmorillonite (mohs hardness: 1–2), respectively. Micro-flotation results showed that higher recovery was achieved by using malachite particles of higher surface roughness as feed. The contact angle measurements demonstrated that the contact angle of natural malachite surface decreased with the increase of its surface roughness, while the contact angle of malachite conditioned with 5 × 10−5 mol/L sodium oleate increased with the increase of its surface roughness. It might be concluded that grinding media can influence minerals surface roughness, thus affecting the wettability of their surface and, consequently, the flotation performance.Flotation is a physico-chemical separation process that makes use of differences between surface properties of valuable minerals and unwanted gangue minerals ( In this work, malachite particles with different roughness values were produced by grinding malachite sample with quartz and montmorillonite (different mineral media), in order to study the wettability and floatability of malachite sample of different roughness. It was found that interactions of particles in comminution process can affect the roughness of mineral surface, and thus, changing the wettability of natural and reagent treated mineral surface and, consequently, altering the floatability of mineral. Natural malachite samples were obtained from “Lupe” mine in Puebla, Mexico. The samples were hand-sorted to obtain lumps for roughness and contact angle measurements; some lumps were crushed then dried-ground mixed with quartz and montmorillonite to obtain malachite particles for BET (Brunauer-Emmett-Teller) characterization and flotation tests. In addition, some lumps were crushed and dried-ground to obtain fine particles to perform X-ray diffraction (XRD) and chemical analysis. Chemical analysis and X-ray diffraction pattern ( Surface topography for polished malachite samples were measured by Nanovea PS 50 3D Non-Contact profiler with Mountains Map Premium Software to report the average surface roughness (Ra) and the root mean squared roughness (Rq). Scans were recorded with an optical pen (1 mm scan range along the z-axis and 2.60 μm lateral resolutions). Scan step size was of 0.1 μm for x axis and 1 μm for y axis, respectively. Smaller Ra and Rq values indicate smoother surfaces. Raw data previously recorded during the surface profile measurements were further post-processed by using NANOVEA 3D software. The contact angle of malachite samples was measured with a goniometer (DSA-25, Kruss, Germany). The DSA-25 goniometer was equipped with a CM4210 optics module with zoom lens and was operated using the sessile drop method in the ADVANCE software. For measurements of polished natural malachite samples, air dried malachite lumps were loaded on the goniometer stage and 1.5 μL distilled water was dropped on them. The advancing and receding contact angles were reported. When the difference between the two contact angles (advancing and receding) was less than 1%, the average value of these two angles was reported as the contact angle. For each roughness condition (e.g., R The Brunauer-Emmett-Teller (BET) surface area measurements were performed using a NOVA touch LX1 surface area and pore size analyzer from Quantachrome Instruments (USA), using nitrogen as purge gas. The samples for specific surface area measurements include malachite ground together with quartz, malachite ground together with montmorillonite and purified by gravity separation, and quartz which was the dissolution product (at pH 2) of malachite ground with quartz. A 150 mL Hallimond tube equipped with a 20 μm frit and a magnetic stirrer was used to test the effect of sample roughness on malachite flotation. In each flotation, 3 g of sample (−75 + 38 µm) were conditioned for 2 min in 130 mL distilled water, and the solution was adjusted to a desired pH by using HCl or NaOH. Then, a given amount of sodium oleate was added and conditioned for about 3 min. After that, the conditioned slurry was transferred to the Hallimond tube, and the flotation was performed for about 5 min with nitrogen gas at a flow rate of 30 mL/min. The floated (concentrate) and unfloated (tailing) products were separately collected, dried, weighed, dissolved in acid solution (pH = 2), weighed again, and the recovery was computed based on the mass ratio of the floated malachite.  It is well known that malachite is a hydrophilic mineral, therefore, the contact angle on malachite surface should be small. Since surface A is the smoothest surface among surface A, B, and C, and the surface is hydrophilic, the contact angle value was 28.3°. While the roughness of surface B and C is much greater than that of surface A, so the values of cosθ were higher and the contact angle were smaller, and it is reasonable to expect that the contact angle cannot be measured. It is well established that sodium oleate is a powerful collector for malachite (  Recoveries of malachite ground with quartz and montmorillonite in presence of 2 × 10  For natural malachite surfaces, the contact angle measurements are in agreement with Wenzel model and the contact angle decreases with the increase of surface roughness. The contact angle measurements of malachite conditioned with 5 × 10 Particle interactions during comminution can affect the roughness of the mineral surface. Grinding malachite with gangue minerals of greater hardness can make the malachite surface rougher, and therefore, the contact angle is larger after adsorption of collector, resulting in greater malachite recovery. This study was financially supported by the