Red mud (RM) is a typical mass quantity of solid waste generated from industrial alumina production and usually consists of valuable metals such as Al and rare earths (REs). This work mainly investigated the extraction of Al and REs from RM via aerobic and anaerobic bi-stage bioleaching by Acidianus manzaensis with the addition of pyrite, by monitoring the morphology, phase and speciation transformations of Al, Si, S and Fe using primarily SEM-EDS, XRD, XPS, and XANES. The results showed that during the aerobic bioleaching stage with increase in mass ratios of pyrite/RM, the extraction rates of Al and REs increased; the highest rates for Al (85.1%), Ce (82.4%), Gd (86.8%), Y (85.3%) and Sc (78.6%) were achieved at pyrite/RM mass ratio 2:1 after 22 d of bioleaching. A slight decrease then occurred because that the complexes formed from jarosites, hematite, diaspore and SiO2-gel can adsorb small amounts of the dissolved elements. Under anaerobic conditions, the additive S0 gradually oxidized to sulfate, and the jarosites gradually dissolved into Fe2+ and disappeared at day 10 with maximal bioleaching rate for Al, Ce, Gd, Y and Sc as 52.5%, 86.3%, 93.7%, 90.2% and 74.9%, indicating that the residues from the first stage were dissolved with the dissimilatory reduction of jarosites by A. manzaensis using S0 as an electron donor. These results suggested a new method for the efficient recovery of valuable metals from RM.Red mud (RM) is a type of alkaline hazardous waste produced from alumina production from bauxite via the Bayer process and is one of the most complex and abundant secondary resources that has great commercial value. In 2018, the annual RM production in China reached nearly 80 million t and the global inventory was over 2 billion t Many strategies have been investigated for disposal or utilization of RM, including: as adsorbents for the removal of heavy metals and other toxic substances (e.g., dyes) from contaminated waste water Notably, RM contains dozens of rare earth elements (REs) such as Ce, Sc, Y, Nd and Gd in addition to Al and Ti, and the recovery of these valuable metals from red mud has attracted more and more research interest due to the rapid increase in the demand and price for them Acidophilic Fe/S-oxidizing bacteria, which are capable of generating acid via bio-oxidation of elemental sulfur (S The current study focused on high-efficient leaching of Al and REs (e.g., Ce, Gd, Y, and Sc) from RM by aerobic and anaerobic bi-stage bioleaching using a single strain. We systematically investigated the extraction of these valuable metals by aerobic bioleaching with the addition of pyrite followed by anaerobic bioleaching with the addition of S The RM sample used in this study was collected from the Aluminum Corporation of China, Jiaozuo, Henan, China. The pyrite sample was provided by the School of Minerals Processing and Bioengineering, Central South University, Changsha, China. The elements and phase compositions of RM and pyrite analyzed by X-ray fluorescence spectroscopy (XRF, Axios mAX) and X-ray diffraction (XRD, RIGAKU, D/Max 2500) are shown in  The bioleaching experiments were conducted under aerobic conditions with an initial pH of 1.8 ± 0.05 at 65 ℃. Prior to bioleaching, the RM was washed to reduce the level of alkali metals adsorbed on the RM surface with deionized water at room temperature until the supernatant pH was constant and was then vacuum-dried. No RM phase changes were observed after washing with deionized water ( Jarosites were biosynthesized using S Solution samples were collected every 1–2 d for monitoring cell densities and the concentrations of soluble Al, Si, Ca, Ti, Ce, Gd, Y, Sc, SO Solid residues from cultures were collected on days 0, 4, 8, 12, 22, and 30. The surface morphologies of the residues were examined using FESEM coupled with an energy dispersive spectroscopy (EDS) system (Hitachi S-4800, Hitachi, Ltd., Tokyo, Japan). Mineral phases of all bioleaching experiments and sterile controls were analyzed using XRD equipped with Cu Kα radiation (40 kV/250 mA) in a RINT2000 vertical goniometer. Samples were scanned from 5° to 80° 2θ with a step of 0.02° and a dwell time of 4 s. The speciation transformations of Al, Si, Fe and S in the bioleaching residues were analyzed by X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS), Fe L-edge and S K-edge X-ray absorption near edge structure (XANES) spectroscopy, respectively. The XPS spectra of the residues were collected using an ESCA-lab-250XI X-ray photoelectron spectrometer (Shimadzu, Japan) with a monochromatic Al Kα X-ray source (15 KeV) and a hemispherical analyzer fitted with a five-channeltron multidetection system. All photoelectron binding energies (BE) were referenced to the C1s adventitious contamination peak set at 284.6 eV BE. The Fe L-edge and S K-edge XANES analyses were carried out on 4B7B and 4B7A beamline, respectively at the Beijing synchrotron radiation facility (BSRF), Beijing, China. The Fe L-edge XANES spectral data were recorded in total electron yield (TEY) mode at widths of 0.5 eV from 690 to 705 eV and widths of 0.1 eV from 705 to 730 eV. The S K-edge XANES spectral data were recorded in the fluorescence mode at ambient temperatures and were scanned at a step width of 0.2 eV from 2450 to 2520 eV. Athena software was used for normalization of all XANES spectra and linear combination fitting (LCF) analysis according to a previous description in Bioleaching experiments were conducted at different pyrite/RM mass ratios to investigate their effects on the leaching parameters in terms of the elemental recoveries from RM, including Al, Si, Ca, Ti, Ce, Gd, Y and Sc; cell density; [SO    In The [SO The pH in the bioleaching assays sharply increased from 1.7 to >4.0 within the first day, followed by a rapid decrease due to the rapid bio-oxidation of pyrite (Eq. ORP value is one of the most important factors that determines leaching behavior. In the current work, it can be found that higher pyrite/RM mass ratios (within 2:1) result in lower solution ORP values at the beginning (within 3 days) (  The morphology changes (SEM) and main element distributions (EDS) on the mineral surfaces are shown in The EDS analyses ( The XRD results ( XPS provides an effective method for investigating aluminum and silicon and their compounds. The Al 2   The S K-edge XANES spectra for the reference samples and leached residues are shown in The quantitative characterization of sulfur speciation in the residues was obtained from the LCF analysis using different sulfur-containing references (  According to the above results, the RM residue after aerobic bioleaching for 30 days mainly contains jarosites, hematite and a small amount of diaspore (  The XRD results ( We further tested the impact of S After anaerobic bioleaching, the elemental composition of the residue was analyzed by XRF and the results ( Based on the above results, the schematics of the bi-stage bioleaching of RM by In summary, our results demonstrated that the extraction of Al and REs from RM can be efficiently driven by aerobic and anaerobic bi-stage bioleaching with the addition of pyrite and S The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. This work was supported by the Supplementary data to this article can be found online at The following are the Supplementary data to this article: