Early gangue rejection or metal preconcentration at coarse scale (millimetres) based on size has been identified as a feasible operating alternative whereby energy efficiency and unit metal productivity can be greatly increased. This is achieved by understanding and exploiting ore-specific preferential grade by size responses. Preferential grade by size refers to the propensity of some ores to naturally concentrate metal into specific size fractions during breakage. The magnitude of metal deportment is described through a Ranking Response parameter (RR). This parameter has been used to measure the extent of “liberation at coarse scale”. Mineral Liberation is defined as the measurable rock property that can link with a downstream separation technique which aims to concentrate valuable material to produce a saleable product. Liberation traditionally has been defined at grain scale whereby the efficiency of processes such as flotation is greatly dependent on particle properties at micro scale (microns). However, in size-based coarse separation the efficiency relies on having a processing stream with a strong grade variability across size fractions (i.e. high grade by size response) and therefore a high RR value.
                  This work aims to develop a model to predict preferential grade by size response, in terms of the RR of ores as a function of particle size distribution and size reduction process. To achieve these aims a novel methodology has been developed comprising a new preferential grade by size characterisation method coupled with Monte Carlo and comparative statistical methods (analysis of variance (ANOVA) and t-test). Six run of mine (ROM) bulk samples from 3 different geological style deposits (stock work vein hosted, Cu–Mo breccia porphyry and Cu–Mo volcanic porphyry) have been utilised in the analysis.
                  This methodology provides useful insights for the development of an optimum coarse separation circuit flowsheet design for preconcentration prior to energy intensive and inefficient grinding.The mining industry is currently facing several energy efficiency and productivity challenges. Grade depletion coupled with high volatility in commodity prices are adding more uncertainty to the current industry outlook ( Early coarse uneconomic material rejection has been identified as a plausible operating alternative that can significantly increase energy efficiency and unit metal productivity ( The concept of mineral liberation is defined as a function of the downstream separation technique aiming at selectively concentrating elements of interest to make a saleable product. “Liberation” is a rock based property that allows certain measurable rock characteristics to be linked with separation process efficiency. For example, in flotation the material is “liberated” to the extent that the mineral surface is sufficiently exposed enabling an effective bubble-particle interaction and therefore a high separation efficiency. In size based coarse separation ( This work focuses on understanding the interaction between “coarse liberation”, measured by an RR factor, and comminution. Information obtained from a novel preferential grade by size characterisation test is employed to predict RR values as a function of parent particle size and changes in particle size distribution. A set of analytical techniques have been utilised, spanning non-linear regression coupled with Monte Carlo simulation and comparative statistical tools, including analysis of variance (ANOVA) and the It is implicit in this analysis that impact breakage is the mechanism being assessed. However, the same framework can be used to assess other breakage mechanisms. Particle bed breakage has been proposed as a breakage mechanism that might increase mineral micro scale liberation ( Six ROM bulk samples were extensively characterised for preferential grade by size. The aim was to obtain a RR parameter that represents the “global” preferential grade by size bulk sample response (RR The model (Eq. The characterisation of bulk samples for preferential grade by size comprises three steps: Screening material into previous defined size fractions. Obtaining chemical assays in each screened size fraction. Calculating of the RR parameter to quantify the preferential grade by size response. The source of error within first step (screening) can be easily managed by controlling the screen loading which might neglect screening efficiency. Nevertheless, information obtained within the second step, chemical assays, is more prone to errors, since its resulting error is the sum of the errors (in its variance form) related to the prior sample preparation processes. The management of chemical assays error is particularly difficult for coarse samples (mm) due to material sampling and its associated sampling statistics requirements (  This characterisation method is robust since it does not jeopardize grade by size data analysis due to sampling preparation error, ensuring that RR truly reflects the natural rock propensity to concentrate metal in the finer fractions after breakage. The total number of assays (#Assays An extensive preferential grade by size ROM characterisation program was conducted involving 3 distinctive geological style deposits with preferential grade by size deportment responses (RR) ranging from low (∼20 RR units) to high (∼100 RR units), whilst increasing feasibility of applying size based preconcentration. In estimating RR it is desirable to determine the uncertainties in the fitted values. Preferential grade by size characterisation is mainly exposed to two sources of error (once the sampling error associated with splitting has been appropriately addressed; see earlier discussion on progressive crushing, Section Error propagation of chemical assays (e.g. Eqs. Model fitting error (Eq. The former is calculated by inspecting assay measurement error within each of the final branches (32 in total) depicted in The RR model fitting error is obtained through the minimisation of least squares (Eq. Discarding the grade by size data, since sample preparation might have been compromised, or A different model is required to describe grade by size responses. The first can be explained by poor sampling procedures or low screen efficiency. This can be assessed by analysing the particle size distribution (PSD) curve smoothness prior to chemical assays. PSD should be approximately described as a straight line in log–log space. The absence of certain mass size fractions, for instance, would clearly reflect sample preparation issues. In this work the model proposed in Eq. The term “Monte Carlo method” is used to describe a wide range of simulation techniques, all of which are based on the use of random numbers. These methods are used to explore the behaviour of systems which are either too complex or too large to be calculated analytically. Monte Carlo methodology involves the use of a computer program with a random number generator to conduct many iterations. The results are then examined and then conclusion can be drawn in terms of characteristics of the system. The method employed here is described in detail by Results of preferential grade by size characterisation for the six samples are displayed in Progressive crushing grade by size test work enables the generation of a coarse liberation matrix (CLM), spanning preferential grade by size responses (RR It is noteworthy that to develop the CLM it is necessary to confirm whether the model proposed to describe preferential grade by size responses is still statistically valid. Monte Carlo is again used to determine the confidence intervals of RR A two sample Furthermore for the totality of samples tested, RR The information contained in the CLM is plotted as a function of the relative size (  There is a clear relationship between the particle size ( The pattern described in (1) is more noticeable (RR A higher RR The rate of change of RR Material having different textural characteristics, or Different breakage mechanisms under assessment.  In regression analysis it is often implicitly assumed that each observed value The An empirical coarse liberation model categorised by the RR parameter has been developed based on six ROM samples from three different geological style copper deposits. This model is able to predict the propensity of each size fraction to preferentially concentrate metal into finer fractions (RR For the majority of samples tested, RR This methodology relies on an extensive sample characterisation program. However, the development of predictive geological driven models will reduce the need for such physical test work. Further testing will determine whether the model proposed is independent of the geological deposit characteristics. Experience to date indicates that the current methodology can be applied to drill core material, reducing material handling and sample statistic requirements compared to ROM bulk samples. However experience to date indicates that scale up factors are required ( The authors’ intent is not to develop a universal model, but rather to provide insights regarding coarse liberation and its interaction with the size reduction process. This model could be used to understand the potential bias in RR when samples at different particle size distributions are being used to characterise preferential grade by size responses (e.g. ROM, SAG feed material). The model also supports coarse separation circuit flowsheet design as well as process control optimisation, identifying whether size reduction of coarser particles will still deport to economically recoverable ore. The present work adds an additional dimension, grade, to the current comminution models focused on understanding how new particles are created within a wider range of size reduction equipment. However, in ore bodies where the mineralogy has a large impact upon processing performance, grade deportment should be characterised in conjunction with mineralogical information. The authors which to thank the