Discarded CFL samples are evaluated as a potential source of REEs (Y, Eu, Ce, Tb). The phosphors powder obtained from mechanical separation contains 31% rare earth values. The quantitative XRD analysis of phosphor sample yielded 39.9% red (YOX: Y1.90Eu0.10O3), 14.6% green (CAT: Al11Ce0.67MgO19Tb0.33), and 21.4% blue (BAM: Al10.09Ba0.96Mg0.91O17: Eu2+) phosphor along with 14.1% silica. Planetary ball milling was found promising in the liberation of REEs from given phosphor sample. A short milling of 20–30 min and 3–4 M acid concentration was found adequate for optimal recovery (>90%) of REEs. Calcination of the precipitates resulted in the formation of REO with Y-Eu purity of >98% and >90% recovery rate. Eu, Y phase dissolution behavior was found completely different than Ce, Tb phase due to inert nature of Al11Ce0.67MgO19Tb0.33 till 120 min milling and 6 M acid concentration in leaching. Excessive milling promotes overall dissolution along with impurities dissolution and which further restrict the precipitation process. Based on the complete material balance 13 g of a mixed oxide of Y and Eu can be obtained from 100 units of CFLs.HNO Leaching conditions: 3–5 M acid, 1–24 h, and 50–80 °C. Leaching time was decreased with the addition of 4–10 v/v% H Limited attention is given to Ce and Tb dissolution. >90% recovery of Y, Eu, Ce and Tb. Roasting with caustic soda (1:1.5) (800 °C, 120 min) and leaching in 5 M HCl. Roasting with NaOH, and reductive ferrous powder (2:4:1) (700 °C, 120 min) and further leaching in 3 M HCl for 1 h. >90% Y, Eu, Ce and Tb dissolution. Mechanical activation using planetary ball mill for 60 min and leaching in 4–6 M acid for 15–120 min at 60 °C. The rare earth elements (REEs) and their compounds have a wide range of applications including a catalyst in chemical and metallurgical industry, coloring of glass and ceramics, magnets and phosphors ( Phosphors are essential components for luminescent behavior in fluorescent lamps. Excitation of REEs by absorption of UV radiation causes specific energy level transition within the atom creating emissions of visible radiation. The REE content in the phosphor is significantly higher than natural occurring deposits and make up more than 23% of the phosphor in fluorescent lamps, which is 10–100 times more than that of the minimum industrial grade of REE ores (0.15–2%) ( There are five main rare-earth phosphors found in fluorescent lamps: the red phosphor Y Based on the literature it is found that the recovery of REEs from waste CFLs is focused primarily through the hydrometallurgy route whereas few studies are reported on mechano-activation assisted leaching. Hydrometallurgy based studies are mainly focused on Y and Eu recovery and involve leaching in high acid concentration (>5M), extended leaching time (h) or high temperature (80–100 °C). Furthermore, the following route fails for recovery of Tb and Ce from the green and blue phosphor, which are difficult to leach out under moderate conditions. Pyro-metallurgical routes are generally energy-intensive involving higher reaction temperature as well as flux requirement. Roasting is found to be effective with the recovery of >95% REEs but involves serious drawback of additional flux requirement and leach residue generation. Mechano-activation based studies are focused mainly on Tb and Ce extraction from commercial LAP phosphor. Mechanical activation by planetary ball mill involves the application of compressive force and shear impact that causes physiochemical changes, new surface generation, polymorphic transformation and direct reaction in some case. Mechanical activation also decreases the activation energy of the leaching process thereby increasing the leaching efficiency ( Mechanical activation reported works are scarce, lacks the information on the effect of mechanical milling on different phosphors, recovery of REEs from leach solution and leach residue utilization. The purpose of this research work for the recovery of REEs from discarded CFLs includes (1) separation and characterization of waste phosphor (2) direct leaching and effect of milling on leaching (3) precipitation route selection (4) optimization through statistical design (5) leach residue analysis and (6) material balance. The end of life CFLs used in this study was procured from a local electric warehouse. The CFLs were shredded and different components were separated. Phosphors sample was separated from waste cullet and plastic by standard sieving operation at a size of 53 µm. The mineral element composition (oxides) of waste phosphor powder was determined using X-ray fluorescence (XRF) technique (Rigaku, Supermini 200). The morphology of the powder sample was studied by scanning electron microscopy (SEM) attached with Electron Dispersive X-ray technique (EDS) (Fe-SEM, Zeiss EVO18). The X-ray diffraction study of the sample was carried out by X-ray diffractometer (XRD, Rigaku Smart Lab) using Cu Kα radiation. The diffraction peaks were recorded in the 2θ range of 5−80° with a step size of 0.02° and a scanning rate of 2°/min to identify the different phases. The degree of crystallinity of maximum intensity peak was calculated by the formula; (I/I The leaching experiments were carried out in a 250 mL glass beaker using magnetic stirrer (C-Mag HS-7, IKA) at 40 °C with a subsequent solid-liquid ratio and the stirring speed of 1:25 (g/ml) and 900 rpm, respectively. The subsequent leach residue was separated from the leach solution by vacuum filtration and was dried in a laboratory oven at 110 °C. Leach solution was further processed for REE precipitation. The amount of REE values remaining in the leach residue was determined by XRF analysis and subsequent dissolution % of REEs was calculated as shown in Eq. Oxalic acid was added to the leach solution to precipitate REE ions, and the pH values were adjusted by adding HNO The waste phosphor sample was mechanically activated using a planetary ball mill (PBM) (Retsch, PM 100) for different time duration using ball-powder ratio and milling speed; 9:1, 450 rpm respectively. The feed was loaded into tungsten carbide jar of capacity 125 mL along with tungsten carbide balls (diameter 0.25 in.) and the jar was sealed with a clamp. The mill was set to run and pause alternately for 10 min intervals, to prevent generation of excessive heat. After milling, the milled products were retrieved using a spatula and special care was taken to minimize the risk of contamination. The statistical Box–Behnken design approach was pursued to obtain optimal conditions to maximize the recovery of REEs. In general, the Box-Behnken response-surface design does not have experimental runs at the extreme combinations of all the factors but compensates by having better prediction precision in the center of the factor levels ( The composition of the feed sample determined by XRF is shown in The direct leaching of the waste phosphors sample in different lixiviants) yielded low REE dissolution (1–5%) with distilled water and ∼40% with inorganic acids (2 M HCl, 2 M HNO The effect of mechanical activation on leaching behavior of REEs from waste phosphor powder was evaluated by milling for the duration of 20, 40 min followed by leaching in 3 M HCl, HNO The dissociation of different phases during milling was studied using the XRD and SEM analysis as shown in As per the literature of REE extraction from waste phosphors, it was found that limited efforts were made for the recovery of REE from the leach solution. Therefore, in this study, an attempt has been made to recover REEs from the leach solution using oxalic acid (H The Eh-pH diagram of the Re-O-H and Al-OH system is shown in The REE dissolution and extraction of REOs by precipitation process was investigated using a statistical design, Box Behnken method. Milling time, acid concentration and leaching time were the parameters investigated whereas REE dissolution, impurities dissolution, and REO extraction were the response variables. The experimental run and the corresponding responses are shown in The experimental values of REE, impurities dissolution and REO extraction are best-fitted to a modified quadratic model. The statistical parameters i.e., p and F value of the complete model and individual terms are shown in The contour plot of desirable response values and significant factors for REE, impurities dissolution and REO extraction are shown in Fig. The REOs extracted at optimum condition (28 min milling, 3.8 M HNO The XRD spectra of leach residue shown in In this study discarded CFL samples, unlike commercial phosphors, are evaluated as a potential source of REEs (Y, Eu, Ce, Tb). Sieving of crushed CFLs below 53 µm separated the phosphors powder from glass effectively. Glass, plastic and metal casing separated can be recycled directly. Based on the quantitative XRD analysis phosphor sample consist of 39.9% red (YOX: Y Planetary ball milling was found promising in the liberation of REEs such as Y and Eu from given phosphor sample. Excessive milling promotes REE dissolution along with impurities dissolution which further restrict s the precipitation process. Short milling of 20–30 min and 2–3 M acid concentration was found adequate for optimal recovery (>90%) of REEs. Calcination of the precipitates resulted in the formation of REO with Y and Eu purity of >98% and >90% recovery rate. Eu, Y phase dissolution behavior was found completely different than Ce, Tb phase due to the inert nature of Al The authors would like to acknowledge the funding received from