Background
                  Because the gold standard for the treatment of Vancouver type-B3 periprosthetic femoral fractures (PFFs) is yet to be defined, we sought to analyze the complication rate between the impaction bone grafting (IBG) technique with a cemented stem and reconstruction with an uncemented distally-fixed modular stem (DFMS).
               
                  Methods
                  We retrospectively studied 54 B3 PFFs operated between 2000 and 2016, comparing the complication rate of 33 patients treated with the IBG technique (group A) with 21 patients treated with a DFMS (group B). Median follow-up of groups A and B were 75 months (interquartile range [IQR], 36-111 months) and 55 months (IQR, 32-73 months), respectively (P = .008). Median age of groups A and B were 78 years (IQR, 74-83 years) and 81 years (IQR, 74-86 years), respectively (P = .30). Median grade of Endo-Klink femoral bone defect was 3 (IQR, 3-3) for both groups (P = .11). We performed a multiple regression analysis to determine risk factors for complications including the following variables: age, initial diagnosis, and surgical technique.
               
                  Results
                  As for infection outcomes, 2-stage revision surgery was more frequent in group A than in group B (4 vs 0, P = .003). Group A presented more implant failures than group B (5 vs 1, P = .195). We found 4 dislocations in group B and 2 in group A (P = .192). Multiple regression analysis showed a significant association between surgical technique and complication rate (P = .01). The IBG technique presented an odds risk for complications of 4.77 (P = .016; IQR, 1.33-17.21).
               
                  Conclusion
                  Femoral reconstruction with the IBG technique evidenced an ostensibly higher complication rate than that of DFMS for the treatment of B3 PFF.One of the most challenging complications after total hip arthroplasty (THA) is periprosthetic femoral fracture (PFF). Several studies reported on a prevalence of 1.7% and 6.2% at 10 years of follow-up after primary and revision THAs, respectively Periprosthetic femoral fractures around a well-fixed stem (Vancouver type-B1) are usually treated with internal fixation, and fractures about a loose implant with adequate bone stock (Vancouver type-B2) can be treated with revision THA. Nonetheless, a periprosthetic fracture about a loose stem with bone loss (Vancouver type-B3) comes up with the challenge to simultaneously achieve implant and fracture stability. In this sense, the choice of stem to bypass the fracture and reconstruct the femur is of utmost importance Vancouver type-B3 PFFs pose a challenge even for the most experienced hip reconstructive surgeon. Several surgical techniques have been described for their treatment Evidence dealing with the treatment of B3 PFF is mainly composed of short case series with short-term follow-up as well After obtaining approval from the institution’s research ethics board, we retrospectively studied 57 PFFs with loose implants and associated lack of proximal bone stock operated between 2000 and 2016, including 35 cases treated with the IBG technique (group A) and 22 treated with an uncemented distally-fixed modular stem (group B). All fractures were classified as Vancouver type-B3 as they were located around or just distal to a loose femoral component and were associated with inadequate proximal femoral bone stock Within the study period, the same group of experienced hip reconstructive surgeons performed all surgeries. Around the years 2009 and 2010 and without a standardized protocol, there was a change on the surgical strategy to address these fractures. Before 2009, all the revision surgeries consisted of procedures with the IBG technique associated with metal meshes and/or cortical struts. After 2009, there was a trend toward femoral reconstruction with cementless modular, distally-fixed stems. During the period 2009-2010, there was a dual tendency, with some cases receiving IBG and some others distal fixation. Median age of the series was 79 years (IQR, 74-84 years), being 78 years (IQR, 74-83 years) for group A and 81 years (IQR, 74-86 years) for group B ( Only 12 cases (6 from each group) had been previously operated at our institution; the rest of them were referred to our institute because it is a high-volume arthroplasty hospital and a level I trauma center. Median number of prior surgeries was 1 (IQR, 1-2) for both groups ( All surgeries were performed in laminar flow theaters following the general principles that have been described for both original techniques ( In group A, the following stems were retrieved: 12 Charnley stems (DePuy, Leeds, United Kingdom), 10 Charnley Elite-Plus stems (DePuy), 5 C-Stem (DePuy) triple-taper polished femoral stems, 3 Müller stems (JRI, London, United Kingdom), 2 Exeter stems (Stryker, Newbury, United Kingdom), and 1 Harris-Galante stem (Zimmer Biomet, Warsaw, IN). Similarly, in group B, we retrieved 6 Charnley stems, 4 Charnley Elite-Plus stems, 2 C-Stems, 3 Exeter stems, 3 Müller stems, and 3 CPT stems (Zimmer Biomet, Warsaw, IN). As for group A, we obtained fresh-frozen bone allografts from the institution’s bone bank following the protocol of the American Association of Tissue Banks for the harvesting and processing of grafts Regarding group B, the most distal part of the fracture was identified and secured with a cerclage wire to prevent eventual crack propagation during reaming or stem impaction Routine prophylaxis for thromboembolic disease was indicated during the first postoperative month. This consisted of 40 mg subcutaneous enoxaparin/d in patients with high clinical risk of thromboembolic disease and 325 mg aspirin/d per oral in patients with low clinical risk The rehabilitation protocol included early mobilization 48 hours after surgery and ambulation with a walker and toe-touch weight-bearing on the operated side for 90 days in group A and 45 days in group B. After that, we encouraged patients to progressively weight bear as tolerated with the use of a cane for at least 1 month, depending on the evolution of graft incorporation and healing of the osteotomy and fracture seen on follow-up radiographs. Anteroposterior and lateral radiographs of the pelvis and the operated femur were obtained immediately postoperatively, at 45 days, at 3, 6, and 12 months, and then annually. All cases were contacted for a radiological follow-up appointment for purposes of this study. Radiographs were reviewed by 2 of the authors (FDD and PS). We considered the fracture/osteotomy as healed when it had radiographic evidence of callus bridging the fracture on the 2 views or absence of the fracture line Continuous variables were expressed as means and standard deviations or medians and interquartile ranges (IQRs) depending on whether they had a normal distribution. Categorical variables were reported as frequencies and percentages. Continuous variables were compared using the independent samples We computed 11 surgical complications in group A and 5 in group B ( Although not significant, group A presented with more aseptic implant failures than group B (5 vs 1, We found 2 dislocations in group A and 4 dislocations in group B ( One of the 4 patients operated with a transtrochanteric approach in group A developed an asymptomatic greater trochanteric nonunion that was managed conservatively. We found 6 and 7 cases of up to 2 mm subsidence in groups A and B, respectively ( We also computed other minor medical complications, which were not included on the survival analysis. Four patients treated with IBG had a deep venous thrombosis, whereas 2 others developed pneumonia during their in-hospital stay. In group B, only 1 patient developed a deep vein thrombosis that was medically treated. Multiple regression analysis showed a significant association between surgical technique and complication rate ( In this retrospective series, we found that the IBG technique was associated with substantially more postoperative complications than revision with a modular, cementless stem. The idyllic treatment of Vancouver type-B3 fractures remains as controversial. Several treatment options had been reported, including IBG, modular distal fixation, alloprosthesis composite, and even proximal femoral replacement Our study was not without limitations. First, its retrospective nature correlated with the biases exclusive to the study design. The sample size of the series resulted in a small number of cases included in both IBG and distal fixation groups, restraining the production of more accurate statistical analyses. It can be argued that the lack of statistical significance observed in some of the variables analyzed can be the result of a beta-type error (underpowered study). However, it is one of the largest studies comparing the surgical outcomes of these 2 techniques in cases of Vancouver type-B3 PFFs. Second, we have not analyzed clinical scores to define functional outcomes of both revision methods; in this sense, the presence of postoperative pain, abnormal gait, and the capacity to perform activities of daily living could have added more information about patients’ failed expectations, which may be under-reported with the sole advent of a re-revision surgery. Third, we think that our survival rates should be considered as best-case estimates. Because there was a different follow-up period between both groups, being shorter for the distal fixation cohort, we expect that some of these patients may yet undergo a revision arthroplasty for any reason at a longer follow-up. Fourth, our data did not include comprehensive information about demographics and specific frailty-comorbidities or perioperative factors that would contribute to either infection or dislocation, which were our most common complications. Hence, our complication outcomes should also be considered as best-case estimates. Fifth, because of the quality of scanned analog radiographs in our database, Barrack's classification was not performed in the first impaction grafting cases. As some of these cases were operated before 2003, when postoperative radiographs were analog and added to our database by scanning them, we found it difficult to perform a proper analysis. The fact that many of the impaction grafting cases were reconstructed with metal meshes limited us to perform an accurate classification of the cementing technique as well as a classification of bone incorporation. Although uncemented, long, fully porous-coated femoral stems can be efficaciously used to treat most of these fractures Nevertheless, and as we described in this study, IBG is not without complications. We found 5 cases of aseptic implant failure in the IBG group, including 3 atraumatic femoral stem fractures. A retrospective review of the Swedish National Joint Registry Revision with a distally-fixed modular stem seems more versatile, as long as there is a sufficient bone stock for distal fixation and no fracture comminution that extends into the distal femoral metaphysis, which can be a particular challenge for planning and achieving stem fixation Other options had been used to manage these fractures. After analyzing the outcomes from the Mayo Clinic registry for 118 femoral revisions due to PFF, Springer et al In summary, femoral reconstruction with the IBG technique evidenced a higher complication rate than that of uncemented distal fixation for the treatment of Vancouver type-B3 PFFs. Unless there is an anatomic contraindication, it is our current practice to routinely use cementless modular fluted, tapered stems for the treatment of these fractures. Main causes for gradually changing from one method to the other was the demanding surgical technique, the longer operative time, and mostly, modern local regulations for the use of fresh frozen bone allograft, especially in surgeries that have to be performed as soon as the patient is stable, sometimes the same day the fracture occurs. 