The production of fenofibrate nanoparticles combining stirred media milling and ultrasonication method was investigated in the current work. The fenofibrate drug sample was first wet milled in stirred media mill for different times and subsequently processed by ultrasonication. The effects of ultrasonication time, power on final product particle sizes were studied. The pre milling by stirred media milling was resulted into reduction of comminution resistance of material. Subsequent treatment by ultrasonication produced smaller particles than obtained by stirred media milling alone. The resulting nanoparticles were found to exhibit excellent stability as investigated by particle size, zeta potential, and multiple light scattering measurement techniques. Further, qualities of nanoparticles obtained by combined approach were characterized by TEM and XRD analysis.The nanomaterials have recently received great attention on account of their promising properties and their use in advanced applications. Different methods were reported for production of nanomaterials. They are basically classified as a bottom-up and top-down methods and can produce nanoparticles in solid, liquid and gas phase In the present work drug nanoparticles were prepared by effectively combining stirred media milling and ultrasonication method. A fenofibrate is a poorly water soluble drug and used in this study. Fenofibrate drug sample was first wet milled in stirred media mill for different times, and subsequently processed by high power ultrasonication. The stability of prepared nanoparticles was investigated over the period of 15 Fenofibrate sample was kindly donated by M/s. Almbic Ltd., Vadodara, India. The mean size of feed fenofibrate was 10 For a production of fenofibrate nanoparticles, the premix solution was prepared by dispersing 12.5 The particle size measurements of the ground sample were carried out by a dynamic light scattering (DLS) technique (Malvern Zetasizer Nano ZS90, UK). The size measurement range of the instrument is between 3 The preparation of fenofibrate nanoparticles by stirred media milling was carried out by maintaining solid mass fraction ( Stirred media milling was used in combination with high power ultrasonication. The nanosuspension obtained after 30, 60 and 120 The stability of fenofibrate nanoparticles was investigated by particle size, zeta potential measurements and turbiscan analysis. The samples were stored at 5 The stability of prepared drug suspension was also evaluated by zeta potential. To seek more details on stability of dispersion optical analyzer (Turbiscan) was also employed. The zeta-potential is generally measured for dilute dispersion, whereas Turbiscan allows measurement of suspension stability with higher particles concentration and should provide better understanding of stability. Turbiscan can readily investigate dispersion destabilization phenomena, including particle size variation kinetics and particle migration kinetics, in emulsions and suspensions The morphological features of fenofibrate particles were investigated by TEM analysis. TEM micrographs of fenofibrate particles obtained by stirred media milling and combined stirred media milling and ultrasonication method are shown in The effects of milling on structural properties of fenofibrate nanoparticles were investigated by X-ray diffraction analysis ( In the present work fenofibrate nanoparticles were successfully prepared by combined stirred media milling and ultrasonication method. The application of ultrasonication on milled suspension significantly improves the qualities of nanoparticles viz.; smaller Z-Average size, and polydispersity index. This is because the pre-treatment of drug sample by stirred media mill could have resulted into reduction of comminution resistance of drug materials. Effects of time and power input during ultrasonication were investigated and optimum conditions were identified. The prepared fenofibrate nanoparticles exhibited a great degree of stability over 15 Authors wish to acknowledge the Sophisticated Instrumentation Centre for Applied Research and Testing (SICART), Vallabh Vidhyanagar, India, for providing analytical services for TEM and XRD analysis.