Within the complexity of the design and execution of a solar power plant project, one of the main challenges falls on rainwater management, since there is the need to collect, conduct and store it for its use in the water-vapour cycle process. Therefore, the primary piping for rainwater transportation from the solar power plant is regarded as an essential installation for the operation of the plant. Within this framework, the appearance of pathologies in its conduction just a few months after the plant start-up is considered to be a critical problem, as it can endanger the electrical production of the facility.
                  This problem has taken place at the solar power plant of “La Asturiana”, in Southern of Spain, with a solar field of 2Mm2 in size and a gross generation capacity of 50MW.
                  The need to understand the reason for the pathologies, in order to prevent their reappearance, justifies a detailed analysis of the adopted design, as well as its execution. The research is completed with novel techniques for in-situ tests, which enable us to obtain rigorous data to be used in computer models with the aim of reproducing, in a controlled way, the execution conditions in order to establish the causes of the failure.Reinforced concrete pipes are designed, at both practical and project levels, taking into account the depth at which they will be buried as well as the traffic overloads that these may be subjected to, using approximate formulae or semi-empirical methods The classical theory of earth loads on buried concrete pipe, published in 1930 by A. Marston In later work published in 1933, M. G. Spangler Spangler's theory suggested that the bedding factor for a particular pipeline, and consequently the supporting strength of the buried pipe, depends on two installation characteristics: Width and quality of contact between pipe and bedding. Magnitude of lateral pressure and the portion of the vertical height of the pipe over which it acts. For the embankment condition, Spangler developed a general equation for the bedding factor, which partially included the effects of lateral pressure. For the trench condition, Spangler established conservative fixed bedding factors, which neglected the effects of lateral pressure, for each of the three beddings. This separate development of bedding factors for trench and embankment conditions resulted in the belief that lateral pressure becomes effective only at trench widths equal to or greater than the transition width. Such an assumption is not compatible with current engineering concepts and construction methods. It is reasonable to expect some lateral pressure to be effective at trench widths less than transition widths. Although conservative designs based on the work of Marston and Spangler have been developed and installed successfully for years, the design concepts have limitations when applied to real world installations. The limitations include: Loads considered acting only at the top of the pipe. Axial thrust is not considered. Bedding width of test installations less than width designated in its bedding configurations. Standard beddings developed to fit assumed theories for soil support rather than ease of methods of construction. Bedding materials and compaction levels not adequately defined. In 1970, ACPA (American Concrete Pipe Association) began a long-range research program on the interaction of buried concrete pipe and soil. The research resulted in the comprehensive finite element computer program SPIDA, Soil-Pipe Interaction Design and Analysis, for the direct design of buried concrete pipe. Since the early 1980's, SPIDA has been used for a variety of studies, including the development of four new Standard Installations, and a simplified microcomputer design program, SIDD, Standard Installations Direct Design. Those studies resulted in the replacement of the historical A, B, C, and D beddings used in the indirect design method, by four new Standard Installations, and presents a state-of-the-art method for determination of bedding factors for the Standard Installations. Through consultations with engineers and contractors, and with the results of numerous SPIDA parameter studies, four new Standard Installations were developed. The SPIDA studies were conducted for positive projection embankment conditions, which are the worst case vertical load conditions for pipe, and which provide conservative results for other embankment and trench conditions. The parameter studies confirmed ideas postulated from past experience and proved the following concepts: Uncompacted bedding loosely placed directly under the invert of the pipe significantly reduces stresses in the pipe. Soil in those portions of the bedding and haunch areas directly under the pipe is difficult to compact. The soil in the haunch area from the foundation to the pipe springline provides significant support to the pipe and reduces pipe stresses. Compaction level of the soil directly above the haunch, from the pipe springline to the top of the pipe grade level, has negligible effect on pipe stresses. Compaction of the soil in this area is not necessary unless required for pavement structures. All that research resulted in the publication of the “Concrete Pipe design manual”, from the American Concrete Pipe Association From an interior structure point of view, the pipe is a concrete-steel cage composite. The load distribution that reaches it influences its redistribution in the pipe itself, causing the concrete and steel reinforcing cage to work in different ways in different soils, despite the pipe being buried at the same depth and subjected to identical surface overloads. Moreover, the effects of asymmetric loads are not considered in the design. These, in general, produce a more unfavourable stress distribution over the materials that constitute the pipe. The use of approximate formulae leads, in many cases, to working with oversized pipes, which entails a higher cost, not only economic but also environmental and energetic (higher raw material needs). In other cases undersizing may take place. This is a more serious problem as it implies that the pipe is not fit for service (supply or sanitation issues), leakages (contamination issues), and dragging phenomena (the transport of solids from the fillings to the inside of the pipe, dragged by water, may take place, which implies silting and loss of consistency of the fillings), which add to the elevated reparation costs for these works (these usually mean excavating again as well as replacing the pipes and backfillings). During their useful lifetime, the pipes are subjected to different load states: vertical and horizontal ground pressures, their own weight, internal pressure, superficial static or dynamic loads and seismic loads. The handbook “Engineering and Design: Conduits, Culverts, and Pipes” An alternative for the study of buried pipes In In flexible pipes, when these tend to deform or oval, the walls react against the surrounding ground. Due to this, an increase in the horizontal ground stresses is produced, subjecting itself to a state of passive earth pressure. This shift in the stress state of the surrounding ground in turn influences the deformities that will be produced in the structure. As a consequence, in these cases it is essential to undertake an analysis of the pipe, considering it as a mechanism of soil-structure interaction. Some recent scientific studies have started to attach more importance to the soil-structure interaction. Tian and Cassidy Other authors like Salehi et al. This is the case of Francisca, Redolfi and Prato, who in their study Talesnick and Baker Other authors approach this study, but they do not take into account the soil. This is the case of Nonetheless, the distinction between concrete and steel reinforcement is the key point, as the distribution of loads and deformations are not homogeneous within both elements of the composite. This can cause their “separation” and consequently breakages, which would not appear in a model with homogeneous material. Recently, studies have been done based on the possibility of replacing the traditional steel reinforcing cage with fibres embedded in the concrete (steel or polypropylene). In A more detailed analysis in the fibre reinforced concrete pipes was developed by De la Fuente Regarding the in situ test on pipes, Park et al. The thermosolar power plant La Asturiana is located in the south of Spain. It is a solar plant of 2 The pluvial water collector object of this research is made of reinforced concrete (250 This conduit had very unusual characteristics, maybe not because of the 2500 Therefore, its design was based on the handbook “Concrete pipe design manual” This led to the following design consisting of the following section: Prepare the surface at a depth of 400 Geo-textile sheets of 140 Single layer of 150 Fill with 6–12 This design is illustrated in the following image ( Technical design has been developed by means of the “Concrete pipe design manual” Embankment soil load (W W VAF: Vertical Arching Factor (in this case 1.35), PL: Prism load weight (739.31 ρ: soil unit weight (20 H: Height of fill (12 D So, W Fluid load (W Live loads (W Bedding factor (B Safety factor (FS): By means of the manual recommendations, a safety factor FS Maximum load: Maximum load equation for a 0.01″ crack width is: B D Replacing into [Eq. Cracking load (FF): Cracking load is obtained by referring the maximum load for a 0.01″ crack width to the pipe diameter [Eq. Finally, obtained cracking load is 336.825 Once the cracking load (FF) is obtained, it can be checked against the supplier data for an ASTM Class V pipe. As it is lower than the allowable one, the design is correct. The guaranteed strength limits offered by the manufacturer for an ASTM Class V pipe were: Cracking load: 350 Failure load: 438 However, based on calculation results and its own experience, the operator decided to raise concrete requirement up to 40 Concrete: HA-40/S/12/IIa Reinforcement: Corrugated B500T, with the design showed at Thickness: 250 Useful length: 2200 The execution of the collector ( During the excavation, the water table level was intercepted. Thus 400 The pathologies found in the pipe appeared in the form of interior longitudinal cracks, both at the crown and the invert of the pipe ( Following the methodology described by Kuliczkowskain 2015 Category of probability 1, very unlikely (acceptable structural condition). Category of probability 2, unlikely (minimal failure probability in the short term but potential for further deterioration). Category of probability 3, somewhat likely (sewer failure unlikely in the near future but further deterioration likely). Category of probability 4, likely (sewer failure likely in the near future). Category of probability 5, highly likely (sewer collapsed or imminent collapse). The damage observed on the collector falls into Taking advantage of the excavation that was done to uncover a section of the collector, the presence of millimetrical gaps was observed, by way of porosity of the ditch walls (see The appearance of these gaps could be explained as the consequence of dragging fine particles from the filling by water which, for the three months after installation, entered the pipe through joints and cracks. In this way, the damaged section of the invert of the pipe became covered in mud, as can be observed in In light of the observed facts, three possible failure hypotheses are considered: Insufficient quality of the concrete pipes and/or pipes that are undersized for the project loads. Poor quality of the base and filling materials, entailing insufficient thickness of the support bed. Overloads that are not considered in the calculations taking place during construction. In order to be able to assess which of the proposed hypotheses is more likely to be the cause of the described failure, a series of lab-scale, field and computer simulations were carried out, as described below. The natural soil is constituted, in its first metres, by clay silts, under which gravel embedded in a sandy matrix appears. With the aim of characterising these materials, seven ramming tests of a hydraulic cylinder were undertaken in the ground. To carry out this assay, it is firstly necessary to excavate a trench in the ground and then place the cylinder inside, so that the edges of the cylinder are disposed perpendicularly to the trench walls. Once the cylinder is placed on the lithology to be tested, pressure is applied and gradually incremented, this being transmitted from the cylinder rod to the ground in a perpendicular fashion due to the ball joint situated on its head. The pressure is increased until failure of the ground is caused. For the characterisation of the filling materials that cover the collector, another ten tests of this type have been completed. The tests have been distributed among eight trenches, located at different depths. For this, it was necessary to perform an excavation of 15 For the characterisation of materials from these tests, a 3D model has been created with the program FLAC 3D (Itasca Consulting Group), which simulates the effect of ramming into the ground. In the model, cohesion, friction and deformation module properties are introduced, and a pressure-displacement graph is obtained. Comparing this theoretical graph with that of the real test, the properties of the ground can be estimated, given that the more similar these are, the closer the values of the properties introduced in the model will be. This methodology has already been described in In order to obtain an estimate of the uniaxial strength by the concrete used in the pipes (to dismiss the possibility of using a poorer concrete), rebound “in situ” tests undertaken with a Schmidt Hammer were carried out as well as laboratory tests on samples obtained from the concrete pipes. The results thus obtained are summarised in These results show that the concrete used to make the pipes has an uniaxial strength above 45 Brazilian tests have also been undertaken, obtaining an average value of 3.9 A tube similar to those used to build the drain has been cut into four rings, with the aim of assaying these with the same hydraulic cylinder used to characterise the ground. Each ring had the same cross section of the original tube and around 450 For this purpose, four trenches were dug in the ground (one for each ring), where the cut pipe ring and the cylinder were introduced, in order to cover all the lithologies present throughout the path of the drain. On a wall of each trench, a niche for hosting concrete blocks that would serve as a reaction structure for the cylinder were made, and on the opposite wall the gravel bed over which the pipes have been placed in the drain was reproduced (see Once the trench and the measuring devices have been prepared, the ram of the hydraulic cylinder is employed to apply an increasing load over one of the ring diameters until reaching its breaking point. The damage evolution throughout the test can be seen in  As it can be observed, until that moment onwards, the deformation becomes reversible. In order to analyse the observed problems, a series of numerical models have been generated and calculated with the computer application FLAC3D (Itasca Consulting Group), by using an explicit finite difference formulation implemented in such application. First, a model validation was developed using experimental results from described pipe in situ test. A first model to simulate in situ pipe test was developed to validate the mechanical behaviour of concrete and reinforcement modelled with FLAC3D. In this kind of simulation, cracking initiation and development is not directly modelled. Concrete has been considered as a Mohr-Coulomb material to evaluate the stress field at pre-cracking state and stress redistribution at post-failure state. The model represents the geometry of the test, taking into account its axial symmetry, as it can be seen in Pile structural elements are two noded, straight, finite elements with six degrees of freedom per node. The stiffness matrix of a pile element is identical to that of a beam element, however, in addition to providing the structural behaviour of a beam, both a normal-directed (perpendicular to the pile axis) and a shear-directed (parallel with the pile axis) frictional interaction occurs between the pile and the grid. In addition to skin-friction effects, end-bearing effects can also be modelled. The nodes of the pile elements do not need to be located at the solid element nodes (gridpoints) and pile-grid interaction is modelled by shear and normal coupling springs. The coupling springs are nonlinear, spring-slider connectors that transfer forces and motion between the pile and the grid at the pile nodes (by way of the link emanating from each pile node). The behaviour of the coupling springs is cohesive and frictional in nature. The coupling spring properties have been calibrated from pipe in situ tests. Load over pipe was simulated applying a velocity of deformation at corresponding nodes. In In As it can be seen, although a crack model has not been implemented, simulation results are reliable and close to real behaviour. A model that simulates a trench dug in natural ground has been created, in which the concrete pipe would be installed and would be filled with different types of materials (more and less strength).The aim of its analysis is to test the influence of the type of filling on the deterioration of the pipes. What would occur at the concrete pipe in the case of a loss of material to the exterior surface has also been studied (internal erosion observed in the recognition of the area). The model represents half of one of the trenches dug for the placement of the drain, as it is considered that trench, pipe and filling are symmetrical with respect to their central axis (perpendicular to the length of the pipe). Hence, the values at both of its sides are identical. This makes the model simpler and the calculations faster, without entailing a loss of quality in the results. The different simulated elements of the model are the natural ground, the concrete pipe of 40 15 15 high fillings above the pipe, of very poor quality due to the appearance of small gaps resulting from the drag of fine particles. Temporary overcharges that had an effect on the conduit. During the execution of the collector, part of the solar field was used as a storage area for the excavation material (temporary soil movement). Such storage was then used both to fill up the trench and to create a 5  In all that cases, ground water table has not been taking into account, because the maximum value of pore pressure (0.15 The failure state of the pipe and surrounding ground, evaluated through the model, can be seen on As it can be observed, at In the case ( However, when this overload is applied upon the simulation corresponding to This kind of damage (related with Clearly, the determining factor of the failure has thus been the unforeseen overloads. This assertion is reinforced in The black spots indicate that relative displacements between the steel bars and concrete of the pipe are taking place (sliding between concrete and reinforcement), while the red spots indicate this kind of phenomenon in previous stages of the calculation process. It is found that, both for In light of the works that have been done throughout the present investigation, it can be considered the following conclusions to be proven: It has been found that a wash of the fine particles present in the filling material used for filling the collector trench has been produced, which would have passed into its interior through the membrane existing at the union between pipes. This process could have caused the gaps in the filling and the consequent redistribution of stresses. The average value of uniaxial strength obtained from concrete tests is over 45.9 A new in situ test was developed to obtain pipe behaviour under external load conditions. This test has allowed validating the constitutive model implemented in numerical calculus by means of FLAC3D and, subsequently, to validate the conclusions obtained through the numerical models. The pipe is correctly dimensioned for design overloads and the use of a filling equivalent to natural ground. However, it is subjected to larger tensions when the fillings are of poorer quality as compared to more competent materials. In any case, the existence of a poorer quality filling related to the wash of fine particles would not explain by itself the appearance of the observed damage. The execution of a 5