In cases with difficult scaphoid screw placement due to small, fragile bone fragments, or transplants and insufficient space, the internal Kirschner wire fixation is a fallback option; however, controversy remains regarding its stability, safety, and outcome. Between 2001 and 2011, 95 patients were treated in our center (n = 80 with cannulated compression screws and n = 15 with Kirschner wires), and retrospectively analyzed. The outcome measurements included the analysis of patient data, union rate and analysis of functional measures, and quality of life. Bony reconstructions were performed with Vascularized Bone Grafts (VBG) based on the 1,2-Intercompartmental Supraretinacular Artery (ICSRA) , Medial Femoral Condyle (MFC)-VBG, cancellous bone, and iliac crest grafts. Bony healing and functional outcome showed no significant differences between Kirschner wire fixation and cannulated compression screws, although significantly more 1,2-ICSRA-VBG were treated with Kirschner wires. Although predominantly used as an intraoperative fallback option, our data demonstrate that Kirschner wire internal fixation can be safe and reliable, with comparable bony union rates and excellent functional outcomes.Scaphoid fractures are the most common fractures of carpals, accounting for up to 80% of all carpal fractures in active patients. Although CSF has been shown to be the gold standard for scaphoid fractures and nonunion, KWF seems to be necessary in selected cases due to impossible screw placement because of small, fragile bone fragments or transplants and insufficient space, and thus may serve as an intraoperative fallback option. KWF was often believed to be inferior with regard to stability and outcome, and tended to be undesired among hand surgeons if necessary, and worrying about the outcome for the patient. We conducted a retrospective, comparative study to determine whether KWF may be as safe as screw fixation applied as an intraoperative fallback option, when it is necessary to perform bone grafting with internal fixation to treat scaphoid pseudarthrosis to provide valid data for patient education and to overcome hand surgeons´ concerns as a secondary option compared to internal screw fixation as the standard of care. Between 2001 and 2011, a total of 95 scaphoid reconstruction procedures were performed in our center and were included in this study. Our institutional algorithmic approach was as follows: The CSF is the gold standard in our institution for internal fixation. Scaphoid plates and K- wires serve as an alternative to provide internal fixation, as internal fixation isone of the key steps of scaphoid reconstruction, and no fixation of the bone graft is not favoured. In the following study, including and comparing only scaphoid nonunions with screw or K-wire fixation, we wanted to address only nonunion cases in which internal fixation by CSF was not feasible by intraoperative evaluation because of minor proximal pole fragments or a fragile bone graft or bone graft with a limiting vascular pedicle, which required K wire fixation as a fallback option. We aimed to compare results, and used internal screw fixation as the standard of care for reference, to validate the algorithm in view of feasibility and outcome, and to reduce the worries of many handsurgeons. Preoperatively, conventional X-rays of the wrist were performed in four planes (posterior-anterior, lateral view and according to Moneim and Stecher (scapholunate configuration and dissociation). Additional CT scan of the wrist was performed in all patients to indicate the reconstruction and surgical approach. The local ethics committee approved the study (Nr. 837.074.11(7616), Mainz, Germany). Informed consent was obtained from all patients. The operative approach was performed in a standardized manner as described earlier. During follow-up, the MAYO wrist score was applied, including pain intensity, functional status, range of motion, and grip strength with patients answering multiple-choice questions covering previous four weeks. The Disabilities of the Arm, Shoulder, and Hand (DASH) score was used in the German version 2.0. For statistics, all values were given as the means ± standard deviation. Univariant analysis, Chi square, Fisher's exact, and Wilcoxon rank summation tests were used. Out of 95 patients, 80 (84.2%) were treated with CSF and 15 (15.8%) were treated with KWF, representing the CSF and KWF cohorts for further analysis. The Palmar approach was used in 54 patients (57%) vs. dorsal in 41 patients (43%), respectively. Previous scaphoid reconstruction was performed in 15 (15.7%) of all included patients. A total of 20 1,2-ICSRA-VBG were used for the CSF (14 out of 80, 17.5%) and KWF groups (6 out of 15, 40%). Subgroups of all 1,2-ICSRA-VBG were as follows: 1,2-ICSRA-VBG ( Nonvascularized (NBG) cancellous bone grafting from the distal radius (DR-NBG; The average time of operation, the period between trauma and surgery, demographic data, comorbidities, dominant hand and cast immobilization showed no statistical differences ( No procedural-related, intraoperative, perioperative or postoperative complications occurred.  The mean follow-up was performed at 81.0 (± 40.8) months for KWF and at 67.1 (± 37.9) months for the CSF group after reconstruction without statistical significance ( The mean range of motion of the wrist for active extension/flexion (E–F AROM) was 103.8 (±21.4) degrees for the KWF group and 114.2 (±18.6) for the CSF group ( The average grip strengths measured by JAMAR dynamometer were 42.5 (±13.9) kg and 42.4 (±9.6) kg for KWF and CSF, respectively ( The subgroup analysis comparing 1,2-ICSRA-VGB and IC-NBG with KWF vs. the standard of care by CSF did not demonstrate a statistical difference ( The DASH scores were 16.2 (±8.9) points and 14.1 (±9.9) points for KWF and CSF, respectively (  The SF36 quality of life scale results are summarized in At the time of follow-up, all patients had resumed their former work without the need for occupational retraining or retirement.  The timing of the operation, duration of the operation, comorbidities, and other injuries showed no differences. The bony union between K wire and screw fixation showed no significant differences ( Stable internal fixation of bone grafts through compression screws after the resection of pseudarthrosis of the scaphoid remains the gold standard for most types of scaphoid reconstruction. Treatment with no fixation has several disadvantages leading to unfavorable results and should be avoided whenever possible, as investigated in 2015 by Pinder et al. in a systematic review ( The argument for palmar plating is as follows: Plate fixation may offer superior fixation in some scaphoid fractures, particularly those with comminution, nonunion, segmental bony defects, and osteopenic or osteoporotic bone. Sander et al. discussed the role of palmar plating for scaphoid fractures and nonunions, with acceptable results. They compared a headless compression screw directly with palmar mini condylar plate fixation. However, their presentation of data with Bioabsorbable products are gaining more popularity over time. Ek and Wang used bioabsorbable fixation nails for ultrasmall proximal pole scaphoid fractures with adequate results. The use of Kirschner wires for internal fixation for scaphoid nonunions has a long history. As long ago as 1980, Cooney et al. performed a study comprising of 86 patients with various bone grafting techniques. They stated that the rate of union was increased when Kirschner wire fixation of unstable nonunions was performed. Nevertheless, in complex scaphoid reconstructions where screw placement is not feasible, the surgeon needs a safe and reliable fallback option. Following key steps of scaphoid reconstruction, internal fixation is crucial to achieve bony union and functionality. In the above-mentioned cases – fragile, small, or flat fragments and grafts and the interference of screw placement with the pedicle position in vascularized bone grafts – K wires seem to be the only option, but maybe a useful and superior option. We consider any successful attempt for internal fixation superior to no fixation at all. Based on the results of our comparative study to evaluate the outcome of frequently disagreeable K wire fixation, it remains a useful and reliable fallback option, when the intraoperative situation does not allow screw fixation. K wire fixation is more often necessary in the case of 1,2 ICSRA vascularized bone grafts because of the sometimes fragile grafts and detracting course of the pedicle, but finally provides a comparable and safe outcome to CSF. The limitations of this study are restricted numbers of the KWF group and differences in the amount of used K-wires. The small number of subjects decreases the potential to detect a significant difference. Also, it is a retrospective study comparing nonequivalent groups (distribution 1,2 ICSRA grafts); nevertheless, the CSF cohort serves as a valuable reference for union rates and functional outcome. Not all K-wires were removed postoperatively, so possibly influencing the outcome in the long run. Also, the palmar vs. dorsal approach could be one factor giving a bias in results. The gold standard for the treatment of scaphoid nonunion remains the use of vascularized and nonvascularized bone grafts in combination with stable internal fixation through compression screws. There remains controversy regarding the usability of Kirschner wires in situations where there is no chance of placing the cannulated screw safely. Our data demonstrate that Kirschner wire internal fixation as a fallback option is safe and reliable, with nearly comparable bony union rates and functional outcomes. Concerns and worries of many hand surgeons to use K wires are comprehensible, but can be put into a new perspective based on results of this study. It remains to be seen whether relatively few implants such as palmar scaphoid plates or bioabsorbable products further increase outcomes and serve as reliable and safe alternatives, for primary indication and as a fallback option. None. The local ethics committee approved the study (Nr. 837.074.11(7616), Mainz, Germany). Informed consent was obtained from all patients. This research received no specific grant from any funding agency in the public, commercial, or not-for-profit sectors.