Background
                  Pseudoxanthoma elasticum (PXE) is a rare connective tissue disorder involving fragmentation and mineralization of elastic fibers predominantly in the skin, eyes, and cardiovascular system.
               
                  Objective
                  The objective of this study was to assess the efficacy of sevelamer hydrochloride on the reversal of elastic fiber calcification and clinical lesions of PXE.
               
                  Methods
                  This was a randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled, two-part prospective study. In the first year, 40 patients with PXE were randomized to receive either sevelamer hydrochloride (800 mg by mouth three times daily) or placebo in a 1:1 ratio. In the second year, all patients received sevelamer hydrochloride (800 mg by mouth three times daily).
               
                  Results
                  In the first year, the placebo and treatment groups' mean calcium scores decreased from 29.52 to 15.97 (41.93% mean improvement) and 27.48 to 16.75 (38.37% mean improvement), respectively. In the second year, the mean calcium scores decreased to 13.36 (53.94%) and 14.03 (51.35%) in these groups. The mean clinical score in the placebo group decreased from 6.25 to 6.05 at year 1 (2% improvement) whereas the mean clinical score in the sevelamer hydrochloride group decreased from 7.10 to 6.55 (7% improvement). In year 2, the scores in the original placebo and sevelamer hydrochloride groups decreased to 5.33 (14% improvement) and 5.72 (19% improvement), respectively.
               
                  Limitations
                  Magnesium stearate in our placebo and active drugs may have played a confounding role in this study, contributing to the small differences observed in these two groups.
               
                  Conclusion
                  Sevelamer hydrochloride produced a reduction in both calcification levels and clinical scores; however, this difference was not statistically significant compared with placebo. Future clinical studies should examine the inhibitory role and potential therapeutic effect of magnesium in PXE.  Pseudoxanthoma elasticum is a rare connective tissue disorder associated with considerable morbidity and mortality. There is no specific treatment that addresses the calcification that occurs in pseudoxanthoma elasticum. Oral phosphate binders may play a role in regulating the serum calcium phosphate product in patients with this disease. The cutaneous manifestations of PXE include discrete, yellowish papules that eventually coalesce and form cobblestone plaques resembling plucked chicken skin. These plaques appear on flexural areas including the neck, antecubital and popliteal fossae, axillae, wrists, and groin. Although skin manifestations usually develop during childhood, more serious ocular and cardiovascular complications occur in the third or fourth decade of life. The majority of patients develop angioid streaks, which result from breaks in the calcified elastic lamina of Bruch membrane. Calcification is an intrinsic component of PXE. It is known that mineralization develops in several stages, with amorphous calcium phosphate deposited in the early stages of the process and then less soluble crystalline apatite-like compounds at a later time point. As a result of these preliminary findings, we set out to evaluate the impact of oral phosphate binders on the clinical and histopathologic changes of PXE in a larger, randomized clinical trial. Because aluminum hydroxide was discontinued by the manufacturer, we chose to study the efficacy of sevelamer hydrochloride, an aluminum-free oral phosphate binder. Sevelamer hydrochloride is an agent that is widely used in hemodialysis patients and has proven safety and efficacy in binding phosphate. Accordingly, the objective of this study was to assess the efficacy of sevelamer hydrochloride on the reversal of elastic fiber calcification and clinical lesions of PXE. This was a randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled, two-part prospective clinical study that was approved by the Institutional Review Board at the Mount Sinai School of Medicine. Adult patients 18 years or older, with normal renal function and a biopsy-confirmed diagnosis of PXE, were enrolled in this study. Patients with history of significant osteoporosis or osteomalacia were not enrolled. Patients with primary hyperparathyroidism, medical conditions associated with hypophosphatemia or hypokalemia, idiopathic hypercalciuria, and primary hypophosphatemia were excluded. Patients taking antiseizure or antiarrhythmic agents or taking diuretics, phosphate-binding antacids, or anabolic steroids were also excluded. All patients were required to provide written informed consent. This study was conducted in accordance with the ethical principles set forth in the Declaration of Helsinki. The study involved two parts: a year-long, double-blind, placebo-controlled portion; and a year-long open-label portion. Patients were randomized using complete randomization. In the first half of this study, 40 patients with PXE received either sevelamer hydrochloride (800 mg by mouth [po] three times daily [TID]) or placebo in a 1:1 ratio for 1 year. After that point, all patients received sevelamer hydrochloride (800 mg po TID) for 1 year. At the baseline visit, a skin examination was performed; a target lesion was chosen, evaluated, and photographed; blood was drawn for renal function tests, complete blood cell count, and serum calcium and phosphorus; and two 4- to 5-mm punch biopsy specimens were taken from the target plaque. Patients were referred to an ophthalmologist who obtained baseline fundus photographs using a Topcon TRC-501X camera (Topcon America, Paramus, NJ) with 50-degree views of the fundus. Ophthalmic evaluation included a complete eye examination with retinal drawing, stereo fundus photography, red-free photography, and indocyanine green angiography. Patients also underwent a bone density scan. Sevelamer hydrochloride tablets were encapsulated using Capsulgel DB size AA gray opaque capsule shell (Quintiles, Mount Laurel, NJ) containing 160 mg of magnesium stearate. Each tablet contained 400 mg of the active ingredient, sevelamer hydrochloride. The placebo contained an inert compound, Avicel PH-102 (Quintiles, Mount Laurel NJ), and a filler containing 400 mg of magnesium stearate. The placebo was manufactured in an identical capsule to the sevelamer hydrochloride. All patients were asked to take vitamin E (400 IU) on a daily basis to avoid potential decreases in absorption of vitamin E. Patients had repeated blood tests during the first 3 months and then every 3 months thereafter. Patients returned every 6 months for skin photography and lesion evaluation using a numeric scale ( Patients returned to the ophthalmologist for additional fundus photographs and indocyanine-green angiograms at 1- and 2-year intervals. Bone density scans and punch biopsies of target lesions were also performed at these time points. Each biopsy specimen was fixed in neutral buffered formalin, embedded in paraffin, and processed for hematoxylin-eosin staining according to routine histologic methods. Serial 4 μm–thick sections were stained with von Kossa stain for calcium and Verhoeff-van Gieson stain for elastic fibers. For the analysis of elastic fibers, Von Kossa-stained sections were examined under the 20X objective with an Axioskop Zeiss microscope (Carl Zeiss MicroImaging, LLC, Thornwood, NY) with an attached Hamamatsu 3CCD (color-chilled) camera (Hamamatsu, Hamamatsu City, Japan). The image of the elastic fibers was digitized corresponding as closely as possible to black images of elastic fibers. The data was analyzed by Samba 4000/IPS interactive image processing 4.01 software program (Samba Team, Software Freedom Conservancy, Brooklyn, NY) and expressed as a percentage of the total areas of the corresponding visual field. A least 3 to 5 separate areas were examined by a blinded dermatopathologist and the results averaged. After data were acquired, they were analyzed on an intent-to-treat basis using statistical software (SAS, Version 8, SAS Institute Inc, Cary, NC; and Stata, Version 10, StataCorp LP, College Station, TX). The Wilcoxon signed rank test was used to compute differences between groups and analysis of covariance was performed to adjust for individual baseline values. Random effects analysis using software (Proc Mixed, SAS Institute Inc) and several different types of mixed models examining the effect of the clinical score as a function of month, treatment, and baseline score were used. Results were considered statistically significant if the Forty patients were randomized to receive either sevelamer hydrochloride (800 mg po TID) or placebo in a 1:1 ratio for 1 year. After that point, all patients received sevelamer hydrochloride (800 mg po TID) for 1 year. Among the 40 randomized patients, 36 completed the study and 4 did not complete the study. Of the 4 patients who did not complete the study, two patients randomized to the treatment arm withdrew their consent at month 12. In the placebo group, one patient became pregnant at month 6 and withdrew from the study whereas another patient withdrew consent at month 12. Although all patients were included in the safety analysis, a total of 36 patients were included in the final efficacy analysis ( A total of 39 patients completed the double-blind portion of the study (19 in the placebo group and 20 in the sevelamer hydrochloride group). At year 1, the placebo group's mean calcium score decreased from 29.52 to 15.97 (41.93% mean improvement) whereas the sevelamer hydrochloride group's mean calcium score decreased from 27.48 to 16.75 (38.37% mean improvement). In all, 36 patients completed the open-label portion of the study (18 in the placebo group and 18 in the sevelamer hydrochloride group). At year 2, the original placebo group's mean calcium decreased to 13.37 (53.94% improvement from baseline) whereas the sevelamer hydrochloride group's mean calcium score decreased to 14.03 (51.35% change from baseline). Both the placebo and sevelamer hydrochloride groups showed a significant decrease in calcium over 2 years ( During the double-blind portion of the study, the mean clinical score in the placebo group decreased from 6.25 to 6.05 at year 1 (2% mean improvement) ( During the open-label portion of the study, the mean clinical score in the original placebo group decreased to 5.33 at year 2 (14% improvement from baseline) ( Both the placebo and sevelamer hydrochloride groups showed a significant decrease in clinical scores over 2 years ( In analyzing the number of patients who sustained an improvement or worsening in their clinical score over time (improvement defined as a decrease in 1 point in baseline clinical score and worsening defined as an increase in 1 point in baseline clinical score), there was no significant difference in the number of patients who improved compared with those who worsened for both the placebo and sevelamer hydrochloride group at year 1 ( At year 2, there was a significant difference in the number of patients who improved compared with those who worsened for both the original placebo and sevelamer hydrochloride groups ( Comparing the initial with end-of-treatment bone density scores, there was a statistically significant difference in the forearm and hip scores in the sevelamer hydrochloride group ( During the double-blind portion of the study, two patients treated with sevelamer hydrochloride experienced 3 or greater lines of vision loss and one patient treated with sevelamer hydrochloride experienced 3 lines of improvement. The most common change noted was progression of loss of pigment in the retinal pigment epithelium, or an increase in the reticular pigmentary change. Five patients (2 placebo, 3 sevelamer hydrochloride) experienced progression of angioid streaks during the study and two patients had progression of the peau d'orange (one placebo, one sevelamer hydrochloride) whereas one patient appeared to have less of this mottling of the fundus (one sevelamer hydrochloride). Two patients developed new calcified drusen in the first year (both sevelamer hydrochloride) and one had a new salmon spot appear (sevelamer hydrochloride). The changes in the amount of blood and lipid were difficult to assess as more than half of the eyes of 4 patients had evidence of choroidal neovascularization (CNV) upon entry in the study (1 placebo, 3 sevelamer hydrochloride). One patient treated with sevelamer hydrochloride developed new CNV during the first year ( Very few adverse events deemed related or possibly related to the study drug occurred in this study. Of 20 patients in the sevelamer hydrochloride group, only 5 patients experienced side effects. Four patients experienced gastrointestinal side effects during the blinded portion of the study (one experienced constipation and irritable bowel syndrome, one stomach discomfort, one gastritis, and one nausea) whereas a fifth patient experienced metromenorrhagia during the open-label portion. In the placebo group, a total of 9 patients experienced side effects during the blinded portion of the study. Gastrointestinal side effects included nausea, gastroesophageal reflux, constipation, upset stomach, and gastritis. Two patients experienced the onset or worsening of osteopenia at the end of the blinded portion of the study (month 12), whereas another patient encountered joint pain. The remaining side effects included increased plaque buildup on teeth and weight loss. PXE has been associated with more than 110 different mutations in the ABCC6 gene. PXE is associated with considerable morbidity and mortality. Patients are advised to abstain from high-risk sports that may cause ocular trauma and encouraged to modify their diet and lifestyle to delay cardiovascular complications. However, currently there are no established treatment regimens for PXE. Therapeutic approaches to treat CNV have included surgery, photocoagulation, and photodynamic therapy with varying success. More recently, vascular endothelial growth factor inhibitors such as bevacizumab have led to the slowing of CNV growth and the concomitant deterioration of visual function. Our prior studies have examined the role of oral phosphate binders in the normalization of the serum calcium-phosphate products in patients with PXE. Encouraged by previous results, we attempted to assess sevelamer hydrochloride on the reversal of elastic fiber calcification and clinical lesions of PXE. Both the placebo and sevelamer hydrochloride groups showed a significant decrease in clinical scores and calcification over 2 years; however, the difference between the two groups was not significant. There was no significant difference in the change in visual acuity between the sevelamer hydrochloride and placebo groups. However, there were no ocular exclusion criteria for entry into the study and many of the patients had ocular complications at baseline. Of the 78 eyes from 39 patients who completed the first year of the study, 21 had 20/200 vision or worse upon entry. In addition, 5 eyes had active CNV upon entry, 13 eyes had previous laser treatment, and 4 eyes had previous photodynamic therapy. A limitation of this study is the fact that the placebo contained a small amount of magnesium stearate, an agent that has been implicated in reducing calcium levels. As this information was only revealed to us after the completion of the trial, we suspect that the placebo group may have showed improvement in clinical scores and calcification during the first year because of the addition of magnesium stearate. Moreover, during the trial, patients became more educated about their disease and learned to control their dietary intake of calcium. Although sevelamer hydrochloride did not statistically contribute to the reversal of elastic fiber calcification or clinical lesions in this study compared with placebo, prior treatment of PXE with aluminum hydroxide did show significant regression of skin lesions, both clinically and histologically. We suspect that the difference in results between our original and current study is secondary to the fact that we changed the phosphate binder that was used to treat our patients. In the initial pilot study, patients were treated with aluminum hydroxide, the most effective phosphate binder available. In a PXE mouse model study performed by LaRusso et al investigating the effect of dietary sevelamer hydrochloride in ABCC6 Provided these results, consideration has been made to use an alternate phosphate binder such as lanthanum carbonate, which has a similar phosphate-binding capacity to aluminum hydroxide. We are grateful to Dr Sylvan Wallenstein for his expertise and assistance with the statistical analyses.