In this work, the productivity and work quality of different types of chipping machines used for biomass comminution produced by dedicated plantations were evaluated. Drum and disc chippers with different powers were compared with feller-chippers and grinders. Machines were tested using only one tree species (poplar) and two different feedstocks: branchwood (seven-year-old treetops and biomass produced by a vSRC) and whole-trees (materials produced by an SRC). This study showed a similar performance for all types of machines tested in terms of working rate using different feeding systems, i.e., automatic and forestry crane. However, different results were obtained for woodchip quality. The whole tree comminution was able to guarantee the best woodchips, and chippers produced better wood chips in comparison to grinders. The results obtained indicate that productivity is linked to engine power and that feedstock size can influence wood chip quality. Furthermore, feller-chippers are able to guarantee the same productivity and wood chip quality as “conventional” chippers.The comminution of wood is performed to homogenize different wood assortments (logs, branches, etc.) and to increase the load density Typically, woodchips are used for energy production and making chipboard panels. At present, in Italy and in Europe, large amounts of woodchips are used as biomass for energy production because there are many economic incentives for this biofuel use In Europe, large amounts of woodchips are produced by dedicated cultivations: short rotation coppices (SRC). Recently, the ligno-cellulosic species cultivation has increased because several farms have included SRCs in their cultural plans Woodchips used for energy production must be of high quality (uniform size), and every chip should be of a size smaller than 60 mm to guarantee the correct automatic feeding of the power station The chipping operation can be made during the biomass harvest or some days after tree cutting. This operation can be performed by two different groups of machines: chippers, i.e., machines using sharp tools (knives) to cut or slice wood, and grinders, i.e., machines using blunt tools (hammers) to smash or crush wood Chippers used for woodchip production for energy use can be divided by the function of their comminution devices, i.e., discs and drums Over multiple years, these different chipping machine types were tested singularly at different sites and using different feedstock types. On the basis of these tests, the goal of this work is to evaluate the productivity and work quality of different types of chipping machines used for biomass comminution produced by SRC and vSRC under the same working conditions and using the same feedstock. Drum and disc mobile chippers with different power sizes were compared with feller-chippers and grinders. Machines were tested using only one tree species (poplar spp.), but two different feedstocks were used (branchwood and whole-trees). For this experimentation, eight different machines were chosen. In particular, three of these were powered by tractor PTOs, whereas the other five were powered by an independent engine. The tested machines required power ranging between 103 and 420 kW. In the tests, drum chippers and disc chippers were used. In addition, one grinder and three feller-chippers (self-propelled) were analysed ( To obtain the best performances, all machines were equipped with a “No stress” electronic device capable of managing the speed of the feed rolls in relation to the available power. For each machine category, an appropriate feeding system was used; self-propelled chippers were fed automatically, whereas “conventional” chippers and the grinder were fed by a forestry crane. All stationary machines, in order to reduce the operator's effect, as is well known in other forestry sectors The poplar tree species ( In this work, we also considered treetops because in some cases, for the economic balance of an SRC to be positive, the basal part of the trunk, up to 4–6 m, is used to produce industrial wood (OSB panel, packaging) Branchwood had an average diameter (measured to approximately 10 mm from the cutting section) of between 50 and 120 mm, whereas whole trees had a base diameter of between 280 and 400 mm. Due to the limited size of their cutting heads and to the specific cutting system type, not all chipping machines tested were able to work with two different feedstocks. Feller-chippers 1 and 2 worked on the vSRC plantations (branchwood) only, whereas feller-chipper 4 worked only in the SRC (whole tree). All of the wood was freshly processed, with a water mass fraction of approximately 55%. Feedstocks were made available in large piles (approximately 100 m Each feller-chipper was tested on a rectangular area of 0.25 ha, with dimensions of approximately 105 m in length and 24 m in width (eight rows). In particular, the rows had lengths of 95 m and headlands of 5 m. Chips were blown into three-axle trailers with a capacity of 35 m The research was conducted in northwestern Italy, near the town of Alessadria (45° 8′ 33″ N; 8° 28′ 11″ E), between January and March, 2012. The sampling unit consisted of a full trailer. The experimental design aimed at testing the effect of the technical characteristics of each machine category used for woodchip production (disc chipper, drum chipper, feller-chippers, and grinder) on the productivity. Each treatment was replicated three times ( All machines worked with new knives and hammers. Productivity was estimated through a detailed time-motion study conducted at the cycle level Outputs were estimated by measuring the volume and weight of all woodchips produced during each test. The weight of each trailer was measured by a certified weighbridge with an accuracy of 10 kg (Ferrero Moisture content determination was conducted using the gravimetric method according to European Standard CENT/TS 14774-2 The quality of wood chips was assessed on one sample (1 kg) per trailer according to European Standard EN 15149-1 All data collected were processed using Microsoft Excel and analysed with SSPS (2013) advanced statistics software to check the statistical significance of the eventual difference between the trials. The difference between machines was determined using the Ryan–Einot–Gabriel–Welsch (REGW) test because it has higher statistical power with this data distribution. Time consumption ranged from 29 to 196 s m Independent of feedstock and machine type used, the net chipping time was 78% higher, whereas the supportive work time and delay showed an incidence of total work time of only 2–8%. Complementary work times of the grinder were very low (approximately 8%) in comparison to the other machine types analysed (12–19%) ( The statistical analysis showed all differences in the net chipping time for all machines and feedstock types tested ( In branchwood chipping, a higher value of productivity (102.67 m Net productivity expressed per unit of nominal power of the machine ranged between 30 and 38 kg h In whole tree chipping, a higher working rate (112.67 m In a comparison of all productivity values, that obtained for whole tree chipping (0.053 t h Furthermore, considering that the chippers were only fed with forestry cranes, the data processing output showed an average productivity of 0.22 m In general, chipper productivity increased in relation to the nominal power engine ( In whole tree chipping, it is possible to obtain a higher data correlation (R This machine, in contrast to the other machines tested, cannot work continuously because, before performing the chipping operation, it needs to reach the tree, cut it, and successively place it in the feeding mouth. The sequence of these operations reduces its productivity (  Disc and drum chippers produce high-quality woodchips and show little presence of fine particles in comparison to grinders (hammers) ( In vSRC and SRC harvesting, independent of feeding systems adopted by chippers (automatically or with forestry crane), the supporting work time and delay are low (8% of total working time). This value is similar to those obtained in other works performed using traditional chippers Productivity is influenced particularly by rotation length of the SRC harvesting because a different plantation edge can lead to different feedstock types. In fact, it is lower when the wood assortment processed is characterized by a small size (branchwood – vSRC). This effect may be attributed to low feedstock density and the greater difficulty of its operation. This feedstock can also cause some problems in feeding operations, where the branches can become stuck in the feeding mouth of the chippers. These operative problems were also shown in other studies Furthermore, this study has highlighted that cutting operations performed simultaneously with the chipping operations (feller-chippers) do not considerably reduce chipping operation productivity or influence woodchip quality. The results also indicate the strong performance of feller-chippers, which in previous tests, have shown economic advantages In this study, it is noted that independent of the machine type used (self-propelled chippers, feller-chippers or grinders) in biomass comminution, the productivity was strictly related to the nominal engine power. These results are comparable with those found in previous works The particle size distributions obtained in this experiment are very similar to those obtained in other experiments conducted in similar conditions The woodchips are of high quality for all of the chippers tested (acceptable size > 80%) except for the grinder (acceptable size < 67%). This trend is similar to that found in other works where the biomass was processed with grinders Considering the importance of forestry species This study showed similar performances for all type of machines tested in terms of specific working rate (working rate expressed by unit of nominal power). No difference in productivity was obtained using different feeding systems (automatic and with forestry crane) and comminution systems (disc, drum or hammers). However, different results were obtained in woodchip quality. In fact, in order to obtain high-quality wood chips, large size feedstock (whole tree) and chippers (drum or disc) were required. This information is very important because it is useful for consideration during biomass plantation planning and management. Finally, the data obtained in this experiment highlight that in the SRC, it is better to use feller-chippers. In fact, these machines, in addition to ensuring the same performance of “conventional” chippers in terms of productivity and wood chip quality (results obtained in this work), are able to reduce soil compaction and hourly costs (results obtained in other studies).