Reduction of energy consumption in comminution is of significant importance in mining industry. To reduce such energy consumption the energy efficiency in an individual operation such as blasting must be increased. By using both new investigations and previous experimental results, this paper demonstrates that (1) kinetic energy carried by moving fragments in rock fracture is notable and it increases with an increasing loading rate; (2) this kinetic energy can be well used in secondary fragmentation in crushing and blasting. Accordingly, part of the muck pile from previous blast should be left in front of new (bench) face in either open pit or underground blasting. If so, when new blast occurs, the fragments from the new blast will collide with the muck pile left from the previous blast, and the kinetic energy carried by the moving fragments will be partly used in their secondary fragmentation.The comminution of rocks consumes not only significant amounts of energy but also large quantities of steel due to wear of grinding media and machine liners. Comminution costs represent an important contribution, 30–50%, of total mining operation costs Regarding the first way, various studies have been performed detailing how to improve rock fragmentation by decreasing the total energy expenditure Concerning the second way, different measures have been taken to increase the energy efficiency in blasting. These measures include: (1) to change stress or energy distribution by choosing a proper explosive whose VOD (velocity of detonation) well matches the sonic velocity of rock mass (e.g. On the above background and by means of previous experimental results and new investigations, this paper will describe how kinetic energy is carried by fragments in either mechanical crushing or rock blasting, and discuss how to use this energy so as to increase the energy efficiency in fragmentation as well as comminution. Fracture of solids is a dynamic event, regardless of either static or dynamic loading. For example, rock bursts might be induced not only by dynamic loading but also by static loading The energy Surface fracture energy of the main crack that completely separates the rock sample. In the case shown in Internal cracking and damage energy of the fragments produced in the fracture process. The branching cracks (or bifurcation) shown in Kinetic energy carried by flying fragments that was observed, for example, by Zhang et al. Rotation energy carried by rotating fragments. Heat energy consumed in heating rock, for example in the tips of cracks. Electromagnetic radiation energy emitted during the fracture of some rocks. For example, electromagnetic radiation was found in rock bursts and earthquakes Sound energy used in releasing sound. Other energies such as the energy consumed by friction. In the SHPB system, the contact between the rock sample and the bars consumes certain energy due to friction. Note that in the above description, the energy analysis involves a whole process starting at the beginning of the striker bar’s impact and ending at the time when the impact is completed and both the reflected wave and the transmitted one are completely recorded. In other words, the reflected waves from both the left end of the incident bar and the right end of the transmitted bar are not considered in the analysis. Note also that the transmitted energy in the SHPB system corresponds to the seismic or vibration energy as well as some other forms of energy in rock engineering. The measurements This equation indicates that the ratio During a series of Point-load-index tests at the Svea North, one coal mine of Store Norske Coal Company in Svalbard, the author observed the fragments of most sandstone samples flying away during slow compression, as shown in When blasting happens, fragments fly away from their original places. Usually, the average flight speed of the fragments is determined by measuring the velocity of the free surface or the velocity of the rock mass between the blastholes and the surface. This velocity is often called burden velocity. For example, the velocity of the rock mass measured in During dynamic rock fracture, it was observed that fragments not only flew but also rotated On the basis of the aforementioned description, a flow chart for energy expenditure in rock fracture can be made, as shown in Bergstrom and Sollenberger In the case of gelatin, the fragments produced by the compressive loading are allowed to move but there is no secondary breakage caused by the flying fragments; in the case of steel ring, the fragments can fly and impact on the steel ring. Therefore, the secondary breakage happens, meaning that the kinetic energy of the flying fragments may be used as an additional energy to break the fragments again. The experimental results by Bergstrom and Sollenberger High-pressure grinding roll (HPGR) was considered to be a great potential in improving capacity and reducing energy consumption in a grinding circuit The reasons for the marked difference in the energy savings between the HPGR and the hammer mill could be several but two important reasons are loading rate and utilization of kinetic energy. Since the HPGR corresponds to a quasi-static loading while the hammer mill does to an impact dynamic loading, the HPGR has higher energy efficiency than the hammer mill. In terms of the kinetic energy, the HPGR hinders the flight of ore particles and their kinetic energy can be partly used in additional breakage, while the hammer mill allows the particles to fly, resulting in wastage of the kinetic energy. Giacomini et al. As mentioned in the introduction, many investigators have observed that there are more boulders from the first row than from other rows in either open pit blasts or small scale tests. In addition, Aler et al. One of main reasons is that the fragments from the first row can freely fly away. This free flight makes the kinetic energy mostly wasted, since the kinetic energy carried by the flying fragments contributes nothing to fragmentation, provided that they are not fragmented again when they land on the ground. However, if such a free flight is stopped and some of the kinetic energy is transformed into effective energy to cause secondary fragmentation, the boulders can be reduced. To reduce or stop the free flight, the distance between the face of the bench to be blasted and the muck pile in front of the bench is to be reduced. Because such a distance (often in the upper part of a bench) decreases with the increasing number of the rows in a multi-row blast, the fragmentation becomes better (greater index) when the number of the rows in the blast increases. A simple model, as shown in In case (b), the fragment newly produced by blasting cannot freely fly since the fragment left from previous blast stops its flight as shown in According to the above description, we may utilize the kinetic energy in open pit blasting by stopping the flight of the fragments from the first row. Similarly, the rotation energy carried by the rotating fragments can be also utilized. To utilize the kinetic energy as well as the rotation energy, the easiest and cheapest way is to leave some fragments from the previous blast, as shown in In underground mining, especially sublevel caving (SLC) mining, when mining activity is performed beneath hanging wall that is inclined, as shown in The blasting in the first method is similar to that of the first row in open pit mines when the front face of the first row is completely free and nothing stands in front of this row. In this case, as analysed previously, the fragments (from ring On the contrary, in the second method, since the fragments from previous rings are left in front of the ring to be blasted, the boundary between the front face of the ring ( In SLC mining, after the extraction of a production ring is completed, next ring will be charged and blasted. The formation of such a gap surrounding the interface is mainly due to the blasting that suddenly releases a huge amount of detonation energy. This makes the burden rock move forward and result in the gap. This has been confirmed by two investigations in sublevel caving mining, one from Power In order to reduce fly rocks, Olofsson The condition of the interface between the buffer such as a muck pile and the bench face (or the face of an SLC ring) decides whether secondary fragmentation could happen or not. For a normal production blast either in an SLC ring or in an open pit blast, the interface is to a great extent like a free or partly free surface. In this case, the collision between the flying fragments and the muck pile or buffer happens and some of the kinetic energy carried by the fragments can be used in the secondary fragmentation to them. However, if the interface is fully and even tightly covered by the material, particularly confined by some other continuum materials, the situation will be different from that in normal SLC or open pit production blasts. Accordingly, secondary fragmentation may not happen. This can be analysed by using stress wave theory. In rock fracture process, the kinetic energy carried by the fragments is an important component of the total input energy, and it increases with increasing loading rates. According to dynamic tests, it is estimated that in blasting, the kinetic energy can be up to 28% of the total input energy if burden speed is 20 Different types of experiments have shown that secondary breakage to flying fragments is possible. Therefore, the kinetic energy carried by a flying fragment can be utilized in its secondary breakage so as to increase the energy efficiency and improve fragmentation. In open pit blasting, to utilize the kinetic energy and improve fragmentation, part of muck pile from previous blast should be left in front of new bench face. In this case, when next blast happens, the fragments from the first row will collide with the muck pile left from the previous blast. Similarly, in sublevel caving, an empty room should be avoided in front of a production ring. The point load index tests were done in Svea mine with the help from Tomas Warnqvist, Ayk Schindewolf, Turid Haugen and Thomas Skotte. The author is grateful to the anonymous reviewers for their valuable comments and suggestions on the manuscript.