The treatment of fractures of the posterior pilon is a timely issue. Restoration of the integrity of the incisura fibularis and subsequent anatomic reduction of the fibula are essential for reconstruction of the ankle mortise after trauma, and syndesmotic stability. Inappropriate treatment ultimately will lead to a poor functional outcome and quality of life. Open reduction and direct internal fixation through a posterolateral or posteromedial approach are increasingly preferred over indirect reduction and anteroposterior screw fixation. The posteromedial approach, although elegant, straightforward, and offering an excellent exposure of the fracture site, is used less frequently than the posterolateral approach. In this technical note we describe the posteromedial approach for the treatment of posterior pilon fractures in a step-by-step fashion. We will discuss the indications, its benefits and limitations.Ankle fractures comprise approximately 9% of all fractures Recently, the treatment of both posterior malleolus and pilon fractures has gained increasing attention. Small fractures of the posterior tibial rim were frequently ignored or fixed using an anteroposterior lag screw without appropriate reduction with inferior results Bartonicek et al. Since the posteromedial approach is used less frequently but may be very useful especially for posteromedial fragments, in this technical note we will discuss the indications, technique, benefits, and limitations.  Preoperative CT imaging of the fracture configuration, comminution, displacement and impaction is necessary for the planning the surgical approach and technique of fixation ( The patient is put in a prone position while a cushion is placed under the foot to optimize the access to the posteromedial aspect of the ankle ( The skin incision starts 3 A wound retractor is set in place in order to excerpt a constant pull on the subcutaneous tissue. Dissection continues from the superficial posterior compartment towards the deep posterior compartment, longitudinally dissecting the transverse intermuscular septum ( The interval between the neurovascular bundle, containing the tibialis posterior artery and nerve, and flexor hallucis longus muscle is exposed. The flexor hallucis longus muscle is retracted laterally and the neurovascular bundle medially. The fat tissue envelope surrounding the neurovascular bundle is left intact to avoid damage through pressure or traction ( After incision of the periosteum, the fracture fragments are mobilized. The tibiotalar joint and incisura fibularis tibiae are partially exposed and small intercalary fragments are either reduced or resected, depending on size and cartilage cover. Subsequently, the cortex is reduced using a raspatorium and temporarily fixed with one or two K-wires and the reduction is verified with standard fluoroscopy ( Finally, a buttress plate (2.7 After fixation of the posterior pilon, stability of the tibiofibular syndesmosis is tested with external rotation or the hook test. In most instances, bony fixation of the strong posterior syndesmosis will lead to syndesmotic stability The wound is closed in a single-layer using skin staples ( Over the last decades, treatment of posterior pilon fractures has evolved with the development of different surgical strategies and approaches The posterolateral approach is a relatively common approach and allows a surgeon to treat fractures of the posterior pilon simultaneously with distal fibular fractures through a single incision The posteromedial approach provides a good overview of both smaller and larger posterior pilon fracture fragments with medial extension. A direct access to the joint surface of the posterior pilon and adjacent incisura fibularis tibiae is obtained, which facilitates direct reduction of intercalary fragments Assal et al. There are multiple applications for the posteromedial approach in posterior pilon fractures. In the first place, the posteromedial approach is a very elegant approach for the treatment of small posteromedial or medially extended posterior pilon fractures. It should be particularly considered in the absence of fibular fractures and for posterior malleolar fractures accompanied by excessive ligamentous injury with substantial lateral talar shift and laterally displaced fibular fractures, which require additional lateral buttressing. It is furthermore useful for revision surgery in cases of inadequately reduced or secondary displaced posterior pilon fractures resulting in malunion and nonunion; and patients with severely comprised soft-tissues around the lateral aspect of the ankle. In summary, the posteromedial approach is elegant and straightforward in the treatment of posteromedial pilon fractures, posterior malleolar fractures with medial extension and/or intercalary fragments. Moreover, the postoperative complications are limited provided that the posteromedial neurovascular bundle is respected. No. Harm Hoekstra, Wouter Rosseels and Stefaan Nijs don't have any disclosures. Stefan Rammelt is a member of the AOTrauma Foot & Ankle Expert Group and the AOTrauma Education Taskforce; as such he receives travel support to meetings and courses from the AO Foundation.