Phase change materials are a promising strategy to reduce energy consumption in a wide range of applications including the building sector. Many studies have been done to evaluate the impact of PCM on thermal properties of building materials, however there exists little information on the influence of PCM on other properties of the support materials. This knowledge is necessary to determine the feasibility to apply and use building materials containing PCM. In this paper, the effect of the addition of different percentages of microencapsulated phase change material on the properties of two commercial single layer mortars has been studied. Physical and thermal properties as well as fire reaction have been evaluated.The building sector accounted for 34% of total global final energy use in 2010 according to the Energy Technology Perspectives (ETP) 2012 In recent years, several studies have been done in order to improve the thermal response of the building envelope to achieve a reduction of the energy demand. Temperature fluctuations can be minimized providing high thermal mass into materials that compose the building envelope A proper selection of the PCM to be implemented in the constructive system is mandatory. The melting temperature of the PCM must be around the range of operation, the PCM must be chemically stable with a minimum subcooling and without increasing toxic risks. The cost is also an important parameter that must be kept low. Paraffin waxes are a good example because they have low cost, moderate thermal storage densities, a wide range of melting temperatures, negligible subcooling, are chemically inert and stable without phase segregation, but, its low thermal conductivity limits their applications Normally, PCM is placed inside the wall but there are studies that verify the improvement of thermal response of the building envelope by adding the PCM in the outer face. In In this study, different percentages of microencapsulated PCM (0, 10 and 20%) are added into two different types of single layer mortar (SLM) with and without colouring agent. The purpose of this material is to be implemented in the outer face of the building envelope as a finishing coating due to its water repellent properties and its aesthetic quality. SLM can be an interesting option to improve thermal behaviour of the building envelope in new buildings and refurbishments. The main difference between SLM and conventional mortar taking into account its composition is that it includes glass fibres, organic additives, mineral pigmentations and water-repellent resins, as well as cement, fine aggregates and water. The aim of this research is to test SLM properties at micro-scale and laboratory scale in order to check the improvements of the material thermal behaviour, as well as to evaluate the modification of the physical and mechanical properties. Furthermore, fire reaction is also evaluated to check compliance with building codes. Two single layer mortars (SLM), white and yellow, supplied by Weber Saint Gobain have been used in this study. The main difference between the two mortars was the presence of colouring pigments in the yellow SLM. In addition to the components of a conventional mortar, cement and fine aggregates, these SLM contain glass fibres, organic additives, mineral pigmentations, and hydrofuged resins. Micronal Single layer mortars were prepared according to UNE-EN 1015-2 In previous studies, the effect on the hydration process of conventional mortars by the addition of microencapsulated PCM has been demonstrated SLM are tested at early age of 7 days, 28 days, and finally at a late age of 90 days to ensure the curing process is completely finished. The testing ages were selected according to the current standards. Bulk density is determined according to UNE-EN 1015-10 In order to calculate relative density and porosity, the hydrostatic weight ( The relative density ( The porosity of the material is the relation between the weight of the water inside the pores and the submerged weight of the sample, expressed in percentage by the following equation: Morphology of samples and distribution of microencapsulated PCM along the mortar have been studied with a Jeol J-6510 scanning electro-microscope. Two tests are used during the experimentation to determine dynamic modulus of elasticity, fundamental resonance frequency and propagation of ultrasonic waves, which are classified as non-destructive tests. There have been analysed samples of the prepared SLM formulations at different ages, 7, 28 and 90 days using samples of 40 In the case of the fundamental resonance frequency, both longitudinal and flexural MOE Dynamic modulus of elasticity (longitudinal) can also be calculated by the propagation of ultrasonic waves through the material. Compressive strength tests are carried out following the standard UNE-EN 1015-11 As it is specified in the standard, the samples used for compression tests result from the flexural test of three specimens of 40 The adherence test described in the standard UNE-EN 1015-12 The equipment Quickline-30 manufactured by Anter Corporation is a multi-functional equipment that uses the principle of the transient heat line method to calculate thermal conductivity ( A Differential Scanning Calorimeter (DSC) is used in order to analyse thermal properties of the single layer mortar. The equipment used to perform the DSC analysis was a DSC-822e commercialized by Mettler Toledo. The crucibles used were aluminium crucibles of 100 One of the most important concerns about the use of paraffin in buildings is its high flammability. Therefore, the study of the fire response of the SLM with microencapsulated PCM is mandatory. A fire reaction test using an epiradiator described in the standard UNE 23721  The results show a decrease of the bulk density by the addition of PCM. Bulk density of white SLM is reduced by 8.95% due to the addition of 10% of PCM and by 22.39% when 20% PCM is added. The decrease of the bulk density with PCM addition is slightly lower for the yellow SLM samples, 1.6% and 15.2% for 10% and 20% of PCM, respectively. These variations are caused by two main reasons: the lower density of microencapsulated PCM if it is compared with SLM density and, the variation of porosities due to the addition of another material (microencapsulated PCM) that acts as an aggregate. Relative density is the density of the material without taking into account the open pores. Relative density of SLM decrease with the addition of microencapsulated PCM, due to the lower density of microencapsulated PCM. Other authors have obtained similar trends for mortars and concrete containing PCM Porosity values are around 50% in all cases. Regarding the decrease in mechanical properties observed for the mortars containing PCM it was expected an increase of the porosity of the samples with PCM. Probably the reduced particle size of the microencapsulated PCM helps to keep the same values of porosity. These results differ from the ones obtained by Hunger et al. Results of MOE Moreover, final MOED is reduced by 39% and 44% in M10 and M20, respectively. Similar trends are observed in longitudinal modulus of elasticity. The behaviour of the compressive strength follows the same trend tan MOE The microencapsulated PCM is an organic material that do not take part in the hydration process of Portland cement, but that is avid of water. As it has been reported by Norvell et al. Compressive strength of M10 SLM ( One of the limitations in the use of PCM in cementitious-based products is the decrease of mechanical properties The values of SLM adherence ( White SLM without PCM has an adherence of 3.37  Results in A DSC analysis was carried out in order to calculate the enthalpy and the specific heat from DSC signal. The temperature range used in the experiments was from 10 to 50 The samples used to calculate the heat capacity weighted between 25 and 60 The Spanish building regulation The results of the reaction test show the ignition and extinction times, and the average duration of the flame. As general observations, the temperature of SLM samples without PCM increases with the application of the hot focus but are not flammable. White SLM do not change its colour with the application of the hot focus but yellow SLM suffers a variation of its colour becoming orange ( SLM samples have differences on the surfaces roughness and this fact can cause differences in the fire behaviour due to higher flame persistence in rough surfaces. Therefore M20 samples have been tested on both surfaces: rough and smooth. Both single layer mortars, with and without colouring agents, show the same trends regarding the effect of PCM in their formulation. The addition of microencapsulated PCM to SLM requires higher amounts of water to maintain the same workability and it affects the hydration process achieving lower values of mechanical properties, mainly at early ages. The increase of water during mixing as well as the modification of the particle size distribution and the amount of cement could be some of the most important factors affecting mechanical and physical properties. To sum up, only M10 could fulfil the requirements for plaster applications since compressive strength is only reduced by 5%. Thermal conductivity and thermal diffusivity decrease with the amount of PCM due to the lower thermal conductivity of the microcapsules. The enthalpy of M10 and M20 SLM are slightly lower than 10 and 20 As expected the presence of organic PCM worsens the fire behaviour of the mortar. M10 produces flame, but exhibit auto-extinguish ability once the heat source is removed. However, samples with 20% PCM may significantly contribute to flame spread in case of fire. SEM images show that once the PCM is added in the final matrix, the microcapsules were dispersed along the material. Furthermore, it is demonstrated that the mixing process to prepare mortar samples does not cause the breakage of microcapsules. The work is partially funded by the The work leading to this invention has received funding from the European Union's Seventh Framework Programme (FP7/2007-2013) under grant agreement no. PIRSES-GA-2013-610692 (INNOSTORAGE)