Physiological and behavioral aspects of masticatory function may have an impact on nutritional status, which has been little studied. The aim was to perform a comprehensive evaluation of objective, subjective and behavioral aspects of masticatory function in 231 adolescents, aged 14–17 years and compare these parameters between normal-weight (n = 115) and adolescents with overweight/obesity (n = 116). Objective aspects were examined by the Oro-facial Myofunctional Evaluation-expanded protocol (OMES-e), determining the masticatory type, chewing time/frequency, abnormal movements, and other; masticatory performance (color changeable chewing gum) and bite force were also explored. The subjective and behavioral evaluations were assessed using the Quality of Mastication Function Questionnaire, which explores the masticatory behavior and frequency/intensity of difficulty in chewing different types of foods. Results were submitted to normality tests, Chi-square, unpaired t-test and Mann-Whitney. A multiple linear regression model was used to evaluate which of the variables under study contributed to the variation in Percent Body Fat (α = 0.05). The results showed that OMES-e total score differed significantly between groups, that is, individuals with overweight showed more changes in oro-facial myofunctional aspects than normal-weight ones. Unilateral mastication was more frequent among females with overweight/obesity. They also showed greater difficulty on Habits and Fruit domains, reporting the need of adding sauce to the meal to facilitate swallowing and peeling and cutting fruit (apples) in small pieces in order to better chew them. OMES-e total score also showed a significant relationship with Percent Body Fat. Masticatory performance evaluated by chewing gum and bite force did not differ between groups. This study showed that adolescents with excess weight presented changes in masticatory behavior and greater difficulty in performing the masticatory function comparing to normal-weight ones.The rise in excess weight has been recently shown to occur among adolescents, reaching epidemic proportions in Western industrialized ( Mastication is the first step of the digestion and is responsible for the breakdown of food into smaller particles suitable for gastrointestinal absorption of nutrients ( Due to its complexity, the masticatory function can be evaluated by different aspects; the measure of masticatory performance and efficiency may reflect the quality of mastication by determining the number of chews necessary to render food ready for swallowing ( Excess weight may be associated to alterations in some aspects of mastication ( This study was approved by the Research and Ethics Committee of Piracicaba Dental School, University of Campinas (protocol n. 152/2014). The procedures and possible discomforts/risks were fully explained to the adolescent and their parents/guardians, who gave voluntary signed consent to participate in this research. The reporting of this research follows the STROBE recommendations for reports of observational studies. At the beginning of the study, 1585 students aged 14–17 years from ten public schools of Piracicaba (SP, Brazil) were invited to participate. Only 390 agreed formally to participate; from those, 231 adolescents were included considering the inclusion/exclusion criteria and divided into four groups, according to the reference data BMI-for-age and sex ( Sample size was calculated from results of a previous study ( The interview with the adolescent was structured in order to verify the medical and dental history: history/presence of nail biting, bruxism, mouth breathing, snoring, asthma/bronchitis; medical and dental treatments; chronic use of medications/drugs; symptoms of orofacial pain/temporomandibular disorders (TMD). The inclusion criterion was the presence of permanent dentition established (exception of third molars). The exclusion criteria adopted considered possible confounding factors, such as: presence of caries and/or tooth loss; periodontal disease (pockets>3 mm); pain of dental origin; history/current orthodontic treatment; symptoms of TMD in the previous month reported in the interview; chronic diseases such as asthma/bronchitis, epilepsy, cancer, rheumatoid arthritis, diabetes mellitus or hypertension; chronic use of drugs such as benzodiazepines, anti-inflammatories, steroids and antidepressants; dietary restrictions; dry mouth or salivary glands diseases; and inappropriate behavior and/or refusal to cooperate. Subjects presenting thinness and severe thinness were also excluded. TMD was screened using a questionnaire proposed by the American Academy of Orofacial Pain (AAOP), which consists of ten questions exploring joint sounds and pain, masticatory muscle pain or fatigue, and difficulty during opening the mouth ( The oral examination was performed at school, using a clinical mirror with LED light, exploratory probe, after oral hygiene instructions. Caries experience was evaluated by determining the number of decayed, missing, and filled permanent teeth (DMFT) and data on probing depth was collected according to the Community Periodontal Index ( As masticatory function is also related to dental occlusion, assessment of the severity of malocclusion was performed using the Peer Assessment Rating (PAR) index, based on the sum of 11 components of malocclusion including posterior/anterior tooth displacement (maxillary and mandibular), right/left buccal occlusion, overjet, overbite, and midline discrepancy ( Anthropometric evaluations involved the measurements of weight, height, body skeletal muscle mass and fat mass, by means of a digital stadiometer scale and bioelectric impedance analysis. Body mass index (BMI = kg/m The maximum unilateral bite force was measured using a digital gnatodynamometer (model DDK, Kratos Equipamentos Industriais Ltda., Cotia-SP, Brazil). During the evaluation, the subject remained seated, with the head in a relaxed position and the bite fork (10 mm of thickness) was placed between the maxillary and mandibular arches, at the permanent first molars. The adolescent was instructed and trained before to bite it with maximum force, and two measurements were made for each side of the dental arches (left and right). The maximum value of the two measurements on each side was considered as final value, with an approximation of 0.1 N. Masticatory performance was measured by colorimetric method using a color-changeable chewing gum, which changes color as mastication proceeds. The gum base contains red, yellow, and blue dyes, citric acid and xylitol. The red dye is pH-sensitive and appears under neutral or alkaline conditions. As the pH inside the gum is kept low by the citric acid, the color of the chewing gum remains yellowish-green before chewing. With the progression of chewing, the color turns from yellowish-green to red because the yellow and blue dyes seep into saliva, and the red dye appears as a result of elution of the citric acid. After chewing, color measurement can be performed using a portable reflectance spectrophotometer or a color scale, both methods been previously validated ( Subjects were asked to chew the gum for 1 min, as usual (“Please chew the gum well”). The time spent was measured with a chronometer. The chewed gum was extracted immediately after 1 min and compressed between two plastic films for color measurement using the color scale ( Two examiners performed the evaluation (APP and DSA), who were trained with both methods: color scale and reflectance spectrophotometer. A spectrophotometer (Konica Minolta CM-700d-Konica Minolta Investment Ltd. Sensing Business Division, Shanghai, China) was used to measure the color of the gum based on the CIE L*a*b* color space system; the Spearman correlation coefficient obtained between spectrophotometer and examiner 1 (APP) was 0.84 (p = 0.0006) and the correlation coefficient between spectrophotometer and examiner 2 (DSA) was 0.92 (p < 0.0001). After this, all chewed gums were evaluated only using the color scale. The validated protocol Chewing was recorded with the individual sitting in a chair with a backrest, the feet resting on the floor at a standardized distance (1 m) from the camera lens. The individuals chewed the chocolate-flavored cookie in their habitual manner (free chewing). Further, all video-recordings were evaluated and each item scored, considering that higher the score, better the function performed. The total time spent to eat the cookie was measured using a chronometer, which was started after the food was placed in the oral cavity and stopped after final swallowing, determining the chewing time (seconds) and chewing frequency (cycles/min). The subjective evaluation was carried out using a self-applied validated questionnaire (Quality of Masticatory Function Questionnaire) ( Do you have difficulty chewing hard, raw fruits, without cutting them (e.g.: apples)? Do you have to drink while eating to facilitate swallowing? In general, is the food well chewed before being swallowed? Statistical analyses were performed using BioEstat 5.3 (Mamirauá, Belém, PA, Brazil) and SigmaPlot 13 (Systat Software Inc., San Jose, CA, USA). A p-value of 0.05 or less was considered significant. A pilot study was conducted before beginning the data collection to verify the reproducibility of the measurements made, and later calculation of agreement (Kappa test) or intraclass correlation coefficient (ICC). The exploratory analysis consisted of means (SD), medians, quartiles and percentages; normality was assessed using Kolmogorov-Smirnov test. Comparisons between normal-weight and overweight/obesity groups for each sex were performed using unpaired A multiple linear regression model was used to evaluate which of the variables under study contributed to the variation in percent of body fat. The model was adjusted using the “Best Subsets”, which is an automated procedure that identifies the best-fitting regression models with predictors specified in the study with smaller variance than the full model using all predictors. In this study, the chosen model was the one which presented the highest adjusted R-square and the variance inflation factor (VIF) at or near 1.0. Based on biological plausibility, the following independent variables were added to the initial model: age, sex, masticatory performance, bite force, OMES-e total score, scores on Quality of Masticatory Function Questionnaire, chewing time and chewing frequency. The intra-examiner reproducibility observed for the variables under study ranged from satisfactory (PAR) to excellent reproducibility (DMFT/dmft), as shown in   Masticatory performance did not differ between the groups. Also, maximum bite force, chewing time and chewing frequency did not differ significantly between normal-weight and overweight/obesity subjects. The subjective evaluation of the masticatory quality also showed significant difference between groups among females. The scores achieved on “Habits” and “Fruit” domains were higher among females with overweight/obesity when comparing with normal-weight ones, that is, females with excess weight presented greater difficulty in performing the masticatory function. Each item of the “Habits” and “Fruit” domains was also tested; according to the results found, females with overweight/obesity reported the need of adding sauce to the meal to facilitate swallowing and peeling and cutting fruits (apples) in small pieces in order to chew them with greater frequency (p < 0.05). Caries experience in terms of filled teeth was compared between groups, although no significant difference was observed ( The dependent variable Due to the high prevalence of overweight and obesity, studies have focused on weight management and a better understanding of the factors that may influence satiety, nutrition and weight gain. The sample of adolescents aged 14–17 years with overweight/obesity enrolled in this study showed more changes in oro-facial myofunctional aspects when performing the masticatory function. The regression analysis confirmed this result, with a significant relationship between body fat percentage and OMES-e total score. Alterations in these aspects may include a decrease in muscle tone and/or the restriction of mandibular movements, which may impact bolus formation; in addition, large volumes of air may be swallowed together with the food, which may lead to an overload of the stomach in its mechanical activity to mix a poorly prepared bolus ( The unilateral pattern of mastication was more frequent among females volunteers with overweight/obesity. Unilateral masticatory pattern has been associated to unilateral crossbite, structural asymmetries and functional impairments ( Although the chewing time and chewing frequency did not differ significantly between groups, alterations in the time taken for eating a test-meal and the number of chews were previously reported among children with excess weight ( The bite force did not differ between groups. According to the literature, bite force may vary according to dental health, facial morphology, age, and, to a larger extend, sex ( It is important to consider that the properties of the food being chewed, in terms of its hardness, fat content, size, and structure may influence the evaluations. Natural foods have the advantage of being well accepted and more pleasant taste and texture, and chewing gum also has the advantage of being routinely consumed by adolescents ( Food preparation methods, such as chopping, roasting or salting, influence the number of masticatory cycles required before swallowing ( When testing each item of the “Habits” and “Fruit” domains, overweight/obesity females reported with greater frequency the need of adding sauce to the meal to facilitate swallowing and peeling and cutting fruit in small pieces in order to chew them. This result shows that females with excess weight did not differ from normal-weight ones in masticatory performance and bite force, but indeed in masticatory behavior and how food is chosen and prepared. In addition, the habit of adding sauce or gravies to moisten the meal to facilitate swallowing may induce the swallowing of larger particles before the bolus is well formed. Further studies are needed to verify if those habits are related to fiber-rich foods avoidance, once consistent unbalanced food selection could result in poor diets, high in calories but low in fiber, vitamins, and proteins. As sugar intake is recognized as the most important dietary factor in the development of dental caries ( Masticatory efficiency and behavior are aspects that in general are not directly related and, thus, changes in dietary patterns may not occur solely because the individual's chewing efficiency improves ( Considering that oral health may have a strong impact on mastication, it is advisable that the dental, periodontal and joints conditions should be similar in all groups when evaluating masticatory performance ( Bite force and masticatory performance as evaluated by a color-changeable chewing gum did not differ between adolescents with and without excess weight; however, volunteers with overweight/obesity presented more changes in oro-facial myofunctional aspects of the mastication. In addition, females with overweight/obesity reported greater difficulty in performing the function and alterations in masticatory behavior. The authors declare no conflict of interests. This work was supported by the The authors would like to thank all study participants. Color Scale was kindly provided by Prof. Eijiro Yamaga, Tokyo Medical and Dental University, Japan.