 Arsenic(III) A chloroform solution of diethylammonium DDTC (formula 4.37) extracts As(III). Sn(II), and Sb(III) from 1 -5 As(V) has been separated from a number of elements by extraction into butanol from acidic medium as the molybdoarsenic heteropoly acid As(III) has been extracted from iodide and chloride solutions by means of a benzene solution of diphenyl(2-pyridyl)methane The separation of arsenic as the toxic gas arsine. AsH Arsenic is normally separated as ASCl Arsenic(III) may also be distilled from HBr Traces of As(V) are precipitated as FeAsO Thionalide deposited on Separation of As(III) from As(V) in ground waters by means of anion exchanger in acetate form has been proposed [ The arsenomolybdenum blue method is the most widely used. The method using the reaction of ASH Arsenic, oxidised to As(V) (e.g. by evaporation to dryness with HNO N The best solvents for the extraction of arsenomolybdenum blue are butyl and amyl alcohols, ethers, and ethyl acetate. The molar absorptivity ε of the As-Mo blue in butanol solution is 2.5·10 Alternatively, arsenic may be extracted as molybdoarsenic acid, and the reducing agent may then be added to the organic phase Phosphorus(V) forms phosphomolybdenum blue under the reaction conditions used to form arsenomolybdenum blue. The corresponding silicon and germanium compounds are Molybdate reagent: a) dissolve 1.0 Standard arsenic(III) solution: 1 Arsenic-free conc. hydrochloric acid. To 20    The arsine evolved by nascent hydrogen is absorbed in a pyridine solution of silver diethyldithiocarbamate. The pyridine-soluble product of reaction between ASH The functions of the reagents used in the reduction of arsenic compounds, such as Zn. HCl. MCl During the extraction of ASCI A solution of Ag-DDTC in CHCl Silver diethyldithiocarbamate (Ag-DDTC). Dissolve 1 Zinc (As-free), granulated. Melt down granulated zinc in a quartz crucible and pour it in a thin jet into a tall beaker filled with water of appropriate purity. Dry the comminuted zinc and store it in a stoppered vessel. Cotton wool impregnated with lead acetate. Preparation as in p. 8.2.3.  After 30 The trace amount of arsenic, contained in the sample solution, is reduced to volatile ASH The nascent hydrogen is produced in reaction of zinc with HCl (3-4 Since also H Mercuric bromide papers. Place thin, compact filter paper disks (about 20 Standard arsenic(III) solution: 1 Filter paper and cotton wool impregnated with lead acetate. Impregnate filter paper strips (2.5 x 4 Gutzeit apparatus ( Zinc (As-free). Comminution method as in p. 8.2.2. Place the sample solution containing 0.2-3 When the evolution of hydrogen is complete (30-60 Sensitive methods for determining arsenic are based on Methods based on extractable associates of the reduced form of molybdoarsenic acid with Crystal Violet (ε=3.1·10 The iodide complex of As(III) associated with Brilliant Green or Butylrhodamine B was filtered off and dissolved in ethanol (ε=1.3·10 The In the reaction of As(III) with IO The arsenomolybdenum blue method was applied for determination of arsenic in: biological materials Trace amounts of As were determined in water and sewage by the following method: The sample was treated with sodium tetraborate (NaBH The Ag-DDTC method was used for determination of arsenic in: waters The Gutzeit method was applied in determinations of arsenic i.a. in: germanium and its compounds Arsenic was also determined in natural water after flotation of the ion-associate with Malachite Green