Background
                  Displaced and shortened clavicular shaft fractures can be treated by intramedullary fixation; however, hardware migration and soft tissue irritation at the insertion site have complicated its use. The aim of this study was to determine whether the new Sonoma CRx intramedullary device (Sonoma Orthopedic Products Inc, Santa Rosa, CA, USA) could be used successfully to treat displaced and shortened clavicular shaft fractures and restore the functional capacity of shoulder without the development of secondary complications.
               
                  Methods
                  Displaced and shortened clavicular shaft fractures in 47 consecutive patients were treated with the CRx device. Incision size was captured during the surgical procedure. The union rate was evaluated postoperatively. Shoulder function was assessed by Disabilities of the Arm, Shoulder and Hand (DASH) score, the Constant Shoulder Score, and a range of motion score. Patients were assessed after 3 to 6 months (group I), 6 to 9 months (group II), or 9 to 12 months (group III) postoperatively.
               
                  Results
                  Union was achieved in all patients at the time of review, without any incidence of hardware migration. Postoperative complications developed in 3 patients, comprising infection in 1 and hardware failure in 2. No differences among the groups were found for the DASH score (P = .33), Constant Shoulder Score (P = .38), and range of motion score (P = .96). The DASH, Constant Shoulder, and range of motion scores were similar to other successful treatment options, such as plating.
               
                  Conclusion
                  The Sonoma CRx is a good alternative device to treat displaced and shortened clavicular shaft fractures and restore the functional capacity of the shoulder. Future research should focus on when nailing and plating should be used to treat clavicular shaft fractures most optimally.Fracture of the clavicle is a relatively common injury, thought to account for 35% of all shoulder girdle injuries in adults. Surgical options for these more complicated fractures include extramedullary and intramedullary fixation devices. Extramedullary fixation typically involves a plate and screw construct and may take the form of a fixed-angle or a nonfixed-angle device. Intramedullary fixation may involve rigid or flexible devices in the form of rigid screw designs or flexible titanium nails, respectively. In response to the concerns associated with existing fixation devices, a new intramedullary device for the treatment of displaced and shortened clavicular shaft fractures has recently been introduced. These claims have not yet been confirmed in a controlled research setting. The main aim of this study was therefore to determine whether this new intramedullary device could be used successfully to treat displaced and shortened clavicular shaft fractures, while showing no evidence of migration in the months after surgery. To achieve this research aim, consecutive patients treated with this device in a 12-month period were monitored and assessed postoperatively for 3 months to 12 months. The study recruited 47 consecutive patients with displaced and shortened clavicular shaft fractures, who were treated with the Sonoma CRx intramedullary device (Sonoma Orthopedic Products Inc, Santa Rosa, CA, USA). All patients were treated by the same surgeon at Tygerberg Academic Hospital, Cape Town, South Africa. Before participation in the study, all patients were thoroughly informed about the study and the associated risks, and an informed consent was signed before the device was implanted. All patients who participated in the study were diagnosed with a displaced and shortened clavicular shaft fracture and were treated surgically using the innovative Sonoma CRx intramedullary device over a 12-month period. Patients were treated within 7 days of the injury, after which the shoulder was immobilized for 6 weeks in a shoulder immobilizer. During this period, patients were asked to remove the immobilizer 6 times a day and perform antigravity pendular exercises of the shoulder and range of motion exercises of the ipsilateral elbow. At 6 weeks, patients were allowed to remove the immobilizer and return to normal activities of the shoulder. No physiotherapy-guided exercise program for the shoulder was provided. The study protocol called for the study patients to return to the hospital on one occasion, which was planned between 3 and 12 months after the surgery. On the basis of the interval between the surgery and the follow-up assessment, patients were retrospectively categorized as 3 to 6 months postoperative (group I), 6 to 9 months postoperative (group II), or 9 to 12 months postoperative (group III). The range of follow-up times was used to provide insight into the healing capacity (union rate) with the use of the new device and, when possible, when complications with the device might tend to occur. In addition, the range of follow-up periods was intended to provide insight into how quickly functional shoulder capacity tends to be restored. During the assessment visit, standard anterior-posterior and 15° cephalad tilt radiographs were obtained. An independent radiologist reviewed these for union, loss of fixation, and hardware migration. A physical examination was used to determine whether migrated or protruding hardware was causing soft-tissue irritation. The functional capacity of the shoulder was assessed using the Disabilities of the Arm, Shoulder and Hand (DASH) score and the Constant Shoulder Score. The Sonoma CRx is an innovative clavicular fracture repair system that transforms from a flexible intramedullary device at insertion into a rigid fixation system after placement inside the clavicular bone. The stainless steel device consists of a solid straight hub, a flexible tubular medial section, and an internal fixation system ( Patients were given intravenous cefazolin (2 grams) preoperatively and a general anaesthetic. The patient was placed in the beach chair position, sterilely prepared, and draped. An incision was made over the fracture site, and the medial and lateral fragments were identified, while taking care that minimal soft tissue was stripped off the clavicle and comminuted fragments. The medullary canal of the medial fragment was opened with a 3-mm awl and then reamed manually with a 4.5-mm awl. The surgeon aimed to prepare the canal as far medially as possible to allow for implantation of the longest possible implant ( The canal was then reamed under power with a flexible reamer from lateral to medial. The length of implant required was measured by passing a length gauge over the reamer when it was at its most medial position past the fracture. An insertion guide was placed into the lateral end of the clavicle over the guidewire before its removal. The intramedullary nail was connected to the locking jig and inserted into the lateral aspect of the clavicle over the insertion guide. The device was passed over the fracture into the medial end of the clavicle. Once the desired position of the device was confirmed, the grippers were activated from distally ( The data were analyzed with STATISTICA 12 software (StatSoft Inc, Tulsa, OK, USA), with statistical significance accepted at Complications developed in 3 patients after implantation of the intramedullary device. A deep infection developed in 1 patient that resulted in the removal of the implant, at which time the fracture was partially united and no further surgical treatment was indicated. The infection was successfully treated with intravenous antibiotics. Two other patients were diagnosed with broken hardware. Both failures occurred at the junction of the flexible and nonflexible portion of the implant. One of these patients had a second trauma incident at 1 month postoperatively but did not seek medical attention because the clavicular bone did not look displaced. The other patient resumed his occupation as a manual construction worker at a building site 1 week postoperatively. Although the behavior of both patients might have contributed to failure of the device, the device in both cases was also not inserted far enough into the medial fragment of the clavicle. However, the clavicular fractures in all 3 patients united in a functional and acceptable position. The descriptive statistics of the 47 patients who had a shortened and displaced clavicular shaft fracture treated with the Sonoma CRx intramedullary nail are reported in All fractures were fully united at the time of review, and no radiographic evidence of hardware migration was found. Visual and tactile examination did not reveal any protrusion of the Sonoma CRx device into the soft tissue or skin of the lateral shoulder. The functional outcome scores of the affected shoulders are reported in The innovative intramedullary fixation device, also known as the Sonoma CRx, was used to treat 47 patients with displaced and shortened clavicle shaft fractures. The mean operation time to implant the device was 74 ± 16 minutes (range, 45-110 minutes). The mean incision length was 49 ± 17 mm, which is substantially less than the incision size of 80 to 100 mm needed to plate clavicular shaft fractures. Complications developed in 3 patients after implantation of the device, which is comparable to the complication rates reported in studies using other extramedullary and intramedullary clavicle fixation devices. In line with our findings, Palmer et al All fractures were fully united at the follow-up visit irrespective of whether the patient was seen at 3 to 6, 6 to 9, or 9 to 12 months postoperatively. Although we cannot conclude that fractures were fully united within a certain time frame, the results within group I suggest that the fractures might unite as quickly as within 6 months. However a longitudinal study with a larger sample size is needed to determine the exact time frame at which clavicular shaft fractures generally unite when the CRx device is used. The functional capacity of the shoulder postoperatively was measured with the range of motion division of the Constant Shoulder Score, the Constant Shoulder Score, and the DASH score. The main limitation of the current study design is that patients were followed up longitudinally so that effects over time could be made. Because the CRx device was not compared with a traditional plating technique, no conclusion can be drawn whether nailing or plating of clavicular shaft fractures is more effective. The current study and the literature suggest that nailing and plating both seem to be associated with complications. However, complications in both these devices are frequently caused by underlying biological factors or technical implantation mistakes, or both, that cause the device to malfunction. Future research should aim to conduct a randomized control trial to establish which method can be best used to treat displaced and shortened clavicular shaft fractures. This study shows that the CRx intramedullary device was able to successfully treat displaced and shortened clavicular shaft fractures, resulting in a 100% union rate. Good functional outcome scores and range of motion of the affected shoulders were found. Future research should aim to establish if the CRx intramedullary device is more effective than traditional plating and when which device can best be used to treat patients with displaced and shortened clavicle shaft fractures. The authors thank all of the patients who participated in this study. The study was funded by the The authors, their immediate families, and any research foundations with which they are affiliated have not received any financial payments or other benefits from any commercial entity related to the subject of this article.