The aim of the study was to compare contents of biologically active compounds (ascorbic acid, phenolic compounds and glucosinolates) and antioxidant activity (ABTS assay) as well as sensory attributes of beverages based on apple juice with an addition of red cabbage added in the frozen (F) (17%), purée (Pu) (17%) or freeze-dried form (FD) (2%). The effect of thermal treatment (-P) of the product on the above mentioned parameters was analyzed. In the produced beverages the content of ascorbic acid was significantly lower than in apple juice. Contents of phenolic compounds increased from 3.1 to 4.9-fold (depending on the applied additive) in comparison to that in apple juice. A statistically significant correlation (R
                     2 = 0.89) was observed between antioxidant activity and total contents of phenolics. In the tested beverages glucosinolates were found at amounts ranging from 149 to 171 mg/L. Thermal treatment caused a significant reduction in the levels of ascorbic acid and glucosinolates in all the tested products. In turn, phenolic contents decreased in F-P and FD-P (by 11% and 16%, respectively). The highest contents of investigated compounds were recorded in samples with an addition of freeze-dried red cabbage. All tested samples were found to be sensorially acceptable.Epidemiological studies conducted in recent years have indicated a positive correlation between the consumption of fruits and vegetables and prevention of cancer and cardiovascular diseases ( Good sources of biologically active compounds are vegetables of the subspecies of The introduction of an addition of red cabbage to cloudy apple juice may increase contents of biologically active compounds, including glucosinolates, in liquid products. The application of frozen, freeze-dried or pulp forms may promote preservation of active compounds in comparison to their contents in comminuted material. Freezing of the raw material may help preserve vitamin C, phenolics or anthocyanins ( Apple juice seems to be a good base for a novel product, since it is frequently consumed and by itself it is a good source of compounds exhibiting biological activity. Compounds extracted from cloudy apple juice include e.g. catechins, polymeric (procyanidin) forms, mainly constituted by (−)-epicatechin units, hydroxycinnamic acids and dihydrochalcones ( The aim of the study was to compare contents of biologically active compounds (phenolics, ascorbic acid and glucosinolates) as well as antioxidant activity of beverages based on apple juice with an addition of red cabbage in the frozen, purée or freeze-dried form. Moreover, the effect of thermal treatment during product preservation on examined parameters was also analyzed. Meta-phosphoric acid (HPO Analyses were conducted on red cabbage cv. Huzaro coming from the Cultivar Testing Experimental Station in Szczecin. Raw material after harvest was stored for 1 week at 1 °C. Apple juice was produced from apples of cv. Shampion coming from the Agricultural and Pomiculture Experimental Station in Przybroda. Apples were processed immediately after harvest. Red cabbage was subjected to pre-treatment. Cabbage heads were sorted and washed, cores were cut out and cabbage was shredded into 3-cm pieces. Next, intermediate products were prepared, i.e. frozen, purée and freeze-dried red cabbage. The frozen intermediate product was produced by freezing red cabbage at −50 °C. After 24 h frozen storage the raw material was comminuted using a Termomix laboratory mill (Wuppertal, Vorwerk, Germany). The raw material thawed during comminution. To produce purée the raw material was heated (500 g raw material/50 mL water; temperature 80 °C; time 10 min) and then comminuted in a Termomix laboratory mill. Comminuted red cabbage was cooled to a temperature of 55 °C and was passed through a laboratory pulper with a 2 mm mesh size (Zelmer typ 986.87, Rzeszów, Poland) (Spomasz, Wroclaw, Poland) to remove coarse fibres. Raw material for freeze-drying was frozen at −50 °C. Freeze-drying was run in a Freeze Dryer 6L by Labconco Corporation (Kansas City, USA) at a pressure of 13.3 Pa for 48 h at shelf temperature of 23 °C. The freeze-dried products were comminuted using a Termomix laboratory mill. Apples of cv. Shampion were sorted, washed and comminuted using a Zelmer type 986.87 food processor (Rzeszów, Poland). Next, they were pressed in a Para-press laboratory press (Arauner Kitzingen, Kitzingein, Germany) at 0.28 MPa for 10 min. Produced juice was supplemented with red cabbage added in the form of the intermediate products and mixed in a Termomix laboratory mill. The following variants of liquid products were prepared: 83% apple juice and 17% frozen red cabbage (F) or purée (Pu), and 98% apple juice and 2% freeze-dried red cabbage (which corresponded to the amount of red cabbage added in the frozen and purée forms in terms of d.w.) (FD). Additionally, analyses were performed on apple juice with no additives, constituting the basis for the product variants. The obtained products were heated in Thermomix up to 90 °C for 5 min and then were hot filled to 0.33 L glass bottles, immediately inverted for 10 min to sterilize the caps, and cooled to 20 °C. Analyses were conducted on samples before and after thermal treatment (apple juice-P; F-P; Pu-P; FD-P). Beverages were analyzed directly after processing. Tested samples (10 mL) were homogenized with 25 mL 10 g/L meta-phosphoric acid in an IKA T-25 homogenizer (Staufen, Germany). Next, samples were shaken for 15 min, after which they were centrifuged for 30 min in a MPW-351R centrifuge (Warszawa, Poland) at 3800 × The volume of 10 mL of prepared samples was collected for analyses (2.3.2). Samples were homogenized using an IKA T-25 homogenizer with 50 mL·700 g/L methanol. Next homogenates were shaken for 15 min in a mechanical Water Bath Shaker type 357 (Elpin, Lubawa, Poland) and then vacuum filtered. Residue was collected from the filter and shaken again with 50 mL 700 g/L methanol and filtered. The filtrates were combined and centrifuged in a mechanical MPW-351R centrifuge at 3000 × Phenolic profiles were determined using the LC Agilent Technologies 1200 Rapid Resolution system equipped with a Poroshell 120, SB-C18 column (4.6 × 150 mm, 2.7 μm). The binary mobile phase according to 2,2-Azinobis-(3-ethylbenzothiazoline-6-sulphonic acid) radical monocation scavenging activity was determined following a procedure described by In order to determine glucosinolate contents the analyzed samples were freeze-drying. This material (0.5 g) was extracted twice with 3 mL boiling methanol (700 g/L) in a water bath at 75 °C for 20 min. The known amount of glucotropaeolin was added to each sample during extraction as the internal standard. Obtained extracts were purified onto an ion exchange mini-column (DEAE Sephadex A-25). The column was washed with 2 mL imidazol formate (6 mol/L) and twice with 1 mL Millipore water and then loaded with 6 mL of each extract. Purified sulphatase was added to the column and it was incubated overnight at room temperature. Desulphoglucosinolates were eluted with water and separated using the LC Agilent Technologies 1200 Rapid Resolution equipped with a Poroshell 120, SB-C18 column (4.6 × 150 mm, 2.7 μm) with a flow rate of 1 mL/min at 30 °C. The used mobile phase was water (A) and acetonitrile in water (20:80 v/v, B). The total running time was 30 min and the gradient was changed as follows: 100% A/0%B for 1 min, then within 22 min–100% B and within 5 min–100% B, after which the column was equilibrated at 100% A for 2 min. A UV detector was used at a wavelength of 229 nm. Desulphoglucosinolates were quantified against the glucotropaeolin internal standard and expressed as mg/L of the product. The peaks were identified by comparison with data obtained from literature ( The sensory analysis was evaluated by a 15-member semi-trained panel (all employees of the Poznan University of Life Sciences), who were informed of the evaluation conditions. Repeatability of panel members was evaluated by a measure of the agreement between assessments on the same sample under the same conditions. Analyses were performed using a structured linear scale of 100 mm in length. Desirability of colour, aroma, taste and consistency was assessed. The following boundary descriptors were assumed: highly undesirable (0 mm) and highly desirable (100 mm). The panel members marked the score for the evaluated sample on the scale taking into consideration the boundary descriptors. Results were converted into numerical values in the scale of 0–10 units (0 mm–100 mm, respectively). The sections of the scale marked by the assessing panel members were converted into numbers by measuring the distance of each marked score from the scale boundary (0 mm) ( The reproducibility of the results is expressed as pooled standard deviation values (Pooled SD). Statistical analysis was performed by computer software Statistica version 9.1 (StatSoft Inc.; Tulsa, USA). The analysis of variance (ANOVA) and Fisher's least significant difference (LSD) multicomparison test were performed. Statistically significant differences were reported at Ascorbic acid content in the products with an addition of red cabbage in the purée, frozen or freeze-dried forms was significantly ( The content of ascorbic acid recorded in apples, i.e. 2.2–35 mg/100 g ( Contents of ascorbic acid in frozen vegetables may decrease by 20% up to 60% and this reduction is connected mainly with blanching ( The lowest losses of ascorbic acid are recorded in the beverages with freeze-dried cabbage. A considerable reduction in ascorbic acid contents in produced beverages was recorded after thermal treatment (90 °C, 5 min), particularly in samples with an addition of frozen or freeze-dried red cabbage. In these samples endogenous ascorbic acid oxidase (AAO) was not previously inactivated. As it results from a study by The highest content of phenolic compounds was found in samples with an addition of freeze-dried red cabbage (FD). In these beverages the content of examined compounds was 4.9-fold higher than in apple juice. Contents of phenolics in Pu and F samples were found to increase 3.5- and 3.1-fold ( Following thermal treatment a significant ( In apple juice hydroxycinnamic acids accounted for 88 ± 2% of total polyphenol contents, while 12 ± 2% were flavonoids. In beverages with an addition of purée and frozen red cabbage the share of hydroxycinnamic acids was 71 ± 4% at 29 ± 4% flavonoids. In all samples with an addition of red cabbage the recorded content of flavonoids was connected with the presence of anthocyanins. In the case of apple juice supplemented with freeze-dried red cabbage the content of hydroxycinnamic acids was 60 ± 1%, while flavonoids comprised 40 ± 1%. Thermal treatment of tested products did not cause any change in the profile of phenolic compounds ( Apple juice was found to contain chlorogenic acid and In the case of flavonoids in apple juice the identified compounds included (+)-catechin, oligomeric procyanidins, (−)-epicatechin, phloridzin, phloretin xyloglucoside and quercetin derivatives. Oligomeric procyanidins were predominant. Thermal processing of apple juice caused a significant ( The content of phenolic compounds in fresh apple juice may range from 30 to 419 mg/kg ( In the beverage with an addition of purée, the content of phenolics was lower than in samples with freeze-dried red cabbage. In the case when purée was the intermediate product, thermal pre-treatment was applied (500 g raw material/50 mL water; temperature 80 °C; time 10 min). Boiling red cabbage for 10 min (1:1 w:v raw material : solution) causes a 33–43% reduction in phenolic contents in the raw material ( The addition of freeze-dried red cabbage to apple juice caused a 2-fold increase in antioxidant capacity in the investigated extracts of phenolic compounds. In these beverages the highest contents of phenolics were also recorded. In the case of beverages with an addition of purée or frozen red cabbage antioxidant capacity increased by 50%. Thermal treatment of tested beverages caused a significant ( Addition of various forms of red cabbage to apple juice contributed to an enrichment of produced beverages with glucosinolates. The highest content of these compounds was found in samples with an addition of frozen (F) and freeze-dried red cabbage (FD). Thermal treatment of produced beverages caused a significant reduction ( In beverages with an addition of purée or frozen red cabbage aliphatic glucosinolates accounted for approx. 70% total contents of glucosinolates. In turn, in samples with an addition of freeze-dried red cabbage it was 65% ( In samples with an addition of frozen and freeze-dried red cabbage after thermal treatment (90 °C; 5 min) losses of indole glucosinolates were higher than those of aliphatic glucosinolates. For aliphatic glucosinolates they amounted to 4% and 10%, respectively, for FD-P and F-P. In the case of indole glucosinolates their degradation amounted to 45% and 50% ( Among aliphatic glucosinolates present in the tested samples glucoiberin, sinigrin, glucoraphanin and progoitrin were identified in beverages with an addition of purée, while epiprogoitrin was found in samples with an addition of frozen cabbage. In the produced beverages glucoiberin and glucoraphanin as well as sinigrin accounted for 32–34% and 16–22% of total glucosinolate contents, respectively. Thermal treatment caused a significant ( Among indole glucosinolates 4-hydroxybrassicin, glucobrassicin and 4-methoxybrassicin were identified in the tested samples. In samples with an addition of purée glucobrassicin and 4-methoxyglucobrassicin accounted for 9% and 10% total contents of glucosinolates. In the other beverages the contents of these compounds were significantly ( In sensory examination colour in the produced beverages was considered desirable. The addition of red cabbage purée to apple juice caused a significant deterioration of desirability of beverage aroma in comparison to other products. In turn, the introduction of freeze-dried red cabbage to apple juice resulted in a lower score for taste desirability in comparison to samples with an addition of puréed or frozen cabbage. In all beverages with an addition of red cabbage desirability of consistency was lower than that of apple juice, which was connected with the presence of suspended particles in juice. A significant ( Principal Component Analysis transforms the original measured variable into new non-correlated components. Based on the correlation matrix, 2 principal components were identified, explaining 80% total variability (PC1 for 56.51% variation, PC2 for 23.45%, respectively), for which correlations with input variables are presented in The PC1 was negatively correlated with the contents of ascorbic acid, hydroxycinnamic acids, flavonoids, aliphatic and indole glucosinolates and sensory quality attributes. The PC2 was negatively correlated with ABTS scavenging capacity (  The content of biologically active compounds in the tested products was to a great extent influenced by the type of the applied intermediate product. The addition of freeze-dried red cabbage to a beverage made it possible to retain biologically active compounds at the highest level. Conducted analyses indicate the necessity to determine the effect of individual stages in the preparation of the intermediate product on the content of active compounds. Optimization of these processes may contribute to better retention of biologically active compounds in the tested products. Thermal processing (90 °C; 5 min) of the beverages contributed to a significant reduction of contents in the case of vitamin C, phenolics and glucosinolates. Obtained beverages had sensorially acceptable attributes. The introduction of red cabbage to apple juice resulted in the enrichment of this product in glucosinolates, being precursors of compounds important for cancer prevention, as well as acylated anthocyanins with high antioxidant activity. The freeze-dried form of red cabbage addition seems to be best in terms of retention of active compounds. This study was supported by a grant within the framework of project “