For pretreatment of selective flotation, plasma treatment of chalcopyrite and molybdenite was applied then the minerals were washed by solution at pH 9 with oxygen bubbling. Surface characteristics of these minerals were investigated with AFM, XPS, zeta potential and contact angle measurements. Contact angle of chalcopyrite and molybdenite decreased a lot by plasma treatment. When they were washed with pH 9 solution with oxygen bubbling, contact angle of molybdenite increased whereas chalcopyrite one kept low. Adhesion force measurements indicated similar behavior. Result of flotation experiments indicated low recovery of both chalcopyrite and molybdenite after plasma treatment and only molybdenite recovery became higher after washing. Selective flotation of chalcopyrite and molybdenite could be achieved with this process. However, flotation of mixture of chalcopyrite and molybdenite after these treatments indicated both chalcopyrite and molybdenite were depressed. Addition of emulsified kerosene changed the flotation results where molybdenite was floated and chalcopyrite was depressed. Possible mechanism of selective flotation was proposed from the results of XPS, AFM, etc.Molybdenite (MoS Pure crystals of chalcopyrite (Miyatamata mine, Japan) and molybdenite (Hirase mine, Japan) were used as experimental samples in this study. For atomic force microscopy (AFM) analysis and contact angle measurements, massive samples were prepared as following procedure. For chalcopyrite, the sample was cut as a flat shape and then it was exposed for polishing from #800 to #4000 emery paper and Texmet (Buehler, USA) perforated non-woven pat and DP-Nap (Struers, Germany) fine polishing cloth mounted on a plate using 3 Powder chalcopyrite sample was ground by agate mortar and screened (+75–106 Plasma treatment of chalcopyrite and molybdenite sample was carried out with plasma generator (Model PA 1504, Kyoto Denshi-Keisoku Co., Ltd.) at 10 Untreated and plasma treated samples were examined by AFM to investigate their morphology, changes in their surface characteristics and surface adhesion force. AFM images were collected in contact mode using a silicon nitride cantilever. Images were collected for each of the treated samples. Additionally, the adhesion force of the mineral was measured under ambient conditions of 25 The floatability tests on each mineral were carried out using the Hallimond tube method ( Prior to flotation experiments, emulsification has achieved with specific experiments as following procedures. Known amounts of kerosene were added in 150 The contact angles were measured using a Goniometer (Dropmaster 300, Kyowa Interface Science Co., Ltd.) with sessile drop method. 0.1 Zeta potentials of powder mineral samples were measured by zeta potential analyzer (Zetasizer Nano-zs, Malvern Co., Ltd.). 0.5 Untreated and treated mineral powder samples were freeze-dried overnight for analysis with X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy XPS using AXIS 165 (Shimazu–Kratos Co., Ltd.) with Al Kα X-ray source (1486.6 To investigate the surface characteristics of chalcopyrite and molybdenite after plasma treatment and washing with (0.001 Adhesion force on the surface of minerals was measured by AFM. Floatability is influenced not only with adhesion force, but also with contact angle. Low floatability in aqueous solution indicates higher wettability. To investigate the phenomena of plasma treatment and washing in detail, analysis of washing solution after plasma treatment has been achieved by ICP–OES. As shown in These results are estimated with thermodynamic calculation.  To confirm the surface product which estimated from the thermodynamic calculation, XPS surface analysis of molybdenite and chalcopyrite has been achieved before/after plasma treatment and followed by washing. As shown in As shown in From these results of XPS and solution analysis, it can be assumed that plasma treatment oxidize on the surface of molybdenite and oxygen is attached on the surface of molybdenite layer. With washing after plasma treatment, molybdenum oxide is dissolved since it can be dissolved as molybdenum oxide ion such as MoO These analyses can be summarized as follows; both chalcopyrite and molybdenite show hydrophobicity. Plasma treatment makes these surfaces rough and increases adhesion force, decreases contact angle. This is due to that, the oxidation of the two minerals by plasma produces oxide, hydroxide and sulphate on their surfaces and these are known as hydrophilic species. Washing after plasma treatment makes smooth surface of molybdenite and it returns to its hydrophobic nature since oxidation products of molybdenite oxide can be dissolved into water and a fresh molybdenite is produced by washing. On the other hand, surface of chalcopyrite kept hydrophilic with washing after plasma treatment. This is because chalcopyrite plasma oxidation products do not release copper and iron as stable forms or these products dissolve but precipitate immediately as hydrophilic oxyhydroxides (goethite). This difference of hydrophobicity after plasma treatment and washing indicated the possibility of selective flotation of chalcopyrite and molybdenite.  This behavior can be explained as previous assumption: floatability of both chalcopyrite and molybdenite are high before plasma treatment since both of them are sulfide minerals and they are known as hydrophobic minerals. After plasma treatment, floatability of both minerals became low; this is due to the oxidation of these minerals by plasma pretreatment covers their surfaces with hydrophilic species like oxides, hydroxides and sulphates. After washing, only molybdenite floatability became higher and chalcopyrite remained hydrophilic. Oxide layer is removed selectively on the surface of molybdenite with washing. Longer plasma time indicated lower floatability and it can be explained due to a thicker hydrophilic layer with longer plasma treatment is produced. Plasma oxidation followed by washing system was applied with chalcopyrite and coarse molybdenite mixture sample and flotation was carried out. As shown in Molybdenite is known as a cleavage mineral and it is constructed with piling thin layers, surface of the layer is arranged with sulfur atoms whereas edge of layer is fracture of chemical bond and mainly arranged with molybdenum atoms. From this structure, it is assumed that molybdenite surface is hydrophobic and its edge is hydrophilic. When fine molybdenite sample was applied for flotation experiments, around 40% was floated whereas more than 80% was floated with coarse molybdenite. It might be due to that the fine particle has low aspect ratio of edge/surface comparing with the coarse one; this means the hydrophilic property of the fine particle is higher. To improve recovery of molybdenite in mixture system, with fine molybdenite sample, following process was conducted. Chalcopyrite and fine molybdenite mixture sample was plasma treated at 10 Detailed surface analysis was achieved for plasma treated chalcopyrite and molybdenite to evaluate the phenomenon and mechanisms of oxidation process and selective flotation. Surface observation by AFM indicated the untreated surface of chalcopyrite was smooth and it showed many small spikey surfaces after plasma treatment. Following washing after plasma treatment did not make any changes to the surface. On the other hand, for molybdenite the untreated surface showed large distributed spikes and many sharp peaks appeared after plasma treatment. After washing the surface became smoother. Zeta potential measurements showed that only chalcopyrite zeta potential increased after plasma treatment and after rinse, whereas molybdenite zeta potential kept almost same with plasma treatment and rinse. Surface products were analyzed by XPS and it was confirmed that plasma treatment of chalcopyrite showed goethite and iron(III) sulphate peaks and the following washing disappeared iron(III) sulphate peak only. Plasma treatment of molybdenite showed molybdenum oxide peak then it was disappeared after following washing. Adhesion force and contact angle measurements indicated that plasma treatment made chalcopyrite and molybdenite surface hydrophilic then only molybdenite became hydrophobic after rinse. These results were confirmed with flotation experiments. Although both chalcopyrite and molybdenite showed high floatability as origin, plasma treatment indicated both showed low floatability. Following washing process showed only molybdenite floated, while chalcopyrite sank. When this process applied to a mixture of chalcopyrite and molybdenite, molybdenite showed lower floatability, this was because the dissolved iron ions from chalcopyrite precipitated not only on chalcopyrite but also on molybdenite which decreased its floatability. This can be overcome with the addition of emulsified kerosene because of effective surface coverage of kerosene. We appreciate support of this research by