The fatigue behavior of a quenched and tempered AISI 4140 steel has been investigated, both uncoated and after coating with a deposit of NiCrBSiW alloy (Colmonoy 88) of approximately 240–250 μm in thickness, applied by HVOF thermal spraying. Previous to the deposition of the Colmonoy 88 alloy, an intermediate layer of a NiMoAl alloy known commercially as Metco 447 of approximately 60–70 μm was also applied by means of HVOF thermal spraying, in order to avoid grid blasting of the steel substrate with alumina particles. It has been determined that coating this steel substrate with such a deposit leads to a significant reduction in fatigue properties in comparison with the uncoated substrate. The reduction in fatigue life, evaluated in the alternating stress range of 544–598 MPa has been found to achieve up to 99.8%, whereas, the decrease in fatigue limit was approximately 43%, that is to say 220 MPa below the fatigue limit of the uncoated substrate. It has been shown that such a decrease in fatigue properties can be attributed almost entirely to the presence of both the intermediate bonding layer and coating, rather than to the inclusion of the coating thickness in the computation of the alternating stress applied to the material. The correction of the specimen diameter by subtracting the coating thickness indicates that the drop in fatigue life is still of approximately 99.2%, whereas, the fatigue limit is decreased by 37%. The interpretation of the stress–life curves, together with fractographic analyses conducted on selected samples tested at both low and elevated alternating stresses indicates that the fatigue cracks are nucleated at the surface of the coating and subsequently transferred to the intermediate bonding layer and the substrate. It is believed that the substrate-bonding layer interface, such cracks bifurcate and propagate both along the interface and towards the substrate. The intersection of the cracks, that run along the interface with other circumferential cracks leads to extensive delamination, fracture and complete separation of the coating from the substrate in some sections of the samples.In a previous investigation, Hernández et al. Hernández et al. In a subsequent investigation, Padilla et al. Padilla et al. Buffoli and Pesetti Steffens and co-workers Similarly, Tipton The present investigation has been conducted in order to investigate the fatigue properties of an AISI 4140 steel in a quenched and tempered (Q&T) condition, coated with a deposit of Colmonoy 88 alloy, applied by HVOF thermal spray. An intermediate-bonding layer of Metco 447, also applied by HVOF thermal spraying to avoid grit blasting the steel substrate with alumina particles. The study was mainly conducted in order to assess, if the elimination of the grit blasting step could give rise to an improvement in the fatigue performance of the coated material, given the absence of alumina particles retained in the steel substrate, which in previous studies were identified as stress concentrators responsible for the nucleation of fatigue cracks. It involved the comparison of the fatigue behavior of the uncoated and coated specimens, and also the analysis of the fracture surfaces of selected samples after testing, in order to understand the fracture mechanisms of the materials coated by HVOF thermal spraying when subjected to cyclic loads. The present study was conducted employing samples of an AISI 4140 steel with the following nominal composition (wt.%): 0.39 C, 0.75 Mn, 0.24 Si, 0.28 Cu, 0.95 Cr, 0.17 Mo and 0.15 Ni. The alloy was supplied as bars of approximately 16 mm diameter and 6 m in length, in the quenched and tempered (Q&T) condition, from which tensile and fatigue samples were machined. It is important to mention that this steel is typically austenitized at temperatures in the range of 1103–1118 K, oil quenched, and tempered at 923 K. The geometries of the two types of specimens employed in this study are shown in In order to carry out the investigation six tensile and 72 fatigue samples were machined, which were subsequently ground with successive SiC papers (grit 100–1200) and polished mechanically, in order to have similar polished, mirror-like surfaces before testing. Three tensile and 36 fatigue specimens were thermal sprayed at Plasmatec Ingenieros C. A. (Guarenas, Venezuela) in order to apply firstly a bonding layer of Metco 447 alloy and subsequently, the Colmonoy 88 deposit. For the deposition of the bonding layer, the as-polished samples were pre-heated at 523 K and sprayed at a distance of 150 mm employing a Tafa HVOF JP-5000 gun under the following conditions: powder feeding rate: 0.57 g s The powder, employed for this purpose was provided by METCO Inc. (Westbury, NY, USA), and had the following nominal composition (wt.%): 5.0 Mo, 5.5 Al and Ni bal. Since, the manufacture of such a powder is carried out by means of an atomization process, the morphology of the particles are spherical with a typical size range of −170+325 mesh (−88 +45 μm). The melting point of this powder is approximately 933 K. The intermediate bonding layer had a thickness between ∼60–70 μm. The deposition of the Colmonoy 88 deposit was also conducted at a pre-heat temperature of 523 K, a spraying distance of 330 mm, employing the same gun. The deposition conditions were as follows: powder feeding rate: 1.5 g s The evaluation of the static mechanical properties of both the as-received and coated materials were carried out by means of tensile tests, which were conducted on a computer-controlled servohydraulic machine (Instron 8502, Canton, MA, USA) at a cross head speed of 3 mm/min. The monotonic mechanical properties were evaluated, employing three specimens of each condition. In order to determine the stresses, at which cracks in the coating were visible to the naked eye, additional tests were conducted either just until yielding or until achieving maximum load. No further finishing treatment after deposition was applied to the coated samples before testing. The fatigue properties were evaluated in air at room temperature (23 °C) under rotating bending conditions ( In order to fulfill the reliability conditions for fatigue testing, according to the ASTM E-739 standard, not less than 24 samples were employed in each condition in order to assess the fatigue life of the materials investigated. Such a testing procedure allowed a replication greater than 80%. On the other hand, the evaluation of the fatigue limit in each condition was carried out by means of the staircase method described by Frost et al. In order to characterize the fracture process of the coated material, selected samples, tested at 318 and 372 MPa that failed as the number of cycles closest to the mean, given by the corresponding Basquin equation  The Metco 447 bonding layer is observed to be quite heterogeneous in its composition, with most of its Al content segregated into irregular particles of different shapes, formed during deposition. On the other hand, As it was pointed out before, the static mechanical properties of the materials investigated, were determined by means of tensile tests, whose results are presented in On the contrary, at stresses of the order of the tensile strength, it is expected that the coating has already fractured and delaminated from the substrate, which in any case should lead to a decrease in strength. Thus, it would be expected that, while the coating integrity is maintained, both the intermediate bonding layer and coating deposit are expected to contribute to the overall strength of the material, by acting together with the substrate, as load-carrying elements of the composite structure.   In order to compute the decrease in fatigue life for the coated specimens, it is necessary, to first determine the parameters, that describe the functional dependence of the number of cycles to failure, in terms of the alternating stress. Since the graphical representation of It is well known that the Colmonoy 88 alloy, deposited by HVOF thermal spraying is widely used for improving some properties of the substrate, such as abrasive wear and corrosion resistance, or in order to achieve the required dimensions, such that worn, undersized or ground components could fulfill properly their role in service. The present results indicate that an improvement is attained at the expense of the fatigue properties of the 4140 steel component, which are compromised to a large extent. Therefore, redesigning the component, in order to avoid fatigue failures under high cycle fatigue conditions, requires the appropriate computation of the parameters A and m involved in The results reported by Hernández et al. In order to analyze the effect of including the coating thickness in the computation of the alternating stresses to be applied to the specimens, As it was mentioned earlier, the fracture surfaces of selected coated samples, tested at 318 and 372 MPa were examined by SEM in order to study more closely the crack initiation sites and the general morphology of such surfaces after failure. Special attention was paid to the state of both the intermediate bonding layer, coating and interfaces after failure, and particularly to the extent of the delamination along the latter. The extent of the delamination and fracture, undergone by the sample, is appreciated more clearly in  The interpretation of these photomicrographs together with the stress–life curves shown in Coating a quenched and tempered AISI 4140 steel substrate with a Colmonoy 88 alloy deposit of approximately 240–250 μm, employing an intermediate bonding layer of Metco 447 alloy with a thickness in the range of 60–70 μm, leads to a significant reduction in the fatigue properties, in comparison with the uncoated substrate. The reduction in fatigue life evaluated in the alternating stress range of 544–598 MPa can achieve up to 99.8%, whereas the decrease in fatigue limit can be up to 43% or 220 MPa below the fatigue limit of the uncoated substrate. It has been determined that such a decrease in fatigue properties can be attributed almost entirely to the presence of both the intermediate bonding layer and coating rather than to the inclusion of the coating thickness in the computation of the alternating stress applied to the material. The correction of the specimen diameter by subtracting the coating thickness indicates that the drop in fatigue life will still be at approximately 99.2% and the fatigue limit will be decreased by 37%. The interpretation of the stress–life curves together with the fractographic analysis conducted on some selected samples, tested at both low and elevated alternating stresses indicates that the fatigue cracks are nucleated at the surface of the coating and are subsequently transferred to the intermediate bonding layer and substrate. It is believed that at the substrate-bonding layer interface, such cracks bifurcate and propagate both along the interface and towards the substrate. The intersection of the cracks that run along the interface with other circumferential cracks leads to extensive delamination, fracture and complete separation of the coating from the interface in some sections of the samples. This investigation has been conducted with the financial support of the Venezuelan National Fund for Science, Technology and Innovation (FONACIT) through the projects S1-2000000642 and LAB-97000644, and the support of the Scientific and Humanistic Development Council of the Universidad Central de Venezuela (CDCH-UCV) through the project PG-08-17-4595-2000. J.A. Berrı́os is also grateful to the School of Mechanical Engineering, Faculty of Engineering and Architecture of the University of El Salvador.