Lead exposure and blood lead levels (BLLs) in the United States have declined dramatically since the 1970s as many widespread lead uses have been discontinued. Large scale mining and mineral processing represents an additional localized source of potential lead exposure in many historical mining communities, such as Butte, Montana. After 25 years of ongoing remediation efforts and a residential metals abatement program that includes blood lead monitoring of Butte children, examination of blood lead trends offers a unique opportunity to assess the effectiveness of Butte’s lead source and exposure reduction measures. This study examined BLL trends in Butte children ages 1–5 (n= 2796) from 2003–2010 as compared to a reference dataset matched for similar demographic characteristics over the same period. Blood lead differences across Butte during the same period are also examined. Findings are interpreted with respect to effectiveness of remediation and other factors potentially contributing to ongoing exposure concerns.
               
                  Reference population comparison
                  BLLs from Butte were compared with a reference dataset (n=2937) derived from the National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey. The reference dataset was initially matched for child age and sample dates. Additional demographic factors associated with higher BLLs were then evaluated. Weights were applied to make the reference dataset more consistent with the Butte dataset for the three factors that were most disparate (poverty-to-income ratio, house age, and race/ethnicity). A weighted linear mixed regression model showed Butte geometric mean BLLs were higher than reference BLLs for 2003–2004 (3.48vs. 2.05µg/dL), 2005-2006 (2.65vs. 1.80µg/dL), and 2007-2008 (2.2vs. 1.72µg/dL), but comparable for 2009–2010 (1.53vs. 1.51µg/dL). This trend suggests that, over time, the impact of other factors that may be associated with Butte BLLs has been reduced.
               
                  Comparison across Butte
                  Neighborhood differences were examined by dividing the Butte dataset into the older area called “Uptown”, located at higher elevation atop historical mine workings, and “the Flats”, at lower elevation and more recently developed. Significant declines in BLLs were observed over time in both areas, though Uptown had slightly higher BLLs than the Flats (2003–2004: 3.57vs. 3.45µg/dL, p=0.7; 2005–2006: 2.84vs. 2.52µg/dL, p=0.1; 2007–2008: 2.58vs. 1.99µg/dL, p=0.001; 2009–2010: 1.71vs. 1.44µg/dL, p=0.02). BLLs were higher when tested in summer/fall than in winter/spring for both neighborhoods, and statistically higher BLLs were found for children in Uptown living in properties built before 1940. Neighborhood differences and the persistence of a greater percentage of high BLLs (>5µg/dL) in Butte vs. the reference dataset support continuation of the home lead abatement program.
               
                  Conclusions
                  Butte BLL declines likely reflect the cumulative effectiveness of screening efforts, community-wide remediation, and the ongoing metals abatement program in Butte in addition to other factors not accounted for by this study. As evidenced in Butte, abatement programs that include home evaluations and assistance in addressing multiple sources of lead exposure can be an important complement to community-wide soil remediation activities.Over the past four decades, blood lead levels (BLLs) have declined dramatically as bans on leaded gasoline and lead in paint, plumbing, and solder for canned foods have spread around the world; however, higher BLLs persist among some individuals, including potentially those people who live in close proximity to some historical mining operations ( Butte, Montana was the center of copper mining in North America during the late 1800s and by the early twentieth century had more than 450 mines ( An exposure study performed in 1990 by the Butte-Silver Bow (BSB) Health Department and the University of Cincinnati identified statistically significant differences in children’s BLLs across selected areas of Butte ( The 1990 study showed that residence location (i.e., neighborhood area) and house age were the strongest predictors of paint lead, soil lead, and dust lead concentrations in Butte. Lead-based paint was shown to be associated with lead contaminated soil, which in turn was associated with lead contaminated house dust. Only house dust lead was directly related to blood lead. The indirect effect of soil lead on blood lead was shown to be both small and weak: only 5.4 percent of variance in blood lead was found to be indirectly attributable to lead in soil. The investigators concluded that 39 percent of the variability in soil lead concentrations was attributable to lead-based paint, while the remainder (61 percent) was attributable to “the heterogeneous distribution of lead in soil, and lead from other sources such as native lead in soil, mine waste, and contaminates from ore processing”. Gardening or eating home grown produce did not contribute to elevated BLLs. Based on the 1990 study findings, the University of Cincinnati investigators recommended the development of a program in Butte to identify and address residential lead exposure from all sources. From this early program came the current, ongoing, multi-pathway residential metals abatement program, designed to mitigate harmful exposure to lead, arsenic, and mercury in the Butte Priority Soils Operable Unit and an adjacent area. This program works in conjunction with the BSB Health Department and the state’s Women, Infants, and Children (WIC) program, which has provided free blood lead testing to thousands of children over the past decade. Any child with a high blood lead is referred to the residential metals abatement program ( The objective of this study was to examine BLL trends in Butte children ages one through five from 2003 to 2010 as compared to a reference dataset matched for similar demographic characteristics over the same period. Children of this age range were the focus because they are a vulnerable population and are known to have higher BLLs than older children and adults ( A variety of demographic and socioeconomic factors are known to correlate with BLLs in children. Development of a reference dataset requires consideration of the relative importance of these factors, as well as the variation in these factors between the target and reference datasets. Major factors associated with higher BLLs include child age, race/ethnicity, socioeconomic status, and house age ( This cross-sectional study examines BLL trends in Butte children ages 1–5 ( The Butte dataset originated from medical records maintained by the BSB Health Department of patients recruited for regular blood lead testing through the state’s WIC program. The blood lead samples were analyzed at a licensed commercial blood lead testing laboratory with a successful record of proficiency testing. Records included both capillary blood samples and venous (whole blood) samples; however, to avoid potential bias from counting both capillary and confirmatory venous results as independent measures for a given individual, all venous records were excluded from the study dataset. The capillary samples were analyzed by graphite furnace atomic absorption spectrometry (GFAAS) with an instrument detection limit of 1.0 The data were compiled from the BSB Health Department's existing hard-copy records in June 2012 after obtaining necessary confidentiality agreements. All data entry was subjected to confirmation against original records. The initial database was comprised of 7278 blood lead records from residents of all ages, including pregnant women, infants, and young children. The following records were excluded from the database: 670 records missing a birthdate, a gender, or a street address; 156 records of venous samples, excluded to avoid potential bias from counting both capillary and confirmatory venous results as independent measures for a given individual; 2782 records from individuals younger than one year or older than 5 years; 826 records for samples collected outside the study years (only 21 blood lead records were collected before 2002); and 48 records for samples collected from children who did not live in Butte-Silver Bow County. After exclusions, 2796 records remained for the analysis comparing BLL data to an external reference population. These records were for 1697 children (some children were tested repeatedly over multiple years) who were sampled between 2003 and 2010. The study years were limited to 2003 and 2010 to correspond to National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey (NHANES) sampling periods. Of the 2796 records, 364 were reported below the detection limit of 1.0 Blood lead data were also internally compared between Butte neighborhoods. Neighborhoods in Butte were initially defined based on Butte's seven main census tracts; this afforded access to potentially representative demographic and socio-economic information not included in the blood lead database. Address information for each record was used to assign geographic coordinates to each property using ArcGIS 10.1 (ESRI, Inc.) and Google Maps. The coordinates for each property were plotted spatially against the census tract boundaries. The data were partitioned into eight neighborhoods (termed N1-N8); the first seven were defined by the boundaries of census tracts in the developed areas of Butte with a 500 meter buffer to include houses near, but not falling in, one of the seven tracts. The eighth neighborhood was defined by the boundaries of the town of Walkerville within the eighth census tract that surrounds the more developed areas ( The NHANES provides nationally representative data on blood lead samples collected from survey participants, ages one year and older, selected from the civilian non-institutionalized household population of the U.S. ( Weighting factors developed and applied to the NHANES dataset allowed for creation of a reference BLL dataset representative of the distribution of BLLs for Butte children that would be expected without the influence of Butte's mining history. The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) uses population adjustments to make the NHANES data representative of the U.S. population ( Differences between the NHANES and the Butte population in demographic factors associated with higher BLLs were considered for developing the weights: gender, age, season of the blood test, the year the child’s residence was built (referred to as “house age”), poverty level, and race. Development of weights for child gender and age was straightforward due to the comparability of available information for each record in both the Butte and NHANES datasets. For some factors, available information was not directly comparable between the two datasets. For example, the date of the blood test was available in Butte, but the NHANES records only provided test season (i.e., May–October as summer/fall and November–April as winter/spring) within a two-year period. In this case, the Butte data were coded to fall into a season and two year period consistent with the NHANES categories. As shown by the Children living in poverty have higher BLLs compared with children in wealthier households ( Poverty level information for the Butte data was not requested at the time of sample collection. According to BSB and WIC staff most Butte blood lead records (90–95 percent) corresponded to children from WIC eligible families. In Montana, WIC eligibility corresponds to a PIR of 1.75 or less. A sensitivity analysis showed little difference when 90 percent or 95 percent of the Butte study population was assumed to be WIC eligible (PIR≤1.75), so we assumed 95 percent. For NHANES records missing a PIR, another sensitivity analysis was performed to examine the change in geometric mean BLLs with assumptions that the missing values were greater than or less than 1.75, or after imputing the values from the known distribution of NHANES PIR values in ProUCL. Imputation was chosen as the appropriate method because it did not result in skewing the geometric mean BLLs from the NHANES dataset. Given the limited poverty information, the PIR categories were used only to weight the NHANES data, not as a variable in the regression models. BLLs in non-Hispanic black children have long been observed to be higher than those in non-Hispanic white and Mexican children ( Unlike the NHANES dataset, record-specific data on race for the Butte dataset was not available. Estimated data from the U.S. Counties Census for Butte-Silver Bow County ( Weights were calculated as Butte to NHANES ratios based on the percentage of records from each dataset that fell into each variable category. For example, the percentage of records in the Butte age group 12–35 months in 2003-2004 was divided by the percentage of records in the same NHANES age group and study period. Weights greater than one signify a higher percentage of records in a given category in Butte than in NHANES. Weights calculated for child age, child gender, and test season showed that distributions were similar for the two datasets; ranging from 0.69 to 1.3 (see For house age, poverty, and child race, weights varied more widely between records in each category in the Butte dataset compared with NHANES (see All statistical analyses were executed in SAS Version 9.3 (SAS Institute Inc., Cary, NC). Because the blood lead data were log-normal, they were log-transformed prior to analysis. Child age was treated as a continuous variable in the models, while the other variables were treated as categorical: test year (two years per category), test season (i.e., summer/fall or winter/spring), child gender (male/female), house age (Pre 1940, 1940–1949, 1950–1959, 1960–1977, Post 1977, and missing). For the reference population comparison, source (Butte or reference) was an additional variable. Neighborhood (N1–N8) was included as a variable in the neighborhood comparison. Descriptive statistics were generated for the Butte and NHANES datasets, including geometric mean BLLs and percentage of BLLs greater than 5 Univariate analyses were performed to check each variable's significance with respect to BLL for the reference population and the Butte population. Linear mixed regression models were built for both the reference population comparison and the neighborhood comparison based on univariate results. The SAS Mixed procedure (SAS Institute, Inc., Cary, NC) was used to account for the repeated measures for some individuals. An autoregressive covariance structure was used so that measurements farther apart in time were assumed to be less correlated than observations closer in time. Significant interaction terms were used to stratify the full models. To determine whether the rate of decline in BLLs over time varies in the two comparisons, a Chi-squared test statistic using the coefficients and standard errors for test year (treated as a continuous variable) from each model was calculated and used to determine if the null hypothesis that the coefficients were the same could be rejected at a significance level of The reference comparison required a weighted regression. All Butte records had a weight equal to one in the model. Four different scenarios for weighting the NHANES data were tested in the regression model using standard weighting procedures in SAS. The first scenario applied weights based only on house age while the remaining three scenarios applied weights as the product of two or more individual variable weights as follows: house age and poverty; house age and race; and house age, poverty, and race. The full model was run four times to examine the effects of the four weighting scenarios. The scenario which combined the weights for house age, poverty, and race was chosen because the combination of the three variable weights did not appear to significantly skew the NHANES data in one particular direction (see General summary statistics for the Butte dataset are provided in Univariate analysis from the Butte population showed statistically significant differences in BLLs for child age, child gender, year house built, test year, and test season (see For the final stratified model, the association between each independent variable (i.e., test year, house age, child age, child gender, or test season) and BLL is presented after adjusting for all the other variables ( For 2003–2004, 2005–2006, and 2007–2008, geometric mean BLLs were higher for Butte than for the reference dataset ( In order to define neighborhood areas within Butte, a Tukey's Multiple Comparison was performed. This analysis showed statistically similar distributions of BLLs for two groupings of geographically similar neighborhoods (see All variables examined in the univariate analysis were significant and were retained for inclusion in the fully adjusted model. Results of the fully adjusted model stratified by Uptown and the Flats showed that, in both areas, the children tested in 2009–2010 had lower geometric mean BLLs than the children tested in earlier years ( Geometric mean BLLs in Uptown were slightly higher compared with the Flats in each period, and were significantly higher only in 2007–2008 and 2009–2010 ( Based on the results of the Chi-squared test, the rate of BLL decline from 2003 through 2010 is not statistically different for Uptown and the Flats ( In both neighborhoods, BLLs were higher when tested in summer/fall than in winter/spring (summer/fall BLLs were 27 percent higher than winter/spring BLLs in Uptown and 18 percent higher in the Flats) ( When the house age categories were compared across Uptown and the Flats ( The BLLs among children tested in the BSB Health Department program declined rapidly from 2003 through 2010. A more rapid decline in average BLLs was seen in Butte than in the reference population, which could possibly reflect the ongoing community-wide remediation activities that mitigate exposure to lead sources. Through 2010, 498 abatements had been conducted in Uptown (288 for soil and 210 for paint), compared with 47 abatements (6 for soil and 41 for paint) in the Flats. No renovations have been necessary for plumbing in either neighborhood. Though studies have demonstrated the effectiveness of lead hazard control interventions within homes, few have documented effectiveness at decreasing BLLs at concentrations less than 10 Despite this progress, the percentage of high BLLs in this Butte population has not yet reached the reference population level, suggesting that a small percentage of children are still experiencing higher than expected lead exposure. Based on the results of the neighborhood comparison, a greater portion of BLLs that exceed 5 One potentially confounding factor that may explain the residual risk of BLLs that exceed 5 The final model showed children from the “missing house age” category residing in Uptown had higher BLLs than children from the “missing house age” category residing in the Flats. Examination of known house age data for both areas reveals a more even distribution of house ages for children tested from the Flats relative to children tested from Uptown, where a disproportionate number of children resided in homes built around 1900. Assuming the distributions of house ages for the “missing” category for both Uptown and the Flats match the respective distributions for the known data, the proportion of children tested who resided in the oldest Butte homes would be even greater in Uptown than reported in the existing known house age data. Based on the findings of This study demonstrates the importance of considering potentially confounding demographic factors associated with higher BLLs prior to evaluating the contribution of suspected lead exposure sources to observed BLLs. In Butte, a comparison of observed BLLs to a BLL distribution representative of the U.S. as a whole would provide little insight into the contribution of local exposure sources to higher BLLs. The extent to which these demographic factors may be associated with BLLs for the Butte dataset can be examined by comparing the NHANES reference data weighted according to Butte demographic and socioeconomic characteristics to the NHANES data that are the basis for the current CDC blood lead reference value of 5 The available data had several limitations. In the present study, both NHANES and Butte blood lead data were collected as part of other programs, and individual information on factors commonly associated with higher blood lead levels was not always consistently available. Individual data on race/ethnicity and poverty were included in the NHANES database, but were not collected in Butte. These variables had to be inferred from census data and first-hand details from the BSB Health Department. House age was included in the NHANES database, but with a large proportion classified as “missing”. The Butte blood lead records did not include house age, but this information was obtained for a majority of records by geo-referencing addresses with property tax records; the remaining records in the Butte dataset were also classified as “missing”. Butte records included the specific sample date, whereas the NHANES records only included a two year sample period and winter/spring vs. summer/fall. Data on other factors that are associated with variation in BLLs were not available in the Butte dataset, notably data on maternal education and own/rent status of housing. Different blood collection methods were used in the two programs: NHANES using venous blood draws vs. Butte using blood collected onto filter paper from capillary samples. Despite initial concern that this difference might have overestimated Butte blood lead values due to external contamination ( Due to differences in the available data, weighting could not fully account for differences between the distributions of values for the Butte and reference datasets. Butte income status was inferred based on WIC eligibility and treated as a binary variable. While there is a high level of confidence in the binary variable, WIC eligibility may reflect a wide range of income levels over which lead risks might vary. Both the Butte and reference datasets included a substantial proportion of BLLs with unknown house age for which the actual distribution likely differs between the two datasets. Information on specific lead exposure sources was generally not available for either dataset, for example lead concentrations in drinking water, soil and house dust lead data were not available for the full study period. We did not have information for Butte blood lead data on the timing of soil remediation or lead abatements of individual Butte properties relative to sample dates for children living at those properties. Similarly, the NHANES dataset did not include data on lead paint abatement. Without lead exposure data, we are not able to identify specific causes of blood lead concentration changes over time or of differences between Butte and the reference dataset. For both Butte and NHANES datasets, previous residence is not available, and for Butte, there is no history of time at current residence. Low income children at highest risk for elevated BLLs are likely to move frequently. Given Butte's significant history of mining-related lead sources and the extensive activities taken over several decades to reduce exposures to such sources, Butte BLL declines likely reflect the cumulative effectiveness of screening efforts, community-wide remediation, and the ongoing metals abatement program in Butte in addition to other factors not accounted for by this study. As evidenced in Butte, abatement programs that include home evaluations and assistance in addressing multiple sources of lead exposure can be an important complement to community-wide soil remediation activities. While the Butte multi-pathway program is likely responsible for the steeper decline in Butte BLLs compared to a reference dataset, persistent disparities across Butte suggest continuation of these efforts is warranted. This study found that demographic factors associated with higher BLLs are important to consider when characterizing community lead risks, and presents an approach for consideration of such factors in the context of a historical mining community. The results highlight the importance of multiple approaches for reducing lead exposure. Our analysis may be relevant when assessing the association between identified lead sources and BLLs in other communities. For the U.S., similar methods could be used to create an external reference population weighted according to community-specific demographic factors using NHANES data. In order for such an approach to be successful, it is important that adjustments for demographic factors be representative of the population for whom blood lead data are available or collected. Random selection of study participants may simplify demographic adjustments by enabling reliance on census data. In our study, the population tested was not representative of the general population demographics, and additional effort was required to obtain representative demographic information. This approach is not limited to lead and could be applied to other biomarkers of chemical exposure, medical conditions, or health indicators included in NHANES for which key demographic factors may vary greatly by community. Funding for the study was provided by Our thanks to the following members of a technical working group who offered advice throughout the study: Dr. Susan Griffin and Nikia Greene (U.S. Environmental Protection Agency), Lisa DeWitt and Joe Griffin (Montana State Department of Environmental Quality), Dr. Michelle Watters and Capt. Dan Strausbaugh (Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry), Dan Powers and Eric Hassler (Butte-Silver Bow Health Department), Dr. Cord Harris and Dr. Terry Moore (Atlantic Richfield Company), Jay Cornish, Helen Joyce, and Dr. Merle Benedict (Butte Citizen’s Advisory Committee), Dr. Steve Ackerlund (Butte Citizens' Technical Environmental Committee). Supplementary data associated with this article can be found in the online version at 