Comminution involves the reduction of materials to the required sizes, from coarser to finer. The population balance method (PBM) is the most frequently used approach to obtain the particle size distribution (PSD) of materials. To numerically obtain the PSD, a semi-empirical approach known as the size-mass balance equation is commonly employed. The existing technique to determine the parameters in the size-mass balance equation is cumbersome as PSD for early grinding times of different feed sizes must be obtained experimentally. Therefore, a new technique using only a limited data to determine the parameters is introduced and examined. In general, the strong capability of the presently proposed technique is evidenced through successfully capturing of the existing experimental PSD. The advantages of using this technique are that only two experimental PSD of any grinding time are needed to predict the PSD using the size-mass balance equation and without the restriction of input from an early grinding time. This study also proposes to use the cumulative PSD rates as an indicator for the limit of particle size reduction of the materials. It is suggested that the grinding of materials should stop before there is a pivotal change in the initial slopes, i.e., before the difference of the cumulative PSD rates between each initial slopes is found to change sign, or when the difference of the cumulative PSD rates is close to 0% in order to prevent agglomeration or over-grinding. The grinding time fulfilling this criterion is considered as optimal.Comminution is one of the most frequently used industrialized operations around the world, in the production of cement, food processing, pharmaceutical, mineral processing, etc. It involves the progressive reduction of materials to the required sizes, from coarser or larger to finer or smaller sizes. Aside from attaining the required size, it can also change the shapes and increase the porosity, bulk density, as well as the surface area of the materials [ In comminution event, knowing the particle size distribution (PSD) of the materials and optimum grinding time beforehand are pivotal, especially in producing sizes of nano range, to assist production planning eliminating needless machinery trials for time and cost saving. Nowadays, there exists an escalated interest and attention on the comminution process owing to the fierce development of nanotechnology. Nanotechnology is well known as a way to improve the properties of the materials by enhancing the structural behaviors in a direct manner. The US National Science and Technology Council (NSTC) committee stated that the materials of nano-sizes range from 1 to 100 nm are capable to produce structures with novel properties due to their size effect [ The PSD of materials and their grinding time have been an on-going research subject since decades ago either experimentally or numerically. However, studies devoted to finding the optimum grinding time of the materials are limited [ The numerical analyses of PSD have been studied since the 1950s. The research of particle breakage was majorly focused on finding the unknown parameters of various materials to be used in the population balance equation, i.e., size-mass balance equation, and obtaining the materials PSD as a result. This equation is a semi-empirical function. The parameters in the equation are obtained by using experimental PSD results fitted with the parameters functions, namely specific rate of breakage, The employed theory and model for the particle breakage in this paper focus on the application of top-down mechanical-energy fabrication method, i.e., grinding. It should be noted that this physical method is preferred to prevent chemical changes on the materials [ The complexity to solve the integro-differential equation of the breakage function above leads to the formulation of a simpler semi-empirical equation known as the size-mass balance equation, as presented in the following form [ The cumulative breakage distribution function, The selection function or rate of breakage, There are four unknown parameters in Eq. In addition, the false time concept [ The PSD of materials with respect to time, by using Eq. The PSD used in this study is obtained from the experimental study on rattan as filler in bionanocomposite for application in the automotive industry [  A new technique is next proposed based on the PSD obtained from Nikmatin et al. [ To remedy this matter, Eq. Analogous to the existing approach, the nature of the normalized log-log curve of In this new technique, where the limited experimental data is used, the parameters of Since the feed size used is characterized as fine feed (75 μm), the The false time concept is used by fitting the experimental and numerical PSD of two grinding times using Eq. The optimal grinding time in this study is the time required to produce the smallest possible particle size before the initiation of agglomeration. To determine the optimal grinding time, the cumulative PSD rates from the initial slopes of the PSD are first calculated. Then, the changes in the cumulative PSD rates at different grinding times are observed and the point where it starts to change sign is considered as the optimal grinding time. Once the optimal grinding time is obtained, a validation is performed against the outcome of the experimental works. The optimal grinding time for experimental work is obtained from the vertex of the degree of dispersion versus grinding time curve [ After the optimal grinding time is validated, the percentage of optimal cumulative PSD rates difference is calculated as an indication of the limit of particle size reduction. This percentage of optimal cumulative PSD rates difference can be used as a future reference when grinding other materials with similar properties. The proposed technique is less laborious and cumbersome in predicting the PSD of the ground materials since a lesser experimental data is needed in comparison to that of the existing. One of the advantages of the proposed model is the elimination of the requirement to acquire PSD for many different feed sizes in finding the parameters of the selection function, where these parameters are determined through the fitting by reducing the discrepancies between measurement and model using the MAPE method. The adopted fitting produces a high conformity to measured input, although experimental PSD of only any two different grinding times (without needing the use of the experimental PSD from the remaining 70–80% of top size interval range) are employed to determine the parameters of the breakage function. Besides, an average of linear and logarithm functions has been introduced to describe the false-real time curve, so that the PSD at any grinding time can be predicted. This new observation-conforming function description circumvents the unnecessary time-consuming experimental work performed by most previous studies to determine the relationship of the curve. Furthermore, this model introduces the technique to find the optimal grinding time so that an over-grinding or agglomeration of materials can be avoided and the smallest possible particle size can be obtained. All these calculations are programmable and its computation flow is summarized in The first grinding time, After obtaining all the parameters, the cumulative PSD is calculated from Eq. In order to check the validity of the proposed technique and its capability to model other materials for various feeds and product sizes, the verification with other experimental studies is next demonstrated. The optimal grinding time of rattan to obtain the smallest possible nanoparticles before agglomeration is presented next. By differentiating the quadratic function of the curve in From The newly proposed technique for an improved description of parameter functions, The authors are grateful to the