This study presents a new and novel technique for the determination of the tensile strength of concrete specimens. A prismatic concrete specimen with a hole at its centre is placed in a new device, called seesaw, and with the use of a conventional loading machine in compression mode, a tensile stress is applied to the specimen for the determination of the indirect tensile strength. In this study, two types of concrete mixes were used for preparation of specimens. The mixes were made of gravel, sand, cement, water, polypropylene fibre, and admixtures. Concrete specimens were subjected to tensile loading using a new load convertor device and a universal loading machine was used for the application of the load to the specimen. The load was applied at the rate of 0.02 MPa/s. The two dimensional finite element code FRANC2D/L was used for numerical modelling of the specimens and the loading conditions to determine the stress concentrations around the hole as a function of the hole diameter and the specimen width. Based on the results of experiments and numerical modelling efforts, a new formula for determination of the tensile strength of concrete is proposed in this study. Concurrent with indirect tensile tests using this new device, splitting test were performed to confirm the observed tensile strength values for concrete specimens. Both experimental and numerical modelling results show that the tensile failure occurs around the sides of the hole along the horizontal axis.Many experimental and theoretical studies have focused on determining the tensile strength of concrete and cementitious materials It is known that the simplest and the most reliable method, which typically provides a lower coefficient of variation, is the splitting tensile strength of a cylindrical specimen (ASTM Zain et al. Two types of concrete specimens were prepared from a mixture of gravel, sand, cement, water, polypropylene fibre, super-plasticizer and micro silica. The material proportions used for batching of the specimens are shown in The reason for using concrete in this study is threefold: (a) concrete is an ideal material that could be representative of a wide range of brittle materials; (b) there is an extensive database of performance and literature exists allowing for comparison of new data with existing data (e.g., A stainless steel mold with the internal dimensions of 12 × 12 × 4 cm was used for preparation of the internally holed specimens. The cast consists of three discrete parts ( Eight similar cubic samples and eight similar cylindrical specimens were prepared from each mixture ( The seesaw device is a new device that allows for the transformation of the compression-to tension loads. The primary design requirement is to be able to convert the compression load applied through a conventional compression loading machine to tensile stresses acting on the failure plane in the concrete specimen. The seesaws device comprises of eight parts made from hardened stainless steel. Part No. 1 is made of two semi cylindrical pieces as shown in The following six steps are followed for setting up the seesaw device: Two stainless steel sleeves, as shown in The steel bar, part No. 5, is placed into the hole in contact with lower sleeve ( The block with parallel notches, part No. 3, is placed on the concrete specimen, as shown in The stainless steel rod is attached to the base part (Part No. 1) in the middle by one pin ( Part No. 1 is connected to the end of steel cylinder through a pin ( The steel bar is inserted into the upper opening in part No. 1 and the assembly is completed (  After assembly of the seesaw device and placing the hardened concrete specimen into the device, as shown in The distribution of the tensile stress around the loaded circular areas is complex. According to the Kirsch solution, the far field tensile stress is distributed non-uniformly around the circle and therefore an average tensile stress obtained by dividing the tensile force by the contact area of the rings would not be a proper representation of the actual tensile stress applied to the concrete. Therefore, a numerical simulation is needed to obtain the stress distribution around the rings in the concrete specimen. Eight specimens of each type of concrete were tested under tensile loading. All specimens showed a fairly horizontal failure plane passing through the centre of the hole. As can be seen from Splitting tension tests (ASTM For the concrete specimen with an opening (hole), the stresses around the hole are higher than the far field stresses applied by the load applier, as confirmed by the Kirsch’s solution The stress distributions around the holes are shown for different models with different W/B ratios ( Based on the results of this numerical modelling effort, a relation has been observed between the normalized stress concentration on the hole along the horizontal axis (the ratio of maximum tensile stress to the applied stress) as a function of the ratio of the hole’s diameter to specimen’s width. The best fit curve to the data is indicated in The equation obtained from the best fit to the data in The stress amount around the hole, according to Eq. (2), is proportional to the far-field failure stress for a homogeneous, isotropic, and elastic material. As the W/B value approaches zero (i.e., the internal hole becomes very small), the stress concentration ratio becomes equal to 1.176. In other words, the amount of tensile stress around the hole becomes only 1.17 times the far-field stress, indicating a fairly uniform distribution of stress around the hole. As the hole diameter increases, the stress concentration ratio also increases. This is in agreement with the Kirsch’s solution A comparison between the values of tensile strength obtained from the Seesaw apparatus and those of split tension is provided in The seesaw device, as a simple, economical, and easy to assemble apparatus, was designed and fabricated to obtain tensile strengths of concrete subjected to tension. The device was used for testing of two types of concrete mixes. Dimension of concrete specimens were 12 × 12 × 4 cm and the ratio of hole diameter to sample width was 0.5. Through numerical simulations, the effect of the hole diameter to specimen width was investigated. As the hole size increased, the tensile stress concentration at the sides of the hole on the horizontal plane also increased under a constant far field stress. A new equation was proposed for the calculation of the concrete tensile strength value. High degree of repeatability in measurement of tensile strength showed that not only the concrete specimens were made uniformly and consistently but also the seesaw apparatus was capable of providing consistent tensile strength values for concrete specimens. It should be noted that the indirect tensile strength values obtained from the seesaw device were about 25% lower than those of splitting test method.