Large scale surface subsidence has been experienced at the Kiirunavaara mine since sublevel caving was implemented as a mining method. Surface disturbances are affecting part of the city of Kiruna, the railway, and the power station. Continuous and discontinuous subsidences characterize the hangingwall deformation, which is periodically monitored using surveying techniques and mapping of surface cracks. A historic review of subsidence prognoses has been carried out and the results compared with the actual condition of the hangingwall. The review showed discrepancies between different prognoses. In addition, limit equilibrium analyses indicated that break angles flatten while the mining depth increases. However, this tendency is not clear in the field where break angles show a large dispersion of values. By using surveying data, two different analyses have been performed. The time-dependent movements of the hangingwall have been described using time–displacement curves and strain analysis has been performed for different sections of the hangingwall. Three different stages of the time–displacement behavior have been identified and described. It has been concluded that extension strain can reach values which may damage civil structures before surface crack can be observed.The Kiirunavaara iron ore mine is located to the west of Kiruna city in northern Sweden about 180 As shown in The orebody is divided into ten production blocks. All the access and mine infrastructure are located in the footwall (see Since sublevel caving was implemented in the mine, the hangingwall has experienced large scale subsidence. In general two types of deformation zones, shown in Discontinuous deformation zone: this zone is characterized by large surface disturbances affecting limited regions. Features such as tension cracks, steps and chimney caves normally appear in this zone. Tension cracks are formed by extension strain with a tendency to develop along subvertical discontinuities striking parallel to the orebody (which is the most predominant joint set). Steps, which started as tension cracks, define the extension of failed wedges or blocks. Chimneys form in the failed rock mass under stress relaxation where individual rocks move vertically through flow channels after ore draw. Continuous deformation zone: in this area, there is a smooth lowering of the ground surface detected only by periodic surveying. This zone, which extends to around 150–200 The block of rock formed between the outermost fracture and the crater limit can be considered to consist of a “semi-intact” rock mass which is thereafter progressively fragmented by the effect of caving ( Today, as mining advances downwards depth, surface and subsurface subsidence extend in the hangingwall towards the city of Kiruna, the railway, and the power station. Several studies during the past years have developed predictions of the subsidence area. The present paper contains a historical review of previous prognoses of the hangingwall failure and the result is compared with the current condition at the mine. Thereafter the ground surface movement is analyzed based on monitoring data. The Kiirunavaara orebody is tabular, 4 Major geological structures have been located by interpretation of geophysical measurements and field mapping. These structures have similar orientations as the main directions of small-scale discontinuities ( Although previous studies made comments on the effect that geological structures have on surface subsidence, its effect was not documented. However, the observed surface cracks often follow the orientation of the major structures and joints. Even though deformation of the hangingwall was expected by introducing the sublevel caving method in 1957 ( A similar result was obtained by After 10 During the 1990's new analytical approaches were used not only for the prediction of the break angle but also to explain the failure mechanism. The hangingwall in the sublevel caving method was envisioned by  In 2007, using the concept of break angle and limit equilibrium techniques LKAB estimates new limits of deformation zones ( At the beginning of the underground operation only visual inspection and surface mapping was carried out. A formal survey monitoring system was initiated in 1975 covering only some sections of the hangingwall. Surveying methods such as transit, theodolite and cloth measuring tapes with an estimated resolution of 0.01 Interferometric synthetic aperture radar, InSAR, has been tested in the area with relative success but at the moment it has some limitations related to adverse environmental conditions such as snow and vegetation. With this technique it is possible to measure deformation in areas where there is no access for safety reasons. Surveying data are updated every 6 Analysis of surveying data of the hangingwall identified two large zones that move at different rates ( Calibrating the models for failure analysis with limit equilibrium methods and numerical methods requires a criterion to determine the surface crack that is part of the plane of failure. The time-dependent behavior of the hangingwall at the Kiirunavaara mine resembles the behavior of open-pit slopes classified as transitional type by When the scale of graphs is incremented the cycle effect cannot be detected but the point of inflection in the curve is clear as shown in Previous subsidence data analyses showed that the first surface fractures appear at about 15 It is a normal practice in caving mines to estimate the limit of the discontinuous deformation zone on the ground surface ( The extension strain in Kiirunavaara mine was calculated by dividing the differential horizontal displacement between two surveying stations by the horizontal distance between them. Line D, in The lower value of extension strain correlated with the presence of a new surface crack was 2.3 Herdocia's and Lupo's break angle prognoses for the Kiirunavaara mine showed the same tendency with decreasing break angle for increasing mining depth. However, Lupo's prediction showed higher break angles. Their analyses were conducted for different cross sections of the mine and it is likely that the geomechanical conditions were different in these two studies. On the other hand, break angles observed in the mine did not appear to follow any tendency. It seems that there are several factors that have not been accounted for in the models. The time–displacement behavior of the hangingwall is similar to that of high-wall rock slopes. The creep response can be attributed to the resisting force provided by the caved rock. Thus, the rate of movement of the hangingwall depends on the movement of the caved rock which is linked to the mine production rate. The CVD (critical vertical displacement) found in the time–displacement curves can be used to define the tension crack that belongs to the failure on the surface. In previous analyses it was not clear how the location of the tension crack of the failure was determined. The outermost fracture on the surface is generated by extension strain before the failure surface is formed. If one of these fractures was selected, lower break angles were calculated and lower estimated rock mass strength obtained from back-analysis of previous failures.  The limit of the discontinuous deformation zone has been used by LKAB to define a critical damage limit for buildings and civil structures. Thereby, this limit is defined by tracking and mapping the surface cracks along the hangingwall. However, the strain analysis indicates that the magnitude of tensile strain can reach critical levels before a crack is observed. Regarding this fact the municipality of the City of Kiruna and LKAB defined a maximum allowed extension strain of 3.0 There is a strain concentration along lineaments that are associated with geological structures. These structures alter subsidence profile and perhaps a step will form in this area. Previous break-angle prognoses showed well-defined tendencies that the break angles measured in the field have not shown. Models used for these predictions were generated with limited input data regarding rock mass strength, in situ stress and structural geology. The time-dependent response of the hangingwall to excavation resembles the behavior of large-scale open pit slopes. Three phases of deformation have been identified for the hangingwall of the Kiirunavaara mine — regressive, steady state, and progressive. Through time–displacement curves it has been possible to determine the movement rate of the hangingwall at different cross-sections of the mine. The critical vertical displacement, CVD, has been defined and estimated for different places of the mine using the time–displacement curves recorded from surveying stations. The CVD can be used to determine a potential location of the tension crack of the failure on the surface. The critical damage limit defined by outermost fractures in the hangingwall does not define the limit for damage since sensitive civil structures can be affected by lower values of horizontal strain than the 2.3 The authors would like to thank the