A permeable quartzose sandstone was subjected to full-scale cutting tests under a chisel-type drag pick, in both dry and fully saturated conditions. Contrary to the results observed from disc cutting tests in the same setup with the same rock (Abu Bakar and Gertsch, 2011), saturation actually increased the cutting (drag) and normal (vertical) forces by 9.9% and 9.4%, respectively. The specific energy of cutting also was greater in the saturated samples, by 28%. More expectedly, the relation of fracture surface area to specific energy was confirmed through several descriptors of chip size distribution, including the Rosin–Rammler x′ parameter, and the empirical coarseness index. An inverse power relation between coarseness index and specific energy was also confirmed.The increased use of rapid excavation techniques for the construction of tunnels, shafts, raises and other underground excavations has subjected the mechanical excavators employing drag and roller cutters to a variety of ground conditions. While in some cases these excavators cut dry rock, in reality, they are often used in wet conditions and in many instances in saturated rocks. The cutting forces acting on drag and disc cutters and other performance related parameters have been extensively studied in different rock types from analytical, numerical and experimental perspectives ( Meanwhile, it is well known that rock behavior changes at the presence of water and thus the cutting behavior of rock at various moisture contents and perhaps under saturated conditions, could impact the excavation rate of any given machine. Excavators’ designs based on parameters estimated from dry rock testing involve both the economic and environmental risks. These risks could be lessened with improved understanding of saturated rock excavation. This investigative study aims at finding the differences in the cutting performance of drag pick equipped mining, tunneling and other excavators in dry and water saturated rocks using full scale laboratory linear rock cutting machine (LRCM) at Missouri University of Science and Technology (Missouri S&T). The effect of water saturation on the mechanical properties of rocks has been a point of focus of several past investigations. Most of these investigations reported an appreciable reduction in strength (uniaxial compression and Brazilian tensile) of rocks saturated with water. The mechanical excavatability of saturated rocks has been examined by only a few researchers. All of these studies had differing findings depending upon the test procedure, rock type and tool used. Though some instrumented cutting studies report reduction in specific energy and pick wear rate with water saturation ( In a companion study to this one, The full scale drag pick cutting experiments were performed on the linear rock cutting machine (LRCM) at Missouri S&T. The maximum normal load capacity of the LRCM is 27 The normal (vertical or thrust), cutting (in-line) and side (out-of-alignment) forces are measured by using a 3-D load cell mounted between the cutter mount and the stiff reaction frame. This load cell consists of four load transducers arranged in a square diamond pattern, centered over the cutter mount. This load cell design, which is an alternative to the standard square pattern, is more sensitive to the cutting and side forces while maintaining sensitivity to the normal forces ( Radial drag picks (model AM 239 The rock sample used in this research program was Ordovician-age Roubidoux Sandstone, a medium grained, laminated to thinly bedded quartz sandstone that is porous and friable. It is usually found in white, brown, or red varieties depending on iron coloration. The sand grains are nearly euhedral double-ended quartz prisms that show little wear or abrasion ( The rock samples for the test program were obtained from a commercial quarry located near the campus of Missouri S&T. They were split at the quarry into blocks of appropriate dimensions for the size of the testbed. Once delivered, the blocks were cored to obtain samples with which to determine the standard suite of rock strengths, then divided randomly into those to be used for the air-dry cutting tests and those to be used for the saturated cutting tests. The blocks in the latter group were subjected to a saturation protocol developed by the US The rock sample to be tested is cast in concrete in an open-bottomed steel rock box and allowed to cure for about a week prior to testing. The rock box is then turned over and welded onto the table of the LRCM. The desired depth of cut is achieved by clamping in place the appropriate number of spacer plates above the pick holder and 3-D load cell assembly. A number of conditioning passes, multiple cuts of the rock past the tool (usually two to four) are made at the required depth of cut and spacing to create a damaged rock surface comparable to actual field conditions. Once the conditioning is achieved, the data window is marked on the rock sample for chip collection and force data acquisition. The data window excludes data closer than one spacing distance to any block boundaries. The number of cuts in the data window varies for each pass across the rock surface, being dependent upon the rock sample size and the selected cut spacing. To prevent possible drying of the rock during cutting, all saturated blocks were cut under slow, continuous water flow. The quantity of soaking water was enough to keep the rock surface wet, but not sufficient to flush rock chips or to bias the force measurements. The tungsten carbide tips of the drag picks used in dry rock tests experienced several instances of thermal fatigue failure evident in the form of broken tips ( After each data pass, the rock chips and fines lying within the marked data window were carefully collected to avoid any further breakage of the fragile chips during handling. The saturated fragments were oven dried for 24 From the measured forces and collected chip masses, several other parameters required for the performance prediction of excavators were calculated. The specific energy (SE) of rock fragmentation – the amount of energy required to fragment a unit volume of rock (usually expressed in kW The more common method of calculation of SE is nominal ( A third set of measures was determined from the Rosin–Rammler approach frequently used to analyze the products of tumbling mills in the mineral processing industry. The Rosin–Rammler distribution describes the mass (volume) distribution function in exponential form as: Rearranging and taking logarithm twice of both sides of Eq. A plot of log [log (100/ The distribution parameter, The coarseness index, CI and the production rate, PR (or yield) in kg/min (m The experimental results of 50 data passes, incorporating 350 data cuts, are presented herein as weighted average values obtained from 6 to 17 data cuts each (number of cuts varies inversely with the cut spacings). Cut length of each data pass is taken as weighting factor for averaging different cutting related parameters. Detailed experimental results are presented in the An overall comparison of the cutting forces and specific energy values ( Saturated rock cutting seems to experience higher forces and be more energy intensive, contrary to disc cutting experience, but statistically at the 10% significance level (  The 3-D surface plots of cutting (or drag) force against cut spacing and depth of cut for dry and saturated tests ( For saturated rock cuts (  Note that there is less variation in SE values with increasing depths of cut. This relates to the boundary effects; surface roughness or asperities vary the mass of the broken chips more at shallow depths of cut than at deeper depths of cut. As the depth of cut increases there is less variability in the mass of the broken chips, hence making SE less variable. The variation between nominal and actual SE with increasing depth of cut can be seen in The optimum ratio of spacing to depth of cut (  Some fairly high SE values are also present at very small The overall chip mass produced in the saturated rock cuts (especially at shallower depths of cut) was less than the chip mass produced in the dry rock cuts, affecting the Muck from instrumented cutting tests and also from tunnel faces has been analyzed in the past in several ways to gain insights into machine performance. Coarseness index (CI) and Instantaneous cutting rate (ICR) are amongst the most common parameters calculated (   There is strong evidence that the coarseness index (CI) of rock broken during cutting increases with cutting efficiency. In a given rock type and cutter, an increase in the cutting efficiency (i.e., reduction in specific energy) causes a corresponding increase in the coarseness of the product and a reduction in the amount of airborne dust ( For the chisel pick tested in this study, the To better understand the dependence of SE on different independent variables, minimum Minimum Although the selected models are the best models generated by minimum This study characterized the performance of radial drag picks operating in Roubidoux Sandstone, a quartzose sandstone of moderate strength and relatively high permeability. Saturation increase cutting forces by 9.9% and normal forces by 9.4%. The change in side forces is negligible. Force variability seems to be subdued by saturation, though this could be an artifact of variability of the fabric of the samples tested, as well. Saturation increases the specific energy of cutting by 28% (measured by the actual volume of chips produced). The Rosin–Rammler absolute size constant A relationship of the form SE Minimum The observations of this study are very different to those obtained from data of disc cutters operating in the same rock, under same conditions of saturation ( The contrast in these findings emphasize the need for advancements in fundamental comprehending of rock fragmentation process, and implementation of a coordinated, comprehensive program of rock cutting characterization. For complete test results, see