Concentrating solar thermal power system can provide low carbon, renewable energy resources in countries or regions with strong solar irradiation. For this kind of power plant which is likely to be located in the arid area, natural draft dry cooling tower is a promising choice. To develop the experimental studies on small cooling tower, a 20m high natural draft dry cooling tower with fully instrumented measurement system was established by the Queensland Geothermal Energy Centre of Excellence. The performance of this cooling tower was measured with the constant heat input of 600kW and 840kW and with ambient temperature ranging from 20°C to 32°C. The cooling tower numerical model was refined and validated with the experimental data. The model of 1MW concentrating solar thermal supercritical CO2 power cycle was developed and integrated with the cooling tower model. The influences of changing ambient temperature and the performance of the cooling tower on efficiency of the power system were simulated. The differences of the mechanism of the ambient temperature effect on Rankine cycle and supercritical CO2 Brayton cycle were analysed and discussed.area (m specific heat (J diameter (m) enthalpy (kJ height, elevation (m) flow resistance length (m) mass flow rate (kg/s) number pressure (Pa) heat transfer rate (kW) heat flux (kW Reynolds number temperature (°C) velocity scalar (m efficiency density, mean density (kg property difference air side, water side compressor effective inside or inlet, outside or outlet tube The concern over the depletion of fossil fuels as well as greenhouse emissions provide the motivation for seeking alternative energy sources. Solar energy is abundant and clean. Most regions of Australia are blessed with almost continuous sunshine. Moreover, due to the population distribution of Australia, there are vast remote areas with isolated communities and mining sites that are off-grid and currently rely on diesel power generation. Replacement of diesel with Concentrating Solar Thermal (CST) is commercially feasible but requires CST technology suitable for down scaling. Thus the Australian Solar Thermal Research Initiative (ASTRI) is developing scaleable and modular CST power generation systems, which can be utilized in the remote parts of Australia. Like all other thermal power generation, a CST power plant is a heat engine. In a heat engine, the thermal efficiency increases with an increase in the average temperature at which heat is supplied to the system or with a decrease in the average temperature at which heat is rejected from the system. Therefore, the cooling tower is an integral part of the power plant and its performance significantly influences the plant performance A great deal of experimental research has already been published on the cooling performance of tall NDDCTs for large conventional thermal power generation. Kröger et al. In the last few years, a number of researchers investigated the cooling systems of CST power plants using both Rankine and Brayton cycles. Martin The experimental study of the cooling tower is a very important preparation for the future application. However, the experimental studies, especially the full scale experimental study for small NDDCTs, are still not extensive. No full scale experimental study about the short-NDDCT (less than 30 In order to fill the gap, the Queensland Geothermal Energy Centre of Excellence (QGECE) have built a 20 The Gatton experimental NDDCT is of hyperbolic shape and is 20 The air-cooled heat exchanger used in the Gatton cooling tower in Gatton were provided by Thermex Company. 18 individual heat exchanger bundles were horizontally installed at a height of 5 Each heat exchanger bundle consists of 22 parallel circuits. Each circuits have 10 tubes delivering 10 passes of the entire length of the bundle. Because this cooling tower is not yet connected with the power plant, the heat input into the system during the experiments is produced by a heater provided by the RCR energy company. The water temperature is measured at 38 locations. Each of the 18 heat exchanger bundles is equipped with two temperature sensors: one inlet and one outlet. Another pair of temperature sensors is installed at the inlet and outlet of the cooling tower. 7 pairs of pressure transducer were placed into the heat exchanger bundles. A mass flowmeter was installed at the inlet of the heat exchanger bundle to get the total mass flow rate of the water. The air temperature and air humidity is measured at 36 different locations of the tower. The temperature and humidity sensors are placed in 4 loops and located at the heat exchanger inlet plane, heat exchanger outlet plane, the middle of the tower and the top of the tower. Each loop has 9 temperature sensors and 9 humidity sensors. For a power unit running at constant power, the heat rejection of the cooling tower changes very little  As demonstrated in At the second phase of the initialization, the temperature of the air around the heat exchanger start to increase and the natural draft effect gradually forms. The average water temperature keeps increasing because the heat dumped by the cooling tower is smaller than the heat produced by the heater. The energy balance of the system can be expressed by Eq. The initialization ends when the air outlet temperature reaches its maximum value and the natural draft effect is in full strength. The overall water temperature is seen to decrease by a small amount at the increased air speed. The water and air temperatures almost don’t change after this point and the system is stable. The heat produced by the heater equals to the heat dumped by the cooling tower. For this particular cooling tower, it takes about 30 The cooling tower performance is influenced by the ambient conditions. The most important factors are the ambient temperature and the crosswind speed. The crosswind is rarely constant and there are always gusts and transients. That’s why the water inlet and the outlet temperatures in  In order to predict the performance of the cooling tower, Kroger et al. summarized the previous research on heat transfer and fluids mechanics and proposed a one-dimensional cooling tower model. This model has been widely applied in the previous large dry cooling tower research. The one-dimension dry cooling tower model combines the energy balance equations and air draft equations. When these two groups of equations are satisfied simultaneously, the performance of the cooling tower can be predicted. The energy balance equations and the draft equation can be expressed as: The one-dimension model of the Gatton NDDCT was developed before we started the test on the tower. The detailed can be found in First refinement concerns the air temperature distribution of the cooling tower. In the previous simulation, the assumption of the air temperature distribution inside the cooling tower is given by Kroger using Eq. According to this assumption, for this 20 The reason why the temperature in the middle and at the top of the cooling tower is lower is a feature of the Gatton cooling tower construction. At edge of the bottom of the cooling tower, the sealing around the heat exchangers is not perfect and there are small holes. So when the cooling tower is running, the cold air comes inside the cooling tower through both the heat exchanger bundles and these small holes. The temperature sensors at the bottom of the cooling tower are placed above the heat exchanger (not covering the edge of the cooling tower). So the temperatures measured by the bottom temperature sensors are the outlet temperature of the air-cooled heat exchanger. On the other hand, the cold air coming from the edge of the cooling tower will mix with the hot air coming from the heat exchanger bundles during the operation of the cooling tower. So the temperatures in the middle and the top were lower. Thus the temperatures at these two levels are lower. The following equation is used to calculate the temperature distribution in the cooling tower. The second refinement concerns the change of heat transfer coefficient of the heat exchanger. As shown in  The combination of Australia's dry climate and latitude give potentially favours CST power. ASTRI proposed a new form of small CST power system for off-grid applications to produce 24-h industrial scale power for remote communities and mining sites. In this paper, the simple recuperated sCO The system configuration used for this analysis is that of a CST system with two tank thermal storage, as shown in The power cycle analysis in this work is done using IPSEpro version 6.0, an open equation process simulation software package. In this work, the EPP_CSP_CO2 model library was used. This model library was developed by Enginomix for modelling solar thermal power generation. Fluid properties are calculated from REFPROP 9.1 The objective of this modelling is to determine the influence of ambient temperature variation on power output of the plant. With the cycle assumptions and constraints mentioned above there are still a range of possible operating points for any given ambient temperature as the cycle mass flow rate, As shown in Using the simulation and optimization method in Section As can be seen in Because of the sCO  Another dissimilarity between conventional steam Rankine cycles and the sCO In this research, the previously published short cooling tower predictive models were validated through tests on a 20 The model of 1 This research was performed as part of the