In the present study, the leaching of copper using electro-generated chlorine in hydrochloric acid solution has been carried out. The behavior of cuprous ions during the electro-leaching of copper has been extensively investigated. During the leaching of copper with the electro-generated chlorine, the copper leached out as cuprous ions which were accumulated in the solution and affected the oxidation–reduction potential of the leaching solution. The increasing rate of cuprous concentration linearly decreased with current density, which was verified by the retardation of the oxidation–reduction potential drop. At a current density 400Am−2, the leaching rate of copper increased linearly with increase in stirring speed and became saturated at stirring speeds of more than 600rpm. When the supplement of cuprous ions to the anode was rapid enough to consume the applied charge, the anodic reaction changed from chlorine generation to cuprous oxidation. The change of the anodic reaction retarded the leaching of copper. Therefore, the cuprous ions generated from copper leaching simultaneously affected the leaching of copper and the anodic reaction.Due to rapid economic growth, advancement in living standards and continuous launching of new and improved equipment, there has been a tremendous increase in the sale of electrical and electronic equipment (EEE). The rapid replacement of old by the latest advanced models causes mass generation of waste electrical and electronic equipment (WEEE) ( In hydrometallurgy, leaching is commonly used for the dissolution and recovery of metals. Generally, copper leaching from sulfide minerals is carried out by chloride hydrometallurgical processes using cupric or ferric ions as oxidant ( For the recycling of copper from PCBs, there are few effective economical processes. Chlorine is a strong oxidant and capable of leaching precious metals. In our previous work, a process for copper leaching from waste PCBs using electro-generated chlorine in hydrochloric acid was reported ( To achieve a high leaching rate in the process using electro-generated chlorine, the effect of the cuprous ions generated from the leaching on the anodic reactions and copper leaching have been investigated by adjusting process parameters such as current density and stirring speed. The studies will be applicable for the leaching of copper and recycling of waste PCBs. In the present work, an electrochemical cell with three-electrodes, with a thermostated water bath (25 The generation of chlorine with charge (C, the quantity of electricity carried in 1 The chlorine gas was generated by applying a constant current using a galvanostat (Princeton Applied Research, PAR 273A). The aliquots of aqueous solution were periodically withdrawn from the solution and analyzed by the iodide-thiosulfate method. Excess chlorine gas was absorbed in KI solution and was titrated with 0.1  All solutions used for testwork were prepared with reagent grade (Junsei, GR) chemicals and deionized water with a specific resistance of above 18 The effect of the current density on dissolution rate of chlorine in 1 Gaseous Cl The leaching of copper and the electrode potential for the anodic reaction with charge is shown in The electrode potentials were not changed during leaching, the current density being maintained at more than 200   Experiments on the effect of stirring speed were carried out in the range of 200–800   To maintain a high leaching rate of copper, the generation of chlorine with high oxidation power is preferred in the anodic reaction. Cuprous ions generated from copper dissolution ( The ORP drop at all current densities indicates that, when the leaching reaction begins, the concentration of cuprous ions increases regardless of current density, whereas the increasing rate depends on current density i.e., higher current density, lower increase in the rate. We expected that at current densities greater than 200  From the above discussion, it is clear that the cuprous ions generated by leaching of copper significantly affect the anodic reaction for oxidizer generation, simultaneously affect the leaching reaction. This means that the leaching of copper and the anodic reaction are closely related to the behavior of cuprous ions present in the solution. Based on studies on the effect of cuprous ions on copper leaching using electro-generated chlorine, the following conclusions can be drawn. To increase the leaching rate of copper, the anodic reaction is preferred for chlorine generation rather than cuprous oxidation. The anodic reaction is affected by the supplement of cuprous ions generated from the leaching of copper. When the concentration of cuprous ions in the solution was sufficient for the anode current, the anodic reaction changed to cuprous oxidation resulting in lowered leaching rate. To avoid this it is important to suppress the concentration of cuprous ions. Based on our results, the anodic reaction can be controlled such that the chlorine generation dominates, by suppressing the participation of cuprous ions for the anodic reaction by adjusting stirring speed and current density. These results will be useful in scaling up the process for copper leaching, including simultaneous copper recovery from waste PCBs using electro-generated chlorine. The paper is based on the work supported by Resources Recycling R&D Center (Korea) under the project entitled “Development of total recycling technology for WEEE.”