Gravelly drainage layer and semi-slotted polyethylene pipes are two main components of drainage system of heap leaching structures. Fluid is locally drained and directed to semi-slotted polyethylene pipes by gravelly drainage layer. Then, it is sent to a pregnant leach solution (PLS) pond by the semi-slotted polyethylene pipes gravitationally. In this paper, initially the existing relations, suggested for the design of drainage system of heap leaching structures, are analyzed. Then, the main differences between fluid drain in landfills and heap leaching structures are presented, and consequently, two new correction factors, named “replacement” and “delay” factors are suggested. The replacement factor illustrates the ratio of mean value of heap layers area to the acid-washed area and the delay factor represents the reduction of heap layers area. The new correction factors are added to Giroud equation and the modified format of the equation is suggested for computing gravelly drainage layer thickness of heap leaching structures. Also, these two correction factors are added to Majdi et al. equation and two new relations are suggested for determination of main and auxiliary drainage semi-slotted polyethylene pipes diameters in these structures. Finally, based on the new relations, adequate drainage systems are designed for two case studies (“Tarom” and “Sarcheshmeh 2” heap leaching structures) and the results are compared with those calculated by the exiting equations.heap height (m) admissible thickness of the gravelly drainage layer (m) dimensionless factor (for more details see Eq. dimensionless factor (for more details see Eq. length of base rock (m) base rock slope (m) rate of liquid supply per square meter (m/s) coefficient of long-term hydraulic conductivity for the drainage layer (m/s) laboratory coefficient of hydraulic conductivity for the drainage layer (m/s) factor of safety for design drainage system reduction factor due to particulate clogging (dimensionless) reduction factor due to chemical clogging (dimensionless) reduction factor due to biological clogging (dimensionless) pipe diameter (m) pipe gradient (%) modification factor (dimensionless) leach solution inflow supply per square meter (m/s) inflow due to precipitation supply per square meter (m/s) length of valley (m) distance between apexes of the two sides of the valley (m) length of pipe (m) replacement factor (dimensionless) delay factor (dimensionless) surface of layer total acid-charged surface (m mean value of heap layers surface (m total value of heap layers surface (m number of heap layers (dimensionless) number of sections (dimensionless) cross-sectional area of heap layers placed between pipes “ height of heap layers (m) distance between pipes “ total slope of the heap (degree) it is equal to “ cross-sectional area of heap layers placed between pipe “ In order to construct heap leaching structures, a large area with low slope and close to oxide copper dump(s) (mineral deposit) is selected In this paper, the existing equations, suggested for designs of drainage system of heap leaching structures, are analyzed and two new parameters are added to these relations. Then, a supplementary method is suggested to design heap leaching drainage system. Finally, based on the new method, suitable drainage systems are designed for “Tarom” and “Sarcheshmeh 2” heap leaching structures. Darcy and Manning equations are common relations for designing drainage systems (gravelly layer and pipe nets) Since the leaching fluid is an acidic liquid, hence, the metal pipes cannot be used for the drainage system purposes. Cross-sectional area of pipes is changed by overburden pressure of the heap. If gravelly layer or semi-slotted polyethylene pipes do not act well, total drainage system of the heap leaching structures will not work properly. PLS is charged into gravelly layer and semi-slotted polyethylene pipes lengthwise gradually. Rock particles of gravelly drainage layer are dissolved by acid fluid and its hydraulic conductivity changes. There are chemical and biological clogging as well as particle clogging in drainage system of heap leaching structures. Repair, inspection and maintenance of heap leaching drainage system are impossible. Drainage system of heap leaching structures is one the most effective and controlling elements on environmental damages of hydrometallurgic processes Some researches have been done to develop more suitable methods for the design of heap leaching structures drainage system. Theil and Smith Also, Majdi et al. added a new correction factor, named “Modification Factor ( Eq. Flow fluid in gravelly layer is laminar. Inflow of fluid is steady. Fluid-charged surface is equal to gravelly drainage layer surface. Majdi et al. proved that acid flow in gravelly layer of heap leaching structures satisfies these conditions and modified format of this relation can be used for the computation of gravelly drainage layer thickness of heap leaching structures Conditions of fluid flow in gravelly drainage layers of landfills and heap leaching structures (items 1 and 2) are the same, but there are two main differences between their fluids-charged surfaces (item 3). In this paper, the differences are summarized as follows: First, oxide copper soil layer of heaps are divided into some paducks and, in each instance, only limited number of the paducks are acid washed. In There is another difference between landfills and heap leaching fluid-charged surfaces. In Based on Eq. If “delay factor ( Semi-slotted polyethylene pipes are placed on the valley floor and hill, parallel to the heap bedding and beneath the gravelly layer. These pipes send the leachate to PLS pond gravitationally. As mentioned, the PLS is usually directed towards semi-slotted polyethylene pipes by gravelly drainage layer. Hence, direction of acid drainage in gravelly layer and semi-slotted polyethylene pipes is usually vertical. In As mentioned, Eq. Total surface of oxide copper soil layer has been acid washed. 50% of pipe capacity has been used. Total inflow of fluid to heap (acid and seasonal precipitation inflow) has been directed to ponds by only main semi-slotted polyethylene pipe(s). But, the first assumption is not correct. As mentioned previously, a layer is divided to some paducks and, in each instance, only a few paducks are acid washed. Hence, total leached surface is Eq. In this paper, Eqs. Primary exploration of “Tarom” copper mine was done with three exploratory tunnels in 1942 The geometrical and hydraulic characteristics of Tarom heap leaching used for design of drainage system are presented in Heap leaching structure 2 at Sarcheshmeh copper mine was constructed in an area of approximately 230,000 The investigation in this paper led to the following concluding remarks: Drainage system of heap leaching structures is a combined form of gravely layer and semi-slotted polyethylene pipes. Two main differences between fluid-charged surface of heap leaching and landfill structures, have been distinguished. It is suggested that the Giroud and Majdi et al. equations be used with taking the correction factors presented in this paper into account. In Heap leaching structures acid-washed area (acid-charged surface) is less than heap layers surface; hence a new correction factor ( Mean amount of replacement factor can be computed from Eq. The area of heap layers will be decreasing in lifetime of heap leaching process, and area of gravelly drainage layer is larger than heap layers surfaces; hence a new correction factor ( Amount of delay factor can be computed form Eq. Eqs. For Tarom heap leaching drainage system, a parallel pattern of semi-slotted polyethylene pipes and constant thickness of gravelly layer are suggested. For Sarcheshmeh 2 heap leaching structure a parallel pattern of semi-slotted polyethylene pipes along with an ascending thickness of gravelly layer are proposed. The authors would like to sincerely thank Mr. Golafshani and Mr. Asar, owner of Tarom copper mine, who provided support for the data required and encouragement throughout the investigation. The total and mean value of heap layers surfaces can be determined as follows: Hence the mean value of delay factor can be calculated as follows: The area of layer decrease gradually, hence the mean value of heap layers surfaces can be determined as follows, too: Replace Eq. With considering We have Also, for Eq. (B.5) can be rewritten as follows: Hence; With considering Substituting Eq. Eq. We suppose a new parameter as follows: Hence, Extended form of Eq. Hence, Substituting Eqs.