Natural polysaccharides such as starch, dextrin, guar gum, cellulose and their derivatives are promising non-toxic organic depressants. Although generally perceived as non-selective, these polymers have found use in commercial processes or have been tested in laboratories in practically all flotation systems involving every type of minerals. In this communication, the adsorption mechanisms of natural polysaccharides are reviewed, with the objective of promoting the wider applications of the polymers. While it seems generally accepted that natural polysaccharides interact with minerals via surface metal-hydroxylated species, an acid/base interaction model between the natural polysaccharides and mineral surfaces is proposed to explain many observed adsorption and flotation phenomena.Polysaccharides are condensation polymers of high molecular weights based on simple monosaccharide (sugar) units. Many different types of polysaccharides exist in nature but only a small number of them have been used by mineral industry, especially in flotation. These include starch, dextrin, guar gum and carboxymethyl cellulose and they are mainly used as flotation depressants. Selective depressants are indispensable ingredients in any flotation reagent scheme targeting selective separation of different minerals. Various inorganic depressants have been routinely used. Many of these depressants, especially the ones used in differential sulfide flotation, are extremely toxic and environmentally unacceptable. Examples of such depressants are sodium cyanide, sodium dichromate, sulfur dioxide, arsenic trioxide, phosphorous pentasulfide, etc. Some of these inorganic depressants are reducing agents and thus are susceptible to oxidation in aerated flotation pulps. High reagent consumption usually results. On the other hand, polysaccharides are natural organic polymers that are non-toxic and biodegradable. They are also cheaper and more resistant to oxidation than the inorganic depressants. Not only do these properties make them ideal as flotation reagents, but they have also shown potential for use as selective depressants in many differential mineral flotation systems. Polysaccharides have been utilized in mineral industry for almost 70 years, mainly as depressants for iron oxides, inherently hydrophobic minerals and rock-forming gangue minerals. They are also reported as being selective in the differential flotation of sulfide minerals. However, a general lack of understanding of the interaction mechanism between the polysaccharides and mineral surfaces has hindered the wider application of these polymers. In this communication, we wish to summarize the current status in this important field and postulate the interaction mechanisms. As mentioned, the basic structural units of polysaccharides are sugar monomers. Various polysaccharides are built of many different types of such monomers joined together in different ways. Starch, dextrin, cellulose and guar gum are the polysaccharides that have been most extensively used in mineral processing and only these polysaccharides will be discussed. Cellulose and starch are the most abundant and most important natural polysaccharides. They are found in various plants. Both are made of Dextrin is derived from starch by partial thermal degradation under acidic conditions. The treatment causes the break down and reversion of the starch molecular chains and consequently, the resulting dextrin molecules are smaller than starch but are more branched All the three hydroxyl groups (–OH) in the glucose monomeric units may rotate in such a way that they face one side of the monomer ring, making that side hydrophilic. The opposite side is consequently slightly hydrophobic due to the exposed –CH groups. In fact, in aqueous solutions, amylose forms a helix with six glucose monomers per turn. The interior of the helix is hydrophobic, whereas the outer shell is hydrophilic Guar gum is a branched polysaccharide belonging to the group of galactomannan. Structurally, it is made of a straight chain of β- It is known that the two –OH groups on C-2 and C-3, when in the The above descriptions show the monomeric structures of starch, dextrin, cellulose and guar gum. In reality, these polysaccharides can be extracted from different sources and the chain length and configuration, molecular weights, and the contents of impurities may vary considerably. A number of different functional groups can be introduced to the polysaccharides through etherification or esterification reactions with the hydroxyl groups. This results in the “modified” polysaccharides. Carboxymethyl cellulose is a typical example of such modification in which the carboxymethyl groups have replaced the protons in some of the hydroxyl groups. The number of these substituted functional groups per monomer is called the “Degree of Substitution” (DS). In the case of carboxymethyl cellulose, the maximum DS is 3, in which case all the three hydroxyl groups in one monomer are replaced by the carboxymethyl groups. Commercial carboxymethyl cellulose typically has a lower DS than this maximum value, which usually ranges from 0.3 to 1.2. Polysaccharides have been used in the mineral industry for almost 70 years. Generally, starches have been used mainly as flocculants or flotation depressants for iron oxide minerals and phosphate minerals while the associated silica is floated. Dextrin has been mainly tested as depressants for inherently hydrophobic minerals such as talc, molybdenite and coal. Carboxymethyl cellulose and guar gum are widely used as depressants for hydrophobic talcaceous minerals in Cu–Ni bulk sulfide flotation. Applications of polysaccharides in other mineral systems, both in the laboratory and in commercial processes, have also been frequently reported. The predominant perception regarding the use of polysaccharides in mineral flotation is that their adsorption is non-selective (primarily resulting from hydrogen bonding) and their functions unpredictable. The applicability of the polysaccharides in such a wide range of mineral systems, however, seems to indicate that this general perception is probably oversimplified and incorrect. In fact, the following sections will show that the adsorption mechanisms of the polysaccharides are more complicated than hydrogen bonding. As can be seen from Due to a lack of the impurities content data, only the role of the hydroxyl groups in the polysaccharides will be discussed. This does not affect the validity of the conclusions since the impurity contents are usually very low and do not seem to contribute significantly to the adsorption. In fact, several authors (e.g., Several hypotheses regarding polysaccharide adsorption mechanisms, principally hydrogen bonding The current picture of the polysaccharide adsorption reflects the role of metal-hydroxylated species present on mineral surfaces. Through adsorption studies on intentionally modified adsorption substrates, These observations led to a study of the interactions between the dextrin and several metal salts in aqueous solutions. It was found that the interactions of dextrin with the metal salts were pH-dependent. The optimum pH of interaction varied with the metal salts used, and coincided with the isoelectric points (iep) of the metal-hydroxide precipitates It is noted that the reaction scheme shown in In fact, it had been observed in previously published researches that the addition of calcium or magnesium ions increased the adsorption or the depressive function of natural polysaccharides. These include the studies reported by A number of subsequent studies supported the observation that the unmodified natural polysaccharides, such as dextrin, starch or guar gum, adsorbed on mineral surfaces through interactions with mineral surface metal-hydroxylated species. These include the studies of The direct consequence of the interaction of natural polysaccharides with metal-hydroxylated species is that the interaction, and thus the adsorption, is strongly dependent on pH. The pH-dependence of polysaccharide adsorption was in fact first observed by  However, the foregoing discussion does not imply that the maximum adsorption of polysaccharides will always occur at the iep of minerals. This is because the iep does not always reflect the pH at which the surface metal sites are hydroxylated. One example is the Pb-coated quartz. Due to the incomplete Pb coverage of the quartz surface, the Pb-coated quartz had negative zeta potentials in the pH range 3 to 13  The postulation that the polysaccharides interact with mineral surface metal-hydroxylated species, and the fact that metal-hydroxylation is dependent on pH, explain many of the flotation separations listed in However, there are several published results that showed that the adsorption of polysaccharides is independent of pH. These include the adsorption of dextrin on chalcocite The forgoing summary shows that the natural polysaccharides interact only with mineral surface metal-hydroxylated species. The following questions then have to be answered. Why do they not interact with metal cations? Why do they interact more strongly with one metal hydroxyls than with other metal hydroxyls? Unfortunately, very little information is available with regard to these questions. While it is obvious that more research is needed, the following discussions only attempt at shedding some light on these questions. In mineral suspensions, the hydroxyl groups on mineral surfaces can either give away or accept a proton, thus behaving as a Brønsted acid or Brønsted base. The Brønsted acidity depends on the metal atom to which the hydroxyl group(s) is attached. If the metal atom is relatively more electron attracting, e.g., a small metal atom with a high positive valence, the proton will be less strongly held to the oxygen and the acidity of the hydroxyl group(s) will be higher. The reaction mechanism proposed between the hydroxyl groups in polysaccharides and the mineral surface metal hydroxyls, i.e., It is known that for solid oxide, the iep is an indication of the acidity/basicity of surface hydroxyl groups. A high iep indicates a basic surface. This can be visualized as follows: the solid surface will give away –OH groups and thus be positively charged unless the solution pH is high enough so that the hydroxyl groups are driven back to the surface, resulting in zero surface charge at this high pH. Similarly, a low iep indicates an acidic surface. It is noted that the oxides of lead, nickel and magnesium have high ieps between 10 and 12 This acid/base interaction hypothesis also explains the use of starch in the separation of iron oxide minerals from quartz. Quartz has an iep around 2, indicating a strong surface acidity, which does not favor polysaccharide adsorption. In fact, all the literature data indicate that quartz does not strongly adsorb polysaccharides. Iron oxide minerals typically have ieps around 6–7. The surfaces of iron oxides are therefore less acidic than quartz. That is probably the reason why iron oxide adsorbs more starch than quartz and is depressed. It follows that the hydroxyl groups in polysaccharides would behave as a Brønsted acid during the interaction with mineral surface hydroxyl groups. This is supported by the following observations. (1) Polysaccharides show very low adsorption on quartz surface which is known to be a strong Brønsted acid. (2) Polysaccharides do not interact with exposed surface metal ions, which are Lewis acids. In fact, several researchers used the same Baker dextrin in their adsorption studies. When the adsorption data were compiled together with the iep of the minerals, a linear relationship was obtained Besides the basicity of the surface metal hydroxyl groups, the adsorption density also depended on the population of the surface metal hydroxyl groups.  Although the five-membered ring complexes between the –OH groups on C-2/C-3 and mineral surface hydroxyl groups were likely A modified adsorption model was proposed by Based on these results, it is likely that either two or three of the –OH groups of one monomer or of immediately adjacent monomers in polysaccharides can be bonded to a single surface metal atom. This would require that the mineral surface hydroxyl groups be in the forms of Types III, IV and V. All these three forms of hydroxyl groups have relatively high basicity, thus favoring the polysaccharide–mineral interaction if it proceeds through an acid/base interaction. If the acid/base interaction hypothesis as discussed is valid, the polysaccharide adsorption will depend on the valence states, ionic radii and coordination numbers of the metal ions on the mineral surfaces. These characters contribute to the basicity of the surface hydroxyl groups, which then dictate the interaction with natural polysaccharides. An examination of literature data indicates that the oxides or hydroxides of some other metals, such as Ca and Zr, also have high ieps. It has been reported that calcium-bearing minerals, such as calcite and apatite, strongly adsorb starch In fact, acid/base interactions have been proposed in several polymer/solid adsorption and adhesion processes. It is noted that acid/base interactions do not necessarily answer the question whether the adsorption is through hydrogen bonding or through chemical complexation.  Polysaccharides have long been considered to adsorb on mineral surfaces through hydrogen bonds. However, experimental evidences for chemical complexation were increasingly reported. Chemical complexation was initially proposed by It is likely that the nature of the bonds between polysaccharides and mineral surfaces depends on the extent of the acid/base interactions. For weak acid/base interactions, only hydrogen bonds may be formed. For strong acid/base interactions, the interactions may gradually change to a chemical complexation. After all, various complexes between starch and metal hydroxides as well as metal salts were reported It is generally believed that the depressive behavior of polysaccharides in differential flotation is not specific, or not as specific as inorganic depressants. This certainly stems from the fact that the adsorption mechanism of the polysaccharides has not yet been fully understood. Substitution of foreign functional groups is also likely to increase the specificity of polysaccharide adsorption. For instance, Natural polysaccharides, such as starches, dextrins and guar gums that are widely used in mineral flotation adsorb through the interaction with mineral surface metal-hydroxylated species. Based on the fact that the surface metal hydroxyl groups with a lower acidity exhibit stronger interaction with the natural polysaccharides, the nature of the interaction is likely an acid/base interaction. The extent of the acid/base interaction probably determines whether the adsorption is hydrogen bonding or chemical complexation. Natural polysaccharides may be chosen as selective depressants to effect a separation based on the above adsorption mechanisms. The adsorption mechanisms may also guide further studies aimed at enhancing the selectivity of the natural polysaccharides. This work is supported by a RGPIN grant from the National Science and Engineering Research Council (NSERC) of Canada.