A combination of smelting-reduction of bauxite and leaching treatment of the produced slag for alumina recovery is known as the Pedersen process. The process is considered to be more sustainable for producing metallurgical-grade alumina than the Bayer process as it does not produce bauxite residue (red mud), which is one of the most abundant industrial byproducts in the world. In this work, the leachability of a ternary CaO-Al2O3-SiO2 slag produced from smelting-reduction of low-grade bauxite has been studied. The obtained calcium aluminate-slag consists of Ca12Al14O33 and CaAl2O4 phases with minor amounts of complex oxide phases. A leaching series have been carried out at different temperatures, Na2O(carbonate):Na2O(caustic) concentration ratios. The composition of solids and leaching liquors were analyzed for measuring the recovery of the aluminum and silicon. The results show that the highest aluminum extraction extent in the current study is 46.7%, which is achieved at a temperature of 75 °C, 1 atm, in 60 g/L Na2O(carbonate) solution, in 30 min of leaching time. A passive calcium-containing layer at the slag's surface acts as a mass transfer barrier for the reactants and products of the leaching reactions, making their diffusion the rate-limiting step. A high concentration of Na2O(caustic) may decrease the aluminum extraction of the slag as a result of insufficient carbonate anions in the system, where the dissolved aluminum reacts with the calcium cations and produce 3CaO·Al2O3·6H2O phase.Excessive production of bauxite residue (red mud), which is estimated 150 million tonnes annually in 2017 ( The amount of the red mud produced in the Bayer process is positively related to the mass concentration of iron-bearing phases in the bauxite, which is evident as the composition of the red mud is dominated by iron oxide phases ( Furthermore, Moreover, Norwegian University of Science and Technology (NTNU) through research domain 5-Materials and Society in SFI-metal production and National Technical University of Athens (NTUA) have initiated and started preliminary work on reviving the Pedersen process. The European Union under Horizon 2020 program also has launched ENSUREAL project ( In the literature ( The leaching reactions of CA and C Both As seen in In this section, we describe the materials preparation, characterization of the samples, and leaching equipment and process parameters. The main material used in the current study is a slag that was produced by a smelting-reduction process of a mixture of bauxite, coke, and lime from our previous study ( We used non-destructive X-ray Fluorescence (XRF) SPECTRO XEPOS™ to measure the chemical composition of the grey mud produced from the leaching treatment. The Backscattered Electron (BSE) images and the multi-point Energy Dispersive Spectroscopy (EDS) of both the slag and grey mud were performed by using Hitachi SU6600™ Scanning Electron Microscope (SEM). Moreover, an X-ray elemental mapping of the grey mud's cross section was carried out using JEOL JXA- 8500F Electron Probe Micro Analyzer (EPMA) with Wavelength Dispersive X-ray Spectrometer (WDS). For mineralogy phase identification, we used Bruker D8 A25 DaVinci™ X-ray Diffractometer (XRD) with CuKα radiation, 10 to 75 deg. diffraction angle, 0.01 deg. step size, and 2.5 deg. for both primary and secondary soller slits. The liquor samples of the pregnant liquid solution (PLS) were taken after separating the solid and liquid by using an ashless grade of quantitative filter paper. Inductively Coupled Plasma Optical Emission Spectrometry (ICP-OES) was used to measure the concentration of aluminum and silicon of the PLS for observing the recovery of aluminum and silicon from the slag after the leaching treatment. The leaching treatment was performed inside a Parr 4563 mini reactor, which is an Inconel alloys-based vessel with 600 mL capacity that is resistant to chemical attack. The reactor was heated through a conduction heating. It has a lid that is made of Teflon, which is fitted with a condenser for condensing the water vapors that allows the pressure inside of the reactor remained in ambient pressure, and at the same time keeps the liquid-solid (L/S) weight ratio of the system relatively constant. The temperature was measured with a Pt thermocouple and the stirring was performed through a mechanical stirrer. The thermocouple, stirrer, and heater were connected to Parr 4841, a Programmable Logic Controller (PLC), to set and measure the necessitate parameters during the leaching treatment. A schematic of the leaching setup is shown in The leaching solution used in this study has a constant concentration of 60 g/L Na This section shows the results and discussion about the characterization of the slag before and after the leaching treatment, slag's leachability in different temperatures and concentration ratios of Na As seen previously in In Furthermore, the secondary phase consists of 39.1 wt% Ca, 23.8 wt% Al, 3.7 wt% Si, and 3.4 wt% Ti, on average. The average of Ca/Al mass ratio of primary and secondary phase is 1.2 and 1.6, respectively. Based on the similarity of Ca/Al mass ratio between primary and C The subsection of leachability of the slag covers the aluminum and silicon recoveries based on the leaching series that was carried out. Also, it includes a thermodynamic perspective of the effect of different Na A ternary CaO-Al As is seen, the composition of studied slag is located in the green area with the leachable slags and very close to the area of C Regarding the leachability of the slag, concentrations of Al and Si in the PLS after series of leaching are shown in In addition, the aluminum and silicon extraction of the slag after a series of leaching experiments is shown in In On the other hand, as seen in Furthermore, similar to the aluminum extraction, we find that the leaching temperature gives a modest effect to the silicon dissolution as well. A low leaching temperature is more favorable than a high one to minimize the silicon dissolution in the PLS, which is in agreement with the original Pedersen patent where Pedersen used moderate temperatures for the digestion ( In the original The discrepancy between the Pedersen patent and the current result might have resulted from the different digestion's concentration, the method applied, and the phase of calcium aluminate used, which can be described as following: First, in the original Pedersen process, the aqueous solvent is a dilute solution that consists of 18–23 g/L Na Second, the Pedersen original patent uses two or more countercurrent leaching steps, where an excess of slag is charged to the first leachate to lower the SiO Third, according to The leaching reaction between C The effect of sodium hydroxide concentration on the alumina dissolution can be explained from a thermodynamic perspective. The Gibbs energy change of If Results of the BSE cross-section, phase identification, and morphology of the grey mud are presented and discussed in the current section. The BSE cross-sectional image of the grey mud obtained after the leaching treatment of the slag with 100% Na Furthermore, the X-ray mapping element in According to the observations above, we propose a leaching mechanism of a calcium aluminate slag that has both leachable and non-leachable phases, which is shown schematically in The leaching mechanism can be divided to three main stages: The initial stage. The slag consists of a leachable C The CaCO The slow diffusion stage. The Na The XRD results of the grey mud in Another interesting observation from the XRD result is the precipitation of Ca Moreover, The morphology of different grey muds has been investigated and is shown in The GM-A consists of calcite and vaterite crystals. A calcite crystal has a cubical shape, whereas vaterite has a spherical one ( On the other hand, the GM-B consists of calcite, and a fibrous-like shape, which incorporates and forming a network structure to other grains. The fibrous-like shape does not resemble the morphology of any un-hydrated CaCO The leaching treatment of a ternary CaO-Al The leaching reaction of calcium-aluminate phases in a sodium carbonate solution is fast and temperature gives mild effect to the aluminum extraction in the first 30 min of the reaction. The addition of Na The calcite-containing layer formed and distributed around the surface of the slag as the leaching reactions progress. The kinetics of leaching reaction appears to be diffusion rate limited as the passive calcium carbonate-containing layer formed at the unreacted surface of slag and may inhibit the progress of leaching reactions. The results obtained from the current study may pave a new way to utilize CaO-Al The NTNU has funded the research and supported by the  Supplementary data to this article can be found online at