To improve their versatility, many first-order flotation kinetics models with distributions of flotation rate constants were redefined so that they could all be represented by the same set of three model parameters. As a result, the width of the distribution become independent of its mean, and parameters of the model and the curve fitting errors, became virtually the same, independent of the chosen distribution function. For the modified three-parameter models, the curve fitting errors were much smaller and their robustness, measured by PRESS residuals, was much better when compared to the corresponding two-parameter models. Three different methods were compared to perform flotation kinetics analysis and estimate model parameters. In Method I, recovery vs. time data were used to obtain model parameters. No significant insight into the distribution of rate constants could be obtained because the distributions were presupposed. In Method II, the froth products were fractionated into several size fractions and the data for each fraction were fitted to a model. This task was easy to perform and the method could describe the flotation kinetics reasonably well. In method III, flotation products were fractionated into many size-specific gravity fractions. The procedure involved a large amount of time and effort and it generated relatively large errors. Based on the analysis presented in this article, it was concluded the smallest errors were obtained with Method II. The overall distribution of flotation rate constants could be obtained from a weighted average of the distributions of individual size fractions. The distributions so obtained were demonstrated to be less sensitive to the choice of the model used to represent the kinetics of individual size fractions, and therefore can be assumed to be “true” representation of the flotation rate distribution.Micro- and macro-scale models have often been used to describe the kinetics of flotation. In the micro-scale models, the sub-processes of the flotation system are identified and used to determine the cause and effect relationships between the system variables. However, identification of all sub-process and the corresponding cause and effect relationships is extremely difficult because of the interactions between physical and chemical parameters. The reader is referred to articles by In macro-scale modeling, the overall response of the flotation system is related to various operating parameters through a set of mathematical equations. The macro-scale models can be divided into two categories, namely, empirical and phenomenological ( Kinetic models that invoke the chemical reactor analogy and consider flotation as a reaction between bubbles and particles have received most attention in the literature. These models can be readily adopted for development of control strategies in industrial applications. Some such models were modified as a part of this investigation in order to increase their versatility. The general rate equation for flotation may be written as: There has been a great deal of discussion over the actual order of the flotation process ( Solution of the first-order rate equation results in the classical first-order flotation model. The corresponding equation, along with relations for other models are given in If the material to be floated consists of particles whose Another complication arises because model parameters cannot be compared among different first-order models since they correspond to a different property of the distribution function for each model. For example, the rate parameter for the classical first-order model represents some kind of mean flotation rate while the rate parameter for the first-order model with a rectangular distribution of The evaluation of flotation kinetics using an appropriate first-order model can be carried out in several ways. Most often, the total flotation recovery is used in the estimation of The purpose of this paper is two fold. (1) To redefine the first order flotation kinetics models with a distribution of flotation rates such that all the models can be represented by the same three parameters, namely a mean (2) To develop a physically representative and reliable kinetics analysis procedure using the modified models to estimate the “true” distribution of Three coal samples were used in this investigation: As-mined raw coals from the Upper Freeport and Pittsburgh seams were chosen as typical of those processed in a flotation plant. These are designated as UF and PR, respectively. A third sample, which was the product from a jigging plant was chosen since it was believed to have a narrow distribution of The as-received coal samples were crushed down to −3.35 mm and stored under an argon atmosphere in aluminum-laminated plastic bags of 15 kg capacity. The 15 kg samples were further divided into samples of 500 g as needed and stored in smaller bags under the same conditions. Prior to each flotation test these samples were wet-ground to −600 μm nominal size using a rod mill. Flotation tests were carried out in a 5-l cell using a Wemco laboratory flotation machine at a solids concentration of 10%. The flotation cell was equipped with paddles for automatic froth removal based on an earlier design by Miller ( Froth products were collected at preset time intervals and were wet screened at 37 μm to prevent caking during drying. Both the +37 μm and −37 μm fractions of each froth product were filtered and dried overnight at 80°C. They were stored separately for the subsequent size or size-specific gravity fractionation. The +37 μm fraction obtained from the wet screening step was dry-screened at screen sizes of 300, 150, 75 and 37 μm. An overall −37 μm material was obtained for each froth product by combining the screen undersize from the wet and dry screening steps. The size-fractionated flotation products were weighed and analyzed for ash to obtain the flotation recovery, The +37 and −37 μm fractions were classified separately at specific gravities of 1.3, 1.5, 1.7 and 1.9. The specific gravity fractions of the +37 μm material were further classified at the screen sizes given above. A centrifuge was used for specific gravity fractionation of the −37 μm material. Additional details of the procedure for fractionation of froth products into various size-specific gravity fractions are given in an article by It was seen early in the test work that some size-specific gravity fractions contained rather small amounts of material based on the 500 g feed used in a flotation test. Hence, a given flotation test was repeated between 7 to 10 times under identical conditions until a sufficient amount of material was obtained. The reproducibility of these tests was fairly good ( The recovery vs. time data for the total, size fractionated and size-specific gravity fractionated materials were subjected to a curve fitting procedure using various first-order models. Each curve fitting procedure resulted in the best estimates of the parameters of a given model. The curve fitting errors for the total material, The size fractionated froth products from various time increments were analyzed using oil immersion microscopy to determine the amount of mineral matter locked with carbonaceous material. Cylindrical pellets molded by mixing the coal particles with an epoxy resin were prepared to create a surface for reflected-light microscopic analysis. The microscope was coupled to a automatic counter with a stage translator. A scale of locking was established on the basis of the percentage of the particles' projected surface area occupied by the ash material. Frequency plots showing the percent of particles in each locking interval were obtained for groups of 500 particles. These studies were carried out to determine the hydrophobicity distribution of the size fractionated samples obtained either from the flotation feed or from froth products at different time intervals. Film flotation is based on successive fractionation of a given sample, preferably of a narrow size fraction, by aqueous methanol solutions of varying surface tension ( This study was carried out in two phases. In the first phase of the work ( For the sake of brevity, only the results for the selected models will be presented in this paper. However, they have been observed to be true for all the other models tested as well ( The two raw coal samples UF and PC were floated at dodecane and MIBC concentrations of 0.3 kg/T and the rate data were analyzed using standard curve fitting procedures. The distributions of flotation rate constants obtained by fitting Models R2 and R3 as a function of particle size are given in (1) For a given data set, both the magnitudes of the model parameters and the curve fitting errors were virtually the same for all the modified three-parameter models. On the other hand, they varied considerably for the two-parameter models. (2) The modified models predicted narrow distributions of (3) Fine size fractions, especially the −37 μm fraction, generally gave relatively large curve fitting errors; most probably because flotation of fines deviates from first-order kinetics. Nevertheless, the curve fitting errors were significantly smaller for the modified 3-parameter models, especially for the sample PC. The k distributions predicted by model R3 were quite different from those predicted by model R2, for various size fractions of the two coal samples, as can be seen from the results in    The particles of the UF feed material displayed a wide distribution of hydrophobicities as can be seen from the results in The behavior of the coal sample PC was quite different as can be seen from The preceding discussion established that the modified three-parameter, first-order models represented the flotation rate data much better than their two-parameter counterparts both in terms of the physical meaning of the model parameters and the curve fitting errors. In this section, the robustness of the model, was evaluated using the kinetics data from (a) Assume a set of rate data consisting of recoveries (b) Delete the first pair ( (c) Repeat the process (d) Calculate the average PRESS residual from the formula: For a robust model, the PRESS residuals are small. The average PRESS residuals for the flotation of the intermediate size fractions of the UF and PC coal samples are given in The UF and PR coal samples were floated in the absence and presence (0.65 kg/T) of dodecane in the second phase of the work. The MIBC concentration was 0.65 kg/T in all cases. The flotation rate data were evaluated using the modified three-parameter models by the application of three different methods to determine the best approach to kinetics analysis. Method I is based on fitting the model to the total amount of material floated as a function of time, Overall errors, The total flotation recovery that was used in the kinetic analysis by Method I was obtained by analyzing the flotation products for weight and ash prior to any fractionation. A summary of the model parameters for the total flotation recovery is given in It should be noted that the mean flotation rates generated by the five models, in their modified forms, are very similar for a given test. Hence, a single model could be chosen to discuss the results for varying experimental conditions. Model N3 is selected for the purpose. It can be seen that the mean flotation rate varied appreciably for both coals upon addition of the collector. It increased from 1.95 min The kinetic behavior of the size-fractionated flotation products was analyzed using the modified first-order models. It was observed that the kinetics of the individual size fractions varied substantially both with respect to ultimate recovery and the mean flotation rate. The width of the flotation rate distribution also varied for different size fractions. An example of the kind of flotation rate distributions predicted by various models is given in An analysis of the ash units after short flotation times showed that the large increase in the flotation rate for the coarse size fractions was accompanied by a large increase in the amount of ash-forming minerals reporting to the froth in these size fractions, most probably in the form of locked particles. The kinetics analysis was carried out on the size-specific gravity fractionated flotation products. The parameters predicted by various models were observed to be quite similar for a given size-specific gravity fraction. Also, the width of the flotation rate distributions approached zero and Models R3, S3, N3 and G3 approximated Model C for the majority of the size-specific gravity intervals ( The flotation rate distributions for the UF and PR samples are given in In general, addition of oily collector had a pronounced effect on the flotation kinetics of both the PR and UF samples. The increase in flotation rate was more for the raw Pittsburgh seam coal, however. For this coal, the increase in flotation rates was more even for the material with higher specific gravity. Since the material in higher specific gravity intervals, and for large size intervals to some extent, is expected to be composed mostly of locked particles, it is clear that collector addition favored the flotation of locked particles more than the free coal particles. On the other hand, the oil droplets attached to “free” coal particles may have minimal effect on their The overall curve fitting errors for the various models were determined for Methods I, II and III using It can be seen that Method I generated relatively small errors when the models were modified using the 3-parameters. This also shows that when the modified form of these models was used the difference in the curve fitting power becomes small. On the other hand, the errors by Method III are quite large compared to Method I. This was mostly due to large errors observed in the “tails” fractions of the size-specific gravity spectrum. Since the amount of material in these fractions was very small in some cases, the large errors were most likely due to experimental or statistical reasons rather than modeling. The errors generated by Method II were the smallest for all the models that were tested. The errors in the individual size fractions that were used in calculating the overall error for Method II are given in The magnitude of the error did not differ from one model to another, especially for the intermediate size fractions. Very small errors were obtained for the intermediate size fractions. The errors in the +600 μm and −37 μm size fractions were large. The large errors for the +600 μm size fraction could be due to the very large sizes of these particles. It was seen that some +600 μm particles were quite large and did not float even though they had sufficient hydrophobicity. The large errors in the case of −37 μm size fraction are most likely due to deviation from the first-order kinetics due to water carry-over. It was seen that the recovery in the −37 μm fraction was proportional to the water recovery from the flotation cell. The flotation rate distributions calculated by Method I are given in The calculation of an overall distribution of flotation rate constants is possible for Method III also. However, due to large curve fitting errors observed for Method III, reliability of such a procedure was questionable and it was omitted in this study. The following conclusions can be made on the basis of this investigation. (1) A substantial improvement was made when three-parameter models were used to fit flotation kinetics data to the commonly used first-order models that incorporate a distribution of flotation rate constants. The parameters and the curve fitting errors for all the models that were tested became virtually independent of the chosen distribution function. The curve fitting errors seem to be more sensitive to the location of the distribution function rather than to its shape. These results imply that the choice of a correct model is not very critical when the modified 3-parameter first-order models are used to describe the kinetics of flotation. All models converge to give the same final result. (2) The curve fitting errors were much smaller and the robustness of the model as determined by PRESS analysis was much better for the three-parameter models compared to their two-parameter counterparts. (3) Detailed information can be obtained on the kinetics of flotation by gradual fractionation of the flotation products and conducting kinetics analysis for material in different size-specific gravity factions. (4) Three methods for estimation of “true” flotation rate distributions were compared in this article: In Method I, the total amount of material floated as a function of time was used to determine model parameters. In Method II, the froth products were fractionated into several size fractions and in Method III, the froth products were fractionated into different size-specific gravity fractions. No useful information about the distribution of flotation rate constants could be obtained by Method I. Method II can be used to determine the overall flotation rate distributions from weighted averages of the distributions of the individual size fractions. The overall distributions were less sensitive to the model selected for analysis and the smallest amount of curve fitting errors were obtained with this method. Method III gave relatively large errors, most likely due to combined contributions from both experimental and statistical errors. The experimental errors were large, possibly resulting from successive fractionation of froth products and from the diminishingly small amounts of material in certain size-specific gravity intervals. Method III also required large amounts of time and effort.