A stream of effluent from a mine tailings pond, containing zinc, ferrous ions and other metals, required treatment to prevent pollution and recover valuable metals. A solvent extraction (SX) process using Ionquest 290 as extractant was developed to recover the Zn from the effluent. Ferrous ions were bio-oxidized and removed by selective alkaline precipitation prior to the zinc extraction. The Fe removal as well as the SX process were developed successfully at laboratory scale and verified in a pilot plant on-site, using two Bateman Pulsed Columns for the extraction and stripping of Zn. The results were satisfactory obtaining above 95% recovery of the Zn.An abandoned mine in Andalusia, Spain, has a huge stream of effluent, estimated to be 10,000 Conventional methods for separation of pure Zn include precipitation, ion exchange, adsorption, electrochemical recovery, membrane separation and solvent extraction (SX) ( In the present study, a recently commercialized organophosphorus extractant, Ionquest 290, has been employed for the selective recovery of zinc from a mine effluent located in Aznalcollar (Sevilla, Spain). Ionquest 290 has the same active ingredient as Cyanex 272, bis(2,4,4-trimethylpentyl) phosphinic acid, but has a lower content of inactive impurities, the phosphine oxide impurity is < Iron ions are more strongly extracted than the majority of metals (including Zn) by most of the known commercial extractants ( EGMASA, the regional environmental government company in Andalusia (Spain), suggested the recovery of Zn from the mentioned effluent by combining solvent extraction (SX) and electrowinning (EW) process. Therefore, this process should be environmentally friendly and also to produce an economically effective output. At least 95% of the Zn must be recovered from the effluents in order to satisfy the environmental requirements and the SX plant should provide a final product stream of 90 Laboratory tests were aimed at determining the operating conditions for the pilot plant. To reach the target concentration of < Bio-oxidation laboratory tests were performed in a methacrylate column packed with siliceous stone particles and inoculated with a mixed culture of At the pilot plant site, the bio-oxidation process took place in a bioreactor consisting of a 150 For the laboratory investigation of the solvent extraction process, a solution of 5% Ionquest 290 dissolved in kerosene was used. Ionquest 290 (Purity Two Bateman Pulsed Columns (BPC) were required for the SX and stripping processes at the pilot plant due to their demonstrated feasibility in several SX plants ( An 80 All flows were fed through metering pumps and the flow rates of all inlets and aqueous outlets were measured by rotameters. The pilot was run for 12 working days, 10 The concentration of Zn was determined using a Perkin Elmer 3110 AAS at the mine laboratory. The Zn in the raffinate and SE was determined directly, while the Zn in the barren and loaded solvent (BS and LS) solution were determined after stripping using H The representative composition of the major components in the effluents was Zn 1000 After the bio-oxidation process, laboratory scale precipitation experiments indicated that a final pH of 4.5 was reached after 65 Similar results were obtained in the continuous bio-oxidation process at the pilot plant ( Computer simulations were performed to estimate the required pilot plant inputs and outputs by using CurveExpert 1.3 to calculate the distribution coefficients, D, and the number of stages). Experience has shown that computer simulation is a more flexible design tool than McCabe–Thiele diagrams for pulsed columns ( The initial concentration of Ionquest 290 was chosen to be 5%. Using a higher concentration would require an extreme O:A phase ratio, while a lower concentration would increase the flow rate of the solvent and, accordingly, the size of the stripping unit. The maximum loading that was obtained experimentally at limiting conditions, i.e., by contacting 3 times the solvent with corresponding fresh portions of effluent at phase ratio O:A Tests to determine pH control were done at laboratory. From the results shown in As seen in Shake out stripping experiments were carried out by contacting 200 Additional laboratory tests carried out at the mine site during the pilot plant experiments at phase ratio O:A Preliminary hydraulic tests at the pilot plant showed that the available flux is above 30 Three tests with organic continuous dispersion and with aqueous continuous dispersion were undertaken to determine the preferred dispersion. During both organic continuous and aqueous continuous runs, the temperature rose from 25 As seen from The stripping of the LS containing around 2 While the column worked well and supplied the required BS to the extraction, laboratory tests proved that there was no need for an extra column, and one stage of mixer-settler was sufficient to obtain the required zinc transfer of 40 The results, as demonstrated by the pilot plant, proved the process feasibility with 95% Zn recovery from the effluent. The pre-treatment stage bio-oxidation achieved complete oxidation of ferrous in the bioreactor, subsequent lime precipitation resulted in < For a Zn price above US$2/kg, the value of the zinc product covers the operating costs in addition to solving a serious environmental problem. The public company