Starch is a cheap and eco-friendly polymer that has a broad range of industrial applications. In fine particle separation based on froth flotation, starch can be used to selectively depress the flotation of certain minerals such as iron oxides, sulphides and phosphates. Starch typically consists of two components: amylose (AM) and amylopectin (AP), which have distinct molecular structures. Despite its importance, there has been lack of quantitative, structural information on AM and AP adsorbed on solid particles. In the present work, hematite particles (80% passing 72 μm) were used as model particles, the adsorption densities of AM and AP of two different corn starches on hematite surface were measured at different pHs, and two important parameters of molecular structure of starch, the degree of branching and chain length distributions, were analyzed via size exclusion chromatography and 1H nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy, respectively. These results were compared to the corresponding outcomes of hematite flotation. It was found that the depressing ability of starch in hematite flotation had a positive correlation with the adsorption density of AP, and AP with longer branches would be more readily adsorbed onto hematite surface. In addition, adsorbed AP with more branches has stronger ability to depress hematite flotation. These insights will facilitate the development of novel starches for flotation processes and other industrial applications.Starch is a vital polysaccharide that can be extracted from raw plant materials such as corn, potatoes, wheat and tapioca ( The application of starch is dependent on its composition and properties. Native starches are often chemically modified before being used in various applications. A number of different functional groups can be introduced to the starches through etherification or esterification reactions with the hydroxyl groups ( Two principal components of starch are polymers of d-glucose molecules: amylose (AM), an essentially linear and helical molecule, and amylopectin (AP), a highly branched molecule ( In the present work, fine hematite particles were used as model particles, the adsorption densities of AM and AP of two different corn starches on hematite surface were measured, and two important parameters of molecular structure of starch, the degree of branching (DB) and chain length distributions (CLDs) were analysed. These results were compared to the corresponding flotation results. This paper provides important quantitative, structural information on AM and AP adsorbed on solid particles. Its implications for development of novel starches for fine particle flotation and other non-food applications were discussed. Highly pure natural hematite was purchased from GeoDiscovery, Australia. X-ray fluorescence analysis showed that this sample contained 95.19% Fe Two types of corn starches with different AM/AP mass fractions (i.e., Normal Starch: 27/73 and Gelose 50: 50/50) were used in the present work. More information on the characteristics of these two corn starches can be found elsewhere ( Dodecyl ammonium chloride (DAC), sodium hydroxide, absolute ethanol, sodium acetate, glacial acetic acid, dimethyl sulfoxide-d6 (DMSO‑ A starch solution (20 mL) with known concentration and 2.0 g of hematite were added to an erlenmeyer flask, which in turn was placed in a vibrator and was shaken for 8 h at 298 K. The suspension was then centrifuged at 5000 rpm for 20 min and the supernatant was extracted for further analysis. The starch concentration of the supernatant was analyzed using a colourimetric method. More specifically, the analysis was performed by using a commercial comprehensive starch assay kit (Megazyme International Ireland Ltd., Bray, Co. Wicklow, Ireland) based on enzymatic methods ( The mass of starch adsorbed onto hematite surface was determined from the difference between the mass of starch in the initial starch solution ( SEC was used to analyse the CLDs and AM and AP fractions of the starches. First, the starch samples were enzymatically debranched using isoamylase, an enzyme that can exclusively and quantitatively cleave α-1,6-glycosidic bonds at the branch points of a starch molecule ( Approximately 10 mg of dry starch was mixed with 0.75 L of water and 50 μL of 2 M NaOH solution and was then completely solubilized in a thermomixer at 95 °C for 30 min. 32 μL of glacial acetic acid and 100 μL of 1 M sodium acetate solution were added to the solution after cooling to room temperature. Isoamylase (10 μL) and water (1 mL) were subsequently added to the tube and mixed vigorously. The solution was then incubated for 24 h in a water bath at 37 °C. After incubation, the mixture was heated to 95 °C for 10 min to denature the enzyme, and then freeze-dried. These steps led to a population of chains with two different lengths: the short branches originated from AP and the relatively long branches originated from AM ( Note that the above-mentioned dry starch refers to one of the following: (i) starch as received from the suppliers and (ii) residual starch extracted from the solution after interaction with hematite. In extracting the residual starch, 10 mL of the supernatant was pipetted out from the adsorption experiment, followed by mixing with 40 mL absolute ethanol in a 100 mL of glass flask. The addition of ethanol would cause starches to precipitate since starch is insoluble in ethanol and it will not affect the structure of starch molecules ( The debranched starch sample was subjected to size separation using an Agilent 1100 series SEC system (Agilent Technologies, Santa Clara, CA) equipped with a Shimadzu RID-10A differential refractive index detector (Shimadzu Corporation, Kyoto, Japan) and combined columns, including one GRAM pre-column, one GRAM 100 and one GRAM 1000 analytical columns (Polymer Standard Services, PSS, Mainz, Germany). The sample was dissolved in DMSO containing 0.5% (w/v) LiBr and maintained at 80 °C throughout the tests. The structure of debranched starch molecules was characterized following the procedure described elsewhere ( The obtained SEC results were presented as the SEC weight distribution, The AM fraction of starch NS was directly determined from the SEC weight molecular size distribution of the debranched starch as the ratio of the area under the curve (AUC) of AM branches (the long-chain fraction, normally with degree of polymerization greater than 100) to AUC of total AP and AM branches ( Prior to the Note here that the dry starch refers to one of the following: (i) starch as received from the suppliers and (ii) residual starch extracted from the solution after interaction with hematite in separate and identical adsorption experiments (for the purpose of meeting the sample mass requirement) followed by ethanol precipitation and drying – the same approach as described in Section The degree of branching ( The DB of starch was determined using Eq. Micro-flotation tests were carried out using a XFG-type flotation machine at a fixed impeller rotating speed of 1800 rpm in both conditioning and flotation stages (a picture of this type of flotation machine can be found in The AM fractions of the starches in aqueous solution before and after interaction with hematite particles were measured using the SEC (see Section Substituting Eqs. Eq.  Micro-flotation tests for the hematite particles were carried out at different pHs with1.5 g/L starch and 4 × 10  The adsorption densities of AP were then calculated as Γ The data presented in Addition of a starch and pH regulators in the flotation experiments may cause some changes in the ionic strength. The ionic strength of a solution is positively correlated with the electrical conductivity ( To further understand the adsorption of AP onto hematite surface, we measured the degree of branching ( Substituting Eqs. Eq. The calculated    The effective substrate area occupied per polymer molecule at adsorption saturation (i.e., surface coverage is 1), The calculated values of σ For a particular polymer, the value of σ The adsorption density of a starch on the surface of a mineral is usually considered an important indicator of the depressing ability of the starch ( The depressing ability of starch in hematite flotation was highly related to the stucture of starch molecules. The depressing ability of starch in hematite flotation was mainly determined by the adsorption density of AP, and adsorbed AP with more, longer branches would have stronger ability to depress hematite flotation. These findings could help explain some phenomena reported in previous work by others. For instance, waxy starch with content of nearly 100% AP has the strongest ability of depressing hematite during flotation compared with other corn starches ( The present work has implications for the usage and development of starches for fine particle flotation. The depressing ability of starch on hematite flotation is highly related to its molecular structure. However, most of the current starch manufacturers only provide the basic information of starch products, such as the source, molecular weight, humidity, granular size or AP content ( As starch is one of the representative polysaccharide polymers, the present study also suggests that the molecular structure of other polysaccharide polymers, such as cellulose or glycogen, might be an important factor affecting their functional behaviours for the non-food applications. Further research in this direction is expected to help develop novel polysaccharide polymers for a broad range of applcations. The adsorption densities of amylose and amylopectin of two different corn starches, normal starch and Gelose 50, on hematite surface were measured at different pHs, and two important parameters of molecular structure of starch, the degree of branching and chain length distributions were analysed via size exclusion chromatography and Financial support for this study, provided by Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at 