 Professor Peter King retired as Editor-in-Chief of the International Journal of Mineral Processing in 2004, and since then continued to serve on its editorial board. Peter was a dedicated researcher, passionate teacher, and compassionate administrator. His contributions to the profession will be recognized for a long time to come and he will be remembered forever. Peter was a native of Springs, South Africa, where his father was a gold mine administrator. Peter was educated in South Africa and England, having his B.S. and M.S. degrees from the University of Witwatersrand and a Ph.D. from the University of Manchester in the United Kingdom. He joined academe at the University of Natal in 1966 and subsequently has had a significant impact on education and research in many areas of engineering, but particularly in the area of mineral process engineering. Peter joined the Metallurgical Engineering faculty at the University of Utah in 1990. With regard to engineering education Professor King has been exceptional as both an administrator and a teacher. He has demonstrated his administrative abilities as Head of the Department of Metallurgy at the University of Witwatersrand, President of the South African Institute of Mining and Metallurgy, Director of the USBM Generic Mineral Technology Center for Comminution, and most recently as Chairman of the Department of Metallurgy and Metallurgical Engineering at the University of Utah from which position he retired in 2002. During the past four years Peter has directed much of his energy towards his battle with cancer and the subsequent effects from chemotherapy. As a teacher he received accolades for extremely well organized lectures in which he treated each topic in a rigorous fashion. Prior to retirement he extended his teaching approach beyond the traditional classroom and demonstrated his leadership in the field of mineral processing education by being the first to develop and give a mineral processing course to an international student body over the Internet. In addition, Peter initiated and developed virtual laboratory software for undergraduate education in mineral processing. Dr. King has also distinguished himself in mineral processing engineering research with contributions ranging from comminution to flotation. Perhaps his most notable research is his work in the field of mineral liberation. He developed and perfected precise measurement techniques involving image analysis and advanced models to interpret the resulting data. This work was recognized by honoring him with the A.M. Gaudin Award, SME's most prestigious research award in the field of mineral processing. Equal in magnitude are his contributions in the area of flowsheet simulation. His creation of the first flowsheet simulator, MODSIM, resulted in a tool that is frequently used by both industry and universities. Dr. King's research in mineral liberation is undoubtedly the most widely read and quoted in the field. This research has resulted in a practical method for assessing liberation that is currently being used by several mining companies. Of particular significance here has been the integration of his mineral liberation models into simulators for plant design and optimization. His pioneering work with Internet teaching methods has made mineral processing modeling courses available to students and professionals around the world. Peter was elected to the National Academy of Engineering in 2003 and was recognized with the “Lifetime Achievement Award” by the International Mineral Processing Congress in 2003.