Double shield TBMs are amongst the most technically sophisticated excavation machines in use by tunneling industry. However, using the shielded machine limits access to the walls for observation of ground conditions and presence of shield makes the machine susceptible to entrapment or seizure in weak rocks under high stresses which results in high convergence. To realistically evaluate the possibility of machine seizure in such grounds, the interaction between the rock mass and shields, lining and backfilling need to be understood. This study explains the application of numerical analysis for 3D simulation of mechanized tunneling by using a double shield TBM. For this purpose, a comprehensive numerical simulation is developed to systematically evaluate the potential of excessive ground convergence. Simulation results at five reference points on the tunnel circumference along the tunnel have been examined. The results are including longitudinal displacement profile (LDP) as well as contact force profiles (LFP) on both front and rear shields, frictional forces and required thrust to move the machine, stress history of ground, and estimated loading of the segments. The results also proved that numerical analyses can successfully be used for prediction of loads on the shield during excavation to assess risks of machine entrapment.cohesion uniaxial compressive strength contact forces tunnel diameter Hoek disturbance factor double shield modulus of elasticity required maximum thrust force maximum cutter-head thrust Geological Strength Index tunnel depth in situ stress ratios stiffness of the lining shield stiffness shield length longitudinal displacement profile longitudinal contact force profile longitudinal ground pressure profile material constant number of contact points in situ pressure contact pressure shield radius tunnel radius plastic zone radius Tunnel Boring Machine weight of TBM reduction coefficient overcut dilatancy angle friction angle unit weight skin friction coefficient Poisson’s ratio elastic modulus of intact rock initial stress The use of shielded TBM allows the machine to pass through weak grounds and tunnel through adverse geological conditions. Meanwhile, presence the shield limits access to the walls for observation of ground conditions and the excessive convergence of the weak ground under high in situ stresses imposes high levels of load on the shield. Therefore machine may get stuck (including shield jamming and cutter-head blocking) in the complicated geological structures, which requires manual excavation to release the machine. This is a time consuming, costly, unsafe, slow, and labor intensive work that should be avoided as much as possible. Thus, the main question in selection of shielded TBMs for many tunneling projects remains the possibility of machine seizure in the ground For design of mechanized tunneling in such conditions, the complex interaction between the rock mass, the tunnel machine, its system components, and the tunnel support has to be analyzed in detail and three dimensional models including all these components are better suited to correctly simulate this interplay and avoid the errors introduced by assumption of plane strain conditions The initial results of spatial numerical analyses have already been presented by Lombardi, who discussed the influence of the advance rate on the lining loading for the simplified case of a lining that starts to become loaded 40 Graziani et al. Another group of studies involves numerical investigations, which do not take specific account of the shield in the computational model. For example, Shalabi Ramoni and Anagnostou The main emphasis of this study is on numerical analysis to allow for modeling the detailed configuration of the DS-TBM and its interaction with the intruding ground in a true 3D simulation. The developed model enhances the computational model of Hasanpour et al. The required parameters for 3D modeling of tunneling by a DS-TBM are based on data from excavation of the Lyon–Turin Base Tunnel For numerical modeling of a mechanized tunneling by a double shield TBM, the presence of water pressure and consolidation problems is not taken into account in this study. It is noted that the impact of water pressure and consolidation can be conventionally applied in the numerical calculations. As the model refers to deep tunnels, the in situ state of stress is applied as a uniform initial stress without consideration of the free ground surface and of the stress gradient due to the gravity. It is assumed that this stress varies linearly with depth and is isotropic, equal to For the three dimensional numerical analysis, FLAC The required parameters for simulation of tunneling with double shield TBMs divide into three groups that are as follows: (a) Machine data include the required thrust force In order to model a mechanized tunneling process by a universal double shield TBM, various three dimensional models were developed in FLAC The rock mass is assumed to follow a linear elastic and perfectly plastic behavior according to Mohr–Coulomb failure criterion. Any constitutive law based on these assumptions for rock masses can be implemented in the model. The assumed rock mass parameters are shown in The in situ state of stress is assumed to be isotropic and equal to 26 A comprehensive 3D model of a shield TBM has been developed in FLAC The cutter-head, different shield types and their main components can be modeled easily by small changes in input data for shield and backfilling materials. Other TBM components are updated with respect to type of TBM only by changing of values assigned to each component. For example, a single shield TBM is modeled by removing the rear shield elements and changing the cement grouting material properties to pea gravel material for annular gap backfilling. Same procedure could be used to simulate machine advance in the tunnel and extrusion of the segments from the tail shield. The result of analysis includes the deformation and stresses related to all of the monitoring points in the tunnel and on the shield and cutter-head, also deformations and failure stresses relating to the interaction between the rock mass and cutter-head and between the rock mass and shields as well between backfilling and support can be monitored or observed in each step of analyses. This is in the form of longitudinal and sectional profiles and as the contours in desired cross sections within the model. Data from each step and for all the points is saved as a text file, so it can be transferred to excel file for evaluation of all deformation and stress behaviors along the tunnel walls and on various cutter-head and shield components. An excel spreadsheet has been prepared for evaluation of analysis results of various TBM types and configurations in case of changing machine specifications to evaluate their impact on the system behavior. The model can also be modified to implement some ground improvement measures such as injection of grout or lubricants between the ground and shield in the 3D numerical model.  In the initial simulations the TBM is modeled as a cylinder with variable thickness and diameter. Front and rear shields are modeled with the thickness and material properties of steel that is typically used to manufacture TBM shields. Thrust force of cutter on the cutter-head is applied to the excavation face. Annular gap backfill was assumed to be cement grout and a variable modulus of elasticity was assumed for the backfill to represent different states of the cement grout. The soft phase was used for first 2 In modeling of the shield skin, the total weight of the TBM was applied by normal stress to elastic area of invert which was in contact with tunnel invert. The bedrock for the applying of the TBM weight effect and lying of shield skin was adopted according to the recommendations from Ramoni and Anagnostou In this study, the contact between cutter-head and rock mass as well between shields and rock mass has been modeled by using the interface elements on both tunnel and shield boundaries by considering the gap between them according to non-uniform overcut in the shielded TBM. Cross section of a front shield and the rear shield are illustrated in It should be noted that since there is a difference in zone density between two adjacent grids (shield and rock mass), the interface should be attached to the grid with the greater density. Also the size of interface elements should always be equal to or smaller than the target faces with which they will come into contact. If this requirement is not met in discretization, the interface elements should be subdivided into smaller elements. On the other hand, interface elements should be limited to grid surfaces that will actually come into contact with another grid The numerical formulation used in this study is based on the large strain assumption, but sometimes unforeseen errors such as penetration of rock mass into shield elements occur within numerical calculations. Therefore for avoiding the problems due to large displacements especially in weak rocks and squeezing grounds, the method of displacement control has been applied to contact surfaces. For this purpose, a FISH code was developed in FLAC Another advantages of model developed for this study is using Mohr–Coulomb or Hoek–Brown failure criterion as input data depending on the field measurements and ground conditions. In order to perform numerical analysis of tunnel excavation in the rock mass, a series of FLAC Because of large deformations occurring at tunnel excavation in weak rocks, the large displacement setting approach in the finite difference method was applied to the simulated model. The ongoing TBM excavation was simulated by a step-by-step method depending on the excavation length and construction stages. Assessment effect of step-by-step analysis method on the numerical results is studied in this study. It is noted that the adopted step-by-step method leads to simulate a succession of standstills and not a continuous process. Therefore for reproducing the continuous process of TBM excavation, the excavation length for each solving step is made with fine mesh equal to 1 Excavation of a tunnel is accomplished by applying forces that are required to maintain equilibrium with the initial stress state in the surrounding material as loads on the perimeter of the tunnel. These loads are then reduced to zero to simulate the excavation (steady-state condition). But the tunnel excavation by a TBM is a continuous process and the unbalance forces do not drop to zero because of machine advance rate except when machine stops due to maintenance or other long delays. Therefore the effect of TBM advance rate (subsequently the time factor) on the results should be considered in the numerical calculations. Although time-dependent stress–strain behavior of the rock mass was not included in the step-by-step analysis conducted, but the time effect during advance of excavation is taken into account by relaxing of unbalance forces gradually over some steps. The cutter-head, shield skin, segmental lining and backfilling were installed after the specified value of relaxation of the loads in the numerical simulation of double shield TBM. This means that after the indicated value of relaxation of the unbalance forces, the tunnel convergence has been allowed to continue, meaning controlled ground movement into tunnel. For accurate numerical simulation of tunnel excavation by a shield TBM, it is necessary to include TBM advance rate effect by considering the overcut and shield length for evaluation of the potential of machine entrapment. Also it may be required to assess TBM entrapment risks for critical status in which machine are subjected to slowdown or standstill for an extended time In this paper, relaxation of the unbalance forces for each solving step of numerical analysis is presented by the percentage value of relaxation. This value depends on the material properties surrounding the tunnel, shield length, annular gap between the ground and shield (overcut), and speed of machine movement in the tunneling. To obtain the appropriate percentage of relaxation for numerical analysis, the simulated initial model was subjected to unbalanced forces by different step-by-step excavation of tunnel. Unbalanced forces along the tunnel are monitored at each solving step and results are illustrated in In the steady state condition, the solving step of 1000 offered the best results and the percentage of relaxation was close to 100% where the balance of forces are reached and the maximum displacement was recorded. In this excavation case, for correct representation of continuous excavation by a shielded TBM and accounting for the time factor in step-by-step analysis, an 87% relaxation of the unbalance loads for each step of analysis was used For the conventional tunneling methods including NATM tunneling depending on the rock mass properties, this value may be within the range of 95% to 100% in a case where the support is installed 4 The excavation stages and the total number of steps for the numerical model were simulated based on the construction design of cutter-head, front and rear shields for a double shield TBM. The total number of the solving steps depends on operation modes of the TBM and advance rate. In this study, a total of 41 excavation steps were simulated consisting of the 1 initial undisturbed ground and 40 excavation steps. Furthermore, the excavation stages for simulated model are defined as follows and illustrated in In the first stage, initial in situ stresses are implemented and correct distribution of stresses is applied to the rock mass model. In the second stage, tunnel boring starts, solving time set up with respect to advance rates, cutter-head is activated, the thrust force and TBM weight are applied to face and invert of tunnel respectively and are maintained for all stages of excavation. The contact analysis between the cutter-head and rock mass is performed in this stage. The maximum cutter-head thrust force has been set to 17 In the third stage, front shield moves forward and is considered in the model. Numerical results are examined for evaluation of probable contact between the rock mass and front shield. Also, the entrapment risks are analyzed when contact occurs between the walls and shield. In the fourth stage, rear shield with reduced diameter (compared to front shield by considering the conical shape of rear shield) is activated by considering the length of rear shield. Analysis of numerical results for this stage is the same as third stage. In the fifth stage, installation of the segmental linings is implemented inside the rear shield. In the sixth stage, the segmental ring is subjected to ground loading on the segments is assumed to start from the third segment behind the machine. Moreover, the injection of backfill into the annular space between rock mass and lining by using the soft grout is started. This also allows for simulation of pea gravel in other types of machine. In the seventh stage, backfilling the annular space by hard grout is implemented. The model is set up such that when a segment ring is extruded from the tail shield, the material property of the rear shield is replaced by the material property of soft filling for the annular space in the area of the first two segmental rings. It should be noted that in modeling of the lining, the joints between segments and adjacent rings are not considered. Numerical analysis has been performed for examination of the longitudinal displacement profile (LDP) for the intrinsic excavation condition as shows in In order to verify and assess the accuracy and applicability of numerical simulation results, two method including ground reaction curve (GRC) and Hoek and Marinos The main assumptions in the analysis by GRC method are as follows: Tunnel is circular. In situ stress field is hydrostatic. Rock mass is isotropic and homogeneous. Failure is not controlled by major structural discontinuities. By considering the assumptions mentioned above, the GRC for given rock mass material properties ( As shown in The calculated plastic radius and percentage strain in the rock mass surrounding the tunnel for intrinsic excavation by using the Hoek and Marinos In this study, the analysis is carried out in terms of longitudinal displacement profile (LDP) on the tunnel circumference to detect the probable contact forces between rock and cutter-head and both front shield and rear shield after each step. Furthermore, the stress history of the ground as well as the thrust force required in order to overcome friction are evaluated for 40 Five reference points are selected on tunnel circumference as well as on shield boundaries for extracting the results of numerical analysis. Over boring (overcut) amounts relating to each reference point are calculated and considered in the analysis. The schematic drawing of the reference points and relevant overcut amounts are shown in For the specified solving step with advancing of tunnel, the shape of longitudinal displacement and force profile (LDP and LFP) changes relative to the previous solving step. Therefore LDPs and LFPs are controlled at each solving steps to find out where the shields and cutter-head get in contact with the rock mass. Also amount of forces in the contact points evaluated at every step for assessment of entrapment risk. In this study, the shields are assumed to be rigid and are not subjected to any failure due to bending and buckling. Displacement contours for the first 6  The conditions for point CW are same as point C (   Contact between front shield and cutter-head with invert starts right after excavation ( Displacement contours for 12  The contact forces applied to the both shields at point CW are 7.5 It is noted that the rock mass experiences three unloading processes during the excavation by TBM. First, as the tunnel walls remain unsupported, the tunnel boundary experiences the first unloading/relaxation process. At the distance of about 1 The longitudinal minimum principle stress history of the ground as well as the deformation at three reference points (C, W and F) for a 35 As can be seen in these figures, the stress of the ground at crown of tunnel decreases because a larger overcut is provided in this point. The reduction of stress in this point where the segmental linings are installed is calculated as 20.5 The thrust force required to overcome shield skin frictional forces are investigated by extracting of sectional profile of contact forces on both front and rear shields. For this purpose, the profile of sectional contact forces between ground and front shield as well as between ground and rear shield are extracted from numerical analysis results as shown in Maximum thrust force to overcome friction and drive TBM forward is calculated by multiplying the integral total contact force by the skin friction coefficient The maximum total thrust force by the auxiliary thrust cylinders is the sum of the maximum cutter-head thrust This is equivalent to 134,100 Another approach is to increase the gap between the rock and rear shield. The stepwise increasing of the annular space gap by decreasing the diameter of the rear shield relative to the front shield can be another solution. With this plan the reduction of shield diameter could increase from 3  As can be seen in the plots, the ground experiences five unloading and reloading cycles, the first unloading being near to the tunnel face until the ground closes the gap and the second reloading is at end of the front shield. The third unloading occurs at end of the front shield and fourth reloading in the middle of rear shield. The fifth unloading is where lining installation takes place at end of rear shield.  It is noted that the high pressure on segmental lining is due to deep tunnel excavation in a ground with squeezing behavior. To avoid failure in the segmental rings and reduce high ground pressure around linings, appropriate ground improvement methods should be applied. Although, uniform distribution of pressures at boundary of the segmental rings may not cause to failure in the segments, however point loading because of a probable faults or other tectonically events will provide breakage in the segments. The main emphasis of this study is on numerical analysis to allow for modeling the detailed configuration of a DS-TBM and its interaction with the intruding ground in a true 3D simulation. For this purpose, a comprehensive 3D simulation of excavation of tunnel by considering the DS-TBM main components was developed to allow for assessment of the ground shield interaction at various points along the shield. The numerical analysis was based on the finite difference method and FLAC Increasing of gap due to conical shape of the shields is considered in the simulations. This property of model distinguishes the model from other 3D models that have been developed for numerical simulation of shield TBMs in the past. Based on the results of numerical modeling, longitudinal displacement and contact force profiles were calculated for both transient conditions and for the final equilibrium of the ground in the model. The results indicated that for the given machine and rock conditions, the initial contact between the shield and rock occurs towards the end of the front shield at relatively low levels of contact pressures and forces. The continued ground convergence will increase the area of contact between the rock and the rear shield, subsequently leading to higher contact forces. In addition, the modeling allows for extracting the history of the axial stresses, shear stresses and principal stress paths along the tunnel boundary. The modeling shows that for the given machine and rock conditions, the initial contact between the shield and rock occurs towards the end of the front shield at relatively low levels of contact pressures and forces. The continued ground convergence will increase the area of contact between the rock and the rear shield and subsequently higher contact forces. The results of modeling shows the potential for simulation of shielded TBM application in weak rocks at higher depth and implementation of various ground condition parameters (i.e. in situ stresses and rock mass properties) for evaluation of the required thrust forces. This allows for assessment of the possibility for machine jamming in given ground conditions and may lead to development of possible solutions. The results are realistic and plausible and show the potential for use of this approach to assess the risk of machine entrapment in weak rocks for deep tunnels. However, the results of the study are valid for a given set of rock mass and lining parameters. The conclusions of this study can be used when evaluating the entrapment risks, but the magnitude of the loads and displacements are surely valid only for given input parameters. While it is possible to develop some generalized guidelines for evaluation of machine entrapment potentials in various grounds by using a systematic parametric analysis of anticipated ground loads, one should be aware of inherent uncertainties related to input parameters and variations in rock mass properties and localized states of stress in the ground.