Background
                  Recent advancements in computed tomography have enabled the diagnosis of naso-orbito-ethmoid (NOE) fractures to be made in much greater detail. Surgical access to the upper nasofrontal buttress in NOE fractures, however, has remained unchanged over the past decades. All approaches to these fractures using skin incisions have individual drawbacks. The transcaruncular approach is free of the drawbacks of the cutaneous approaches. We further extended the transcaruncular approach for the treatment of NOE and Le Fort II fractures.
               
                  Methods
                  Eight patients; six with Markowitz's Type I NOE fractures and two with Le Fort II fractures, underwent fracture repair using an extended transcaruncular approach to access the upper nasofrontal buttress.
               
                  Results
                  In all but one case, which required an additional small skin incision on the glabella, the fracture on the upper nasofrontal buttress was repaired through an extended transcaruncular approach without making any skin incisions. All showed excellent fracture re-alignment on post-surgical CT. Complications happened in three cases; those in two cases were attributed to the extended transcaruncular approach, whereas those in the other were not.
               
                  Conclusions
                  The extended transcaruncular approach is a promising alternative to current conventional approaches for NOE and Le Fort II fractures, achieving accurate repair without the need for skin incision.Naso-orbito-ethmoid (NOE) fractures are relatively rare fractures, representing less than 5% of pediatric and 15% of adult facial fractures ( A transcaruncular approach was first introduced in 1997 as an approach for optic canal decompression ( With these drawbacks of cutaneous approaches in mind, the authors set out to apply the transcaruncular approach to the repair of upper nasofrontal buttress fractures. The purpose of this study is to report our experience and outcomes using an extended transcaruncular approach for the treatment of NOE and Le Fort II fractures. We reviewed the clinical records of all patients seen between October 2012 and October 2015 who had undergone open reduction and internal fixation of NOE and Le Fort II fractures with the upper nasofrontal buttress repaired through an extended transcaruncular approach. Institutional review board approval was obtained. NOE and Le Fort II fractures that showed obvious displacement on CT scans were included. Clinical records were analyzed, looking for the occurrence of complications, CT scan findings of postoperative asymmetry in cases involving unilateral fractures, and any obvious deformities in cases involving bilateral fractures. Complications were defined as major if surgical intervention was required and minor if surgical intervention was not required. All surgeries were performed with the patients under general anesthesia. The approach to the upper nasofrontal buttress via an extended transcaruncular incision is similar to that of the medial orbital wall fractures up to the point of the periorbital incision. The technique of the transcaruncular approach has been well described previously ( After establishing the preseptal route between the orbital septum and Horner's muscle through the caruncle toward the posterior side of the posterior lacrimal crest, a Ragnell and a malleable retractor were inserted to retract the incised caruncle medially and the orbital contents laterally. The periorbita behind the posterior lacrimal crest was incised vertically with a scalpel ( Eight patients (six male and two female), with a mean age of 32 years, underwent NOE and Le Fort II fracture repairs using an extended transcaruncular approach. Two of the patients had Le Fort II fractures and six had NOE fractures. Of the six NOE fractures, all were classified as type I, two were bilateral, and four were unilateral. Therefore, this approach was applied to a total of 12 orbits. The inferior oblique muscle was left untouched in all cases. Concomitant fractures and injuries are summarized in All but one fracture repair was accomplished via an extended transcaruncular approach without making any skin incision. Because the right medial orbital rim was comminuted and unstable, case 7 required an additional small skin incision on the glabella to fix the cranial part of the plate on the frontal bone. The types of plates used for the upper nasofrontal buttress fixation were as follows: a three-hole absorbable plate for the pediatric NOE fracture (case 1), five-hole titanium plates for two of the NOE fractures (cases 3 and 5), seven-hole and four-hole titanium plates in one of the Le Fort II fractures (case 7), and three-hole titanium plates in the rest of the cases. The mean follow-up period was 248 days, with a range of 21–537 days. The final postoperative CT scan was taken an average of 170 days after surgery, with a range of 2–274 days. On postoperative CT scan, all cases showed excellent alignment of the fracture repair with no deformity along the upper nasofrontal buttress or inferior orbital rim. One minor and five major complications occurred in five orbits of three cases. Of these, one minor and two major complications in two cases (case 1 and 6) were attributed to the extended transcaruncular approach. Case patient 1 developed trichiasis on the center of her right lower eyelid ( A 7-year-old girl was referred to us for treatment of bilateral type I NOE fractures ( A 52-year-old woman presented with a left NOE type I, left inferior orbital rim and orbital floor fractures ( A 35-year-old man presented with Le Fort I and II fractures as well as a fracture of the anterior wall of the frontal sinus ( NOE fracture is a relatively rare facial fracture, which, if not treated properly, runs a risk of leaving an obvious deformity over the central part of the face ( A transcaruncular approach is free of these drawbacks of cutaneous approaches. A transcaruncular approach is now widely used in surgery of the medial orbit. Furthermore, it can be easily combined with a lower eyelid transconjunctival incision to provide continuous uninterrupted access to both the inferior and medial orbit ( Regarding the first concern, Kakizaki et al. showed that dissection via a transcaruncular incision could be safely performed up to the 11 o'clock position (the location of the trochlea) ( All of our cases of NOE fracture were type I, the uncomplicated type. Accurate three-dimensional repositioning of the fractures was achieved without difficulty in all cases, leading to successful results. Since the vast majority of NOE fractures are type I ( Similarly, our approach can be successfully applied to cases with Le Fort II fractures (see As for the second concern, rigid fixation appears to be well achieved using the extended transcaruncular approach. This is supported by the postoperative CT findings, which show no displacement of any fracture segment, even in case 1 in which only two screws were used for the nasofrontal buttress fracture plate. The only functional force acting on the fracture segment bearing the medial canthal tendon is that exerted by the orbicularis oculi muscle ( As to the third concern, the potential for morbidity with this approach, among repairs to 12 orbits in eight patients we experienced two major and one minor complication in three orbits of two patients, which directly related to the extended transcaruncular approach. Case 6 developed asymptomatic bilateral granulomas over the caruncles requiring excision. This might be caused by some inflammatory response due to the suture material. We also saw mild trichiasis in case 2, which was considered to be a result of retraction of the lower eyelid with suture material. As we described, it is considered that the extended transcaruncular approach was not responsible for the complications that occurred in case 3. In their article on the transcaruncular approach, Choi et al. summarized 11 studies involving 228 cases and reported an overall incidence of complications of 2.6% after the transcaruncular approach ( Finally, regarding whether this approach can be applied to complex type II and type III NOE fractures, although we have no experience so far, it may be worth attempting. This approach offers a wide surgical field over the medial orbital wall, including the area posterior to the posterior lacrimal crest where transnasal wiring would be placed. Even in cases in which a cantilever bone graft is required simultaneously with fracture repair, only an additional local scalp incision for calvarial bone graft harvest, and an additional small skin incision on the nasal root for bone graft insertion and fixation, would be required. Combined with a transconjunctival lower eyelid and gingival buccal sulcus approach, an extended transcaruncular approach enabled accurate repair of NOE type I and Le Fort II fractures without making any skin incisions in all but one of the cases. This approach can be a superior alternative to conventional ones. Patients, parents, or guardians provided written consent for the use of patients' images. None. The authors sincerely thank Thomas Lynn Hurt, MD, for English proofreading. The following are the supplementary data related to this article: Supplementary data related to this article can be found at