This work employs an anodic surfactant, sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS), to improve the flotation performance of the electrocoagulation–flotation (ECF) process to treated fluoride containing semiconductor wastewater following calcium precipitation. The dissolved fluoride ions and CaF2 particles in the wastewater after calcium precipitation were effectively removed in the ECF process simultaneously. The dosage of SDS required for ECF was much less than those for dispersed air flotation (DiAF) or dissolved air flotation (DAF) processes because the CaF2 particles can be collected by hydro–fluoro–aluminum flocs in ECF. Thus, SDS only served as a frother to make the bubbles tiny and stable in the ECF defluoridation process. The interference of co-existing anions can be overcome by increasing the dosage of calcium ions and SDS. The optimum initial acidity for ECF is close to the initial fluoride concentration after calcium precipitation; the amount of SS removed dropped rapidly if the initial acidity exceeded the optimal value because the surface charge of the hydro–fluoro–aluminum particles increased. The initial acidity of the wastewater after calcium precipitation can be modified by changing the [Ca(OH)2]/[Ca2+]T ratio and the appropriate ratio is approximately given by the acid dissociation constant of hydrofluoric acid and the initial pH of the wastewater before calcium precipitation.initial fluoride concentration (kg residual fluoride concentration (kg faraday constant, current (A) dissociation constant of hydrofluoric acid (mol cells number ( atmosphere pressure (N charge loading (C ideal gas constant ( reaction time (s) temperature (°K) volume of the solution (m volume of the hydrogen gas (m valence treatment efficiency of fluoride (%) treatment efficiency of suspended solids (%) estimated appropriate [Ca(OH) An appropriate concentration of fluoride in drinking water is required to prevent dental cavities, but long-term ingestion of water that contains more than a suitable level of fluoride causes bone disease and mottling of the teeth ( Treatment of fluoride-containing wastewater efficiently has been important for environmental engineers in Taiwan, following the fast development of the semiconductor industry. Around 350–700 Another problem associated with calcium precipitation is that the particles of CaF An electrochemical method (electrocoagulation, EC) has been employed to perform defluoridation ( Some researchers call the EC process the electrocoagulation–flotation (ECF) process because they emphasize the flotation performance of EC ( Surfactants are employed as a frother to reduce the surface tension of solutions and thus make gas bubbles finer and more stable during dispersed air flotation (DiAF) and dissolved air flotation (DAF) ( This study attempted to employ SDS to enhance the flotation capacity of ECF to remove the dissolved fluoride ions and CaF Experiments were conducted in a bipolar batch reactor with seven aluminum electrodes connected in parallel, as in the authors’ previous work ( Synthetic solutions were prepared by mixing stoichiometric amounts of sodium fluoride (500 Wastewater was taken from a semiconductor manufacturer in Taiwan. The quality parameters of wastewater are shown in A 100  The concentration of SDS considerably influenced the efficiency of SS removal  Notably, when The pH of a solution is one of the most important parameters that govern the removal of fluoride in both the electrocoagulation and flotation processes ( The residual fluoride concentration also increased as the final pH dropped to 6.3 because the solubility of the hydro–fluoro–aluminum precipitate increased. The same result was also observed elsewhere ( Some co-existing anions may be present in the fluoride-containing wastewater. Among these co-existing anions, SO  Increasing the concentrations of SDS and calcium increased the treatment efficiencies of SS and fluoride. The wastewater from the etching process is very acidic because a large quantity of hydrofluoric acid (HF) is used to etch wafers and clean quartz. Ca(OH) Combining Eqs. The The operating current was 0.6 Wastewater from semiconductor manufacturers that contains large amounts of fluoride can be effectively treated by ECF with SDS. SDS can improve the treatment efficiency of the SS. The dosage of SDS in EFC is much lower than that in the DAF or DiAF process, because the Al The authors would like to thank the National Science Council of the Chinese Taiwan for financially supporting this research under Contract no. NSC 92-2211-E-002-028.