The influence of gallium ions on the development of the mineralization process in a cell culture model was investigated. To determine the elemental composition the proton microprobe in combination with proton induced X-ray emission (micro-PIXE) and energy-dispersive X-ray fluorescence (XRF) were used. Micro-PIXE allows a precise quantification of elements combined with their accurate localization. In contrast, the XRF results may be used as a rough estimate of the mineralization process development. It was found that gallium influences the mineralization process in a dose-dependent manner. At low doses an increased while at high doses an impaired mineralization was observed. The amount of deposited gallium correlates with the concentration of the element in the cell culture medium.Gallium has been used in medical practice for many years. There are three areas of medical applications of this element. Firstly, clinical studies have shown gallium nitrate to be an effective treatment for the accelerated bone resorption that leads to cancer-related hypercalcemia It is known that gallium accumulates preferentially in bone The aims of this paper are: (1) to show that a proton microprobe in combination with proton induced X-ray emission (micro-PIXE) delivers valuable information about the mechanism of mineral deposition in a cell culture, and (2) to compare the usefulness of micro-PIXE and X-ray fluorescence (XRF) in the study of cell cultures. Bone marrow cells were seeded in a cell culture insert at a density of 4×10 The average contents of elements in the samples were obtained from the XRF measurements conducted on an energy-dispersive X-ray spectrometer (ED 2000, Oxford, UK) equipped with a silver anode X-ray tube. The tube voltage was set to 45 kV and the measurement time was equal to 500 s in all cases. The applied collimator allowed measuring a sample area of To determine the distributions of the elemental contents, the micro-PIXE measurements were carried out using the Eindhoven University of Technology proton microprobe An image of the bottom foil of the cell culture insert is presented in Since the mineralized nodules have different shapes and sizes the micro-PIXE method offers the possibility of in situ investigations of organic and inorganic components. The distributions of P, S, Cl, K, Ca, Fe, Cu, Zn and Ga contents were determined by the micro-PIXE method. An absorber in the microprobe studies was selected to ensure the determination of P, Ca and Ga contents in one run limiting the detection of light elements ( The separation of the organic and inorganic components was performed on the basis of the Ca content distribution since the minerals in the investigated cell culture are composed of hydroxyapatite (Ca Two observations can be made considering the composition of the mineralized nodules. Firstly, low Ga concentration in the medium (<5 mg/l) increases the deposition of minerals comparing to the control sample (Ga concentration in the medium 0.0 mg/l). For higher Ga concentrations impaired mineralization occurs. Secondly, it was found that the amount of deposited gallium correlates with the concentration of the element in the cell culture medium. In contrast, the correlation between Ga and Ca contents was not observed. The examination of the average contents of elements in the organic matrix ( The presented results confirm that the treatment with gallium may cause an increase in the calcium content of bone. It was demonstrated that the Ca–P correlation coefficient in the mineralized nodules was higher than 0.9. This leads to the conclusion that the newly incorporated calcium was accreted into maturing hydroxyapatite crystals causing these crystals to grow or is incorporated into de novo-forming Ca–P compounds. The accumulation of Ga in the organic matrix indicates that in vivo treatment in humans with gallium may cause significant changes in metabolic bone parameters and the mechanism of its action is probably more complex as described earlier Some methodological conclusions could be also drawn. The micro-PIXE and XRF allow the quantification of many elements. In this paper we took into consideration only two: Ca and Ga. Since the therapeutic meaning of the investigations at low Ga concentrations in the medium The disadvantage of the XRF is limited spatial resolution reducing its capability to distinguish between the organic and inorganic components. Since ∼99% of Ca and ∼90% of Ga are accumulated in the mineral phase, the average contents of both elements depend mainly on their contents in the mineral component. It indicates that the results of the XRF measurements may be used for investigations of the mineralization process but this method is useless in the study of the organic component. The use of the micro-PIXE method is the only way to determine separately the elemental composition of both compartments. The main limitation of this method is the long measurements time. The irradiation time was ∼11 h per one sample while the complete experiment comprises tens of samples. It is necessary to improve the beam current to apply micro-PIXE as a routine tool in the studies of the mineralization process in the cell culture model. Increasing the beam current by increasing the beam diameter is not good solution because the beam diameter used in the study was of the same order of magnitude as the size of the mineralized nodules. The results confirm that micro-PIXE is a useful method in the study of the mineral deposition mechanism in the cell culture. It was found that Ga is deposited both in organic and inorganic components of the sample. The action of Ga on the mineral formation is a dose-dependent process. At low doses an increased mineralization is observed. The exact nature of induced by Ga ions changes resulting in measurable calcium contents increase is not known, but clearly identify gallium as a therapeutically useful agent for augmenting bone mass. The accumulation of Ga in the organic matrix indicates that the mechanism of gallium action is likely to be complex. Micro-PIXE measurements, although time consuming, allow a precise quantification of elements combined with their accurate localization. In contrast, the XRF results may be used as a rough estimate of the development of the mineralization process.