AlCrN coating which has been widely applied in industrial application was produced on the surface of nitrocarburized SKD 11 cool-work tool steel by physical vapor deposition (PVD) method. The effects of nitrocarburizing pretreatment and PVD deposition temperature on microstructures, mechanical and tribological properties of the coatings were investigated. The results show that the AlCrN coating consists of an inner CrN adhesion layer with columnar growth and an outmost AlCrN work layer with planar growth, and the AlCrN coating shows a superior hardness of about 43 GPa. The nitrocarburizing pretreatment considerably improve adhesion strength, load capacity and wear resistance of duplex coated samples when compared with the single AlCrN coated samples. The improved mechanical and tribological properties are mainly related to the thicker nitrocarburizing layer and the gradient in the hardness profile of the duplex coating. In addition, the nitrocarburizing-PVD AlCrN duplex coated samples can be further enhanced by increasing deposition temperature of PVD coatings. The main wear mechanisms of duplex coated samples are oxidation wear or oxidation wear and adhesion wear, whereas the main wear mechanisms of single AlCrN coated samples are spalling and chipping wear as well as oxidation wear.Physical vapor deposition (PVD) CrN coating has been extensively used to improve the lifetime of cutting and tool components for its attractive mechanical and tribological properties Generally, conventional nitrocarburized layer is commonly composed of an outmost compound layer (CL) and an inner diffusion layer (DL), and the former shows higher hardness when compared with the latter Extensive investigations of nitrocarburizing-PVD coatings of hot-work steels, low-alloy steels and high-speed steels have been carried out in past decades, and have found that the nitring/nitrocarburizing pretreatment efficiently improve the mechanical and tribological properties The substrate material used in the present study was a commercial SDK11 cool-wok tool steel with the chemical composition (wt.%) of 1.45 C, 0.35 Si, 0.5 Mn, 0.022 P, 0.02 S, 12.6 Cr, 1.0 Mo, 0.45 Ni, 0.36 V, 0.2 Cu and 83.048 Fe. Prior to plasma nitrocarburizing, a slab was heated to 1020 °C for 45 min and quenched at room temperature, and then the treated sample was tempered at 550 °C for 3.5 h. The average hardness of the tempered slab was 59 HRC. Subsequently, the tempered slab was machined to 12 mm × 12 mm × 3 mm blocks, and then these blocks were polished to an average roughness of less than 0.05 μm. The polished and cleaned specimens were plasma nitrocarburized in a vacuum chamber at 510 °C for 3 h in a mixture of 420 L/h ammonia and 3.5 L/h acetone gases, followed by slow furnace cooling. Follow-up the AlCrN coating was deposited on the surface of the samples with and without nitrocarburizing pretreatment by cathodic multi-arc ion plating. The cathodic arc ion targets included Cr and Al Prior to characterization, all samples were ultrasonically cleaned in acetone. Cross-sectional microstructures of these samples etched with 4% nital solution were observed by a JSM 6360LV scanning electron microscope (SEM) equipped with an energy dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDS). The phase structure of all samples was identified by a Bruker D8 advance X-ray diffractometer operating with Cu Kα radiation at 50 kV and 150 mA. The scans recorded in the range of 30–90° with the step size of 0.02° and a 0.5 s dwelling time. The JCPDS card numbers A standard Rockwell-C indentation tester using a load of 150 kgf was carried out to characterize the adhesion property of the coatings. The indentation impresses were observed by optical microscope (OM). The adhesion strength of the coatings to substrate was further measured by a multifunctional scratch tester (HT-3001) with a load of rage of 10–70 N. Scratches were made using a diamond Rockwell indenter at a constant speed of 1 mm/min, and the load speed and distance are 15 N/min and 4.0 mm respectively. The tester was equipped with acoustic sensors to detect the critical load which corresponds to the creation of the first cracks. After scratch generation, the details in the tracks were observed by OM. A ball-on-disk tribometer (HT-2005) with WC-12 wt.% Co counter-balls was performed to measure the friction coefficients under a relative humidity of 15% at room temperature. The hardness of counter-balls is about 950 HV. The applied normal load was 10 N and the wear time was 3600 s. The diameter of the counter-balls and the rotational speed were 6 mm and 318 rpm respectively. During the test, debris was removed from the wear tracks by compressed Ar. Subsequently, the wear tracks were observed by a SEM, and the volume loss from wear surface of the samples was measured by a KLA-Tencor AlphaStep P-7 tester to calculate the wear rate of the samples. The cross-sectional hardness of the samples was performed by a standard Vickers hardness tester under an indentation load of 50 g. The load capacity of the coatings was measured by a standard Vickers hardness tester with different loads of 50–1000 g. Prior to nanoindentation measurement, all samples were polished with fine diamond powder (0.25 μm) to remove surface defects such as macroparticles, and then surface roughness was measured by a KLA-Tencor Alpha Step P-7 tester and an optical microscope was performed to see the surface of polished samples. The surface roughness of the Single-450, DP-400 and DP-450 samples is 0.043 μm, 0.034 μm and 0.041 μm respectively. Subsequently, a computer-controlled nanoindenter (CSM UNHT) equipped with Berkovich diamond indenter was carried out to measure the hardness (H), the elastic modulus (E) of the AlCrN coatings and effective Young's modulus (E In the present work, the microstructures and mechanical properties of all samples were systematically characterized except the DP-350 sample, and the DP-350 sample were investigated only for phase structure, thickness and adhesion strength. The cause is that the most AlCrN coating of the DP-350 sample occurs to spall due to lower adhesion strength caused by low deposition temperature. This means that the DP-350 sample is not suitable for industrial application.    It has been reported that the indentation depth should be above 50 nm to avoid the effect of surface macroparticles and zero drift, and it should be also less than 1/10 of thickness of coating to avoid the effect of plastic deformation in substrate The H/E and H The surface hardness under various indentation loads commonly reflects a comprehensive hardness of both hard coating and the inward matrix The hardness along the depth direction of the nitrocarburized sample was measured using a Vickers hardness tester under a small load of 50 g, and the hardness curves are shown in Adhesion strength of the duplex coating is a very important property and can directly affect the service life of coating products. Up to now, Rockwell indentation and scratch tests are commonly carried out to measure the adhesion strength of coatings to substrate. Quantitative measurement of adhesion strength for the Single-450, DP-400 and DP-450 samples were carried out by scratch tester, and corresponding results are shown in  SEM observation was carried out to further investigate wear behaviors of these coatings, and corresponding results are shown in It has been reported that the nitriding layer can effectively improve adhesion strength and wear resistance In the present work, the AlCrN coating was deposited on the surface of the samples with and without plasma nitrocarburizing pretreatment by multi-arc ion plating, and the microstructures of these samples were systematically investigated by means of XRD, OM and SEM, in association with property measurement. From the results obtained, the following can be concluded. The AlCrN coating consists of an inner CrN adhesion layer with columnar growth and an outmost AlCrN work layer with planar growth, and the latter is composed of alternatively (Cr,Al)N sublayers and its modulation period is about 15 nm. Therefore, the AlCrN coating shows a superior hardness of about 43 GPa. The nitrocarburized layer considerably improves load capacity and adhesion strength of the nitrocarburizing-AlCrN composite coating as a result of the thicker nitrocarburized layer and the gradient in the hardness profile of the duplex coating. Hence, the duplex coated samples show higher wear resistance when compared with the single PVD coated sample. The main wear mechanisms of the duplex coated samples are oxidation wear or oxidation wear and adhesion wear, whereas the main wear mechanisms of the single PVD coated sample are spalling and chipping wear as well as oxidation wear. Therefore, nitrocarburizing pretreatment on SKD 11 cool-work tool steel before PVD is a suitable process for improving the mechanical and tribological properties of materials. Deposition temperature do not affects the phase structure of the AlCrN coatings, but increases adhesion strength, load capacity and wear resistance of duplex coated samples. This work was supported by the key research project of