This paper presents a case study of investigations into retarded groundwater bursting along the fault zones in the seam floors in coal mines. In addition to in situ measurements of ground stresses, a number of rock samples from the fault zones at the site of the case study were taken, and laboratory tests were performed for conventional and special rheological rock mechanics properties. The effects of different parameters on deformation and failure of the fault zone materials were analyzed, and the mechanism of retarded groundwater bursting along fault zones was further revealed. In the case study, different scenarios accounting for the different development phases of the fault weakness zone and groundwater bursting as well as different groundwater pressures were considered, and each of them was simulated using the 3D visual elastic–plastic numerical mechanics model FLAC3D (Fast Lagrangian Analysis of Continua in 3 Dimensions). Through the case study, the applicability of rock mechanics modeling software for studying retarded groundwater bursting along a fault zone was examined. Several issues are discussed regarding the investigations of retarded groundwater bursting and a general structured approach to investigate and control this geological hazardous event is presented.Groundwater with high pressure can break through seam floors and burst into the tunnels and winning excavations constructed for coal mining. This phenomenon is called groundwater bursting and can be a severe geological hazardous event if an unexpected amount of groundwater were to appear suddenly from the underlying aquifers through the breached seam floor. This could result in significant loss of life and property. Groundwater bursting can be instantaneous or retarded. Instantaneous groundwater bursting refers to situations when bursting immediately follows the construction of tunnel or coal mining excavations. Retarded groundwater bursting, however, occurs when the groundwater bursting happens with a lag time after the tunnel or winning excavations have been formed. The lag time could be many years. The latter type of groundwater bursting may result in significantly higher risk during mining since it may have been assumed that groundwater bursting will not occur and that the seam floor is strong enough to resist the water pressure. Essentially, groundwater bursting occurs when the water pressure is greater than the strength of the seam floor beneath the tunnel or winning excavations. In general, fault zones have weaker strength than those areas unaffected by faults. Additionally, there is more complexity associated with investigations of retarded groundwater bursting than with contemporaneous bursting. The study of groundwater bursting has been highlighted in past decades, with reports given on the progress of investigations Most of those investigations, however, do not directly account for the gradual change of strength of the seam floor, especially the fault zone, with time. It was observed that the strength of the fault zone in the seam floor beneath the tunnel and winning excavations constructed for mining decreases gradually with mining under groundwater pressure and penetration This paper focuses on the investigation of retarded groundwater bursting along fault zones, provides a framework for understanding the fundamental process, and provides a mechanism of the retarded groundwater bursting along fault zones. Such a phenomenon occurred at Zhaogezhuang Coal Mine, a mining site in northern China, in winning face No. 9132, during winning around the A–B cross-sectional line ( It was understood that the tunnel excavation caused an increase of rock tension and created more potential for groundwater penetration along the fault zone. Due to the winning excavations in the mine, rock tension around the excavation increased further. The fault zone was then active again, and the groundwater in the aquifers beneath the excavation site intruded around the fault zone. With the increase of excavation time and wetting of the fault zone, the strength of the rocks in the fault zone decreased gradually and the extension length of the fault weakness zone, in which fault zone materials had been wetted and then weakened, increased progressively. When the overall strength of the fault zone decreased to such an extent that its strength limitation was lower than the water pressure, and both the lower induced-uplift hydraulic connection zone related to the fault weakness zone and the upper mining-induced fracturing zone were connected to each other, groundwater bursting was manifested. A further investigation of the mechanism and modeling of retarded groundwater bursting along fault zones was performed through a case study of Zhaogezhuang Coal Mine. Based on the observations, it is necessary to investigate the effect of different parameters on the strength of fault zones in order to establish the factors involved in groundwater bursting, especially water content, at laboratory scales. Therefore, a number of samples from the case study site were taken and laboratory rock mechanics tests were performed. The effects of different parameters on deformation and failure of fault zone materials were analyzed, and the mechanism of retarded groundwater bursting along fault zones further revealed. In this paper, different scenarios were considered, and each of them was simulated using the simulation package FLAC Zhaogezhuang Coal Mine is located in Hebei Province, northern China. From the bottom to the top there exist two large rock formations: the Middle Ordovician System (O Fractures and karst are well developed in the underlying Middle Ordovician System, which is considered a significant aquifer. The hydraulic conductivity was 3.0–22.0 Faults developed in the rock systems have different horizontal and vertical extension dimensions. The horizontal lengths of the faults could extend up to several kilometers with varying displacements. Gravity faults dominated in the coal mine field. Both the Middle Ordovician System and the Permian System can be cut through by faults. The rock types of the fault zone were recognized generally as gray–yellow mud-bearing mylonite and black fault sludge. As mentioned previously, an event of groundwater bursting occurred through a fault zone in the Zhaogezhuang Coal Mine. Conversely, safety mining for winning face 1132 was reported. The layers beneath the winning face also were cut by fault F7. Those data could be used in model developments for investigations of groundwater bursting. The thirteenth mining level for Coalbed No. 12 will be studied in relation to the retarded groundwater bursting. The designed mining level for Coalbed No. 12 will be −1000 ∼ –1100 The stress releasing approach was applied to the in situ measurement of the original ground stress. The ‘Voidal Enclosure’ method was adopted, and the measurement of ground stress was completed through the ‘Casing Core’ technique. Data from the measurements indicated that gravity dominated the original ground stress field of the surrounding rocks, with a slight addition from the tectonic stress field. The direction of the maximum principal stress is approximately vertical with a magnitude ranging from 29.1 to 30.6 Sample tests for mechanical properties of the background rocks uninfluenced by faults were conducted in this study. Because fault zones play a critical role in groundwater bursting, rock specimens for laboratory tests for mechanical properties were also taken from the materials of fault zones exposed in the mine tunnels in this investigation. Two types of sample materials were obtained from those fault zones: gray–yellow mud-bearing mylonite and black fault sludge. After on-site sealing treatment, the samples were brought to the Opening Laboratory of the Geological Institute at the China Academy of Sciences. Uniaxial and triaxial conventional tests and triaxial rheological tests were carried out in the laboratory. The triaxial rheological tests were conducted using an imported triaxial rheological meter. Test results are shown in The mechanical properties of the fault zone materials are dependent on many factors, such as the percentage of soft, scattered, and fractured materials, their distributions, particle contents, shapes, ore contents, water contents, confining pressures, and developments and extensions of cleavages and joints, etc. The next section presents the analyses of the laboratory experimental results based on the deformation-failure characteristics and regular trends in the laboratory rock mechanics tests. The deformation of fault zone materials depends on the confining pressure. Generally, there exists a lesser effect of confining pressure on the elastic modulus of the hard rocks. However, the elastic moduli obtained from the uniaxial compressive experiments were clearly lower than those obtained under conditions with confining pressure and with the same water contents. The elastic moduli increased with confining pressure for the rocks with similar water contents. This phenomenon could result from the effect of confining pressure on the deformation of components with elastic materials. When the confining pressure is increased, the failure stress increases; on the other hand, the response from the clayey and elastic materials decreases. As a result, the elastic modulus increases. Four groups of flowing deformation-failure tests were conducted. It was shown from the test results that the strain corresponding to the accelerated flowing deformation for each of the test samples increased with confining pressure. For example, the strains corresponding to the accelerated flowing deformation for gray–yellow mud-bearing mylonite at the water content 7.1–7.5 with different values of confining pressures 0, 0.05, 0.1, 0.15, and 0.2 A comparison was made between the strain corresponding to the sample degradation in conventional instantaneous loading tests and the strain corresponding to the accelerated flowing deformation in rheological rock mechanics tests. The comparison showed that the strain obtained under the first test condition was smaller than that obtained under the second test condition. The extra strain produced in the rheological rock mechanics tests is related to the time effect. It is understood that the extra strain is accumulated under a long period of loading and relatively more viscosity-plastic components were produced in the different parts of the test samples. In practical applications of tunnel engineering, breakdown of wall rocks often happens. Most of these instances, however, result from instantaneous loading. Thus, forewarning for groundwater bursting might present itself immediately after a working front of tunnel excavations is formed; however, it may last much longer for the wall rocks when they are supported. Since deformation of the wall rocks is supposed to happen prior to groundwater bursting in the tunnels with supporting wall rocks, groundwater bursting could be controlled and prevented based on the forewarning signs. This would be practicable, provided that forewarning of the deformation is monitored and attention is paid to it along with the appropriate treatment. The test results of samples taken from the fault zone materials indicate that the water content affects not only the instantaneous mechanical parameters, but also those related to time. It has been observed that the types of fault zone materials determine the profile of features of failure and the general trend of the failure. Experiment results have shown that the test samples underwent bulging failure or bulging flowing failure in both conventional and rheological rock mechanics tests. Those tests were under both uniaxial and triaxial compressive test conditions for gray–yellow mud-bearing mylonite at water contents of 7.1–7.5 and 12.0–12.2%. However, the bulging degree increases with confining pressure and water content. Moreover, it also varies from conventional to rheological tests corresponding to the duration of the applied stresses. The samples tested under rheological stresses that bore a longer duration of stress action exhibited a larger degree of bulging than those under instantaneous loading. On the other hand, variant failure forms and features for black fault sludge were presented at water contents of 7.2–7.5% and 12.0–12.2%. Shear failure, network shear failure, and network bulging failure, for example, were observed in the test samples undergoing conventional rock mechanics tests, while shear flowing failure, network shear flowing failure, and network bulging flowing failure were observed for the samples undergoing rheological rock mechanics tests. The gray–yellow mud-bearing mylonite Results from the conventional mechanics tests on the fault sludge at water contents of 7.2–7.5 and 12.0–12.2% indicated that the fault sludge displayed forms of shear failure under uniaxial compressive stress conditions. In addition, the angles between the direction of axial stress and shear failure plane decrease with water content ( Results from both the conventional and rheological rock mechanics tests indicated that failure forms of the test samples changed gradually from shear failure or network shear failure to shear flowing failure or network shear flowing failure under the same water content with an increase of confining pressure. This implied that the test samples would present more attributes of plastic deformation with the increase of confining pressure under the condition that fault zone materials bore similar water contents. Rock samples applied with instantaneous loading and creep loading in the conventional and rheological rock mechanics tests, respectively, evidently presented different failure features and types in different stress conditions. It is understood that those different failure features and types were related to the time scales. Compared with long term creep loading under the same water content and confining pressure, fault zone materials deform insufficiently and they could display more brittle deformation failure in instantaneous loading. Nevertheless, fault zone materials under long term endurable loading experienced relatively sufficient deformation, and this deformation, which depends upon viscosity and plastic deformation related to time scales, would be strengthened greatly. Therefore, with the same water content and confining pressure, the features of viscoplasticity display themselves more extensively in the long term creep loading conditions than in instantaneous loading conditions. FLAC Based on the geological and working front conditions of the site, the bedrocks of the seam floor were divided into eight sub-layers The model domain for the first producing area of Coalbed No. 12, which is cut by fault No. F8, is bounded by the top boundary at an elevation level of −800 Three phases for time scales in the investigation of retarded groundwater bursting after excavations of the tunnels and coalbed were considered. Three models were designed corresponding to those three stages of development of deformation and failure of the seam floor. It is assumed that the extension of the fault weakness zone continues with the winning time, after which the hydraulically connected fault zone would be developed in the seam floor above the limestone bedrock aquifer. Consequently, the thickness of hydraulically connected fault zones would increase with the winning time. Additionally, different groundwater pressures were simulated to account for the seasonal change of groundwater levels in the limestone aquifer. The designed water pressure values were 11.0 and 11.5 The scenarios of the three models designed to represent the aforementioned three phases of development of a retarded groundwater bursting are presented below. Model I was designed to simulate the first phase of the development of the fault weakness zone. In this phase, the fault weakness zone and the induced-uplift hydraulic connection zone are extended to an elevation of 10 Model II was designed to simulate the second phase of the development of the fault weakness zone. With excavation continuing and mining time increasing, the fault weakness zone and the induced-uplift hydraulic connection zone would be extended further. It is assumed that the fault weakness zone reaches to an elevation of 30 Model III was designed to simulate the third phase of the development of the fault weakness zone. In this model, it is assumed that the fault weakness zone and the induced-uplift hydraulic connection zone continue to be developed and reach to an elevation of 60 The three models were implemented using the numerical simulation package FLAC The simulation results obtained from Models I and II under groundwater pressure of 11.5 Based on all the above simulation results and discussions, predictions for the groundwater bursting for Coalbed No. 12 at the thirteenth mining level were as follows. If, when the fault weakness zone is developed on the first phase, the groundwater pressure of the limestone aquifer is lower than 11.5 If, when the fault weakness zone is developed on the second phase, the groundwater pressure of the limestone aquifer is greater than 11.0 The most important model parameters might be identified during model sensitivity analyses and, based on the above discussions, it is clear that, in addition to the groundwater pressure, fault zones play an important role in groundwater bursting. In the case study, the simulation results from Model II indicated that if, when the fault weakness zone is developed to a length of 30 Two additional aspects need to be considered in the sensitivity analyses of the fault zone. The first one is the extension of the fault weakness zone, which is quantitatively described as extension length or thickness of the weakness zone along the fault zone. The second is the strength of the fault zone materials. Two values of 10 and 60 Simulation results show that, for the case in which the thickness of the initial fault weakness zone equals 10 The simulation results with groundwater pressure equal to 10.5 It is interesting to note from the sensitivity analyses results that retarded groundwater bursting could be insensitive to the extension length of the weakness zone along the fault zone if the groundwater pressure is low. Otherwise, the extension length of weakness zone would be a sensitive parameter to groundwater bursting. Most importantly, through sensitivity analyses by implementations of a 3D visual elastic–plastic numerical mechanics model with applying the observed groundwater pressures, the sensitivity of this parameter can be determined. The retardance effect of a fault is exhibited by gradually weakening of fault zone materials under the high water pressure of the bedrock aquifer and reducing resistance to groundwater bursting to break through the seam floor during the winning processes. A number of factors play a significant role in determining whether and when groundwater bursting happens. Based on the obtained investigation results from this study, along with comprehensive analyses on a number of records of groundwater bursting, the major factors are analyzed and their retarded effect from faults are summarized as follows. First, features such as displacements and types of faults, cutting through bedrocks that consist of seam floors, are important in determining whether and when ground water bursting could occur. Fault zones could greatly reduce the strength of the seam floor bedrocks due to the production of the weakness zones. Additionally, fault zones may significantly decrease the thickness of bedrock, due to the displacement of the seam floor rock layers, and greatly reduce resistibility to groundwater bursting. Therefore, attention needs to be paid to those fault characteristics. Second, the initial extension length of fault weakness zones also plays an important role. Prior to mining, the fault zones could be already wetted and weakened, and there exists a certain extension length of the weakness zone along the fault zone. The longer the initial extension length of the weakness zone, the easier for groundwater bursting to happen. Third, structural features of fault zone materials need to be considered. Structural features of fault zone materials determine the disintegration ability of those materials. Resistance to groundwater bursting of the seam floor bedrocks along the fault zone will be quickly reduced if those materials are easy to disintegrate. Consequently, the lag time for an occurrence of groundwater bursting will be greatly shortened. Fourth, the mechanical strength of fault zone materials plays an important role. It is not difficult to understand that if the mechanical strength of fault zone materials is larger, the fault zone will bear a larger capability to resist groundwater pressure and will not be easily disintegrated. Fifth, mining and excavation approaches and mining-induced fracturing zone could cause a significant effect. Different mining and excavation approaches provide varied disturbances on fault zone materials. The less the fault zone materials are disturbed, the more the original mechanical balance status is maintained and the larger the resistance to groundwater bursting. The sixth factor is water pressure. The larger the water pressures is, the bigger the perturbation and the weaker the resistance to groundwater bursting. Finally, the chemical constituents of groundwater in the bedrock aquifer could play a role. This effect will be reflected by chemical and physical erosion of the fault zone materials. The stronger the chemical and physical erosion, the more quickly the resistance to groundwater bursting is lessened. In this study, the cut-off value of the rock displacement that would produce a hydraulically connected path to contribute to groundwater bursting is taken as 1 Another issue which investigators of groundwater bursting in mines may be concerned with is model validations. Essentially, it is difficult to validate a mechanics model set up for simulations of groundwater bursting based on site data. This is because groundwater bursting may not happen before forecasting it, and, generally, it is not permissible to create a groundwater bursting. Furthermore, even though some records on groundwater bursting are available, it could be time- and cost-consuming to obtain the site geological and mechanics parameters that are needed for model validations. This is not like a groundwater flow model validation because it is much easier to collect and obtain field data for groundwater flow model validations. However, it would be useful to collect and study the events of groundwater bursting from other sites that bear similar site conditions. Those data could be used to roughly validate a constructed numerical mechanics model used for investigations of groundwater bursting. A general structured approach, principally based on the case study, to investigate and control retarded groundwater bursting is presented below. The first step is collecting the data concerning site conditions related to investigations of groundwater bursting, such as site geological and hydrogeological characterizations. Particularly, the features of faults that are located within mining sites need to be identified. The second step is rock sampling and site and laboratory tests. The major tasks in this step include: (1) sampling fault zone materials and background rocks, and measuring ground stresses and (2) testing samples for mechanics properties, such as internal cohesion and internal friction angle. Then a conceptual mechanics model, which conceptually describes the model domain, layers, parameter distribution features, boundary conditions, and spatial relation between different model components, needs to be set up based on geological and hydrogeological conditions, mechanics properties of rocks, and the mining excavation approach. The next step is numerical mechanics model development, sensitivity analyses, and model validations. This step consists of: developing elastic and plastic numerical mechanics models based on the records of safety mining and groundwater bursting in the investigated site or other sites with similar site and mining conditions; estimating a range for each of the parameters used in the numerical model based on the sample tests and site conditions; performing sensitivity analyses based on the estimated parameter ranges, assessing the model uncertainty, and selecting the most sensitive parameters; if necessary, conducting more site investigations and laboratory tests to narrow the range of those most sensitive model parameters in order to reduce the model uncertainty; and performing model validations based on the records of safety mining and groundwater bursting in the investigated site or other sites with similar site and mining conditions. Afterward, Monte Carlo simulations could be considered and integrated in the next step of forecasting groundwater bursting in order to investigate the average, worst, and best scenarios. To do that, historical records on safe mining and groundwater bursting in the site need to be collected, and possibly a regional or national site database presenting historical records on safe mining and groundwater bursting could be needed, to obtain distributions of investigated variables. The next step, which could be considered the central task of the investigation of groundwater bursting, is to forecast, probably dynamically, the deformation of seam floor bedrocks and assess the possibility of retarded groundwater bursting. After an evaluation of mining safety from the simulation results is obtained, the necessity for optimizations of the mining design, such as sizes of winning faces and mining periods, should be examined for a lower risk with an acceptable cost. Furthermore, it would be necessary to formulate the control and prevention policies regarding the deformation and failure of the seam floor and groundwater bursting, such as the ways and criteria for controlling and preventing groundwater bursting. Finally, the model simulation results will be integrated with control and prevention policies to find ways in minimizing the risk and damage resulting from the geological hazardous events of groundwater bursting. Following the above steps, the model refinement could be performed when new data are available with mining proceedings. Investigations of retarded groundwater bursting bear a critical significance for the safety of coal mining. Through a case study of Zhaogezhuang Coal Mine for forecasting retarded groundwater bursting, the mechanism of retarded groundwater bursting along fault zones has been further revealed. It has been demonstrated that the fault weakness zone plays a significant role in determining the occurrence and possibility of groundwater bursting. It was shown that gradual development of the fault weakness zone and the mining-induced fracturing zone in surrounding rocks, induced due to excavations of tunnels and winning faces, indicates the progress on groundwater bursting. In order to understand the effect of fault weakness zones on groundwater bursting, different factors in determining mechanics properties and behavior of the fault zone materials were presented. In addition, relations between those factors, and mechanical properties and behavior were analyzed based on the laboratory rock mechanics data from the uniaxial and triaxial tests under conventional and rheological stress conditions. A 3D visual numerical mechanics model for simulating and forecasting retarded groundwater bursting was built for Zhaogezhuang Coal Mine based on the site geological and hydrogeological conditions, safe and unsafe history mining records, and laboratory rock mechanics experiments along with in situ measurement of the rock stress field of the site. Through model simulations of the different scenarios, the retarded groundwater bursting was examined and the possibility of it occurring for different scenarios was evaluated. The model prediction results from the numerical simulations indicated that if, when the fault weakness zone is developed on the first phase with 10 Several issues such as the main factors for retardance or the time lag effect of faults for groundwater bursting and a general structured approach to investigate and control retarded groundwater bursting were discussed. The structured approach presented in this paper could be generally applied to investigations of retarded groundwater bursting in other coal mines and other excavation sites such as metal mines and civil engineering tunnels. It seems that it is practicable to investigate retarded groundwater bursting by implementing an elastic–plastic numerical mechanics model using a powerful modeling software package like FLAC The authors are grateful to Kailuan Mining Bureau, Hebei Province, China for providing funding for this research. We also want to thank Dr. Chen Zhu for his suggestions on the manuscript.