The use of polyethylene (PE) liners for protection against wear has become of interest in applications dealing with abrasive slurries, for example in the minerals processing industry. The present study aims at studying the influence of various operating conditions on the erosive wear by slurry of low-density polyethylene and high-density polyethylene samples, manufactured by either rotational molding or extrusion. In particular, this work presents for the first time a systematic study on slurry erosion at temperatures from 35 to 65°C, since minerals processing operations may reach temperatures above ambient. The experiments were conducted in a slurry-pot equipment using quartz suspended in water as erodent. The wear of PE was also investigated as a function of impact angle. The indicator to describe wear was weight loss of PE samples after the experiment. Finally, the erosion of PE in experiments lasting up to 72h with and without addition of fresh erodent was analyzed. It was determined that high temperatures invariably resulted in lower resistance to wear, but its influence on wear is only observed at impact angles lower than 90°. Furthermore, it was found that the manufacturing method of PE has a stronger influence on its erosive wear compared to its density.Polyethylene (PE) is a plastic material commonly used as a protective layer to shield mechanical components of machinery against wear that has recently gained interest in the field of minerals processing. PE is considered to offer an excellent resistance to erosive wear while also being lightweight, easily processed, and resistant to corrosion. These properties make PE an interesting material to protect equipment in direct contact with abrasive slurry, for example when handling suspended mineral particles. PE is often classified by its density and branching, e.g., ultra-high-molecular-weight polyethylene (UHMWPE), high-density polyethylene (HDPE), low-density polyethylene (LDPE) and high-density cross-linked polyethylene (HDXLPE). It is well established that the mechanical properties of polyethylene depend significantly on its density and branching Erosion studies of plastics and plastic composites can be found in the literature for at least PE Studies about the effect of the solid particle characteristics on erosion have also been conducted by several authors e.g. Friedrich In the present study, the erosion resistance of three different kinds of PEs is discussed. These PEs include rotational molded LDPE (RM-LDPE), rotational molded HDPE (RM-HDPE), and extruded HDPE (E-HDPE). The densities of these species were determined using the Archimedes principle and had values of 0.92 The erodent utilized in this study was quartz sand (Sibelco Nordic) with a nominal particle size of 100–600 A slurry-pot erosion tester was employed to conduct the erosion experiments. A schematic of the vessel and the sample holding impeller is shown in The rotational speed of the impeller was 520 To understand the flow characteristics inside the slurry-pot reactor a computational fluid dynamics (CFD) model was created using Fluent software with a mixture model to model the multiphase flow. The analysis indicates a relatively homogenous shear stress distribution within the samples ( The discussion of results is based on the assumption that the particle flux is independent of sample inclination. This is justified when the flux is governed by the amount of rebounding particles blanketing the surface and not by the flux of particle hitting the surface. With a slurry density of 30% this is considered to be a reasonable assumption. If on the other hand, the particle flux were considered to be strictly perpendicular to the rotational direction of the stirrer blades, a smaller number of particles would be hitting the sample surface at lower contact angles. This would imply a bias, favoring the wear of the sample as the contact angle approaches 90°. However, as will be detailed in The samples were attached into sample holders ( The amount of erosion was determined as the mass loss of a sample during an experiment. The samples were weighted and then dried in a heat chamber for 24 Wear surfaces were investigated with JEOL JSM-6490 LV scanning electron microscope to understand the wear mechanisms occurring in the experiments and how the inclination angle of the sample holder influences on the mechanism. Hardness tests at various temperatures were carried out for each type of PE using a Mitutoyo Hardmatic Durometer Model HH-337-01 following the ASTM D2240 Standard test method for rubber property – Durometer hardness test. The hardness scale of Shore D was employed and the values by maximum indicator were utilized as the results. The lowest temperature in the hardness tests was the same that in the erosion experiments (35 The recorded mass losses of RM-HDPE samples after 24 Another noteworthy result shown in Slurry-pot erosion tests were carried out on RM-HDPE, E-HDPE, and RM-LDPE at four different temperatures – 35 There was no significant difference in the amount of weight loss due to erosion between RM-LDPE and RM-HDPE. Another surprising finding was that there was a significant difference between the two HDPEs studied, with a mass loss of RM-HDPE almost twice as much as that of E-HDPE throughout the temperature range of this study. This indicates that the manufacturing method influences more to the erosion mass loss the type of the polyethylene. Two possible contributing factors associated with manufacturing methods that may be responsible for this behavior are the differences in the residual stresses and the orientation in the surface of the material.  The effect of the erodent particle rounding (i.e., its shape) to the erosion of polyethylene was studied by carrying out slurry-pot erosion experiments lasting for 72 To corroborate that the decrease in erosion rate was due to wear of particles and not because of wear of PE samples (e.g. a sample could contain a thin surface skin with different material properties), an experiment was carried out where the erodent particles were changed at 24-h intervals and the mass loss of the samples were measured before the addition of fresh quartz. As shown in With the aim of understanding the observed decrease in erosion rate, sieve analyses were conducted to determine particle size distributions for a sample of erodent material used in a 24-h erosion experiment and for a sample of erodent material used in a 72-h experiment. As shown in In this study, the slurry erosion behavior of three varieties of PE were investigated under conditions relevant for the mineral processing industry, presenting for the first time results of slurry erosion at temperatures higher than ambient. The main findings of this investigation, can be summarized as follows: The manufacturing method of the plastic has more a significant impact on the erosion resistance of the polyethylene plastic than the density of PE. Indeed, extruded PE presented better erosion resistance properties than rotational molded PEs but between rotational molded LDPE and HDPE there was no significant difference in erosion resistance under the conditions used in the present study. This behavior may be associated to the differences in the residual stresses and the orientation in the surface of the material as a result of the different manufacturing methods. Erosion damage at impact angles around 45° increased significantly while the temperature increased, but remained the same at the impact angle of 90°. The hardness of the material, which depends on temperature, appears to be of relevance when erosion due to cutting wear is the dominating mechanism. The importance of particle shape to the erosion rate was established in the experiments. The erosion rate decreased as a function of time but the particle size distribution did not change significantly during the experiments to explain this. However, some very small particles formed during the experiments which might be due to wear of sharp angles of the particles. Especially at elevated temperatures, the angularity in quartz particles appear to present a more vital role on PE erosion than at lower temperatures. The authors would like to thank J. Xia (Outotec) for performing the CFD modelling presented in this study.