Recent studies have shown that microwaves heat some minerals faster than others. This creates the opportunity to use microwaves to selectively heat minerals to enhance separation of valuable minerals from gangue minerals. This opportunity has been investigated by studying the heating process under controlled conditions. It involved creating synthetic samples of ore using pyrite grains suspended at known locations within a matrix made of quartz and poly(methyl methacrylate).
                  Previous experiments used cement or plaster as the matrix however, these compounds are slow to set and allow the mineral grains to settle to the bottom of the mould during the setting process. This disadvantage has been overcome by using a cost-effective mixture of quartz and poly(methyl methacrylate) (PMMA). The experimental work presented in this paper has shown that it is possible to use this mixture to place mineral grains at precise locations within the matrix, and that the bulk dielectric properties of the matrix are similar to those of pulverised quartz sand. It was also determined that the optimum ratio of 10% of PMMA (as adhesive) was the minimum mass proportion that can be used, to create the designed mineral texture without compromising mechanical properties of synthetic samples. The synthetic ore samples were resistant to breakage and could be used in multiple tests. The work in this paper demonstrates a method for creation of synthetic samples as well as their use in assessment of selective microwave heating in different types of microwave applicators.An early study from Simulation models can be used to predict the thermo-mechanical response of minerals when exposed to electromagnetic waves (whether they are radio or microwave frequency) and are the easiest way to study the potential of selective heating. Software packages such as Microwave heating inside a cavity is not uniform and depends on various factors such as cavity geometry, properties of treated material and frequency.  For a variable feed, such as ore particles, the applicator design can be optimised for a specific load property to enhance physical processes. These processes can later lead to improvements in the physical separation of minerals. Therefore, it would be beneficial to test applicators with designed loads that provide specific properties for the evaluation of their efficiency. The work of The authors of the current paper also encountered a similar problem when using chalcopyrite mineral grains and plaster as a host rock mineral, as shown in Casting with cement and plaster had the advantage of being affordable and relatively transparent to microwaves (more importantly less absorbing compared to sulfides). Hence, they are a good choice as substitute for the host rock minerals. In addition, the castability meant that if necessary, a large numbers of samples could be easily manufactured. The downside was the mineral sinking, which influenced the desired texture, the predefined spacing of the mineral grains and mechanical properties. A new approach is reported in this paper. By introducing an appropriate polymer adhesive, any combination of minerals can be investigated. The host rock minerals can be taken from any ore deposit and not be restricted to cement or plaster. This paper presents the results of a detailed study of synthetic samples. These samples were used to experimentally validate the theoretical approach to selective heating. The procedure for how to create synthetic samples (with predefined shape and composition) is provided, followed by measurement of their bulk dielectric properties. The methods of testing in two different applicators are reported and discussed. Synthetic samples were made from two phases. The first was a microwave absorbing phase (usually a mineral of interest) and the second was a matrix (less absorbing phase). Pyrite is a very common sulfide mineral, occurring in a wide variety of geological conditions. It is also associated with sulfides of copper and other minerals. As a sulfide mineral, it is also ascribed to a group that has a good response to microwave heating, according to most studies sourced from literature. For the above reasons it was decided that pyrite is a good mineral to use as a heating source, or mineral of interest in synthetic samples. Using the same amounts of pyrite, different textures can be created with different grain sizes. For those textures, different temperature profiles can be seen and investigated. To create a relatively transparent matrix for microwave heating, quartz was chosen as the base mineral. Quartz is a silicon dioxide and it is one of the most common minerals in the earth's crust. It was decided that dried quartz sand could be pulverised and used to create a suitable matrix. The next step was adding the right amount of adhesive compound to hold the material together; in this case poly (methyl methacrylate) (PMMA). This adhesive compound is a transparent thermoplastic, often used as a light or shatter-resistant alternative to glass. It is sometimes called acrylic glass. In chemical terms, it is the synthetic polymer of methyl methacrylate. PMMA was chosen because it can easily bind together pulverised quartz sand with pyrite grains and provides mechanical properties to synthetic samples that can match natural rock particles. It also allows the creation of different textures, embedding grains of minerals before hardening. The dielectric properties of PMMA are given in The simple mass ratio rule was applied in designing synthetic samples. The PMMA used was LECOSET™ 100 (Acrylic), a mix of one part liquid with two parts powder. The air curing time was 10 to 12 A cube mould was created out of Teflon A cooled water bath was prepared before mixing all components. After weighing the quartz powder it was placed in a glass container and the powder component of PMMA into a disposable plastic cup. Both containers were placed into the water bath to be cooled. The bath was used to cool the glass and plastic containers used during mixing. After the powder was cooled the liquid LECOSET™ monomer was measured by syringe, and added to the powder component, starting the chemical reaction in the disposable plastic container. A glass laboratory stick was used to rapidly mix the liquid and powder components. After five seconds of rapid mixing, viscous PMMA was poured from the disposable plastic container onto the surface of the quartz powder. To increase the contact surface, PMMA was poured in circular motions. Mixing was continued in the glass container. Mixing was stopped when the adhesive had been well distributed within the whole mass of the quartz sand. For the synthetic particles without mineral grains, the freshly made matrix material was placed directly into the mould, applying compression from the top. For the synthetic particles with mineral grains, the matrix was placed in layers in the mould. This approach allowed the placing of mineral grains in the desired position within the volume of the matrix. After preparation, the synthetic particles were randomly labelled with numbers from one to eleven. Numbers 3, 5 and 9 were dedicated to the synthetic particles with pyrite grains (these particles can also be referred as tracers). Position three was given to the cube with the smallest grain size, while position nine was given to the cube with the largest grain size. Using described procedure, synthetic particles (with constant shape and defined composition) were created, as simplified ore particles with an average measured mass of 16.91 The experimental objective was to measure the bulk dielectric properties of synthetic particles as they would be used in actual testing or microwave load modelling. For this reason, three randomly chosen synthetic particles without pyrite texture (No. 4, 7 and 11) and three used as tracers (No. 3, 5 and 9) were measured. The Resonant Cavity Method uses a resonant cavity for the sample holder, and a network analyser to measure the resonant frequency and the The cavity is connected to a network analyser using suitable adapters and cables as shown in   The glass microwave tray, which can be seen in In typical industrial conditions, actual rock particles can be measured for their temperature profiles on the conveyor belt from the top surface, while the temperature profiles from the bottom stay hidden. To complete the temperature profile it would be beneficial to have information from both the top and bottom surfaces. This is why synthetic particles were tested first with their labels or numbers facing up and then a second time with their numbers facing down. With this arrangement, exposure to the microwave energy was repeated four times: twice with the numbers up and twice with the numbers down. Before the microwave exposure, an image of the synthetic particles was taken using a CEDIP infrared camera. The camera is capable of detecting electromagnetic waves with the wave lengths between 2 and 5  For this experimental set-up, a simple wave guide type of applicator was used. It had an opening that allowed the load to be inserted into the middle of the wave guide. All synthetic particles were placed in a numbered sequence on the vibratory feeder, which can be seen in By analysing data from the microwave exposures in the applicator, it was straightforward to detect and identify heating patterns on the surface of the synthetic samples from their predefined locations of mineral grains. To allow repeatability during testing of microwave/RF applicators, material handling should not affect the synthetic particles. To test mechanical properties, JK abrasion testing equipment was used. The test was performed by tumbling one synthetic particle with five quartzite ore particles (see For assessment of synthetic particles, X-ray Cone Beam Tomography was used to measure the designed texture and point to possible localised heating areas. Digital X-ray images provided opportunity to visualise and measure the proximity of the embedded minerals to the surface of the minerals. The distance of heating minerals will be reflected on the heating patterns on the surface of the synthetic particles, measured using an infrared camera.  This particular cube was later labelled as Cube No. 7. It was used with two more barren cubes for testing dielectric properties along with the cubes that had microwave absorbing mineral. All others cubes made in the same manner present barren rock particles. They are used as particles made of common rock forming minerals which have low dielectric properties, and have a tendency to heat less when exposed to applied microwave energy.   Cube No. 9 had a very simple structure as presented in X-ray images in The ASTM 2520 ( The chosen synthetic particles were tested in two positions along the length of the resonant cavity. The first was parallel and the second was under an angle of 45 degrees. These two positions were investigated because of the depolarisation effect. Measurements were repeated three times and the depolarisation effect caused by the different positions was examined on a macroscopic level (not by different shapes) of the synthetic ore particles. The aim of rotating the particles was to investigate whether the difference between two types of synthetic samples was equally distinguishable. In  From infrared images, two values were obtained for each particle: the maximum and the mean surface temperature. To compare experimental data, the temperature difference for maximum and mean temperatures were calculated from data after and before microwave exposure. The following abbreviations were taken to represent the data. For each exposure of the samples in the applicator:Δ From three times repeated exposures in the applicator:average Δ It needs to be stated that all microwave exposures in two different applicators were repeated three times. This enabled the calculation of standard deviation from heating experiments, average Δ  Tracers Cube Nos. 3 and 9 had much lower standard deviations due to their more symmetrical texture. The lowest average Δ In the case of wave guide type applicator (see The purpose of this experimental work was to identify a matrix that can be used to create synthetic ore samples to investigate the behaviour of ore when heated by different types of microwave applicators. The PMMA mix with pulverised quartz sand proved to be a good choice because: the mechanical experimental testing showed that there was no more significant damage on synthetic samples when compared to in situ quartzite ore particles, it was demonstrated that synthetic ore particles could be reused with minimum damage which was necessary to achieve repeatable testing, and the X-ray tomography results clearly showed that large mineral grains did not have a tendency to sink to the bottom of the synthetic samples, as it was reported for plaster or cast cement. The resonant cavity proved to be suitable for measuring the bulk properties of synthetic rock particles as a non-destructive testing method. The presence of adhesive polymer within synthetic particles did not significantly change its bulk dielectric properties compared to the properties of pulverised quartz sand which was chosen as the host rock mineral. The difference in bulk dielectric properties between synthetic particles characterised as tracers and particles without pyrite mineral was easily measured, along with the presence of depolarisation effect. Tracers were recognisable in both types of microwave heating experiments, which was previously shown by testing particles for their dielectric properties using the Resonant Cavity Method. The microwave heating experiments showed that the mineral texture created was detectable and useful to investigate heat dissipation from mineral grains into host rock mineral and PMMA mixture. The repeatable testing of microwave heating experiments enabled calculation of possible errors in the temperature difference that can be measured on the surface of the particles with proposed experimental settings. This experimental work clearly demonstrates that design of synthetic samples enables the systematic study of selective heating, which could lead to microwave heating process optimisation. The optimised conditions that are necessary for more uniform treatment of variable feed, such real ore particles, can be used for final applicator design. The authors would like to acknowledge the financial support from Centre for Advanced Mineral Separation (CAMS) as a part of SMI-Julius Kruttschnitt Mineral Research Centre.