To improve the beneficiation efficiency of carbonate-bearing iron ore, a selective-flocculation flotation method was developed to separate micro-fine siderite with citric acid and pregelatinized starch, which serve as the dispersant and the flocculant, respectively. Given that pregelatinized starch may have adverse effects on dispersion effect of citric acid, the regulating effects of these two species on the selective flocculation flotation of micro-fine siderite were examined by micro-flotation of artificially mixed ores and molecular dynamics simulations. The analyses of particle-size distribution and aggregation behaviour showed that citric acid effectively decreased the attachment of micro-fine siderite to hematite and quartz. In contrast, micro-fine siderite formed flocs selectively with pregelatinized starch. Molecular dynamics calculations revealed that citric acid and pregelatinized starch could co-adsorb on siderite. Collector molecules of sodium oleate penetrated the adsorption layer and thus were adsorbed onto siderite. However, sodium oleate was unable to penetrate the dense pregelatinized starch layer on hematite. Furthermore, both pregelatinized starch and sodium oleate were barely adsorbed onto quartz. The regulating effects of citric acid and pregelatinized starch improved the selective flocculation flotation of micro-fine siderite. The FeO content of the ore was 5.15%, and this was increased to 20.15% by the above treatment, with a recovery rate of 71.08%.The particle sizes of minerals have a significant effect on flotation [ The predominant minerals in carbonate-bearing iron ores are quartz and hematite [ In recently published studies, we used X-ray microscopy coupled with density functional theory analyses to investigate the inherently favourable sliming mechanism of siderite over other minerals during iron ore processing [ Research describing the flotation of fine and ultrafine minerals has gained increasing attention [ To improve the performance and efficiency of selective flocculation, mineral particles in a pulp must be dispersed thoroughly beforehand [ In this study, the regulating effects of citric acid and pregelatinized starch on the selective flocculation of micro-fine siderite were examined by characterising their particle-size distribution (PSD) and aggregation behaviour. The effects were also computationally modelled by molecular dynamics simulations in terms of molecular-level reagent adsorptions. Finally, the results of these initial theoretical investigations were experimentally verified via micro-flotation tests of artificially mixed ores. Mineral samples of siderite, hematite and quartz were obtained from Liaoning Province in China. High-purity lump ores were sorted by hand from these samples and crushed with a jaw crusher (FRITSCH, Germany) before being ground by a porcelain mill (Wuhan Rock Equipment Manufacturing Co. LTD, China) as separate samples. Particles smaller than 74 μm were collected. The purification of hematite and siderite was performed using a shaking table and a magnetic separator (Shanghai Sile Instrument Inc., China), respectively. Acid pickling was used to eliminate surface contamination and remove impurities from quartz. Finally, quartz, hematite and siderite samples with purities of 99%, 95% and 87%, respectively, were obtained. For the artificial ore mixtures required for the analyses of PSD and aggregation behaviour, the mass ratio of quartz, hematite and micro-fine siderite was set at 5:4:1 [ Analytical grade citric acid, sodium oleate, hydrochloric acid and sodium hydroxide were purchased from Sinopharm Chemical Reagent Co., Ltd. in China. Pregelatinized starch with a purity of 99% was purchased from Henan Jianjie Industrial Co., Ltd. in China. Deionised water was used for all of the tests. Micro-flotation tests were performed in a laboratory flotation machine according to the following procedure. In a 50-mL flotation cell, 6 g of artificially mixed ore was introduced into 30 mL of water. The resulting slurry was stirred for 2 min and then conditioned for another 2 min at an adjusted pH of 6.4. Dispersant (citric acid), flocculant (pregelatinized starch) and collector (sodium oleate) were then added in succession at 2-min intervals. After all of the substances had been added, flotation tests were performed for 4 min. During the tests, the froth was scraped off the top of the cell every 10 s. Both the floated concentrate and the unfloated tailings were dried in an oven at 60 °C. The dried products were weighed and analysed chemically to determine TFe and FeO contents. The FeO content corresponded to the siderite content, and the difference in the Fe content between TFe and FeO corresponded to the hematite content. Three parallel flotation tests were performed to obtain average values. To characterise the relative dispersion and flocculation behaviours, three separate slurry samples were taken from the cell: one before pH adjustment, a second after the addition of citric acid, and a third after the addition of pregelatinized starch. The PSD was determined by a laser diffraction technique using a Malvern particle size analyser (Mastersizer 2000). A particle dynamics analyser fitted with an image-collecting system was used to evaluate the aggregation behaviour of mineral particles in the pulp. During this process, slurry was passed through a chamber under the microscope, and images were recorded for analysis. Molecular dynamics simulations were performed using the Materials Studio 8.0 software package (Accelrys, USA). First, surface models of siderite, hematite and quartz were composed according to the method used in our previous study [ The Amorphous Cell module was used to compose reagent solutions. The packing of these solutions with mineral surfaces was completed using the ‘build layer’ section. Moreover, a 15-Å vacuum layer was added to eliminate periodic boundary effects. The Forcite module was used for dynamics simulation. COMPASS force field and SMART algorithms were applied during all of the calculations. Geometry optimisation was performed at the beginning of the simulations to generate the initial equilibrium configurations. The convergence tolerance values for energy, force and displacement were set at 0.001 kcal·mol Based on previous optimization experiments, the suitable dosage of sodium oleate was determined as 50 mg∙L As shown in Citric acid and pregelatinized starch exert opposite effects in iron ore slurries. To better understand the regulating effects of citric acid and pregelatinized starch on selective flocculation flotation, the dispersion effect of the acid was first investigated. A sample of artificially mixed ore slurry containing no reagents was imaged under a particle dynamics analyser.  After the mineral particles were dispersed by citric acid, pregelatinized starch was added to selectively flocculate the micro-fine siderite. To evaluate the flocculating effects of pregelatinized starch, the PSD of a pure siderite slurry and the artificial ore mixture were analysed in the presence of starch, using the same slurry density. The results of these analyses are shown in The suspensions of artificial ore mixtures containing micro-fine siderite were flocculated selectively due to the bridge-connection effects of pregelatinized starch [ The adsorption of reagents onto minerals changes the minerals' surface properties and therefore alters the interactions between particles [  To reveal whether citric acid and pre-gelatinised starch simultaneously influenced the flotation of hematite and quartz in the selective flocculation flotation of siderite, the adsorption configurations of citric acid, pregelatinized starch and sodium oleate on hematite and quartz were computed and optimized.   Due to variations in the adsorption behaviours of citric acid and pregelatinized starch, the dispersion and flocculation of micro-fine siderite were enhanced. Furthermore, the adsorption of sodium oleate onto the mineral surfaces was influenced by the different molecular arrangements of the adsorbed acid and starch. The combination of these factors ensured that the selective flocculation flotation of micro-fine siderite was successfully regulated. The selective flocculation flotation of micro-fine siderite was regulated by citric acid and pregelatinized starch. Based on the analyses of PSD and aggregation behaviour, citric acid was shown to enhance the dispersion of siderite, hematite and quartz particles in the pulp. After this, the micro-fine siderite was flocculated by pregelatinized starch and the selective flocculation of siderite was realised. The results of micro-flotation experiments showed that citric acid enhanced the selectivity of the flocculation flotation process. The adsorption of the collector sodium oleate onto various mineral surfaces determined the selective flotation of siderite flocs. The adsorption of sodium oleate was further found to be regulated by the molecular arrangements of acid and starch on all of the three mineral surfaces. Citric acid and pregelatinized starch were co-adsorbed onto siderite. As the starch was adsorbed onto siderite according to the ‘tail model’, sodium oleate was able to penetrate the adsorption layer and was easily adsorbed onto siderite. As a result, siderite flocs could float. In contrast, due to the chain-model adsorption of pregelatinized starch on the hematite surface, sodium oleate was unable to be adsorbed onto hematite, and the flotation of hematite was therefore depressed. Additionally, pregelatinized starch and sodium oleate were discovered to not be adsorbed onto quartz, which indicated that the flotation of quartz did not occur. The combination of these factors allowed the selective flocculation flotation of micro-fine siderite to be realized.  The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. This work was supported by the