3D unstructured grids for heterogeneous and anisotropic compositional reservoir simulation in conjunction with an element-based finite-volume method (EbFVM) are presented. The approximate equations of the EbFVM adopted in this work are obtained from integration of the compositional material balance equations directly to each element type. Using this approach, the final approximation equations do not impose any limitation on the element shape. The methodology used in this work is suitable for modeling complex features of reservoirs such as irregular boundaries, fractures, faults, inclined and distorted wells. The mesh for 3D dimensional domains can be built of hexahedrons, tetrahedrons, pyramids and prisms, or a combination of these elements. According to the number of vertices, each element is divided into sub-elements and then mass balance equations for each component are integrated along each interface of the sub-elements. The finite-volume conservation equations are assembled from the contribution of all the elements that share a vertex creating a cell vertex approach. It is expected that the approach employed in this work will have less grid orientation effect than the one using Cartesian meshes since more gridblocks are used in the approximated equations. The results for several compositional reservoir simulation case studies are presented to demonstrate the application of the method.From discretization point of view, unstructured grids are more flexible than most grids employed in petroleum reservoir simulation (Cartesian and regular corner point meshes). The application of unstructured grids in petroleum reservoir simulation started about two decades ago by The ideas of In this study, we investigated the EbFVM in conjunction with 3D heterogeneous and anisotropic reservoirs using hexahedron, tetrahedron, prism, and pyramid elements. Except for absolute permeability tensor and porosity, all the physical parameters are evaluated at the vertices of each element rendering a cell vertex approach. We also assume that each element has constant porosity and permeability tensors, but the values of these properties can change from element to element. As each element has a constant permeability tensor, all the fluxes along each integration point employ the same absolute permeability. General Purpose Adaptive Simulator (GPAS) was developed at the Center for Petroleum and Geosystems Engineering at The University of Texas at Austin for the simulation of enhanced recovery processes. GPAS is a fully implicit, multiphase/multi-component simulator which can handle the simulation of several enhanced oil recovery processes. This simulator is divided into two main modules: Framework and EOScomp. Framework is responsible for input/output and memory allocation, while EOScomp handles the computations for flash calculation and solution of non-linear equations arising from the discretization of the governing equations. Details for EOScomp and Framework modules can be found in Isothermal, multi-component, multiphase fluid flow in a porous medium can be described using three types of equations: the component-material balance equation, the phase equilibrium equation, and the equation for constraining phase saturations and component concentrations ( The material balance equation for the In Eq. The first partial derivative of the total Gibbs free energy with respect to the independent variables gives the equality of component fugacities among all phases, In the EbFVM, each element is divided into sub-elements. These sub-elements will be called sub-control volumes. The conservation equation, Eq. To evaluate the first and second terms of Eq. Using the shape functions, any physical properties or positions can be evaluated inside an element as To evaluate the gradients, it is necessary to obtain the derivatives of the shape functions relative to where det( Further details of the expressions given by Eq. Hexahedron: Tetrahedron: Prism: Pyramid: It is important to mention that det( Substituting Eqs. where the superscript Eq. This section presents four simulation case studies using the EbFVM approach. The first case study was used to validate the implementation of each one of the four element types used to model the reservoir geometry. The results of this case study are validated with the GPAS simulator using Cartesian meshes. Case 1 is the simulation of six-component gas injection in a quarter-of-five spot with the simultaneous flow of gas and oil. The second case study also refers to gas injection in a quarter-of-five spot, but now an anisotropic and heterogeneous reservoir has been considered. Except for the porosity and absolute permeability field, all of the previous data presented for Case 1 were used. The In order to present the three hydrocarbon phase capabilities of GPAS simulator, the third case study refers to a fluid flow simulation of three hydrocarbon phases in equilibrium (two liquid phases and a gas phase). The reservoir again refers to a gas injection in a quarter-of-five spot. The last case study refers to a simulation of a gas injection in an irregular reservoir. Except for the reservoir dimension and absolute permeabilities, we used the same properties shown in  The results in terms of volumetric rates of oil and gas rates at standard conditions obtained for Case 2 are shown in The results for Case 3, the three hydrocarbon phase, homogeneous, and isotropic reservoir, in terms of volumetric rates at standard conditions of oil and gas obtained in conjunction with hexahedron element are shown in  An element-based finite volume approach for 3D compositional reservoir simulation using unstructured grids based on tetrahedron, prism, pyramid, and hexahedron elements was presented. The results for the gas flooding simulation using the mentioned elements were compared to the results of the original formulation of the GPAS simulator in conjunction with Cartesian meshes. The results of GPAS using fine Cartesian meshes were close to that obtained using the EbFVM approach implemented and tested in the present work. Based on the results presented in this work, the EbFVM method was less prone to the grid orientation effect, but according to the results presented, it can be verified that the numerical error produced by tetrahedron and pyramid elements is larger than by the hexahedron and prism elements. When these results were compared to the ones obtained using GPAS Cartesian grids, it was observed that the simulation using Cartesian grids requires many more gridblocks than the EbFVM approach. In conclusion, the EbFVM approach was tested for several complex reservoir simulation problems and based on the results presented the method was shown to be an excellent method for solving such problems. This work was conducted with the support of the