In evaluating the impacts of products and processes, life cycle assessment has taken a prominent role. Missing data, however, continue to affect the completeness and accuracy of such environmental assessment tools. Data are missing for many reasons, for specific processes, at random in existing inventories or worse, nonexistent. This article proposes a statistical approach to address the lack of data in life cycle inventories and applies it to hydroelectric power plants. Among large power production technologies, hydroelectricity varies considerably in scale and from one site to another. The procedure relies on relationships between the technical properties of a system or process, in this case hydropower plants, and the embodied material and energy flows in construction, operation and eventually dismantling. With highly flexible estimators known as kriging, predicting the value of material and energy flows becomes more accurate. From relatively small sample sizes, kriging allows better estimation without averaging out any of the observed data. Similarly, parameter estimation and model validation can be performed through cross validation which assumes very little on the data itself. Calculations of mean absolute errors for various forms of kriging and regression show that the former estimates the values of material and energy flows more accurately than the latter, more so in cases of incomplete data. Accounting for several technical characteristics as well as joint estimation of covariate material and energy flows provide different ways to further reduce the errors and improve the completeness of inventories where data are missing. The specificity of hydroelectric power makes existing inventory data largely unrepresentative and kriging offers new possibilities to increase the reliability of estimated, representative data.Missing data in life cycle assessments (LCAs) are one of the main challenges to improving their quality and reliability ( Technological developments make assessments based on passed information relatively uncertain. Among the primary sources of energy, however, the best sites and highest quality resources have already been used up. Generating electricity from hydropower stations is a relevant example in many respects. Two main trends can be identified, first the continued construction of large hydro dams such as in the province of Quebec, Canada, at increasingly high costs. With two hydropower plants producing close to 1% of world hydroelectric output, Quebec is a quintessential example of large hydro. A second trend is the renewed development of pump back and storage facilities, particularly in Switzerland, Portugal and Austria ( Life cycle inventory, as defined by international standards, requires the quantification of material and energy flows as well as emissions crossing a system's boundaries ( When ignored, missing data in LCI introduces a bias towards lower impacts and therefore favors the least documented processes or products. Also, the lack of (specific) data has been identified as an important source of uncertainty ( Without generic production facilities, compiling the LCI of a kWh from given hydropower plants, or equivalently that of processes on similarly large scales, would require considerable data collection efforts. Even if data were technically available, access often runs into confidentiality issues. LCI databases such as ecoinvent are not necessarily representative of major processes (ecoinvent Centre 2009). The data on hydroelectricity for example are scarce and refer to a few alpine dams, adjusting emissions for reservoir location, nothing on the scales of dams built in China, Brazil, Ethiopia or Canada. Moreover the size and scale of hydropower seldom translates into equivalently small or large impacts ( Although substitution of missing data for more representative values can be justified against ignoring emissions, statistical estimators have been relatively successful at evaluating data missing at random or complete lack of data ( Regression and other linear methods have been applied to inventory analysis, including for electricity generation ( The rated power of hydroelectric plants depends on two main factors, the water flow and the hydraulic head or height difference between water intake and turbine, according to the formula: Despite the specificity of every power plant and reservoir, a set of characteristics was chosen based primarily on data availability. Given the background description above, The construction of large hydroelectric power plants requires the temporary diversion and permanent impoundment of a river. Dams and dikes increase the storage capacity and raise the hydraulic head of a power plant. They may consist of concrete at various concentrations of cement as well as earth or rock filled dams with either clay or asphalt cores or concrete slab surfaces for imperviousness. Spillways are part of both run-of-river and reservoir plants and dimensioned according to river regime to evacuate flood waters. The line between large and small hydropower projects is somewhat arbitrary. Although nameplate capacity is often the defining criterion, no single variable is necessarily more important than another. The Manicouagan reservoir for example is among the world's largest but only about a quarter of its volume can be used for electrical generation purposes. Installed capacity and annual production are useful to evaluate plants which continually operate at low capacity factors. Technical characteristics can be identified for many different processes, including chemical manufacturing ( By and large the main material and energy flows involved in hydroelectric power construction and operation are cement and concrete, steel of various grades for structures and equipment, explosives, and fuels and lubricants for machinery and equipment. They are listed as inventory flows in the data available online. Their provision and the construction phase itself often account for an important share of hydropower's environmental impact ( Borrowed from spatial statistics, kriging distinguishes itself on several accounts from other linear estimators. Clearly no cartesian points exist in LCIs such that the characteristic variables described in This particular combination reflects technological systems more appropriately than the estimator with constant mean as shown by other forms of variable means ( If deterministic and random components as well as covariance functions impart great flexibility to kriging, another key advantage is the multivariate estimator, or cokriging. Multivariate kriging enables the estimation of primary variables using data from secondary variables simultaneously ( Small sample sizes (here The results draw upon the characteristics of hydropower plants, large systems with widely different properties and affected by data scarcity, but apply elsewhere. Besides secondary data sources, namely the ecoinvent database and Itaipu assessment, primary data were collected to achieve a reasonable sample size with characteristic variables in the ranges shown in Because of different scales the data were normalized, dividing variables by their mean values. Moreover, material flows were selected to compare the complete case – data on cement and steel are available for most observations – with data missing at random, excavated volumes and explosives have approximately 30% of missing values. The important difference between Testing for the error reducing potential of accounting for several system characteristics with kriging, the one and two dimensional cases are compared below. Intuitively, the more variables from which to estimate missing values the better. Kriging and cokriging MAEs in one and two dimensions are presented in The benefits of accounting for multiple characteristics are not straightforward. Annual production and installed capacity are positively and significantly correlated in this case whereas annual production and hydraulic head are not. From the right side of A direct application of these results consist of estimating inventory flows required in the construction and operation of hydropower plants totaling 1550 MW and commissioned for the year 2020 by the provincial utility in Quebec, Canada. The project involves the construction of four dams and corresponding reservoirs covering 279.2 km Until the project is completed and operating at capacity, nothing can be said about the precision of either of these estimates. However, and despite differences of up to 20% between estimators, the error calculations above show that kriging will be more accurate on average. The example in The lack of data in life cycle inventory affects subsequent steps in the assessment and represents a significant source of uncertainty in the results. Data might be missing for specific processes or products, at random in existing inventories or nonexistent. In this article, the authors show how missing data on material and energy flows can be better estimated based on the design and operating characteristics of hydropower plants. Such characteristics can be identified for other systems and processes and shift the data collection efforts away from inaccessible or unavailable inventory data. Indeed, a statistical approach differs substantially from the conventional process models but is complementary in many respects. As elsewhere in statistical problems, the larger the sample size the greater the significance of the results but with kriging results can be conclusive from relatively small sample ( The example of electricity generation is convenient because of the variety of processes yielding the exact same product among other reasons, there are limitations with respect to kriging which are more general. The combination of deterministic and random components in the model described above suits industrial processes but remains more appropriate for interpolation than extrapolation purposes. In other words, parametric models gradually converge towards the mean of the observations beyond the ranges of characteristics such as those shown in The versatility of kriging allows for better estimation especially in the absence of complete data and the complete absence of some data with the use of covariates. The results above show that when data are missing at random, univariate kriging has consistently lower mean absolute errors than regression with its multivariate equivalent being even more accurate in some cases. Similarly, when comparing actual estimates, the standard deviations are lower for kriging than they are for regression. Two potential improvements over process-based models or linear estimators, and future research objectives, are first to incorporate the uncertainties in the observations and translate them into that of the estimates. Second, to make statistical estimators for missing data more accessible or at least acceptable among practitioners. Careful analysis of the data as well as the additional steps kriging requires, are welcome but also obstacles to the automation of the procedure in life cycle inventory and in other material and energy flow analysis. To conclude, the approach presented in this article contributes not only to the estimate of missing data but also to much needed representative data which lack from existing inventory databases, particularly in the case of hydroelectricity. The authors would like to thank the industrial partners of the The following is/are the supplementary data related to this article: Supplementary data related to this article can be found at