The synthesis of nano-sized CeO2 powder was investigated via mechanochemical reactions between hydrate cerium chloride and sodium hydroxide as the starting materials. The process was followed by a subsequent calcination procedure. Characterization of as-synthesized powder was performed using X-ray diffraction, FTIR spectroscopy, Brunner–Emmett–Teller (BET) nitrogen gas absorption, scanning electron microscopy (SEM) and particle size analyzer (PSA). The precursors were milled for different milling times and then were subjected to different heat treatment procedure at variable temperatures from 100 to 700°C. According to the results, milling time and calcination temperatures induce paramountal effects on crystallite size and surface area of as-synthesized powders. In addition, the average activation energy for the growth of nanocrystals during calcination was determined to be about 12.53kJ/mol, suggesting the influence of interfacial reactions on the crystallite growth during the calcination procedure.Nanostructures and nanomaterials have significantly different physical or chemical properties compared to their ultrafine or micron sized counterparts due to their greater surface area which provides them with a higher reactivity. These fantastic properties have attracted interests in nano materials for researchers and investigators Cerium dioxide is an attractive oxide ceramic due to its interesting properties such as good chemical stability as well as high relative permittivity. This ceramic material represents a fluorite like cubic structure with the space group Production of ceria nanoparticles has been extensively investigated, since these materials display unique properties as a typical result of the size reduction to nanometer range. For instance, one of the most important variations, resulted from shifting the size to the nanometer range is the transformation of atomic structure and broadening of band gap in nano ceria Mechanochemical synthesis is one of the promising methods to prepare nanosized materials. This method which combines the benefits of both chemical and physical routes, has the potential to fabricate final products directly through the milling stage or after a subsequent heat treatment at low temperature. A typical displacement reaction, as shown below, occurs during mechanochemical synthesis: In the present work, we have reported the preparation of ceria nanopowders using mechanochemical method by employing cerium chloride and sodium hydroxide as the starting materials. The aim of this study is to investigate the effect of milling time and subsequent heat treatment on crystallite size, surface area and particle size distribution of ceria nano powders. Moreover, the optimal conditions were identified for the synthesis of nano ceria powder in this method. In addition, effect of milling time on the activation energy needed for nanocrystal growth in the synthesized powder was investigated. CeCl  It can be seen that the cerium oxide peaks appeared after 5 The extra amount of NaCl, applied as the reactant, can be explained by this fact that the presence of NaCl in the mixture of raw powders could play the role of an inhibitor against further particle agglomeration during milling and calcination process  Results of the FTIR test for the milled powders for 180 By using Debye-Scherer equation  BET method was performed to determine the specific surface area of powders.  SEM micrographs of different magnifications from the powders milled for 5 and 180 The straight line fitted in The results of particle size distribution for powders calcined at 500 Considering the particle size distribution, on the other hand, one can recognize that the milled powders in 5 and 30 Ceria nano powders were synthesized via a solid-state displacement reaction between CeCl