We study the thermal equilibrium properties of tiling models for decagonal quasicrystals using Monte Carlo simulations. Two-dimensional (2D) rhombus tilings with a ten-fold quasiperiodic potential are used to model the layers in the decagonal quasicrystals where the potential mimics interlayer interactions from the neighboring layers. When the long wavelength density wave with the ten-fold symmetry is used for the potential, the ground state becomes Penrose tiling. At high temperature, equilibrium configurations are locally similar to the maximal random tiling indicating almost free proliferation of phasons as in the unlocked phason phase. However, their phason-space fluctuations seem to remain finite indicating the long-range quasiperiodic ordering, whereas the logarithmic divergence of phason-space fluctuations is expected in an unlocked phase 2D tiling.Since the discovery of quasicrystals in 1984 However, the phasons may also appear in energetically stabilized quasicrystals. Phasons and phonons are low-energy elastic modes associated with broken translational symmetry of quasiperiodic system. In the long-wavelength limits, phonons represent uniform translations while phasons correspond to rearrangements of atoms, or flipping of tiles from one perfect quasiperiodic lattice to another. For energetically stabilized quasicrystals, there are two different phases in phason elasticity: the locked phase and the unlocked phase. In the locked phases, elastic free energy F has the form In this paper, we consider 2D rhombus tilings with a ten-fold quasiperiodic potential. The real 3D decagonal quasicrystals can be considered as a periodic stack of decagonal quasicrystalline planes. Therefore, the quasiperiodic layer in the real quasicrystal material would have interlayer interactions with the neighboring layers. An external quasiperiodic potential is considered to mimic this interlayer interaction from the neighboring layers. Since the neighboring layers also have decagonal symmetries, we choose the long wavelength density wave like potential, The amplitude of wave vectors, In real material, there would be interactions between atoms in the same layer in addition to the interlayer interactions. However, to focus on the effects of interlayer interactions, we do not consider any intralayer interactions between tiles and we therefore assume that all tile configurations have the same energy except the external quasiperiodic potential energy. (Of course, by using the tiles, we have assumed strong atomic interactions in the plane that prevent the breaking up of atomic clusters corresponding to the tile itself.) Hence, if we turned off the quasiperiodic potential, the equilibrium configuration would be a 2D maximal random tiling. When we turn on the potential of The details of our models and simulation procedures are presented in the next section. We use a series of periodic approximants to the rhombus Penrose tiling and the hexagon flip as a basic Monte Carlo movement step. In Our system is a 2D tiling with decagonal symmetry, constructed from two types of Penrose rhombi (fat and skinny rhombi). All close-packed tile configurations are allowed with no interaction energy between tiles. As a toy model, we put atoms at all vertices of the tiling and the energy of the system is determined by the external potential energy of these atoms: To get equilibrium configurations, we use conventional Metropolis Monte Carlo methods with the hexagon flip as a basic Monte Carlo movement step We then measure the phason space fluctuations which is the measure of the long-range order in the system and perform the R-dependence test  Using a Monte Carlo simulation, we studied a 2D decagonal rhombus tiling model with a ten-fold quasiperiodic potential whose ground state configuration is a perfect Penrose tiling. At high temperature, local tile configurations look like those of maximal random tilings and phason fluctuations are freely created indicating the system is in the unlocked-phason phase. However, they seem to pertain to the long-range quasiperiodic ordering with finite phason-space fluctuation while unlocked-phase 2D tilings have only quasi-long-range quasiperiodic ordering. The almost free hexagon flips with finite phason-space fluctuation are similar to the dynamics of a layer in the unlocked-phason phase of a 3D tiling. We speculate that the quasiperiodic potential of This work was supported by Creative Research Initiatives of the Korea Ministry of Science and Technology. H.C.J. was supported by a Korea Research Foundation Grant (KRF-2000-015-DP0108).