Biological removal of reduced sulfur compounds in energy-rich gases is an increasingly adopted alternative to conventional physicochemical processes, because of economical and environmental benefits. A lab-scale biotrickling filter reactor for the treatment of high-H2S-loaded gases was developed and previously proven to effectively treat H2S concentrations up to 12,000 ppmv at gas contact times between 167 and 180 s. In the present work, a detailed study on selected operational aspects affecting this system was carried out with the objective to optimize performance. The start-up phase was studied at an inlet H2S concentration of 1000 ppmv (loading of 28 g H2S m−3 h−1) and inoculation with sludge from a municipal wastewater treatment plant. After reactor startup, the inlet H2S concentration was doubled and the influence of different key process parameters was tested. Results showed that there was a significant reduction of the removal efficiency at gas contact times below 120 s. Also, mass transfer was found to be the main factor limiting H2S elimination, whereas performance was not influenced by the bacterial colonization of the packed column after the initial startup. The effect of gas supply shutdowns for up to 5 days was shown to be irrelevant on process performance if the trickling liquid recirculation was kept on. Also, the trickling liquid velocity was investigated and found to influence sulfate production through a better use of the supplied dissolved oxygen. Finally, short-term pH changes revealed that the system was quite insensitive to a pH drop, but was markedly affected by a pH increase, affecting both the biological activity and the removal of H2S. Altogether, the results presented and discussed herein provide new insight and operational data on H2S removal from energy gases in biotrickling filters.Energy rich off-gases such as biogas are sometimes not used for electric power generation due to the presence of corrosive compounds, such as reduced sulfur compounds (RSC) ( At present, biogas energy recovery is becoming more and more interesting due to increasing environmental and economical constraints associated to fossil fuels. Furthermore, an increasing number of solid and liquid wastes management facilities (biomethanation plants) are being installed with biogas production as the main economical benefit. So far, biological sulfide removal has usually been applied to odor control ( After absorption, treatment and biodegradation of H Also, depending on the redox conditions, further oxidation to sulfate can take place if sulfide is limited but elemental sulfur (S All four reactions above result in pH changes, as do parallel abiotic reactions such as oxidation of sulfide to thiosulfate (Eq. Also, abiotic polysulfide formation and oxidation under alkaline conditions as described by In a preliminary study ( As a follow up, this study was directed toward optimizing the start-up phase using different inoculation methods and an improved reactor design. A second objective was to acquire a deeper knowledge of the influence of key process parameters when operating the system at less extreme conditions (lower H A lab-scale prototype reactor described in details elsewhere ( Metered amounts of H Continuous monitoring of outlet H On-line liquid phase monitoring included pH and oxidation-reduction potential (ORP) (PH 28, Crison Instruments, Spain) and dissolved oxygen (DO) (oxi340i, WTW, Germany) measurements. Also, daily samples of the purge flow were taken for ionic sulfur species and total inorganic carbon (TIC) analysis, using an ICS-1000 Ion Chromatography system with an IonPac AS9-HC column (Dionex Corporation) and a TIC-TOC 1020 analyzer (IO Analytical) respectively. Biomass concentration in the liquid phase was measured as mg N L Reactor inoculation was carried out using aerobic sludge from a local municipal wastewater treatment plant (MWWTP) diluted 1:1 with MM, thus having a final volatile suspended solids (VSS) concentration of 1.9 g L The maximum elimination capacity (EC) and the effect of reduced EBRTs were assessed 1 and 12 months after reactor inoculation in order to asses the evolution of the bioreactor treatment capacity over time. The EBRT was decreased stepwise hourly from 180 s down to 30 s through gas flow increases at a constant inlet H To test the effect of gas supply shutdowns, the biogas mimic supply was stopped while the air flow, liquid recirculation, the purge and the make-up water flows were all kept constant. Since inorganic carbon in a full-scale system would be normally supplied via the gas, the Finally, short-term, large pH variations were introduced in the system, using either HCl or NaOH 1 M and the pH controller, to assess the impact of pH shocks. Initially, a pH drop down to 2.5 was imposed and kept constant for a period of 34 h prior to resuming normal pH conditions (pH 6–6.5). Afterward, a pH increase up to 9.5 was imposed and maintained for 24 h before returning the pH to its normal setpoint. In both cases, a shorter HRT of 19 ± 1 h was used in order to shorten the reactor response time. After 1 h of operation at 1000 ppm Thus, a very short start-up phase of only 2 days when based on H Overall, this results show that specific sulfide oxidizing cultures are not needed in order to start-up a biological sulfide treatment system despite what has been reported by other authors (  Examination of The absence of sulfide accumulation during the high-load periods (LR up to 334 g H A maximum EC of 126 g H The same determination of EC was repeated after one year of reactor operation (run 2). A 14% increase in the maximum EC was observed, reaching an average value of 144 ± 4 g H The TLV is an important parameter for the attachment (and shear) of biomass onto the packing material, for proper gas-liquid mass transfer and for S The increase in TLV above typical values for biological systems (1–12 m h Starvation periods were implemented to simulate industrial operation with short-term shutdowns. The gas supply was discontinued for 2.5 and 5 days and the response of the reactor was monitored. Only a very small and brief reduction of the RE was detected during the first hours after resuming the gas supply. The maximum RE reduction was 4% after the 2.5-day stop (results not shown) and 7% after the 5-day shutdown ( Shortly after the H Interestingly, a sulfur mass balance during the starvation period reveals that actual sulfate concentrations were 30–40% higher than expected from simple dilution by the make-up water ( These results show that H Complete biological oxidation of sulfide leads to protons production and thus pH changes. However, it is not known to what extent, pH variations need to be controlled to ensure stable bioreactor operation. Since a pH control failure (lack or excess of control actuation) is relatively plausible during industrial operation, the reactor response to large but fast pH variations was studied. On day 135 the reactor pH was forced to drop to 2.5 for a period of 34 h. Later, after 60 h of operation at normal conditions (i.e., pH 6–6.5), the pH was increased to 9.5 for a 24 h period. As shown in The high pH test was conducted next. Immediately after increasing the pH to 9.5 for 24 h, a sharp drop in the ORP occurred indicating an accumulation of sulfide ( This demonstrates that the bioreactor was much more susceptible to high pH exposure than to low pH changes. Such behavior can be explained by the fact that acidification is the natural consequence of sulfide oxidation and, therefore, most sulfide oxidizers are more tolerant to acidic conditions than to alkaline conditions ( A detailed study of the operational aspects affecting the biological sweetening of energy gases mimics was carried out in a lab-scale biotrickling filter. Results showed that: Detailed monitoring of the process with on-line H Inoculation of the biotrickling filter with MWWTP sludge led to a very fast (3 days) start-up therefore showing that, provided certain conditions, it is not necessary to obtain a specific culture of sulfide oxidizers to inoculate an H The EBRT (so reactor volume) can be importantly reduced without significantly affecting the removal of H Gas supply shutdowns for up to 5 days had little effect on the biotrickling filter performance after resuming normal operation. Possibly, controlling pH, addition of make-up water coupled with biological oxidation of S A high TLV is recommended because it favors sulfate production through a better use of the oxygen supplied. A short (34 h) but wide (down to 2.5) pH drop was much less aggressive to the biological activity and overall reactor performance than a short (24 h) but also wide (up to 9.5) pH rise. Even so, the robustness of the system allowed for a full recovery after about 48 h of normal operation. The