Recent improvements performed on hard ferrite magnets with the Sr1−x
                     La
                        x
                     Fe12−y
                     Co
                        y
                     O19 composition are presented. The influence of the composition on both structural and magnetic properties of samples with y=x and y/x=0.75 is emphasized. Our investigations have allowed to optimize the permanent magnet properties of La–Co substituted hard ferrite magnets. The optimum composition contains more lanthanum than cobalt at the benefit of both lower irreversible losses and lower raw material costs.Since their discovery in the 1950s, the ceramic permanent magnets based on the magnetoplumbite hexaferrite phase (M-phase), AFe To fulfill the market requirements, ferrite magnets with improved magnetic properties have always been developed. The latest breakthrough is based on partial substitutions with rare earth elements, preferably lanthanum, and with transition metals, preferably cobalt, using a Sr The intrinsic magnetic properties (anisotropy field, saturation magnetization) being strongly dependent on the atomic magnetism, investigations on the sublattice occupation of Co In this paper, we present the recent improvements performed on hard ferrite magnets with the Sr Sr The magnetic properties were measured on sintered magnets. Magnetic measurements were performed using standard techniques. Anisotropy field measurements were performed using the SPD technique. The structural analyses were performed on powders as obtained after step (ii), using X-ray diffraction (XRD) and Mössbauer spectrometry. XRD analysis was performed by reflection with a Siemens D5000 system in Bragg–Brentano The magnetic properties of the Sr Thus, La–Co addition in the same proportions induces a significant improvement of the intrinsic magnetic properties. However, it leads to a decrease of the rectangularity of the demagnetizing curves, which is attributed to the presence of soft magnetic phases resulting from incomplete calcination. Two methods allow to improve the rectangularity: the use of fine powders (to achieve a perfectly homogeneous mixing down to the particle size), and the optimization of the chemical composition. The beneficial influence of these two methods is shown in The phase composition of the samples with The cationic distribution of Co XRD analysis of samples with According to XRD analysis, the Mössbauer spectra of the Different scientific investigations (Mössbauer spectrometry, X-ray diffraction, magnetic measurements, …) have allowed to optimize the permanent magnet properties of La–Co substituted hard ferrite magnets with the Sr