In this paper we are proposing a new type of bioreactor for the biological oxidation of refractory gold ores. In order to reduce the intraparticle friction, to reduce the energy consumption and increase the volumetric rate of oxygen transfer, the sulfide particles are entrapped into the pores of an inert material (non-woven textile). It was named immobilized ore bioreactor. It has been shown that this reactor can handle up to 40% w/v of pyrite, which is twice the typical value for classic slurry bioreactors. The volumetric rate of pyrite oxydation by Thiobacillus ferrooxidans in the new reactor was 2.5 times higher than that in a slurry bioreactor operating under similar initial conditions.Due to the depletion of rich gold ores, the attention of gold mining companies is switching towards low-grade, refractory gold-bearing ores. The gold in refractory ores is encapsulated as fine particles (sometimes at a molecular level) in the crystal structure of the sulfide (typically pyrite with or without arsenopyrite) matrix. This makes it impossible to extract a significant amount of refractory gold by cyanidation since the cyanide solution cannot penetrate the pyrite/arsenopyrite crystals and dissolve gold particles, even after fine grinding Roasting produces off-gases containing sulfur dioxide and arsenic trioxide, which require costly treatment. Both pressure oxidation and oxidation by nitric acid require high pressure, high temperature and/or corrosion-resistant materials The biological pretreatment of refractory gold ores is based on the ability of some microorganisms such as The biological treatment is carried out at temperatures between 20°C and 40°C and under atmospheric pressure. It is considered to be cheaper and more environmentally friendly than other methods Virtually all of the bioreactors presently used for the oxidation of gold-bearing sulfide ores are slurry reactors, i.e. aerated vessels containing ore slurry which are equipped with mechanical mixer The above discussion indicates that both a substantial increase in the process efficiency and decrease in energy consumption can be achieved if sulfide biooxidation is carried out under low shear stress conditions and without the need to suspend the pyrite particles in liquid. The main goal of this work is to develop and test an innovative low-shear, non-slurry bioprocess system for biological sulfide oxidation. The interparticle friction observed in a slurry reactor can be eliminated by fixing the solid particles in space (immobilization). This idea was realized in the recently proposed concept of The concept of soil immobilization was realized in the immobilized solids bioreactor The application of the concept of soil immobilization to the biological treatment of recalcitrant soil contaminants (where the process efficiency was also limited by the particle–particle friction causing detachment of microorganisms from soil particles) resulted in an increase of the process efficiency by 1 to 3 orders of magnitude compared to any other process reported in the literature (most of which are based on slurry reactors) The main goal of this work is to apply the concept of soil immobilization to biologically assisted gold processing, which is based on the pyrite oxidation by microorganisms such as The immobilized ore bioreactor was a vertical cylindric glass vessel with a diameter of 4.7 cm and a height of 37 cm. Its working volume was 500 ml. The cylinder was divided vertically into two semicylindrical sections by means of a porous matrix composed of one or more layers of non-woven polyester textile The slurry bioreactor was a cylindrical vessel with an ID of 10 cm and a height of 13 cm. Its working volume was 500 ml. It was equipped with an 8 cm long magnetic, Teflon-covered, metallic rod. It was rotated by a magnetic stirrer, which was placed below the reactor. The reactor was aerated using the same equipment as the immobilized ore bioreactor. The mineral salts used were analytical grade. The pyrite used was purchased from Ward Natural Science (St. Catharines, Ontario). It was crushed mechanically and only the fraction below 250 μm was used. The concentrations of ferrous and ferric ions in the bioreactor were measured using a new spectrophotometric method using sulfosalicilic acid as an indicator The concentration of solid particles in liquid was measured in a sample of 1 ml, withdrawn from the reactor and replaced by 1 ml of distilled water. The sample was placed for 15 min in a test tube to separate the solid particles from the liquid by settling. The sediment was dried at 100°C for 5 h and weighed after cooling down. The total amount of immobilized pyrite particles was calculated from the difference between the amount of pyrite particles added to the reactor and the amount of particles suspended in liquid. The immobilized ore bioreactor was first studied from a hydrodynamic point of view. We studied the dynamics of pyrite immobilization into the pores of the porous matrix. It was found previously that non-woven textile is very appropriate as a porous matrix. The textile used in this work was described in details elsewhere Our first experiments showed that if more than 31 g of ground pyrite was added to the reactor at once, they could not be kept in suspension by air bubbles because of the high density, and thus, high settling velocity of pyrite particles. Therefore, pyrite was added to the reactor step-wise. Initially 30 g of pyrite were added, followed by the addition of 3 g every minute during the first 5 min. After that, 3 g of pyrite were added each 5 min. In the first experiment, the matrix contained a single layer of non-woven textile. During the repeated addition of pyrite, it was visually observed that the process of pyrite immobilization was very fast: liquid became transparent in 10 to 15 s after the addition of pyrite. The concentration of pyrite in suspension, measured experimentally 1 min after the addition of pyrite, was found to be practically zero. However, after the total addition of 43 g of pyrite, its concentration in slurry increased to 10 g/l. The addition of a new 3 g resulted in the formation of sediment at the reactor bottom. At this point we assumed that the textile matrix was saturated with pyrite and could not accept more solid particles. The maximum amount of pyrite immobilized was studied as a function of the air flow rate. It can be seen Similar experiments were performed for the case of two, three, four and five layers of textile in the matrix. The air flow rate was 30 l/h. The relationship between the number of textile layers and the maximum amount of pyrite immobilized is shown in Therefore, in addition to the absence of intraparticle friction, the new reactor allows to treat two times more pyrite per unit volume of the reactor, compared to the slurry process. The results of our hydrodynamic study also show that the process of immobilization of pyrite is fast, but is has to be performed by a step-wise addition of pyrite. In order to add pyrite in one step, a tapered vessel geometry should be used. The number of textile layers (4) and the quantity of pyrite (100 g) in this study was determined according to the results of the hydrodynamics of pyrite immobilization given in the previous section. The microbial culture was activated by aerobic cultivation with ferrous sulfate as an energy source. Once activated, the culture medium was used as an inoculate for the immobilized ore bioreactor. The bioreactor was filled with 450 ml of 9K nutrient salts solution plus 50 ml of inoculate. After the aeration started (30 l air/h), 100 g of pyrite were added to the bioreactor and immobilized in the textile matrix according to the procedure described in the above section. The concentrations of ferrous and total iron as well as pH in liquid were measured in time. In order to compare the rate of pyrite biooxidation in immobilized ore bioreactor with these in a slurry bioreactor, a second, slurry bioreactor was operated in parallel. The conditions in the slurry bioreactor were the same as those in the immobilized soil bioreactor, including the liquid volume, amount of pyrite, air flow rate, liquid composition, inoculate volume, temperature, initial pH. The only difference was in the amount of energy consumption since slurry bioreactor required intensive mechanical mixing, and therefore, higher energy input. Unfortunately, the exact amount of energy input by the mechanical mixer cannot be measured in the case of magnetic stirring. The amount of iron dissolved from pyrite in both bioreactors as a function of time is shown in A new concept for the biological oxidation of sulfide minerals is proposed in this study. This concept was realized in a novel type of bioreactor named the immobilized ore bioreactor. The main advantages of this reactor are: elimination of the intraparticle friction and elimination of the power input required to keep solid particles in suspension. This novel bioreactor process can be used in different biohydrometallurgical processes, and especially for biologically assisted gold processing. In order to successfully scale up this bioprocess, it will be necessary to conduct additional experiments, for example, on the design of the solids entrapment and detachment to/from the porous support. This work was supported by the Natural Sciences and Engineering Council of Canada and the Academic Development Fund of the University of Western Ontario.