In traditional industrial production, cathode copper is co-prepared by both the pyrometallurgical process and wet electrolytic refining method. In this work, a non-dissolving electrode lead dioxide was used as an anode in an electrolysis experiment, and copper oxide was added to maintain the concentration of copper ions in the electrolyte to improve the quality of cathode copper and current efficiency in the electrolytic copper process. The method could avoid energy consumption in the pyrometallurgical process. The effect of three kinds of electrolytes on the macroscopic morphology, microstructure, current efficiency, purity, and crystal composition of the cathode copper was analyzed. In the electrolysis experiment, Cu2O and CuO phases were observed in the cathode copper by using electrolyte A for a long time. With the use of electrolyte B, the purity of the products did not meet the standard of the cathode copper. With the use of electrolyte C, the products prepared by electrolysis four times for 8 h or 2 h each time met the standards for morphology, current efficiency, and purity. The average current efficiency of electrolysis for 8 h was 96.33% with the new non-dissolved anode, which was 2.58% higher than that of the traditional dissolved anode. Moreover, the electrolyte can be recycled after use with the improved electrolyte and process. This new process can save energy and reduce material consumption for copper production in the hydrometallurgical industry. In addition, this paper provides a new method of improving the current efficiency and product quality in the electrolytic process of industrial production of metals.High-purity cathode copper is widely used in the manufacture of nuclear waste containers, large-scale integrated circuits, memory alloy, and other products ( The copper content is only 99.0–99.5% when produced by a pyrometallurgical process, and its purity is low. Electrolytic refining is necessary to increase the purity of copper to 99.9% or even more and is a key process during the production process of high-purity cathode copper. The process consumes approximately 260–280 kW·h of electricity energy to produce 1 ton of cathode copper in the industry, which accounts for 60–70% of the total energy consumption ( Many local and foreign studies have been conducted on the reduction of electricity consumption in the electrolysis process of cathode copper. First, the electric field must be improved in terms of power supply form and electric field intensity. The electric field is limited by the diffusion–limit current density in the traditional direct-current electrolytic copper process, so the qualified copper could not be gained at high current densities. Hence, using an alternating current and direct-current superimposed power increases the current density ( A blister copper anode plate, which contains 99.0–99.5% copper, is dissolute during the electrolytic refining process of copper in the CuSO In this paper, three kinds of electrolytes were used: electrolyte A was freshly prepared; electrolyte B was produced by recycling electrolyte A that was electrolyzed for 8 h, wherein a constant concentration of copper ions was maintained by continuously adding copper oxide every 2 h; and electrolyte C maintained a constant concentration of copper ions by continuously adding copper oxide every 10 min. The effect of the three kinds of electrolytes on the macroscopic morphology, microstructure, current efficiency, purity, and crystal composition of the cathode copper was analyzed. Electrochemical method was used to analyze the current efficiency improvement of the lead dioxide electrode. After using the improved electrolyte and technology, the electrolyte can then be recycled. The new technology saves energy and reduces material consumption for the production of copper in the hydrometallurgical industry. In addition, this paper provides a new method of improving the current efficiency and product quality in the electrolytic process of industrial production of metals. The fresh electrolyte A consisted of 0.62 mol/L CuSO To further improve the process and achieve continuous and efficient electrolysis, copper oxide was continuously added every 10 min in electrolyte B to prepare electrolyte C, and the concentration of copper ions in electrolyte C was maintained at 0.61 mol/L to 0.63 mol/L before the experiment. During the electrolysis process, copper oxide powder was added continuously every 10 min, which compensates for the loss of copper irons according to the current efficiency of 100% during the electrolysis process. All reagents were of analytical grade, and water was purified using a water purification system (PALL Cascada II I 30, USA).  Electrochemical experiments were conducted on a PARSTAT PMC1000 electrochemical workstation. A three-electrode system was used, namely, the reference electrode (RE), which is a CHI151 Hg/Hg An optical camera (Canon A590 IS) recorded the macroscopic morphology of copper after removing the cathode sheet. A Hitachi SU8010 field emission environmental SEM was employed to obtain the microstructure of copper. Images and spectra were collected at 20 kV accelerating voltage. A SmartLab X-ray diffractometer (Rigaku, Japan) from Rigaku Corporation was used to perform the phase analysis of metal copper electrolyzed under different conditions. Ultraviolet visible (UV–vis) spectroscopy was recorded on a TU-1901 UV–vis spectrophotometer (Beijing Persee, China). Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy (FTIR) was recorded by a Magna 550II FTIR spectrometer (Nicolet, USA). Faraday’s law was used to calculate the current efficiency according to the quality change of the plate before and after copper electrode deposition ( In the process of electrolytic refining of copper, the concentration of Cu According to the industry standard HJ 485-2009, the concentration of Cu A benchtop X-ray fluorescence spectrometer was used to test the purity of the cathode copper. This instrument used energy dispersive X-ray fluorescence for detection. Elements from 13 Al to 92 U were tested in the samples, and the total amount was set to 100%. The test results were compared and graded according to GB/T 476-2010 promulgated in 2010 ( During the traditional electrolytic refining industry of copper, high-purity copper was electrodeposited with a dissolved blister copper (w%, approximately 90–95%) used as an anode and a stainless steel plate used as a cathode. The cathode copper had a flat surface and dendrites at the edges ( Therefore, improving the quality of electrolytic copper and current efficiency by suppressing hydrogen evolution and dendrite is desirable. In this paper, non-dissolved lead dioxide was used instead of traditional crude copper as an anode in the electrolytic copper experiment. Traditional stainless steel was still used as a cathode, and a sealed electrolytic tank was used with the exhaust. During the experiment, the catholyte plate was replaced every 2 h. After electrolysis, four cathodes were continuously collected, and the quality of product and current efficiency of the electrolytic copper were obtained every 2 h. At the same time, the same electrolyte was used in continuous electrolysis for 8 h to obtain the cathode copper plate. The quality of the product and current efficiency of the electrolytic copper were compared between every 2 h and at an average of 8 h. Non-dissolving anode was used for continuous electrolytic refining of the cathode copper, and its mechanism was analyzed by conducting an electrochemical test. Stainless steel was used as the WE. CHI151 Hg/Hg As shown in In the experiment, fresh electrolyte solution A was used, and the cathode plate of stainless steel was changed every 2 h. To recycle the electrolyte, electrolyte solution B was prepared by adding high-purity copper oxide powder every 2 h. The cathode stainless steel plate was changed every 2 h. To further improve the process, copper oxide was added continuously every 10 min in electrolyte B to prepare electrolyte C. The cathode stainless steel plate was changed every 2 h.  In the above experiment, The current efficiency measured every 2 h was from 89.88% to 94.58% for electrolyte B, but the average current efficiency of continuous electrolysis for 8 h was 94.85%. The current efficiency with electrolyte B was lower than that of electrolyte A. The analysis showed that the concentration of acid in electrolyte A was larger than that of electrolyte B as the electrolysis time prolonged. Impurities easily accumulated in the recycled electrolyte B. The current efficiency measured every 2 h was from 94.9% to 97.63% for electrolyte C, but the average current efficiency of continuous electrolysis for 8 h was 96.33%. Therefore, a comparison of the current efficiencies of electrolytes A, B, and C shows that the current efficiency could reach up to 94.9% or more by adding copper oxide to maintain the concentration of the copper ion after continuous electrolysis for 8 h. The purity of the cathode copper sheets shown in  Currently, blister copper is used as an anode in industrial electrolytic refining processes of copper, and its current efficiency is 93.75% after continuous electrolysis for 8 h. Dendritic particles were observed on the edge of the cathode copper. To improve the quality of the cathode copper and the current efficiency of the electrolytic copper, non-dissolving electrodes in lead dioxide were used as anodes, and an improved electrolytic cell was used in the electrolytic copper experiments. The effect of the three kinds of electrolytes on the macroscopic morphology, microstructure, current efficiency, purity, and crystal composition was analyzed and compared. With the freshly prepared electrolyte A, the surfaces of the cathode copper sheets in the first 4 h of electrolysis were flat and dense, and their color was reddish orange with a metallic luster. They met the standards of a No. 2 standard copper. Dendritic particles were observed on the surface of the cathode copper sheets that were prepared in the last 4 h, and their color was partially brick red and black. Their purity did not meet the standards of the cathode copper, and the current efficiency was between 92.75% and 97.23%. With the fresh electrolyte A, the surface of the cathode copper sheet was loose, and many dendrites were present on the surface after continuous electrolysis for 8 h. The average current efficiency for 8 h was 95.74%. XRD results show that Cu With electrolyte C, through preparation by electrolysis for four times every 2 h and continuous electrolysis for 8 h, the morphology and purity of the copper sheets met the standards, and the current efficiency of electrolysis for 8 h was high. The average current efficiency of electrolysis for 8 h with the new non-dissolved anode was 96.33%, which was 2.58% higher than that of the traditional dissolved anode. Moreover, the electrolyte can be recycled after the improved electrolyte and process was conducted. The concentration of divalent copper in the electrolyte was stabilized with the addition of copper oxide. Compared with the traditional process that maintains the concentration of divalent copper by dissolving the copper anode plate made by pyrometallurgy, the new process saved more energy and reduced material consumption for the hydrometallurgical copper production industry. At the same time, it provides a new method for improving the current efficiency and quality of product during industrial production processes of electrolytic metal. This work was supported by the