An electrocoagulation flotation (ECF) process was used to remove selected nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs), specifically diclofenac, ibuprofen, and ketoprofen, from water. A cationic surfactant, cethyltrimethyl ammonium bromide (CTAB), was added to the solution as a collector and frother. Without the addition of the cationic surfactant, the removal of NSAIDs in a single-NSAID solution was in the range of 10–45%; it decreased to approximately 10% in multiple-NSAID systems. However, after adding a stoichiometric amount of CTAB, the removal of NSAIDs significantly improved in single-NSAID systems. For multiple-NSAID removal, the concentration of CTAB required to achieve ideal removal was equal to the sum of the molar concentrations of all the NSAIDs. In addition, a high current density produced smaller bubbles, thus enhanced the electro-flotation and achieved better removal performance. Removal of multiple-NSAIDs in actual hospital wastewater was significantly lower due to interference by oils and other hydrophobic substances.Pharmaceuticals are emerging contaminants of concern The electrocoagulation–flotation (ECF) process has been applied as an economical physicochemical method for treatment of various types of wastewater such as textile wastewater In electrocoagulation–flotation, metal ions and hydrogen gas are produced stoichiometrically and simultaneously when an electric current is passed through a sacrificial electrode (Eqs. Meanwhile, the metal ions are then hydrolyzed to various metal hydroxide complexes and metal hydroxide precipitates by the following reactions: The soluble and colloidal pollutants can be removed by adsorption, ionic complexation, or ion exchange on active surface sites of the metal hydroxide flocs The ECF process emphasized the flotation performance of electrocoagulation To develop a promising way to remove NSAIDs from hospital wastewater, this study applied ECF to remove three NSAIDs: diclofenac, ibuprofen, and ketoprofen. A cationic surfactant, cethyltrimethyl-ammonium bromide (CTAB) was added during the ECF process as a collector and frother to improve NSAIDs adsorption and the removal efficiency during flotation. Furthermore, the effects of the surfactant dose ([CTAB] Diclofenac (⩾98%), ibuprofen (⩾98%), ketoprofen (⩾98%) and CTAB (⩾98%) were purchased from Sigma–Aldrich. NaCl (99.5%) was purchased from Wako. KH The electrocoagulation–flotation experiments were performed in a 250-ml batch reactor, which is schematically shown in Hospital wastewater was spiked with 100 Charge loading ( Both of the aluminum dosage and volume of hydrogen gas produced by the ECF process are proportional to charge loading. According to Faraday’s Law, the aluminum dosage of the ECF process can be calculated by the following equation (Eq. Combining Faraday’s Law and the ideal gas law, the volume of hydrogen gas generated DIC, IBU, and KET were quantified using HPLC (Hitachi, L-7200) equipped with a diode array detector (DAD) (Hitachi, L-7455). The surface tension analysis was measured using Du Nouy ring method (LAUDA, TD1C) by standard method DIN 53914, ISO304, ASTM The removals of the three NSAIDs as a function of reaction time by the ECF process are shown in The removal efficiency of NSAIDs in the single-NSAID system could be improved by adding CTAB to the solution; these results are shown in When CTAB was absent, ibuprofen was the most effectively removed NSAID. If CTAB was present; however, the removal of diclofenac became the best among the three NSAIDs. This may have been due to the higher affinity of diclofenac to CTAB. The removal percentages of each NSAID in multiple-NSAIDs solutions with the concentration of CTAB are shown in In order to determine the NSAID removal mechanism between the current density and reaction time, we controlled the current to 0.1 and 0.5 NSAID removals versus charge loading at different applied currents in the presence of CTAB are shown in The above experiments were all performed in DI water. In order to apply the ECF process to treating real wastewater containing pharmaceuticals, we conducted preliminary investigation that simulated the effects of hospital wastewater matrices. Hospital wastewater was collected from a hospital in Taipei. The water quality of the wastewater is summarized in Results of spiked wastewater experiments suggested that the organic impurities in hospital wastewater might lead to decreased NSAIDs removal. According to the results shown in The ECF process with the addition of CTAB could effectively remove NSAIDs which have lipophilic characteristics and low surface tension in solution. Without addition of the cationic surfactant, the removal of NSAIDs in single-NSAID systems was in the range of 10–45%, which decreased to approximately 10% in multiple-NSAIDs systems. After adding a stoichiometric amount of CTAB, removal significantly improved in single-NSAID systems. The concentration of CTAB required to achieve an ideal performance was the same as the sum of the molar concentrations of the NSAIDs in the multiple-NSAID systems. The actual hospital wastewater contains lots of organic compounds and those compounds might compete with the hydrophobic compounds and occupy the adsorption sites of the hydrogen bubbles. Thus, decreased removal efficiencies of the NSAIDs by ECF were observed in actual hospital wastewater. Future work should include the effects of hospital wastewater with pharmaceuticals and complicated matrix interactions during the ECF process. The authors would like to thank the National Science Council of the Republic of China for financially supporting this research (contract no. NSC101-2221-E-038-011-MY2).