Sulfuric acid–oxygen pressure leaching of white metal was investigated at laboratory scale as an alternative to the pyrometallurgical Peirce–Smith converting to produce metallic copper. The main variables studied were temperature, concentration of sulfuric acid, partial pressure of oxygen, and time of leaching. The results indicated that most of the sulfur in the white metal is oxidized to sulfate in the range 105 °C to 150 °C. The concentration of sulfuric acid over 0.05 M, and oxygen partial pressure over 608 kPa had little effect on the dissolution of copper. The temperature was the most significant variable; below 130 °C copper dissolution was incomplete after 5 h of leaching while at 150 °C the dissolution was complete in 90 min. The dissolution of white metal proceeded in two stages through the formation of CuS as an intermediate compound and the kinetics of copper dissolution was analyzed by considering two consecutive reactions controlled by chemical reaction. The activation energies for the first and second stages were determined as 55 and 88 kJ/mol, respectively.White metal is an intermediate product in the pyrometallurgical processing of copper concentrates. Pure white metal is considered to be Cu On the other hand, the hydrometallurgical processing of white metal (synthetic Cu Solidified white metal is generally considered as a mixture of Cu The oxidation of the Cu However, it should be kept in mind that stoichiometric Cu It is well known that the oxidative leaching of chalcocite, either natural or synthetic, occurs in two stages with the production of CuS as an intermediate product (  for elemental sulfur production for sulfate production The transformation of Cu The aim of the present investigation was to study the dissolution of white metal at high temperature and pressure in sulfuric acid–oxygen media. The experimental work was carried out using white metal produced in a TC reactor at El Teniente Division of CODELCO, Chile. The granulated white metal sample received was ground and sized by sieving to obtain various size fractions. Most of the experimental work was carried out using the size fraction − The white metal sample was also analyzed by X-ray diffraction (XRD) technique and the result is shown in The leaching experiments were carried out in a 1.5-L Parr titanium autoclave, which was equipped with a PID temperature controller, and a variable speed stirrer with two axial impellers mounted 34 mm apart. This autoclave was also equipped with a heating mantle and an internally mounted cooling coil. In a typical experiment, the autoclave was charged with 1 L of H Experiments were performed to study the influence of the main leaching variables on the dissolution of copper from the white metal. The principal variables studied were stirring speed, oxygen partial pressure, sulfuric acid concentration, temperature, and time of leaching. To determine the effect of the stirring speed on the dissolution of the white metal, experiments were carried out with stirring speeds in the range 400 to 1000 rpm at 110 °C, the oxygen partial pressure was 1013 kPa and the leaching time was 2 h. The results are shown in The effect of acid was studied in the range 0.05 to 0.5 M at two different temperatures and partial pressures of oxygen. The results are shown in The results of the effect of the acid at 150 °C and partial pressure of oxygen of 608 kPa are shown in The oxygen pressure was also studied at two temperatures, 130 and 150 °C. In both cases, the partial pressure was varied from 203 to 1013 kPa. The results obtained at 130 °C are illustrated in Experiments were carried out in the temperature range 105 to 150 °C to determine the influence of temperature on the leaching of white metal. During the heating of the pulp to the reaction temperature a small amount of copper dissolution (about 1%) was determined for all the studied temperatures. This initial copper dissolution was probably due to the small amount of oxygen present inside the autoclave during the heating.   Leaching experiments using different particle sizes of white metal were also carried out. The results of these experiments are shown in The iron dissolution from white metal is illustrated in The solid residues from some of the experiments were analyzed for elemental sulfur by the Soxhlet extraction method using CS For the leaching of natural or synthetic chalcocite at temperatures less than 100 °C and atmospheric pressure, shrinking core models have been used to describe the copper dissolution in various leaching media, assuming that in the two stage reaction scheme both reactions occur sequentially ( Considering the above, a uniform internal reaction for both stages of dissolution seems to be a more appropriate assumption and the pressure leaching of white metal can be modeled as a set of two consecutive reactions assuming chemical reaction control for both stages. First order kinetics has been used extensively for analyzing fluid–solid reaction systems ( In these equations, By using the value of The excellent agreement between experimental and calculated values for the fraction reacted, shown in From the oxygen pressure leaching of white metal in sulfuric acid solutions the following can be concluded. The experimental data confirmed that the leaching of white metal occurs in two steps with the formation of CuS as an intermediate product. The results indicate also that most of the sulfide sulfur in the white metal is oxidized to sulfate in the temperature range studied. The concentration of sulfuric acid has a minor effect on the dissolution of copper from the white metal. An increase in acid concentration appears to be slightly favorable for the first stage of dissolution and deleterious for the second stage. The partial pressure of oxygen over 608 kPa has very little effect on the dissolution of copper from the white metal. Temperature was the most significant variable in the leaching of white metal; below 130 °C copper dissolution was incomplete after 5 h of leaching while at 150 °C the dissolution was complete in 90 min. The kinetics of copper dissolution was analyzed by considering two consecutive reactions controlled by chemical reaction. The activation energies for the first and second stages were 55 and 88 kJ/mol, respectively for the temperature range 105–150 °C. The authors acknowledge The National Fund for Scientific and Technological Development (FONDECYT) of Chile for the financial support of this study through Project No. 1040421.