Introduction
                  The objectives of this study were to describe the surgical technique of fixation of 3–4 part proximal humeral fractures with polyaxial locking plates utilising a minimally invasive approach and to evaluate the accuracy of reduction and stability of fixation.
               
                  Patients and methods
                  We retrospectively reviewed 90 patients. Fractures were classified according to the Neer classification system. Different radiological parameters were measured to assess the quality of reduction and the stability of fixation. Complications and clinical outcomes were evaluated after one year of minimum follow up.
               
                  Results
                  There were 76 women and 14 men, with a mean age of 67.4years ±13 (range, 29–85). There were 60 3-part and 30 4-part fractures. Frozen cancellous allograft was used in 30 cases (33.3%). All fractures progressed to union and at one year follow up, the mean Constant score was 79.6±12(range, 62–100). Mean forward flexion, abduction, external rotation and internal rotation were 155°, 148°, 39° and vertebra Dorsal 8, respectively. Complications were noted in seven patients while the postoperative “head-diaphysis angle”, “greater tuberosity height” and “medial metaphysis reconstruction” were close to the anatomical parameters; no significant differences were noted at one year radiological follow up.
               
                  Conclusion
                  Reliable and stable fixation can be expected with the use of polyaxial locking plate through a minimally invasive approach for the treatment of 3–4 part proximal humeral fractures. Satisfactory functional results for this procedure can be obtained.The choice of treatment of proximal humeral fractures (PHF) continues to be controversial The rise of life expectancy in the elderly population has contributed to the increased incidence of these fractures. Moreover, the expectation of an improved quality of life has increased the activity level and demands from aged osteoporotic patients The objectives of our study were firstly to present our surgical technique in the treatment of 3–4 part PHF and secondly to evaluate both the quality of reduction and the ability of the plate to maintain reduction until osseous bone healing has been achieved. Between January 2009 and June 2013 all patients treated in our institution (Hospital Universitario “Río Hortega,” Valladolid and Complejo Asistencial Universitario, Palencia) with 3–4 part proximal humeral fractures that were stabilised with MIS were eligible to participate in this study. Inclusion criteria were: (1) diagnosis of a 3–4 part PHF, as defined by the Neer criteria of a displaced fracture with the limits of 1.0 Under general anaesthesia the anterolateral transdeltoid MIS approach was performed in the beach-chair position with the arm hanging alongside the trunk, and the shoulder in 0° abduction and neutral rotation. The skin incision is made centred on the mid portion of the proximal humeral and runs from the lateral border of the acromion, extending 3–5 Reduction of the proximal fracture fragments is carried out manually: head, lesser tuberosity and greater tuberosity. The objective of the reduction is to achieve the “chair concept” given by the St. Gallen group Three cannulated cortical screws are placed percutaneously with the help of K-wires and the external aiming device, including six cortices. Using the aiming device gives a fixed direction for the locking screws; polyaxial direction for the screws is also a possibility, but without the external jig. A total of five screws can be placed in the fractured humeral head: three polyaxial screws, plus two fixed angle locking screws in the most proximal part of the plate ( Patients have individualised postoperative management. For better comfort, the patient’s arm is placed on a sling for a maximum of two weeks. Passive range of motion exercises are started on the first day after surgery, depending on pain and activity level. For active exercises, patients are allowed to dress, wash and feed themselves right from the very beginning. Patients are discharged home on the first or second day after surgery. Passive physiotherapy is carried out for the first three weeks, followed by active assisted physiotherapy. In order to measure the anatomic accuracy of the reduction and the stability of the fixation until bone healing, we considered the following parameters from simple anteroposterior radiograph (AP view): head-diaphysis angle, medial metaphysis reconstruction, and greater tuberosity height ( Follow up was performed at one, three, six weeks, three, six, and 12 Data were analyzed using SPSS 13.0 (SPSS, Chicago, IL). Continuous variables were described using means, standard deviations, CI 95% of the means, and medians. Categorical variables were tabulated with absolute and relative frequencies. Spearman correlations were used to compute associations between quantitative variables. T tests for unpaired samples or ANOVA were performed to compare subgroups within one time point. For all analysis, A total of 90 patients fulfilled the inclusion criteria. Epidemiologic data of the patients and the fractures, clinical results regarding range of motion and residual pain are shown in The greater tuberosity was lower than the humeral head in 62 of the cases; and lower or at least at the same height as the humeral head in 80 patients, being over the head in 10 patients. The “head-diaphysis angle” postoperatively and at 1-year follow up was also strongly correlated with the correct greater tuberosity height ( Seven patients presented complications including two cases with humeral head avascular necrosis, six cases with screw cut-through into the humeral head joint surface. Of these six cases presenting screw joint penetration: four patients had at least 1 screw going into the joint from the immediate postoperative radiograph; the other two were the two patients with avascular necrosis with progressive penetration of the screws. One patient presented chronic axillary nerve irritation, which disappeared after removal of the plate. Neither deep infection, nor acute axillary nerve injury were found in our series. Five patients needed further surgical procedures for removal of metal work for different reasons (one axillary nerve chronic irritation, and four screw cut-through). Two patients with screw cut-through didn’t complain of any pain, and didn’t accept further operations. Removal of metal work was done through the same MIS approach and using the external jig for percutaneous removal of the shaft screws. Our study yielded several important findings regarding the reduction and fixation of PHF with the NCB-PH plate through MIS. The main one is that we can achieve an almost anatomical reduction through a minimally invasive approach. We chose these radiographic parameters according to Foruria et al. work on patterns of the fracture and fragment displacement in proximal humeral fractures In our series of patients the immediate postoperative mean “head-diaphysis angle” was 49.5° We believe that with the MIS approach the soft tissue envelope prevents the fragments from further displacement; once the fragments are reduced they remain in their reduced position as the soft tissues avoid their displacement. Although the surgical exposure is reduced, there is enough room to see and to make all the manoeuvres (identifying, suturing, and reducing), as the surgical approach is placed right at the fracture site. On the other hand, as in any other MIS we can use the moving windows concept and modify the surgical field: for PHF placing the shoulder in internal rotation gives better access to the greater tuberosity; while in internal rotation, the lesser tuberosity appears in the surgical field. According to the reduction quality and the final range of movement, the lower the greater tuberosity is positioned in relation to the humeral head, the greater range of active abduction the patient achieves ( The functional results observed at one year follow up (mean Constant score 79.6 The definition of complications varies in the literature, which only partially explains the wide range of reported complication rates One of the most threatening complications of MIS is the potential risk for axillary nerve injury. We didn’t experience any acute injury of the axillary nerve. Barco et al., also reported no cases of axillary nerve injury in 23 cases Our study has some limitations. Firstly, it was of retrospective nature. Secondly it didn’t include a control group. Thirdly, we only included patients that were suitable for operative treatment. Finally, the number of patients studied was small. Our findings need further confirmation from large comparative investigations. It is possible to achieve a good anatomical reduction through an anterolateral transdeltoid MIS in the treatment of 3–4 part PHF. It is also possible to build a reliable fixation through this MIS approach. The osteosynthesis obtained with a polyaxial locking plate is stable enough to keep the reduction until fracture healing is achieved and to start physiotherapy promptly after surgery. Satisfactory functional results can be obtained as seen in this cohort of patients. Juan Mingo, Miguel Torres, Aranzazú Alvarez-Ramos and Miguel A. Martín-Ferrero have no personal or commercial association (e.g., consultancies, stock ownership, equity interest, patent, licensing arrangements, etc.) that might pose a conflict of interest in connection with the submitted article. Héctor J. Aguado has been paid for being a faculty member at Zimmer Institute meetings.