Flocs generated by various shear forces exhibit different characteristics of size, strength and structure. These properties were investigated by employing a continuous optical monitoring and a microscope with CCD camera to directly monitor aggregation under six different shear intensities. The floc structure was characterized by the fractal dimension. The results showed that the flocculation index (FI) decreased from 1.16 at 20 rpm to 0.25 at 250 rpm and the floc size decreased from 550 μm to 150 μm, meantime, the FI value showed a good correlation with floc size. In order to determine the floc strength, two methods were used. One was the strength factor, ranging from 18.3% to 62.5%, calculated from FI curve, and the other was a theoretical value between 0.005 N/m2 and 0.240 N/m2, estimated by calculation. The floc strength increased with the G value in both cases. Furthermore, the fractal dimension increased with G and its value was between 1.30 and 1.63. The relation between fractal dimension and strength was also obtained.Coagulation is a well-established process in water treatment and mineral processing operations to remove suspended particles by flocculating small particles into larger aggregates ( Flocs, generated under water treatment or mineral processing, have been shown to be fractal ( Fractal dimensions can be described as one of the significant properties of fractal aggregates. Mass fractals may be summarized by the relationship between their mass For Euclidean objects, In addition to fractal dimension, floc strength is another important parameter to describe floc properties ( In order to compare flocs of different strengths obtained at various shear rates, the flocculation index (FI) was used by The theoretic method for floc strength calculation was elucidated by Although a number of methods have been employed for the determination of floc strength and fractal dimension, there is limited literature for investigating the relation between fractal dimension and floc strength. The main objective of this investigation was to compare the breakage of flocs upon exposure to different levels of shear intensities, the fractal characteristics and strength of flocs formed by coagulation based on aluminum salts. Jar tests were conducted with focus on the relation between fractal dimensions and strength of flocs. Kaolin was applied as a model suspension. The stock suspension of kaolin was prepared in deionized water, which was similar to An 800 mL tap water sample was used in the jar test and the kaolin concentration in the suspension was 50 mg/L. The pH of this suspension was kept at 7.5 by adding 0.1 mol/L HCl or NaOH and zeta potential was about − Aluminum sulfate (Al Coagulation experiments were carried out on a speed-adjustive jar test with 50 Image analysis to calculate the two-dimensional fractal dimensions was used ( The strength factor was used to determine the floc strength, indirectly. As comparing, floc strength was also directly calculated by Eq. 0.1 mmol/L alum was added at the beginning of rapid mixing. At this dosing point, the zeta potential of the alum–kaolin flocs was closed to zero, and thus, could be considered as charge neutralization point. Flocs were formed at different shear conditions in a series of jar test to examine the flocs structure and strength. Mixing at 250 rpm for 1 min was followed by floc growth phase at 20 rpm, 40 rpm, 80 rpm, 100 rpm, 150 rpm, and 250 rpm for 15 Flocculation index (FI) values at different shear intensities were shown in Flocculation index was directly proportional to floc size as shown in Floc size was close to 150 μm as the FI value of 0.25 at 250 rpm, and grew up to 550 μm at 20 μpm with FI value of 1.16. Generally, the floc size was inversely proportional to hydraulic gradient. The log–log curves of floc size decreasing with As Eq. A comparison of floc strength between six different shear intensities was listed in Despite the fact that floc size decreased with shear rate, the fractal dimensions increased with A linear relation of log–log curves between fractal dimensions and strength was shown in Floc size, structure and strength are significant operational parameters in particles separation. The evolution of floc size, structure and strength was monitored by a photometric dispersion analyzer and a microscope with image analysis. The experimental results show that there was a fundamental difference in the alum–kaolin flocs that were generated at various shear force. During turbulent shear flocculation, large floc structures were shown to be more open than smaller flocs. Small and dense flocs with high strength and fractal dimension were formed at high shear force. Furthermore, the FI value recorded by PDA was closely related to floc size measured by particle image analysis. The relation between floc strength and floc dimensions and floc structure was demonstrated. The authors are very grateful to the kind suggestions from the anonymous reviewers. This study was funded by National Natural Science Foundation of China under 20477054 and 20477010.