Continuing industrial development results in ever greater consumption of products and materials. These include electrical and electronic equipment (EEE) such as mobile phones and, consequently, lithium ion batteries (LIBs). Therefore, an efficient and environmentally friendly recycling technology is vital for the recovery of valuable materials from spent LIBs. This work describes an alternative process for the recovery of these materials, using mechanical processing and electrostatic separation. Firstly, the batteries are dismantled and their components are characterized. This is followed by comminution, drying (to remove the organic electrolyte), separation according to particle size, and electrostatic separation of the conductive and nonconductive parts of the LIBs. Parameters evaluated in the electrostatic separation were the electrode voltage, roll rotation speed, distance of the electrostatic electrode, and the inclination angle of the deflector. The results showed recovery of a conductive fraction containing 98.98% of metals and a nonconductive fraction containing 99.6% of polymers, demonstrating that electrostatic separation is a promising and efficient method for the recovery of high purity materials from spent LIBs.One of the consequences of technological development is the great demand for electrical and electronic equipment (EEE). These devices are rapidly discarded, because every day there are new models on the market, making the products become obsolete faster. The composition of this waste electrical and electronic equipment (WEEE) includes many materials that can be recovered, avoiding the unnecessary use of natural resources ( The increased demand for portable devices such as mobile phones, computers, and digital cameras directly increases the consumption of lithium ion batteries (LIBs). As a result, the disposal of spent LIBs has become an environmental concern, although this type of battery can be considered a rich source of hazardous but valuable metals with considerable commercial potential ( A typical LIB consists of a cathode, an anode, separators, and electrolyte, all of which contain a variety of metallic materials as well as plastics, black carbon, and organic liquids ( The anode contains graphite (the active anodic material), adhesives, and a current collector consisting of a copper foil. The cathode is composed of a lithium compound (the active cathodic material), adhesives, and an aluminium foil current collector ( A wide variety of lithium compounds are used as active cathodic materials, including LiCoO There are different technologies and processes for recycling LIBs. These methods are based on essentially two types of recycling: physical and chemical processes. Among the former, mechanical processing, magnetic separation, and heat treatment are widely employed ( Chemical processes include hydrometallurgical, electrometallurgical, and pyrometallurgical techniques ( Despite the advances in LIB recycling technologies, the development of efficient methods for the recovery of valuable materials, such as cobalt, copper, and aluminium, remains an important challenge for a sustainable society ( In the ion bombardment method, electrical charges are produced by the ionization of air resulting from the discharge generated by a corona electrode connected to a high voltage direct current source. In this equipment, the mixture to be separated is fed onto a rotating cylinder by a vibratory feeder and passes through the electric field generated between the roll electrode and the active electrodes ( After the ion bombardment, the nonconductive fraction (NCF) remains attached to the surface of the rotating roll electrode, due to the electric image force. These materials fall into the NCF collector when the gravitational force becomes greater than the electric image force. Due to electrostatic induction, the conductive fraction (CF) acquires a charge of opposite polarity to that of the rotating roll electrode and is attracted towards the electrostatic electrode, falling into the CF collector ( Electrostatic separation has been studied for the recovery of metals from WEEE ( The present work concerns the application of electrostatic separation for the recovery of valuable materials from spent LIBs. Firstly, different models of LIBs were dismantled and characterized. Subsequently, the main parameters of the electrostatic separation were evaluated. Finally, the best processing conditions were used to effectively recover valuable materials from three different types of LIBs. Three different battery brands were used to quantify the materials present in the LIBs. The batteries were first manually dismantled and classified into individual parts in order to determine the amounts of the different materials (metal, polymer, and powder fractions) present in each battery type. The components were separated using pliers and cutting saws, and were quantified in terms of mass percentages. After the manual dismantling, the materials were weighed and dried for 24 Characterization of the active materials adhered to the anode and cathode was performed by X-ray diffraction (Miniflex 300, Rigaku). The metals present in the batteries (external casing and electrodes) were identified by scanning electron microscopy (SEM) (VEGA-3 SBU, TESCAN) coupled with energy dispersive spectroscopy (EDS) (INCAx-act, Oxford Instruments). Characterization of the polymeric fraction was achieved using differential scanning calorimetry (DSC–60 Plus, Shimadzu).  The spent LIBs were comminuted in a hammer mill (Tiger A4) fitted with a 5  The synthetic sample was prepared by manually removing the different materials present in the LIBs. These materials were then manually cleaned to remove contaminants that could cause interference during the electrostatic separation process. The powder fraction was manually separated from the metallic electrode foils. This procedure was used for all the materials present in the composition of the LIBs, with the exception of the aluminium electrode. Due to the difficulty in removing the active material strongly adhered to the foil surface, this electrode was substituted by a commercial aluminium foil with similar physical characteristics to the aluminium foil found in LIBs ( After preparation, 51 The parameters evaluated in the experiments using the electrostatic separator are shown in The experiments were carried out in four stages ( The particles were collected in three different compartments as shown in m After obtaining the best operational conditions for the electrostatic separator using a synthetic sample, the complete process (mechanical processing and electrostatic separation) was applied to three different models of LIBs from different manufacturers. In each test, 10 The results of the LIBs characterization are shown in The results obtained were in agreement with the literature (   Energy dispersive spectroscopy (SEM/EDS) analyses of the different materials were performed after the manual separation. The results showed that for the three LIB models, the cathodic electrode essentially consisted of aluminium, while the anodic electrode was mainly composed of copper. However, two different compositions were found for the LIB metallic casings ( The granulometric distribution for the different materials obtained after milling is presented in The first step in determination of the best parameters was performed using 51 The effect of the rotation roll speed (n) was evaluated while maintaining the other parameters constant, as shown in The best results were obtained at 20 Jiang et al. studied the recycling of printed circuit boards (PCBs) by electrostatic separation ( The voltage applied to the electrodes (U) is the most important parameter in electrostatic separation. At voltages of 15 and 20 The best result was obtained using 25 The effect of the distance between the roll surface and the electrostatic electrode (D2) was evaluated ( At a distance of 4 The final parameter studied was the inclination angle of the deflector (Â). This variable has a great influence, because it depends on the trajectory of the particles attracted by the electrostatic electrode, which determines whether the particles will fall into the CF or IF collectors. At all the angles tested, the amount of metallic material in the CF exceeded 98.8 The best conditions for the electrostatic separation are shown in Evaluation was made of the efficiency of the separation process using samples obtained in the mechanical processing of the LIBs (involving comminution, drying, and particle size separation). This assay employed 10 The separating process resulted in four main fractions: a finer fraction obtained after size separation, and three fractions (conductive, intermediate, and nonconductive) obtained after electrostatic separation. For Battery 1, the losses during comminution represented 9.71 For Battery 2, the comminution step resulted in 1.54 Finally, for Battery 3, the comminution step resulted in retention of 3.34 The results obtained for the different fractions (metals, polymer, and powder) were compared with values reported in the literature. Bertuol et al. ( In other work, Granata et al. ( In addition, the particles collected in the CF A purity greater than 95 The aim of mechanical processing is to achieve segregation of the material, focusing on the metallic portion and providing clear targets for subsequent recycling processes. A metallic fraction consisting only of metals facilitates the recovery of the metals separately, following application of subsequent processes (such as leaching and electrochemical processing or pyrometallurgical processing). An advantage of electrostatic separation is that it can be performed in continuous mode, enabling a high throughput of material using a single piece of equipment, hence increasing the processing rate of this type of WEEE. Characterization of three models of LIBs showed minor differences in their chemical compositions, with the exception of the external casing, which was made of aluminium or steel and represented 17.8–40.2 The greatest differences among the LIBs concerned the mass percentages of the different materials, which varied among the models. Polymers, the cathodic material (LiCoO The application of the electrostatic separation process using different models of LIBs demonstrated the efficiency of the process, despite different compositions (especially of the external casings). Therefore, the LIBs could be processed separately or as a mixture of different models. The best operating conditions for the electrostatic separator were a roll rotation speed of 20 Depending on the battery model, application of mechanical processing followed by electrostatic separation enabled separation of the materials into 25.08–47.59 The results showed that the procedure involving sequential steps of grinding, sieving, and electrostatic separation was effective for the segregation of metallic and non-metallic components, providing materials that could be directly used in recycling industries. Therefore, electrostatic separation is an excellent option for the separation of the different materials present in the composition of LIBs. The authors would like to thank CAPES (