There is a need to develop technology to enable a resource-efficient and economically feasible recycling system for lithium-ion batteries and thus assure the future supply of the component materials. Lithium-ion batteries are complex products, and designs and materials are still evolving, which makes planning for future recovery more challenging. Several processes for recycling are proposed or operating, and each has advantages and disadvantages. This paper compares these processes on technical and economic bases, elucidating differences in benefits as a function of cathode composition. Since none of the existing processes is ideal, research areas are suggested that could enable development of improved recycling methods. The most promising research areas are separation technologies.In the first issue of this journal, we outlined some of the issues involved in recycling lithium-ion (Li-ion) batteries [ The main objective of our work for the U.S. Department of Energy's Energy Storage Office is to identify and characterize technologies that could enable a resource-efficient and economically feasible recycling system for Li-ion batteries, particularly those being developed for automotive propulsion. In addition to being environmentally and financially sound, the technology must be robust to regulatory and institutional roadblocks that might arise. We first identified potential material constraints, and then, through life-cycle analysis of battery production and known recycling options, identified potential energy or emissions issues from all processes, starting with materials in the ground and concluding with recycled materials reused in new batteries [ Concerns about material constraints on the production of Li-ion batteries first focused on the availability of lithium [ However, it can easily be shown that recycling of automotive Li-ion batteries to supply materials is a long-term strategy. Batteries are expected to last about 10 years for propulsion and possibly another 5–10 in second–life applications, like utility load leveling. Thus, large numbers of batteries will not be available for recycling until 10–20 years after mass-market penetration; meanwhile, demand is expected to continue its rapid growth, requiring much more material than recycling could supply. Only after demand slows can recycling supply a significant fraction of material needs. Recycling, however, provides additional benefits, including moderating virgin material prices, reducing costs and other impacts of disposal, and reducing reliance on imported materials. Life-cycle analysis of battery production and recycling processes has demonstrated the efficacy of recycling through reduced energy use and emissions in EV battery production [ The battery pack from the Chevrolet Bolt automobile, shown in Because Li-ion batteries are complex products, many paths for their recycling are possible. Some of these paths, starting after the pack has been dismantled, are mapped out in Pyrometallurgy uses high temperature to facilitate the oxidation and reduction reactions in which transition metals like Co and Ni are reduced from oxides to metals, and recovered in a mixed metal alloy. The metals can then be separated (by hydrometallurgy) and used to make new cathode material. Other materials, including the aluminum, anode, and electrolyte, are oxidized in the smelter, supplying much of the process energy. The aluminum and lithium oxides end up in the slag and are not generally recovered. Hydrometallurgy uses acids to dissolve the ions out of a solid like the cathode, producing a mixture of ionic species in solution. These can be recovered by precipitation or solvent extraction and reacted with other recovered materials to produce new cathode material. Other techniques like membrane separation have been proposed [ Historically, the main objective of Li-ion battery recycling has been recovery of cobalt, because of its high value. Everything else has been secondary. However, as cobalt content in the batteries decreases and mandatory recycling regulations requiring recovery of over 50% of the materials come into effect in the European Union [ From an energy and emissions viewpoint, recovery of cathode material (especially LCO) is second in importance only to recovery of aluminum, the largest contributor to cell material production energy and greenhouse gases [ Both direct recycling and hydrometallurgical processes start with dismantling or shredding the cells. This step enables immediate recovery of the copper and aluminum foils as metals, although they still must be separated from each other. In contrast, pyrometallurgy feeds whole cells into a furnace and sends the copper to a mixed alloy product (where it is generally recovered by hydrometallurgy), and the aluminum and lithium to the slag. These could be recovered by leaching, but the cost and energy requirements generally preclude this step. Use of an electric arc furnace sends most of the lithium to the furnace dust, from which it can easily be recovered [ The main difference between direct recycling and hydrometallurgical processes is that direct recycling retains the cathode crystal morphology, while hydro uses strong acid to dissolve the cathode into its constituent ions, which are sent to aqueous solution. Working with strong acids increases process costs and complexity, prompting several studies proposing use of organic acids [ The positive side of breaking down the structure by hydrometallurgy is that the outputs are generic products, and are not specific to a particular cathode structure, and can therefore be used as inputs to produce a variety of new products. Outputs of direct recycling, however, are assumed to retain a specific, well-defined structure. Although retention of structure can be considered an advantage, it poses a limitation, because (unless cathode mixtures are found to be useful) inputs to direct recycling must be segregated by cathode type, or the output will be a mixture of significantly reduced value. No effective and economic separation technology for cathode material has been proven for use before or after recycling, although a magnetic separation method has been patented [ Although most of the discussion so far has concerned recovery of cathode material and metal foils, it is also possible to recover anode and even electrolyte using low-temperature processes. Both are, of course, burned in a smelter, supplying some of the process fuel. Separators are also burned in a smelter. No process has been proposed for recovering separators because their value lies in their specialized form factor (thin porous film), which would be lost in any processing. The polymeric raw materials could be recovered, but their value is low. Recovery of anode material using simple physical processes has been demonstrated as part of direct recycling; anode material is less valuable than cathode, but must be separated out to obtain usable cathode material. Different methods of separating the black mass into anode and cathode fractions have been reported, including froth flotation and gravity separation using dense liquids [ Recovery of electrolyte, including the lithium salts, by extraction of breached cells with supercritical CO The objective of Li-ion battery recycling research is to recover as many materials as possible, in as useful a condition as possible, and in a manner that makes environmental and economic sense. Throughout this paper, we have highlighted shortcomings of existing processes, and now bring these together as areas where research could improve upon current practice. Research areas can be categorized into several types. The first that stands out is separation processes. The need for material separation permeates the entire recycling process chain from collection through product recovery. The first step is to separate battery types from each other so they can be sent for appropriate processing. Even smelting produces a higher-value product if Ni-MH and Li-ion batteries are separated, and if LFP batteries are removed. For large packs, labels are probably sufficient identification; these can be read by humans or machines. Disassembly of the packs and modules to the cell level could also be either manual or automated. If a mixture of individual cells is to be processed, further separation of these by form factor and chemistry may be required, depending on the recycling process to be used. The large variety of cell sizes and shapes makes this challenging. If these were standardized to just a few variants, design of equipment to sort and process would be much simpler. This is one example of how manufacturers could design for recycling (DFR). Other DFR suggestions include using reversible joining mechanisms to enable disassembly of packs (e.g., nuts and bolts instead of welding). Similarly, if cells must adhere to the module, DFR would dictate using an adhesive compound that could be easily removed, perhaps with a standard solvent. Although this type of thinking is not exactly scientific research, implementation of such concepts would nonetheless help enable economic recycling. For anything but the simplest pyrometallurgical processing, additional separation processes are required to separate materials from the cells. Individual cells are often disassembled manually for experimental purposes, but manual disassembly would be cost-prohibitive for industrial processing of small cells. Robotic disassembly could be developed, although the large variety of cell designs makes that challenging. Therefore, most processing schemes proposed for small Li-ion cells involve shredding before materials can be recovered. And the first thing to do after shredding is to separate out as many different components as possible. The aluminum and copper foils holding the electrode active materials are usually separated out by screening. However, a portion of the active material may still stick to the foils, so, at this stage, some process schemes add a step before or after screening to drive off volatile organics. This step removes the binder and reduces the quantity of active material stuck to the foils, and also evaporates the electrolyte. The electrolyte could be recovered at this stage, but processing would be required to remove decomposition products. Electrolyte recovery may be necessary to reach EU Battery Directive material recovery goals [ For the hydrometallurgical route, ionic components must be separated from each other once they are in solution. Some possible methods include precipitation, solvent extraction, electrochemical processing, and membrane separation. Biological options have also been proposed. Recovery of anode material at this stage could also be considered. The mixed alloy product from smelting also undergoes leaching and then requires separation. Optimization of reagents and process conditions for hydrometallurgy could improve selectivity and yields, resulting in lower overall costs. For direct recycling, the cathode and anode must be separated from each other using physical processes that do not disturb the particle morphology. Heavy liquid separation has been patented, and froth flotation has also been employed. The most efficient methods to separate cathode and anode from each other, and to remove from them any traces of foils, need to be determined. Note that the discussion here assumes a single cathode formulation, but in fact, the shredded cells could have been a mixed batch. In that case, the cathode materials must be separated from each other to obtain the highest possible product value. Although there is a patent for magnetic separation, it may not be economical, and it is unknown whether similar formulations (like two different NMCs) could be separated from each other. Methods for separating cathodes from each other or for using a mixed product would open up possibilities for direct recovery of high-value cathode products. The discussion so far has considered three distinct types of process. However, there is actually a continuum of potential processes between direct recycling and hydrometallurgy, where cathode is treated under conditions of increasing severity; study of these would enable understanding of the mechanisms involved in breaking down the cathode. Use of other reagents besides acids and bases is possible. This could lead to development of a hybrid recycling strategy that removed impurities and imperfections in the crystal structure, without losing its integrity. Another way to handle the variety of materials is to develop recycling processes that could produce high value products, like cathode material, directly out of a mixed feed, without breaking down the structure. One could consider, for instance, if a mixture of NMC cathode materials with different percentages of nickel, manganese, and cobalt could be treated with additional quantities of these to adjust the mixture into a desired uniform composition product. Separating everything may not always be the best route. Another research direction approaches used batteries from the standpoint of retaining and utilizing as much of their existing structure as possible. This category is exemplified by second-life—simply using the entire battery (or the modules) again in a less demanding service. Second-life is discussed elsewhere [ This paper assumes that batteries actually arriving at recycling facilities cannot be used further. Most recycling process flows either start with size reduction or direct feed of cells or modules into a furnace. It may be possible, however, to rejuvenate spent cells [ Other research ideas do not fall into clear categories. All of the processes discussed have room for process optimization. Reagents, reaction times and temperatures, unit process order, pretreatment options, and batch size (or throughput, if run continuously) will all affect product composition and process economics, and they may optimize differently as a function of battery chemistry. Flexible process design would enable use of shifting feedstock. Before scaling up any process, it is important to make sure that all hazardous compounds, even in trace quantities, have been tracked. In particular, the fluorine in electrolyte salts and binder must be accounted for. Even if practical recycling processes are developed, the product must find a market. That means that the reliability of recycled materials must be assured. This would entail long-term testing and development of strict material composition and performance standards. Process modeling enables prediction of process behavior and costs without actually building a plant, and saves considerable time and money in planning new facilities. Argonne is developing a high-level, closed-loop battery lifecycle model called ReCell to provide cost and environmental impacts through all stages and processing steps of the life cycle of a Li-ion battery. This tool will provide insight into the relative impacts of different battery recycling paths and enable stakeholders to simulate and compare both costs and environmental impacts. It can also facilitate DFR analyses. The model will provide a high-level preview of the implications of proposed process and chemistry changes when detailed process data are input. The tool is intended to help develop improved battery recycling processes and verify critical materials recovery. This knowledge will accelerate battery research and guide its direction towards optimization of process-specific and overall economic, energy, and environmental impacts. There is no simple route to recycling of Li-ion batteries. These are varied and complicated products, whose design continues to evolve. Their recycling would have environmental and hopefully economic benefits, but none of the several methods for their recycling is ideal; each has its own drawbacks and advantages. In this paper, we have suggested some possible directions for research that might lead to better recycling processes, so if and when large numbers of electric vehicles are built, we will know what to do with the batteries when they reach their end-of-life. The most fruitful research area seems to be material separation technology on several scales. Design for recycling is another significant advance that could improve the prognosis for recycling. The authors wish to thank the DOE Office of Energy Storage for support, and the battery recyclers and Argonne staff who provided information and helpful comments during the preparation of this work. Thanks to Qiang Dai, who prepared many of the graphs, to Steve Sloop and Richard Schutte for technical insights, and to Daniel Abraham for the material photographs. This work was sponsored primarily by the The views expressed in the article do not necessarily represent the views of the U.S. Department of Energy or the U.S. Government.