The aim of this study was to define optimal conditions by using Simplex lattice mixture design for the formulation of sucrose-free chocolate produced in a ball mill. Milk chocolate mass were made using three different polyols including maltitol, xylitol and isomalt along with Stevia as high potency sweetener. The influences of polyols mixtures as sucrose substitutes on rheological properties and main physical quality parameters were investigated. According to the results, the fitted models demonstrated a high coefficient of determination (≥93%). The optimization of the variables illustrated that utilizing 11.16% w/w maltitol, 8.9% w/w xylitol and 12.93% w/w isomalt produced the optimum milk chocolate with the highest desirability (1.00) without unwanted variations in the rheological and quality characteristics. Also the optimum formulation was produced to validate the optimum model. The sensory analysis of the optimized formulation satisfied the consumer demand.With rising concerns about the consumption of sucrose, manufactures are beginning to search for alternative bulk sweeteners and/or bulking agents to substitute sucrose. Recently the use of polyols in chocolate production has become exclusively important because consumers tend to use less sucrose in order to promote health. Polyols are metabolized and assimilated partially. After reaching the large intestine they are fermented by the micro-biota ( Maltitol have high sweetening power (80–95% of the sweetness of sucrose) and also have excellent moisture-stabilizing properties. Xylitol has the same sweetening power as sucrose and it has a pleasantly sweeting and cooling effect. Xylitol is not fermented by most of the microorganisms in the oral cavity therefore they do not promote tooth decay. Diabetics can use maltitol, xylitol and isomalt because these polyols are insulin-independent. They have a lower caloric value (2.4 kcal/g) due to their slower absorption. The sweetening power of isomalt is 45–65% of sucrose ( Several studies have examined the use of polyols as bulking sweeteners in the production of sucrose-free chocolates ( Although there are some studies evaluating the efficacy of polyols (isomalt, xylitol and maltitol) in chocolates, they have used different manufacturing methods such as pilot refiner and pilot conch and/or different formulation and types of chocolates. On the basis of available researches, recommending a single polyol capable of meeting all requirements of chocolate application is extremely hard. Therefore, the use of multiple polyols, specifically designed to meet desired taste and functional properties in a specific food application, is the most logical solution. Market growth in the last few years obviously indicated that a combination of sweeteners is being well accepted by consumers. These considerations created the basis for extensive study on the effects and benefits of using a combination of polyols. The current study provides the latest information on three alternative polyols and their combination use. Findings from previous studies illustrated that the influences of maltitol, xylitol and isomalt combination on the rheology and other quality characteristics in milk chocolate produced with a ball mill has not been fully clarified yet. For this aim, in the present study mixture design was performed to observe the single or combination usage effects on the quality characteristics of sugar-free chocolate for optimizing the formulation. The simplex lattice mixture design is a helpful technique to identify optimum concentrations of ingredients in chocolate formulations and has been successfully applied by several researches ( Materials such as; cocoa butter (Altinmarka, Turkey), cocoa mass (Altinmarka, Turkey), whole milk powder (Zarrin-shad, Iran), vanilla powder (Polar Bear, China), polyglycerol polyricinalate (PGPR 4120) (Palsgaard A/S, Denmark), soy lecithin (Cargill, Netherlands), sucrose (Iran sugar, Co., Iran), isomalt LM-PF (Beneo-Palatinit GmbH, Germany), maltitol (Roquette Freres, France), xylitol (Roquette Freres, France) and Stevia SU200 (SteviaPack, Singapore) were used in this study. Stevia was used in order to provide proper sweetness for chocolates containing isomalt and maltitol. Milk chocolates were produced according to the subsequent formulation: 33.0% sugar (or polyols), 13.0% cocoa mass (total fat content of 52–56% - origin: Ghana and Ivory Coast (main crop beans)- a mix of 2 varieties), 27.5% cocoa butter, 26.0% whole milk powder, 0.01% vanilla, 0.3% soy lecithin and 0.2% PGPR. Three kinds of polyols, namely maltitol, xylitol and isomalt were used as bulking agents and alternative sweeteners in different concentrations. Milk chocolate samples (17 formulations) were produced with a laboratory-scale ball mill (5 kg capacity, Tabriz University of Medical Sciences, Iran) and formulated depending on the established mixture design ( The standard gravimetric method was used to determine the moisture contents of the chocolates ( Rheological characteristics of the chocolate treatments were quantified at 40 °C using a stress/strain controlled rheometer (Anton Paar, MCR301, Austria). Before the measurements, the chocolates were melted by incubation at 45 °C for 60 min and pre-sheared at 5 s The hardness of chocolates was determined using Texture Analyzer (Stable Micro Systems, TA-XT-plus, UK) with a penetration probe (needle P/2) and the trigger force of 5 g. Hardness was expressed in kilogram force (kg Color of chocolate formulations was measured using a colorimeter (Chroma Meter CR-400, Konica Minolta, Japan). The SCE-mode (Specular light excluded) was used with the color expressed in terms of the CIELAB system L* (luminance ranging from 0 (black) to 100 (white)), a* (green to red) and b* (blue to yellow). Prior to the measurements, the device was calibrated with a standard white tile. Mean values from 4 replicate measurements were calculated. Selected sensory attributes included the appearance (surface color, brightness), flavor (odor), taste, texture (structure, firmness), melting rate and overall acceptability of the chocolate samples. For sensory analysis control milk chocolate containing sucrose and sucrose-free milk chocolate containing optimized formulation were provided. Sensory evaluation was carried out at University of Medical Sciences (Tabriz, Iran) by 30 trained panelists (which were trained for selected attributes). Sessions were performed in individual small rooms between 4:00 and 5:00 p.m., under fluorescent light. Samples were donated in white plastic dishes, and the panel was requested to assess the samples using a hedonic scale from 1 (extremely dislike) to 5 (extremely like), based on color, flavor, texture, taste, and melting rate of each sample. Sensory data were analyzed by the Tukey test for comparison of the samples. Approval for the study was obtained from the Ethics Committee of the Research Vice Chancellor of Tabriz University of Medical Sciences, and written consent was given by all candidates ( In the current study, the simplex (Type of lattice) lattice mixture design according to the procedures described by The following polynomial equation of function For linear model: For quadratic model: For special cubic model: All estimated data were expressed as mean ± standard deviation (S.D.), and each measurement was done in 4 replicate. Computational work including predicted equations, analysis of variance, fitting of the models, model validation and graphical representations (3D plots) was performed using a statistical package (Design Expert Mean values for the responses (moisture, Casson viscosity, Casson yield stress, hardness and The experimental results received for all the studied parameters were statistically determined by fitting the data to the various models, and the evaluated regression coefficients were recorded ( 3D surface plots indicating the influence of the polyols on the exclusive responses are illustrated in Moisture content of the chocolate samples ranged between 0.92 g/100 g and 1.30 g/100 g, which were within the acceptable range (0.5–1.5 g/100 g) ( The optimization technique predicted an optimum value of 1.13 g/100 g moisture with 14.44% maltitol, 7.45% xylitol and 11.11% isomalt if all other responses are not considered illustrating a higher hygroscopicity for xylitol than maltitol and isomalt. The control sample which was not as hygroscopic as the polyols indicated an average of 0.93 g/100 g. The regression equation for moisture content response in terms of L_Pseudo components values, obtained from mixture design, is stated in equation Comparing the amount of hydroxyl groups (–OH) and spatial structure of polyols it can be concluded that xylitol molecules have more free and active –OH groups that are ready to bond with water molecules and form hydrogen bonds. That's why xylitol in comparison to maltitol and isomalt is more hygroscopic. The relationship between the components (maltitol, xylitol and isomalt) and moisture content was special cubic (  Statistical evaluation of the models illustrated that Casson model was the best model for defining the flow behavior of milk chocolates ( Rheological experiments showed that control chocolate samples (containing sucrose) exhibited shear thinning behavior well described by the Casson models. Overcoming this stage, the sample structure is broken down due to the continuous shear and shear thinning dominates the rheology of the sample. The same trend was observed with the other chocolate samples. Casson plastic viscosity parameters of sucrose-free chocolates were found between 2.59 and 7.92 Pa s ( Casson viscosity amounts between 2.2 and 5.5 Pa s has been suggested for milk chocolates ( The flow behavior of the chocolates was dependent on the type of sweetener. As it can be seen from the results, the rheological parameters of chocolate sample were influenced by moisture content ( Also in the study of Since sugar alcohols due to their hydroxyl groups has potential to absorb moisture and bond with water molecules, therefore the viscosity increases. On the other hand, chocolates with high moisture content need more fat to coat the solid particles, thus reduce the availability of free fat for the movement, leading to high viscosity. One of the probable reasons for high viscosity of chocolate formulations containing polyols is the presence of high amount of –OH groups. The hydrophilic ingredients are difficulty dissolved in a chocolate-based lipophilic phase. After being placed in a fat continuous phase, –OH groups tend to form inter- and intra-molecular interactions forming macromolecules. These heavy macromolecules hardly are dissolved in continuous phase due to lecithin's low Hydrophilic Lipophilic Balance (HLB). This phenomenon led to fluidity reduction and an increase in viscosity. The reason for different Casson viscosity values of polyols could be related to their different spatial structure. Due to xylitols molecular structure, more inter-molecular interactions are formed thus creating macromolecules with long chain and huge size, however in maltitol and isomalt more intra-molecular interactions happen and led to macromolecules with smaller sizes. It means due to –OH positions in the molecule, more bonds and interactions are formed inside the molecule than between the molecules. Long chain polyols is less soluble and more viscous in comparison to short chain polyols ( As a conclusion for improving rheological properties of sugar-free chocolates, higher HLB emulsifier (e.g. HLB: 6–9) is suggested to be used. Because the higher the HLB value, the more water-soluble the surfactant will be. The HLB value of 6–9 prepares a moderate fusion of emulsifier in continuous phase. However due to the surfactants higher water-soluble ability, it can easily dissolve the polyols in continuous phase. It means higher amount of polyols are bonded to the surfactant therefore it diminishes the agglomeration and ultimately reduces the viscosity. A general trend emerged that, decrease in xylitol level led to a decrease in Casson yield value ( Among the sugar-free samples, the lowest amount of 1.27 Pa and highest amount 8.97 Pa Casson yield stress were considered for 100% maltitol formulations and 100% xylitol, respectively. The control samples illustrated a mean Casson yield of nearly 0.85 Pa. The optimization technique predicted an optimum amount of 2.81 Pa with 10.33% maltitol, 7.47% xylitol and 15.26% isomalt if all other responses are not considered. The regression equation for Casson yield value response in terms of L_Pseudo components values, obtained from mixture design, is stated in equation Also in a study, higher values for yield stress were achieved with xylitol compared to isomalt and maltitol ( These authors claimed that if shear-thinning behavior is seen in the rheological behavior of chocolate, the Casson model might not be enforceable and might not produce appropriate reproducibility. Products such as chocolate are well characterized by Casson model due to their non linear yield-stress pseudoplastic behavior. However, according to The higher yield value of sucrose-free chocolates is dominated by inter-particle interactions, distribution and arrangements of particles, friction and adhesion, and particle agglomeration caused by presence of moisture and sugar alcohols ( The hardness value of the chocolate formulations differed considerably between the mixture design treatments. High concentrations of the polyols caused to a hardening effect on the chocolates ( The fitted model for hardness was significant (P = <0.0001) and the lack of fit was not significant (P = 0.0597) ( The differences in hardness can be attributed to differences in composition of sweeteners used in chocolate formulation ( Polyols contain various numbers of hydrophilic active sites. These hydroxyl groups usually are involved in intermolecular bonds. During chocolate manufacturing these groups become more active and forms intermolecular (non-polar) interactions between particles in chocolate matrix. For example all nine hydroxyl groups of maltitol are involved in covalent bonds and generate chains leading to higher hardness ( One of the main commercial attributes of chocolate is its color ( Replacing sucrose with polyols led to a darker chocolate in comparison to the reference. Also It was determined that brightness was influenced by the type of polyols and the physicochemical attributes of the polyols are the key factor specifying this difference. This phenoneman could be linked to the sucrose diffusing character. It contains multi-dimensional crystals with sharp edges scattering the light in all directions from the matrix. However polyols contain amorphous arrangements of crystals and minimum light reflection occurs. The addition of polyols due to their higher hydroxyl group's forms macromolecules and agglomerates therefore provides darker color of final product.  This stage calculates the combination of experimental variables along with their responses based on the standard ranges defined for milk chocolate. Thus, a numerical optimization technique based on desirability function approach was applied to optimize the compositions of formulation. During numerical optimization software offers several check point solutions within the experimental domain along with optimized formulation. The numerical optimization also detects a point which maximizes the desirability function. For validating the models, we have selected randomly some solutions. The predicted values of the responses were compared with that of experimentally obtained values. Considering all quality attributes and using the optimization technique which quality parameters were put into standard ranges (moisture, Casson viscosity, Casson yield, hardness and color), formulation one consisting of 11.16% maltitol, 8.9% xylitol and 12.93% isomalt was selected as having the maximum desirability ( Design Expert software prepared optimum chocolate formulations for selected parameters (responses). Optimum formulation was prepared. Additional experimental tests were performed and compared to the models prediction. Optimum formulation, predicted values and experimental results for responses are summarized in The results of sensory analysis of chocolate samples with optimized formulation (recipe) and control sample is indicated in The control chocolate received higher appearance score (4.87) compared to optimized formulation (4.64) ( In the present study, optimized formulation containing maltitol, xylitol and isomalt were produced by addition of some amount of Stevia to accommodate the sweetness intensity of sucrose. Certain differences in taste perception among isomalt samples could be resulted from the inherent attributes of Stevia used in the formulation. Therefore the slight bitterness and astringency taste between other chocolates is related to the inherent bitterness of Steviol glycosides ( Sucrose replacement with optimized formulation of polyols lowered the texture acceptability ( The assessment of melting rate showed that chocolate samples containing maltitol and isomalt had significantly ( The results indicated that it is possible to produce milk chocolate with desired quality characteristics using polyols instead of sucrose. This is important for reduction of calorie since sucrose includes 4 kcal/g calorie and polyols include nearly 2.4 kcal/g. This is important for health of individuals with and without diabetes. Some scientific studies have proved that insulin and blood glucose levels in humans increase only somewhat after oral intake of polyols ( Replacing of sucrose by maltitol, xylitol and isomalt mixtures in sucrose-free milk chocolates caused influences on the flow characteristics and physical quality of milk chocolate prepared by ball mill. The type of the sucrose replacer and also the levels affected the chocolate quality properties. Different combinations of maltitol, xylitol and isomalt could be applied to improve the rheological and quality attributes during production of sucrose-free chocolates. Multiple response optimizations using Simplex lattice mixture design was an efficient modeling tool for detecting the optimum combination of maltitol, xylitol and isomalt producing a low-calorie milk chocolate with close similarity in characteristics to the control chocolate. This work suggests a pilot ball mill for chocolate production which is more affordable for researchers and also small chocolate industries. Also using ball mill in comparison to conventional techniques requires shorter processing times. However, subsequent studies are needed to optimize process duration to reduce more moisture resulting in high quality chocolate samples made with polyols. The authors declare that there is no conflict of interests. This work does not involve the use of human subjects. None. This work was funded by