Effects of the starting TiC particle size on the phase compositions, microstructures and mechanical properties of B4C–TiB2 composites prepared by reactive hot-press sintering of TiC–B mixtures were investigated. B4C–TiB2 composites were prepared from a single grade amorphous B powder (0.9 μm) and three different TiC powders (50 nm, 0.8 μm and 3.0 μm), respectively. The composites prepared from 50 nm and 3.0 μm TiC powders exhibited finer microstructures and higher hardness (29–30 GPa). The composite prepared from 0.8 μm TiC powder showed the coarsest microstructure but possessed the highest strength of 659 MPa due to its homogenous phase distribution without C impurity and abnormal grain growth that presented in the other two composites. The results indicated that the mechanical properties of B4C–TiB2 composite could be controlled by the particle size matching between TiC and B powders.Recently, B B As an alternative method to obtain fine microstructure in ceramic composites, reactive sintering was also applied to B In this work, B Commercially available TiC and amorphous B powders were used as raw materials to prepare B The reactive sintering process was conducted in a hot-press furnace (ZT-50-22Y, Shanghai Chen Hua Electric Furnace Co. Ltd., Shanghai, China) in a dynamic vacuum. The heating rate was 30 The disk was ground to remove the surface layers with a final thickness of 1.5 mm. Bulk density was measured by the Archimedes’ method. Phase composition was characterized by X-ray diffraction (XRD, Ultima IV, Rigaku, Japan). Microstructure was examined by scanning electron microscopy (SEM, JSM-6510LV, JEOL, Japan). Hardness (   It should be noted that the XRD peak intensities of TiB The particle size of raw TiC powder greatly affected the microstructure of the obtained ceramic composite. During the reactive sintering process, the fresh B The density, Vickers hardness, bending strength and fracture toughness of the B Effects of the starting TiC particle size on the phase composition, microstructure and mechanical properties of B The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. This work was supported by The following is the Supplementary data to this article: Supplementary data to this article can be found online at