Because of the world energy crisis, there has been renewed interest in the Synthesis (Fischer–Tropsch synthesis (FTS)) reaction over the last few years. In spite of the fact that it has been studied for over 80 years an adequate description of its kinetics still seems to escape us. There are still significant experimental results that do not appear to fit in with any current theories. In this review we will look at some new results covering a wide range of areas but will focus on some that may help to throw light on the phenomena occurring during reaction. This will include the overall reaction and some selectivity issues particularly the olefin to paraffin ratios of the lower hydrocarbons.  This review comes from a themed issue on Edited by For a complete overview see the Available online 26th February 2012 2211-3398/$ – see front matter, © 2012 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.  The Fischer–Tropsch (FT) reaction mechanism is still an issue of contention [ Fischer–Tropsch synthesis (FTS) catalyst research and development is a lively area, but because of space limitations we will not be able to focus on this in the review. However, of particular interest is the deactivation and regeneration of cobalt catalysts. Saib Kinetic models of FTS on cobalt, iron and ruthenium catalysts have received considerable attention [ The simulation of slurry reactors for FTS has received attention in the past. Much work is still being published pursuing better and more accurate models for industrial applications [ The importance of heat transfer in a fixed bed reactor still receives a lot of attention. One aspect is trying to develop catalysts or structured catalyst to improve the effective heat transfer coefficient of the catalyst bed [ Malek Abbaslou On the contrary using the Peng–Robinson equation of state Biquiza Water is the main product of FTS yet very little attention is given to it, probably as it is of no real commercial value. Its effect on the catalyst performance and FT reaction has been widely investigated by water co-feeding [ It is desirable for environmental reasons to improve carbon utilisation using H With all the planned CTL and GTL plants the study of product upgrading is receiving more attention. Many papers have focused on wax cracking, lubricant base oil production and isomerisation to produce various valuable products [ Norval [ Reactive distillation is a proven reactive separation method that can enhance yields as well as improve product selectivity in multiple reactant/product systems. Srinivas In the latest work some novel experimental methods have been devised to try to get more insight into what is happening in the reactor during reaction [ Some recent transient (first 100 hours in The analysis of the flushed gases in An even more striking illustration of this kind of effect is shown in Other experiments also showed that vapour–liquid equilibrium was set up between the liquid and the gas in the reactor and this equilibrium could be adequately described by Raoult's Law [ The presence of liquid on the surface of the catalyst and the vapour–liquid equilibrium between the liquid and the gas in the reactor do not appear previously to have been adequately taken into account in modelling the FT reaction. Furthermore the apparent equilibria between the lower hydrocarbons also seem to be a phenomenon that has not been taken account of in previous models. It would be of interest to know if this result is also true for the higher ones. The presence of water in the liquid phase and its affect on kinetics and selectivity is another factor that deserves more attention. It is of particular interest to note that when FT is done with a large preponderance of CO All of this suggests that the reason that the kinetics of this reaction are currently so poorly modelled is that appropriate phenomena such as reaction and phase equilibria have not adequately been taken into account. It is well-known that even quite simple phenomena when combined can lead to complex overall behaviour. Everyone knows that liquid is formed to a lesser or greater extent in the FT synthesis reaction, however when modelling the reaction and its kinetics, very little account is taken of the phenomenon. Also, even though water is the main product of the reaction, because it is not valuable, very little attention has been given to its role in the reaction. The effect of water solubility in an organic phase or the likelihood of even forming a two-phase mixture has not been adequately explored. The liquid mixtures will contain more and less volatile components and there is evidence that the liquid and the vapour are close to equilibrium certainly for the more volatile components and that this equilibrium can be modelled by Raoult's Law. Thus the removal of these components from the reactor could be determined by the volatility of the component. In fact one might anticipate that the hydrocarbon removal rate of some species and possibly the water could be controlled by the rate at which they are stripped from the liquid rather than the actual kinetics. Thus the presence of a volatile liquid phase may have a profound effect on the apparent kinetics of the reaction. Maybe the system can best be modelled as a reactive distillation system rather than as pure chemical kinetics? The interaction between even three such simple phenomena such as vapour–liquid equilibrium, partial reaction equilibrium and kinetics can lead to quite complex behaviour and may help to explain the apparently conflicting behaviour found by many researchers in trying to model the system. Papers of particular interest, published within the period of review, have been highlighted as: • of special interest •• of outstanding interest We would like to acknowledge financial support from the