I am pleased to welcome four new members to the Editorial Advisory Board. The EAB is the hard-working body of volunteers who give generously of their time to review manuscripts submitted to this journal. In addition to their well-recognized contributions in the technical community, they each have particular areas of expertise. The EAB is an invaluable support group for the editors. It is, therefore, with great pleasure that I introduce the following:  Peter Blau is a Distinguished R&D Staff Member in the Metals and Ceramics Division of Oak Ridge National Laboratory (ORNL). A native of Reading, Pennsylvania, he received B.S. and M.S. degrees in Metallurgy and Materials Science from Lehigh University, and a Ph.D. in Metallurgical Engineering from The Ohio State University. He has over 30 years of materials research, development, and project management experience that includes the Air Force Materials Laboratory, the National Bureau of Standards (now NIST), the Office of Naval Research, Ford Motor Company, and ORNL. His diverse interests have ranged from the rapid solidification of meteorite fragments in lunar soil to thermo-mechanical treatment of aluminum alloys, and from the development of standards for diesel engine piston ring friction measurement to regulatory issues concerning heavy truck brake linings. In 1992 he chaired the development of the ASM Handbook Volume 18 on “Friction, Lubrication and Wear Technology,” and in 1997 he chaired the International Conference on Wear of Materials. A past Chairman of ASTM Committee G-2 on Wear and Erosion, he is beginning a second term as its Vice Chairman, and is a Fellow of both ASM International and ASTM. The author of four books and over 130 journal articles, he is a member of the Editorial Advisory Board of  Dr. Connolly is currently a Lecturer of Localised Corrosion and Environmental Fracture within the Department of Metallurgy and Materials at the University of Birmingham in the United Kingdom. A native of Salem, Virginia, he received his B.S. in Materials Engineering from the Georgia Institute of Technology in 1992 and his M.S. and PhD in Materials Science and Engineering from the University of Virginia in 1996 and 2002, respectively. Prior to accepting his position at Birmingham, Dr. Connolly held positions of Assistant Research Professor at the U.S. Naval Academy and Visiting Academic Staff at the Manchester Materials Science Centre at UMIST and the University of Manchester. He is a former Royal Society USA Research Fellow as well as a NASA Space Grant Consortium Fellow. Dr. Connolly's research interests include localised corrosion, stress corrosion cracking, corrosion fatigue, and materials characterization via X-ray synchrotron micro-tomography. He is currently performing research programmes in these areas on high strength aluminum alloys, stainless steels, high strength low alloy steels, and magnesium alloys.  Jonathan Spowart worked for the past 5 years on the microstructure-properties relationships of metallic composite materials. His interests span the gamut of materials from nanocomposites to structural carbon foams to metals and metallic composites to nanoenergetics and thermal management materials, with an emphasis on new characterization and modeling techniques. Dr. Spowart's work first began as an on-site contractor with UES Incorporated, but it continues as an Air Force civilian within the Metallic Composites Group of the Air Force Research Laboratory/MLLMD. He is the co-inventor of  Mr. Murphy is currently a Scientist in the Research and Development Laboratory at Hoeganaes Corporation in Cinnaminson, New Jersey, USA. He has more than 30 years experience in the characterization of powder metallurgy materials. His interests and experience include light microscopy and experimentation with the chemical etchants used to reveal unusual PM microstructures, scanning electron microscopy, stereology, and automated image analysis. He is also a member of the Editorial Review Committee for the