In order to find an optimum condition to separate rhodium and iridium, solvent extraction experiments were performed from chloride solution by using Alamine336 and TBP as an extractant. Effects of extraction conditions on the separation of both metals were investigated as a function of the concentration of HCl, SnCl2, and extractants. In our system, the concentration of Rh(III) and Ir(IV) were fixed at 0.0005 and 0.00025M, respectively. In the absence of SnCl2, extraction percentage of Ir(IV) by Alamine336 and TBP was much higher than that of Rh(III) from the mixed solution. However, adding SnCl2 to the mixed solution depressed the extraction of Ir(IV), while the extraction of Rh(III) was increased owing to the reducing action of SnCl2. Extraction order of Rh and Ir by Alamine336 and TBP can be changed by adding SnCl2 to the mixed solution. The highest separation factor was obtained by using Alamine336 in the presence of SnCl2. By utilizing our results, Rh(III) or Ir(IV) can be selectively extracted into Alamine336 or TBP and the choice of either Alamine336 or TBP depends on the concentration of HCl.The platinum group metals (PGMs) are extensively used in automobile, chemical and electronics industry owing to their specific physical and chemical properties. Since natural resources for these metals are limited and their demand in industry is increasing, it is important to find an effective separation process to recover these metals with high purity from diverse secondary resources. Many studies have been reported on the separation of Pt(IV), Pd(II), and Rh(III) from chloride solution. Among PGMs, rhodium and iridium are located at the same row in the periodic table. They are widely used in making precise alloys, apparatus, and plugs electrode. It has been known that separation of Rh(III) and Ir(IV) is one of the most difficult process in hydrometallurgy owing to their similar chemical behavior. Recently, solvent extraction has been employed to separate Ir and Rh ( In this study, separation of Ir and Rh from the mixed solution was tried by solvent extraction with Alamine336 and TBP. Effects of the concentration of HCl and extractant were investigated in the presence and absence of SnCl Stock solution of rhodium was prepared by dissolving the necessary amount of RhCl Alamine336 (Henkel Corp.) and TBP (Yakuri pure chemical) were used without further purification. Toluene was used as a diluent for these two extractants. In the case of Alamine336 (R Some studies have reported that aging effect exists in handling rhodium chloride solution ( Effect of HCl concentration on the extraction of Ir(IV) and Rh(III) from the mixed solution was investigated in the solvent extraction with Alamine336. Mixed chloride solution consisted of 0.0005 There are seven kinds of aqua-chloro complexes of Rh in chloride solution and RhCl When HCl concentration was low, extensive aquation reaction took place and Rh exists as a hydrophilic complex (RhCl Anion exchange reaction is responsible for the decrease in the extraction percentage of Rh with the increase of HCl concentration from 1 to 9  The possible existence of ionic and non-ionic species of Ir(IV) in the chloride solution is represented below ( Among the various Ir(IV) species, IrCl In our experimental range, extraction percentage of Ir was higher than that of Rh. Therefore, separation factor was defined as the ratio of distribution coefficient of Ir to that of Rh. Extraction experiments of Ir and Rh from the mixed chloride solution were carried out by using TBP. In our preliminary solvent experiments of the two metals by TBP, extraction percentage of both metals was very low when HCl concentration was below 5  According to  According to the reported data, SnCl  In our experiment, the molar ratio of Sn to Rh was more than 10, this value was more than enough to convert Rh(III) to an activated rhodium solution (    Extraction of Ir and Rh from the mixed solution by TBP was carried out by adding SnCl  According to the published data ( The extraction percentage of Sn by TBP at different HCl concentration is shown in  Our results clearly show that extraction order of Rh and Ir by Alamine336 or TBP can be changed by adding SnCl Solvent extraction of Ir and Rh had been performed from mixed chloride solution by using Alamine336 and TBP. Effects of the concentration of HCl and extractant and the presence of SnCl Adding SnCl Among our experimental results, extraction with Alamine336 from weak HCl solution in the presence of SnCl This work was supported by a grant from the Fundamental R&D Program for Core Technology of Materials funded by the