Polytetrafluoroethylene (PTFE) is extensively utilized in medical devices and synthetic vascular surgery as an expanded form because of its chemical and mechanical stability. However, clinical applications in small diameter vascular grafts were limited due to lack of its haemocompatibility. In order to improve haemocompatibility or tailor the biological responses to the implant, the surface modification of PTFE was performed with two steps of treatment. After treating PTFE films in a solution of anthraguinone and sodium hydride in dry 100 °C dimethylformamide, the additional modification was performed with O2 atmospheric pressure plasma jet. The water contact angle of chemically treated PTFE was measured as 70.1°. Plasma treatment for 0.25 s decreased contact angle to 35.8°. From the analyses of XPS, plasma treatment might break down the unsaturated carbon bonds and introduce additional functional groups on the surface of the chemically modified PTFE. However, as the treatment time increased, contact angle increased and surface structure was changed, presumably due to etching of the chemical treated layer by oxygen plasma.Regeneration of vascular tissues has drawn high interest in vascular medical society. Among the many materials, polytetrafluoroethylene (PTFE) is extensively utilized in synthetic vascular surgery and medical devices because of its chemical and mechanical stability. Even though a porous, or expanded form of PTFE (ePTFE) is usually employed in medical devices, clinical applications in small diameter vascular grafts were limited due to lack of its cell adhesion properties Though it is necessary to modify the entire surface for tissue regeneration of ePTFE, including the pore surfaces, it is difficult to accomplish it with previously treated methods. In the case of plasma treatment, the treatment of inner side of fine porous structure is not easy due to the characteristics of plasma such as mainly loss of reactive species during their diffusions throughout torturous pore channels, and treatment time is long (a few–a few tens minute) and the cost of facilities is high due to vacuum process. In the case of chemical treatment, it is possible to treat an entire surface with porous structure, however, the hydrophilic characteristics of the chemically treated surface are not enough to improve cellular interaction property or tailor the biological response to the implant To solve the above two problems, modification of the entire surface of PTFE with porous structure and change of its surface chemical structure for improving cellular interaction, we report here the 2 steps treatment of PTFE. As a way of treatment of its entire surface, chemical treatment is adapted in the 1st treatment. The treatment using atmospheric pressure plasma jet is introduced as the 2nd step treatment in order to change its chemical structure and to improve hydrophilic property as well as to incorporate functional groups additionally and to overcome the limitations of vacuum plasma treatment. We, thus, expect that while the 1st step treatment would lead to surface modification of the inner side of its tortuous porous structure, the 2nd step treatment would have an improved cellular interaction property or tailor the biological response to the implant by converting the unsaturated chemical structures into oxygen-containing ones. PTFE films (2 cm in diameter and 0.4 mm in thickness) were extracted by reflux in tetrahydrofuran (THF) for 24 h and dried in vacuum at 80 °C for 24 h. A solution of anthraguinone and sodium hydride in dry 100 °C dimethylformamide was employed for the 1st step modifications. The experimental procedures in detail have been described in Ref. Further modification was performed with atmospheric pressure plasma jet as a second step. The experimental apparatus of atmospheric pressure plasma jet is shown in The extent of surface modification was analyzed by X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy, water contact angle measurement and scanning electron microscopy. To evaluate the surface tension properties of PTFE films, water contact angles were measured before or after chemical or/and plasma treatments as shown in The surface morphological changes were investigated by SEM at the magnifications of 1500 and 10,000×, as shown in In order to investigate changes of surface chemical compositions and induction of additional functional groups, XPSs were analyzed with a resolution 0.05 eV at a 55° take-off angle. Either 292.5 eV or the 284.7 eV on a C1s peak were generally fixed as references for the other peaks, where 292.5 and 284.7 eVs are considered as the binding energies of PTFE and unsaturated hydrocarbons, respectively. From the data of survey scans and C1s high resolutions, we concluded that the extents of the surface modification were dependent upon the durations of O The high resolution C1s and F1s spectra of the untreated and treated PTFE films were shown in We further treated O As we increased the plasma treatment time, the oxygenated hydrocarbon peak increased and fluorocarbon peak also increased and more shifted to the position of − Our experimental results revealed that the O In order to improve cellular interaction property or tailor the biological response to the implant, the surface modification of PTFE was performed with two steps of treatment including plasma treatment posterior to chemical treatment. O This study was partially supported by the Research Institute for Medical Instruments and Rehabilitation Engineering at Yonsei University, Wonju.