Texture perceived in mouth largely depends on the behaviour of the food when it is broken down and transformed by the mouth elements. Texture results from a dynamic process in which texture attributes are continuously analysed by the oral sensory systems during mastication. However, the particular sequence of perceptual events that occur during oral food breakdown remains unknown. The aim of the present study is to describe the succession of perceptual events that happen in mouth during mastication and to show that for each food a texture pathway can be built. This for, we used a sensory method enabling to evaluate the dynamics of texture perceptions during food consumption: the Temporal Dominance of Sensation. On different breakfast cereals, we measured the sensation dominating at each point of the mastication process. We showed that the dynamics of appearance and disappearance of each texture sensation experienced in mouth during the eating process differed among cereals. However, some common features in this sensory trajectory were also observed for the category of products studied. Hardness, crackliness and crispness were rather perceived at the beginning of the mastication period, brittleness and lightness in the middle and stickiness at the end.Texture is the sensory manifestation of the structural, mechanical and surface properties of foods detected through the senses of vision, hearing, touch and kinesthetics ( Indeed, the particular sequence of perceptual events that occur during oral food breakdown and which triggers swallowing remains unknown. This is likely because methods specifically designed to measure texture attributes such as the Texture Profiling ( Dynamic sensory methodologies are available to describe the changes of sensory attributes over the eating process. The Time Intensity method monitors the intensity of a single attribute during the consumption time and even after if aftertaste is of interest ( The latest methodology in the field of temporal evaluation of perception is the Temporal Dominance of Sensation (TDS) ( This method will be used in our study in order to represent in-mouth perceptual changes during food consumption. We chose breakfast cereals as a model because this product requires several chews until swallowing and presents a range of various texture properties. We built and described the sensory trajectories of six different breakfast cereals by evaluating successive textural events that happened in mouth during mastication. The objective of our study was to investigate whether differences and/or common patterns among the sensory trajectories of different products could be highlighted through such an approach. Six types of wheat flakes with the same composition but with different thickness and toasting levels were tasted dry at room temperature. Samples were stored at 20 Twenty-five subjects (13 females, 12 males) aged between 20 and 35 years old were recruited according to strict dental criteria ( To start with, vocabulary and associated definitions were generated in French. In order to make the reading easier, we used the English terms and definitions in this paper according to Then the subjects were trained on TDS method and especially explained two important concepts: dominance and sequence. A dominant sensation was defined as a sensation that triggers the most the attention at a point of time. The nature of the dominant sensation changes over time, which produces a sequence of sensations. Subjects were trained to the protocol, to the use of the computerized system and the sensory method. Samples were coded with three-digit random numbers and served in 2cl transparent plastic cups. Sample size was standardised at 3 Subjects were instructed to start the evaluation process by taking the whole sample in mouth and by selecting the start button on the computer screen. Then, they had to choose the dominant attribute in the attributes’ list while they were chewing the sample. Subjects were informed they did not have to use all the attributes in the list. In addition, during the same run, the subjects were free to choose several times the same attribute either because it was perceived as dominant at different moments during the eating process or because its intensity changed throughout the mastication period. Moreover, subjects were told that an attribute was considered as dominant until another attribute is chosen. The run was stopped by clicking on a stop button when the first major swallowing occurred. This event was beforehand described as the first swallowing where the main part of the bolus is swallowed. During each run, subjects were free to chew the sample as they wanted. The six samples were assessed in duplicate in a randomized order over two evaluation sessions. Analysis of Variance (ANOVA) on mastication durations (e.g., time needed to swallow the product) was computed in order to investigate whether there was any difference among products. ANOVA was calculated with products factor set as fixed and subjects factor set as random. Then Neuman Keuls multiple comparison test was performed to know which products significantly differed from one another. The alpha risk was fixed at 5%. For each product, the dominance rate, i.e. the proportion of subjects who scored each attribute, was computed at each point of time. High proportions indicate a consensus among subjects to quote a specific attribute as the dominant one at a given time. For each product, these proportions are plotted against time for the different attributes and called TDS curve ( Since mastication behaviour and, in particular, mastication duration until first swallowing differed from one subject to the other, time scales of sensory perception differed as well. In order to take this phenomenon into account in the computation of the TDS curves, data of each subject were standardised according to individual mastication durations. After standardisation, the In order to facilitate the reading of the TDS curves, two limits (chance and significance) are displayed on each TDS graph. The chance limit represents the theoretical proportion of subjects selecting an attribute at random. The significance limit represents the smallest proportion that can be declared as being significantly higher than the chance limit (binomial distribution, A covariance PCA based on the standardised data was performed to show sample trajectories in the sensory space over the mastication duration. The variables are the sensory attributes. The individuals are the 6 samples at 11 equally spaced time points regarding the mastication duration (i.e. 66 individuals). Indeed, quasi-continuous data were recorded from TDS evaluations (one record every 240 With the purpose of differentiating products, differences between TDS curves for product pairs were calculated by subtracting the dominance rates of two products for each attribute at each point of time. The significance of the difference was determined by the use of a Fisher exact ( At last, to investigate whether there was any general trend in the sequence of attributes over the mastication period, dominance rates across products for each attribute were calculated so that an average sequence of texture sensations over the mastication period could be determined. The chance and the significance limits were calculated on the same principles than for standardised TDS curves. Mastication durations varied from 30 Non-standardised TDS curves ( Standardised TDS curves ( Wheat flakes A were perceived hard and crackly at the beginning of the mastication period. They were then perceived crispy and later on alternatively sticky and gritty. Wheat flakes B were exclusively perceived hard from intake until the middle of the mastication period and then hard and gritty. Wheat flakes C were perceived crispy in the first half of the mastication period. Hardness was also dominant from First two PCA components account for 80% of the total variance observed among products ( Difference curves between products in pairs confirmed the significance of the different groups observed on the PCA. Differences between products belonging to different groups (A, E, F or C, D or B) are higher than those among products within a same group ( Average TDS curves highlight a trend for an underlying common sequence of texture perceptions during the oral food breakdown process for the breakfast cereal set ( Mastication duration was significantly different among subjects. Individuals are known to have different chewing behaviours which partly explains why they perceive food texture differently. For example, individuals adopting shorter chewing cycles tend to concentrate more on the initial properties of food (hardness for example) than individuals with longer chewing period ( For all samples, dominance rate of at least one attribute became significant just after intake. Then two to five attributes became salient for the subjects, which suggests that sensory contrasts between consecutive perceptions differ among products. For example, a lower number of contrasts were observed for wheat flakes B compared to D ( The products clearly differed in their temporal sequence of sensations and could be clustered into three groups. However, there seemed to be a privileged time window of expression of some specific sensations in the course of the eating period, although not perceived for all the products. Hardness, crackliness and crispness were dominant sensations at the beginning of the eating period. Brittleness was mainly perceived in the middle of the mastication period. Stickiness dominated at the end of the mastication period. The timing of appearance of the different texture perceptions can be compared to what is already reported in the literature. For hardness, although the dominance rate was higher for some wheat flakes (B, A, F) than for others at the beginning of the mastication period, all products had a higher dominance rate at the beginning of the mastication than after. Literature provides different definitions of hardness. The two most used definitions are: (1) the force required to rupture the food, (2) the force required to deform the food to a specific extend ( The distribution of dominance rate for crackliness and crispness was a bit more scattered over the mastication period. There is a quite broad literature aiming at describing these attributes as well as crunchiness and at understanding the physical bases underlying these perceptions. Crispy, crackly and crunchy are closely related sensations. There are several overlapping definitions of these terms and there is still discussion on their meaning but there is a general agreement that these perceptions are related to fracture properties and above all to sound effect ( Stickiness was the dominant sensation for all the products at the end of the mastication. Indeed sensory trajectories show that most of the texture changes occurred in the first half of the mastication. At the end the mastication, all boli were mostly perceived sticky. Samples seem to be masticated until they reach a defined texture before swallowing. This result is to compare with what is known about the physical properties of the bolus before swallowing. For subjects with similar dental state, it was reported that food boli had similar physical properties at the end of the mastication process before swallowing, whatever the initial structure of the products ( The sequence of sensations observed in the present study can be replaced in the context of the different stages of the in-mouth processing of food: initial ingestion, incision, repetitive chewing, swallowing. The succession of oral manipulation consists in: (1) food positioning with the tongue in between the teeth, during this stage surface properties of the food are sensed by the tongue mechanoreceptors; (2) the food is then chewed and fractured with the teeth, that is when hardness, crackliness and crispness may be perceived; (3) the food is comminuted into smaller pieces that may induce brittleness; (4) the food is moistened with saliva which helps to form a soft and cohesive bolus that may lead to increased stickiness. The study of texture perception is complex along the mastication because of the dynamic nature of this perceptual channel and the dynamics of events (oral food breakdown) that constitute the stimulus to this perception. We demonstrated that the use of a dynamic sensory method to investigate the temporal side of texture perception offered new opportunities to more accurately describe in-mouth texture perception. The understanding of the dynamics of texture perception in mouth is one important step in the formulation process of specific, targeted and innovative textures. How this perceptual dynamics in mouth is determined by the product initial structure and the physical breakdown in-mouth but also by oral state and processes is another question to be answered. Finally, the understanding of the impact of physical transformation following an oral food breakdown trajectory and related perceptual texture changes on preference is the final aim of this approach. Indeed, a better identification and control of the sensory contrasts potentially driving liking is key to develop potential innovations for food and beverages.