Sclerostin is a soluble antagonist of canonical Wnt signaling and a strong inhibitor of bone formation. We present experimental data on the role of sclerostin in chronic kidney disease - bone mineral disorder (CKD-MBD).
               
                  Methods
                  We performed 5/6 nephrectomies in 36-week-old sclerostin-deficient (SOST−/−) B6-mice and in C57BL/6J wildtype (WT) mice. Animals received a high phosphate diet for 11weeks. The bones were analyzed by high-resolution micro-computed tomography (μCT) and quantitative bone histomorphometry. Aortic tissue was analyzed regarding the extent of vascular calcification.
               
                  Results
                  All nephrectomized mice had severe renal failure, and parathyroid hormone was highly increased compared to corresponding sham animals. All SOST−/− animals revealed the expected high bone mass phenotype. Overall, the bone compartment in WT and SOST−/− mice responded similarly to nephrectomy. In uremic WT animals, μCT data at both the distal femur and lumbar spine revealed significantly increased trabecular volume compared to non-uremic WTs. In SOST−/− mice, the differences between trabecular bone volume were less pronounced when comparing uremic with sham animals. Cortical thickness and cortical bone density at the distal femur decreased significantly and comparably in both genotypes after 5/6 nephrectomy compared to sham animals (cortical bone density −18% and cortical thickness −32%). Overall, 5/6 nephrectomy and concomitant hyperparathyroidism led to a genotype-independent loss of cortical bone volume and density. Overt vascular calcification was not detectable in either of the genotypes.
               
                  Conclusion
                  Renal osteodystrophy changes were more pronounced in WT mice than in SOST−/− mice. The high bone mass phenotype of sclerostin deficiency was detectable also in the setting of chronic renal failure with severe secondary hyperparathyroidism.The term ‘bone-vascular calcification paradox’ describes various disease states with dysregulated calcification processes, characterized by the coincidence of skeletal demineralization/hypomineralization and vascular calcification. Chronic kidney disease - mineral and bone disorder (CKD-MBD) is a prototypic condition for this paradoxical calcification Given the important role of Wnt signaling in the biology of bone and vasculature, it is tempting to speculate about the potential role of Wnt signaling in all three aspects of CKD-MBD Taken together, the sclerostin metabolism is linked to the entire spectrum of CKD-MBD. In the present study, we evaluated the potential role of an absence of sclerostin in CKD-MBD using a novel in vivo approach: we investigated the bone-vascular axis phenotype in sclerostin-deficient mice with normal renal function which are characterized by a high bone mass phenotype in the absence of CKD Thirty-five to thirty-eight-week-old, female B6-SOSTtm1Dgen mice All animals were treated in accordance with the Guide for the Care and Use of Laboratory Animals and the ARRIVE guidelines. The study was approved by the national institution LANUV (Permit number 2014.A326). Animals were housed in the Institute of Laboratory Animal Science of the RWTH Aachen with free access to food and water and in a 12 Blood was collected and serum was obtained by centrifugation of whole blood at 2000 Calcium in aorta, carotid artery, heart and kidney was quantified by the Femur samples were fixed in 70% ethanol and processed for histomorphometric analysis as described previously The mounted unstained sections are measured in a similar way. The labels are drawn on the computer screen, and the program then calculates the distance between the labels at regular intervals perpendicular to the labels. The single and double-labeled perimeter and total perimeter are also measured after the operator has drawn these on the computer High-resolution micro-computed tomography (μCT) analyses of the femur and lumbar spine were performed ex vivo using a μCT40 instrument (Scanco Medical AG, Switzerland) at an isotropic nominal resolution of 6 The TaqMan® gene expression assay was applied on cDNA obtained from aortic tissue. The qPCR Core Kit for SYBR Green (Eurogentec, Liège, Belgium) was applied for a two-step quantification on a Real-Time PCR TagMan® system. GAPDH was used as a housekeeping gene. The following primers were used: Cbfa1: sense: caagtagccaggttcaacgatct, anti-sense: gacttgtatggtcaaggtgaaactctt; α-SMA: sense: GTCCCAGACATCAGGGAGTAA, anti-sense: TCGGATACTTCAGCGTCAGGA; GAPDH: sense: AGATGGTGATGGGCTTCCC, anti-sense: GGCAAATTCAACGGCACAGT. Differences between treatment groups were assessed by the Kruskal-Wallis test followed by the Mann-Whitney test with Bonferroni's multiple comparison. Statistical significance was defined as The mortality rate up to the end of the experiment was 33% (4 of 12) for 5/6 Ntx WT and 25% (3 of 12) for 5/6 Ntx SOST There was no difference in systolic blood pressure between sham WT (121.3 On the von Kossa-stained sections, calcifications were found in the aortic heart valves and inside the myocardium in some animals in all groups ( Quantification of total kidney and carotid artery calcium revealed no statistically significant differences between groups ( Aortic expression of Cbfa1 mRNA was significantly increased only in 5/6 Ntx WT mice, compared to all other groups ( Quantitative bone histomorphometric analysis of static and dynamic bone parameters in the femora is presented in Irrespective of surgery, femora of all SOST Regarding 5/6-Ntx, SOST deficiency associated with a significantly increased eroded perimeter, osteoclast perimeter, mineral apposition rate as well as trabecular number and more severe marrow fibrosis compared to sham-operated animals ( Irrespective of renal status μCT analysis confirmed the strong bone phenotype of SOST-deficiency: The trabecular phenotype of the distal femur metaphysis was complemented by the bone histomorphometric analysis ( The effect of 5/6 Ntx was less pronounced in the femur diaphysis. The decrease in cortical thickness (− In the lumbar spine ( Sclerostin substantially regulates bone mineralization processes and is a potent anti-anabolic agent in the skeleton. While reduced activity of sclerostin in vivo contributes to increased bone mass and strength (“high bone mass phenotype”) Overall, the present experiments significantly expand previously published findings from a similar mouse model by Cejka et al. In regard to sclerostin's physiological skeletal functions, speculations about similar anti-mineralization effects in the vasculature may arise PTH downregulates sclerostin expression in osteocytes, and this interaction represents an important aspect of how PTH stimulates bone metabolism Due to the high bone mass phenotype of SOST We acknowledge several limitations of our experimental set-up: as already discussed, we did not induce overt calcification pressure in the two uremic groups. Moreover, the generalizability of our findings is incomplete since we analyzed only female animals. In general, sexual dimorphism is present in the skeleton, but here, female mice are known to be more susceptible to vascular calcification and therefore are the better models in regard to calcification experiments. At 35 Lastly, complete deficiency of sclerostin is not a perfect model for human bone-vascular disease with more subtle derangements of sclerostin metabolism, and, moreover, human CKD-MBD is often complicated by interfering and aggravating comorbidities such as diabetes. In summary, the dominance of the high bone mass phenotype in SOST NK, AV, ADM, AD, GJB, AH, PE, JF, NM, AB, RK, DW, PCDH and VMB declare no conflict of interest within this manuscript. IK and MK are employees of Novartis.