Optimum cut-off grades with different types of objective functions are determined by optimization algorithms which recognized as the one of the basis of sustainable development indicators of mining. As different mineral processing methods are applied in mines, it is very essential to choose the most appropriate cut-off grades determination algorithm. The current paper is going to analyze the bioheap leaching method and their associated environmental considerations on optimum cut-off grades policy. Remarking the importance of capital costs, these costs are evaluated in the model. Since the recovery of processing methods are changed based upon copper content, the recovery is considered variable in determining optimum cut-off grades. Presented model is evaluated in Sungun Copper Mine where the hydrometallurgical tests confirm the possibility of using bioheap leaching method to extract copper from its sulfide ores. It is observed that using bio-heap leaching method for low grade copper ores is subjected not only to improve the NPV of copper mines but also to decrease the adverse environmental impacts and produce sustainable results from mining activities.Sustainable development basis are being increasingly applied by mining companies and there is a balance between the cut-off grade determination and sustainable mining practice ( Environmental, cultural and social parameters are counted as the main factors of sustainable development ( It is essential to come into consideration recovery variations caused by grade fluctuation in order to calculate optimum cut-off grades. This is led into a considerable reduction of final products because of average grade decrease. In fact; this issue is remarked as one of the specifications of the new algorithm in comparison to the previous algorithms. The recovery amount is always considered fixed in most of these algorithms ( Science and technology development of ore production and the commodity price fluctuation lead to expanding various mineral processing methods. These processing methods have different technical applications in grade ranges. They also affect the optimum cut-off grades for the sake of various operation costs ( The particular benefits of hydrometallurgical methods have directed them to be exceedingly practiced in copper mines. Some of the specific characteristics of this method have made it be singled out as the main processing method of small mines such as low costs ( In case several processing methods are put into practice in copper mines, determining optimum cut-off grades is important from economical, environmental and social aspects ( Cut-off grade is the criterion normally used in mining to discriminate between ore and waste ( Although some researchers have defined the concept differently, sustainable development, generally, is the combination of improved socioeconomic development, and enhanced environmental protection. Thus, two aspects of sustainability concept are considered in paper as follow: Sustainable development basis leads to applying the environmentally friendly mining activities. It is very essential to integrate the sustainable development requirements in mines’ profitability and optimum cut-off grades ( (1) Mine waste disposal cost ( Mining is an economic short-term activity with long-term effects. The sustainable development requirements have extended social responsibility of mine stockholders ( Mineral processing plants are designed based on average grades of feed. It is obvious that the average grades of ore sent to processing plants completely rely on optimum cut-off grades policy. As mines use several processing methods, this policy seems more significant. The average grade of ores sent to leaching ( These relations are defined in discounted form of grade distribution of mines based on ore tonnage as the following: In relations Scientists have attempted a lot to recognize the relationship between the recovery of mineral processing plants and the average grades of feed ( The amount of marketable product is definitely depended on the feed average grades sent to processing plants and processes recovery. As a matter of fact, marketable product is influential on cut-off grades of mineral processing methods. In the continuous form of grade distribution, the annual final products made by smelting ( In this relation, The effect of capital costs has not been considered in optimum cut-off grades calculations. Determining accurate optimum cut-off grades needs to consider capital costs of mine and mineral processing plants. A comparison between the capital costs of pyrometallurgical (concentration, smelter and electrorefining) and hydrometallurgical methods (Bioheap, SX and EW) indicates the usability of hydrometallurgical methods to low grade ores treatment. Capital costs in optimum cut-off grades determination include the costs related to heap ( Optimum cut-off grades determination depends upon the operating costs beside capital costs. Thus, the operating costs of leaching process should be considered in order to complete cut-off grades determination algorithm. The operating costs of the leaching process ( The SX and EW costs are shown by Mine and plants capacity are the maximum amount of materials (ore, waste, intermediate and final product) mined or produced in a given time period. These limiting capacities have influence upon the cut-off grades. Thus, the time of project can be also controlled by them. Limiting capacities of applying heap leaching and concentration methods are including: Mining capacity Economic criteria and technical aspects are applied to assign destinations for mined material (waste dumps, stockpiles, heap or concentration) based on their value. Mineral and metallurgical characteristics of the ore consider as one of the most important part of technical aspects beside size and shape of the pit. Other technical parameters influencing the determination of mined material destination consist of grade, processing methods recovery, grade variation, plants production capacity, plant life time and their availability. On the other hand, economic criteria are also applied to cut-off grades determination. The most significant economical factors determining mined materials destination include commodity price, capital and operation costs and discounted rate. On the other hand, parameters related to sustainable development are composed of environmental and social. As shown in the Three options are also defined in The second case option indicates a copper mine containing hypogene and supergene sulfide ores. As can be seen in The third case option introduces a mine embracing copper oxide and sulfide ores. In this option, the cut-off grades of these methods are considered as a factor to ascertain ore destinations. Finally, the cut-off grades of oxide and sulfide deposits calculate individually. According to the grade, the algorithm choosing the final direction for each one of the sulfide or oxide deposits in transition zones is similar to the previous one. Only separated blocks will follow different directions for the sake of mineralogy and environmental factors. The NPV maximization is considered as the objective function in optimum cu-off grades modeling. The maximum amount is calculated in the form of discounted series of annual cash flows as follow: It is also expressed in the continuous series of cash flows by Eq. In expressions From the other point of view, the heap leaching and concentration processes recovery will be assumed to vary directly with the ore average grades sent to plants. It is possible to find equations of the form of below (Equation.8) relating recoveries of heap leaching ( However the SX, EW, Smelter and electrorefining processes recovery are assumed independent of the mined material average grades. One can now calculate the cash flow function considering capital and operating costs, environmental considerations as well as the grade-recoveries relations under the various constraints. Considering relation 6 and 7, the NPV of mentioned cash flows function in the discounted form of grades distribution can be written as  As mentioned, the maximum amount of NPV can be obtained by relations In Eq. On the other hand, leaching and concentration optimum cut-off grades are calculated under governing constraints described in  Other limiting cut-off grades are determined with concentration, smelter, heap, SX and EX limiting capacities. In the previous step, the only one of the operations is assumed as the limiting factor. As controlling capacities are placed in pair in balance, 10 balancing cut-off grades will be determined which are named dual balancing cut-off grades ( In case three controlling capacities be in balance, 10 others balancing cut-off grades are calculated. They are named triple balancing cut-off grades ( The annual cash flows surfaces are depend on concentration and leaching cut-off grades. The illustration of cash flows surfaces is also so useful to clarify the cut-off grades concept. Therefore, considering the mine and plants capacity as the constraints, three cash flow surfaces are shown in The initial assumption of optimum cut-off grades applied in optimization algorithm can be considered as limiting, duals balancing or triples balancing are geometrically located in maximum point of the surface, passing through the minimum of all cash flow surfaces. It is also denoted in In In this paper, the initial assumption of optimum cut-off grades is determined by lagrangian multiplier method. Then, final optimum cut-off grades and NPV maximum can be calculated by iterative process and Matlab programming. The iterative process must be used since an unknown NPV is appeared in the NPV maximization function. The unknown NPV is related to opportunity cost and the opportunity cost is inevitable when there are constraints in cash flow function. This cost occurs when the materials was not previously scheduled to be mined or processed. This cost is also demonstrated by “ The Exploration in Sungun copper mine is composed of 240 core which most of them are vertical (83%) with the length of more than 80,000 The resource used for pit design and mine planning is the Measured and Indicated resources of 807 The selection of heap location and associated costs were the main problems considering the The representative samples of Chemical composition of The Roll Bottle test has performed to determine the net acid consumption of every Sample. Test conditions included a pulp of pulverized ore sized to below 0.5 The results of tests are presented in Shake-flask tests are conducted on The To complete the test results, the samples were used for the four large columns test after crushing less than 1 As can be seen, the maximum copper recoveries of hypogene and supergene sulfide minerals are 66% and 69.49%, respectively, in the columns with 2 The copper recovery variations of bioleaching method versus average grades are also evaluated by experimental tests based on four grades. As can be seen in The maximum amounts of NPV and optimum cut-off grades are affected by obtained equations of To calculate optimum cut-off grades of The assumed costs of processing methods, technical and environmental parameters are summarized in The concentration cut-off grades are determined using presented algorithm when the leaching parameters are equal zero. The results are outlined in The bioheap leaching and concentration cut-off grades are determined by lagrangian method and iterative process. In addition, Annual cash flows and maximum NPV are presented in The overall NPV of From environmental point of view, it is indicated that The TEC per unit of final product in second case scenario is increased to $288.3 which is slightly smaller than the TEC of first case one ($302.1). It means that the total environmental costs related to its mine and plants are less while applying both leaching and concentration methods for mineral processing. In case these two methods are simultaneously applied, there will be a reduction in the environmental costs of the mine. In consequence, the optimum cut-off grades are diminished, the benefits will increase and it is easier to access to mining sustainable development. These findings are logical because the pollutants of hydrometallurgical methods are less than the concentration ones. This result is repeatedly observed in various researches. Since the simultaneous effect of practicing pyrometallurgical and hydrometallurgical methods hasn’t been evaluated in calculating optimum cut-off grades, mine planning and accessing to sustainable development, the current research carries out new facts. A comparison between the current research to others reveals the conclusion that mining was beneficial in case of applying both the hydrometallurgical and concentration methods for mineral processing. This problem is determined through assessing the calculated cash flows in this research to other research. Similar results have been obtained in NPV increase and environmental unit costs decrease. As expected, NPV and environmental costs variations decreases the total cut-off grades of this mine in different years of production comparing to similar research. In addition, the decrease of cut-off grades increases the net copper production than other similar modeling. This research has a remarkable novelty because the outcomes and its modeling embrace capital cost and processing recovery variation for changing the optimum cut-off grades. This research considers environmental parameters and accessibility to sustainable development besides technical and economical problems. This increases the novelty of the current research subject. A comparison between the current research results to similar one is led to the idea that the investment costs plays a key role in determining optimum cut-off grades and accessibility to sustainable development from mining. This subject has been ignored in previous researches. Furthermore, the effect of recovery changes has reflected similar results. Comparing this algorithm to the similar ones, it is concluded that this new one is the most complete one for the sake of considering several technical parameters (capacity limitations, ore tonnages and by products, grade-recovery variations), economical parameters (capital costs, investment costs, operation costs and opportunity costs) and sustainable development parameters (social costs and environmental costs of different processing methods). The main limits of the current research include not simple accessing to technical and economical information of the mine like total operation costs, investment costs, final plant recovery and eventually commodity price condition. On the other hand, the most difficult parts of this research are calculating and determining the sustainable development factors including social and environmental issues and their not being quantative. From practical aspects, calculating the recovery of different processing methods and determining grade-recovery curve are identified as the time and cost consuming part of the research. There might be few errors because of sampling and laboratory conditions. Analyzing the changes of commodity price on cut-off grade policy and accessing to sustainable development are regarded as important issues supplying this algorithm in future. The effect of reprocessing other by products such as Molybdenum, gold, copper slag and, etc on optimum cut-off grades can be essential to complete this algorithm. The results of the research will be more exact if the discount rate is contemplated in construction phase and investment costs. This requires a new algorithm expansion. This novel algorithm is simply applied to specify optimum cut-off grades in Sungun copper mine and it ends to reviewing mined materials destination in this mine. The results obtained from developing the new algorithm indicate that this is best fit with the needs of a sustainable development. The algorithm is also able to calculate leaching and concentration optimum cut-off grades considering environmental parameters, social aspects, capital costs and grades-processes recovery relations. Minding these factors can be directed into solving the most significant failures of traditional approaches of optimum cut-off grades determination. The outcomes of the new algorithm and its comparison to other research imply that it is essential to remark investment costs in optimum cut-off grades calculations so that it is directed to real NPV determination. While studying Sungun copper mine, this issue indicates 16% reduction in NPV in comparison to research which hasn’t obtained any investment costs. The presented algorithm regards the effect of average grade variations on processes recoveries and optimum cut-off grades. Thus, grade reduction on Sungun copper mine leads to the recovery decrease of concentration method up to 9% and also NPV to 13% which directly affects the amount of optimum cut-off grades. Holistically, this study proved that the environmental cost of mines practicing leaching and concentration methods is less than mines using only concentration method. This problem is for the sake of less adverse environmental and social impacts of hydrometallurgical methods than pyrometallurgical ones. So, applying hydrometallurgical processes for processing low grades copper ores pave the way to access sustainable development by performing novel algorithm. Moreover, it is remarkable that the production economical value and NPV process are preserved. The authors are grateful to Mr. Rezai as the Bioleaching project manager of