There are several types of mica minerals present in the various types of ore bodies that contain lithium, base metal ore, and other oxide ores. In a number of cases mica has to be removed before flotation of either lithium or other oxide minerals. In the literature it has been quoted that flotation properties of various mica minerals are similar. However, many of the references found in the literature did not make mention of mineral types that were used in the studies. Mica can be floated using anionic or cationic collectors or a combination of the two in the presence of gangue depressants, which can be aluminum sulfate, sodium silicate, and other organic depressants.Introduction Mica minerals and deposits Research and development on flotation of mica minerals Flotation of individual mica minerals biotite (HK) Lepidolite K Muscovite KAl Other mica minerals Commercial beneficiation plants Introduction Plant flow sheets using combination of grinding and gravity Commercial plants flow sheets that used flotation Commercial mica References There are several types of mica minerals present in the various types of ore bodies that contain lithium, base metal ore, and other oxide ores. In a number of cases mica has to be removed before flotation of either lithium or other oxide minerals. In the literature it has been quoted that flotation properties of various mica minerals are similar. However, many of the references found in the literature did not make mention of mineral types that were used in the studies. Mica can be floated using anionic or cationic collectors or a combination of the two in the presence of gangue depressants, which can be aluminum sulfate, sodium silicate, and other organic depressants. The lead nitrate and alkaline earth salts act as an activator for mica. Iron and aluminum salts have a depressing effect on mica minerals. Apart from mica types of deposits, mica can be part of the base metal deposits as well as Rare earth oxides [REO] deposits. Mica has to be removed from the ore before other minerals can be floated. The mica forms a series of complex silicates of aluminum with potassium and hydrogen, magnesium with ferrous iron, and in some varieties, sodium lithium ferric iron with main gangue minerals. More rarely manganese, chromium, fluorine, and titanium are usually present in small amounts. The important mica minerals are as follows: Muscovite: KAl Lepidolite: K Biotite: (HK) Phlogopite: H Lepidomelane: (HK) Lepidolite, with muscovite and phlogopite are the most important commercial minerals for the production of mica. Mica is contained in pegmatite ore bodies that, in most cases, contain either lithium or rare earth oxides. Biotite is a major mica mineral present in a number of major polymetallic deposits of igneous origin, and is rich in iron and magnesium. Extensive research work was carried out by a number of researchers Cationic flotation of mica was carried out using short-chain amine in the acid circuit in conjunction with aluminum sulfate as a silica mineral depressant. In some studies a tallow amine acetate collector was used In this study The concentrate produced assayed about 98.3% mica with 81.3% mica recovery. When using distilled tall oil in place of oleic acid with coco amine acetate, similar metallurgical results were obtained as obtained with oleic acid ( In this study, mica from Carolina, the USA was used. It is confirmed that using fatty acid and coco amine acetate collector system gave good metallurgical results in alkaline pH. A selective flotation of muscovite-containing quartz and feldspar was studied using a collector system consisting of sodium oleate and dodecylamine acetate In the literature it has been established that flotation of biotite depends on the degree of alteration. The flotation of biotite has two maxima. It floats at highly acidic conditions (i.e., pH 1) or under mildly alkaline pH when using dodecylamine (C14). It has been found that sodium fluoride and calcium salts activate biotite when using amine collectors. In the other studies It has been suggested that the flotation of biotite is dependent upon weathering that has occurred, so when using cationic collectors the highly weathered material floats at pH 1and the unweathered part at pH 7 Fluorosilicate and/or pyrogallol has a depressing effect on biotite when using anionic collectors. The actual flotation parameter data using acid or alkaline conditions are shown in This reagent scheme applies to unweathered muscovite. Lepidolite has good flotation properties using dodecylamine in a pH range from 2 to 11. Flotation characteristics of lepidolite are somewhat different from those of biotite. Flotation research was carried out using ore that contains silica and feldspar Research work was performed on the ore containing lepidolite, spodumene, petolite, and feldspar The flotation properties of muscovite are very similar to lepidolite. Flotation of muscovite starts at pH 2–11.5. Extensive development testwork on muscovite flotation was carried out by US Bureau of Mines A second muscovite flotation method examined involves a combination of anionic and cationic collectors Replacing sodium silicate with lignin sulfonate at pH 9.2 resulted in the improvement in muscovite recovery. In studies [12], it has been shown that with no modifiers present, muscovite floats most readily under alkaline conditions with cationic collectors, diamines giving the best metallurgical results. However, the recoveries obtained with primary amines were considerably improved by additions of activators such as fluoride, iron salts, and citric acid. The flotation properties of phlogopite, lepidomelane, and others have not been extensively studied and no particular references on their flotation exist. There are a considerable number of mica producers around the world from Australia, Asia, Africa, Europe, and America. Ore mined from flake mica deposits requires considerable processing to separate mica and any by-products from the gangue minerals. The number of operations varies according to the nature of the deposit and the extent to which the products are recovered. Three general methods are used to concentrate and recover mica as the primary product from the run of mine ores. The simplest process that separates mica from the gangue material is differential crushing and screening in washer plants. Another method concentrates the differentially ground ore by using screens, classifiers, and spirals. The third method concentrates the ore screen classifiers and flotation. Grinding of mica ore is one of the most difficult parts of commercial plants. Some of the properties, which make mica useful, make it difficult to grind. Even tin flakes are tough and elastic and resist abrasion and reduction in size by the conventional types of grinding equipment. Two processes, dry grinding and wet grinding are used in operating plants to produce ground mica. The products of the two grinding methods differ from each other in certain physical properties. Most of the plants for beneficiation of mica have dry grinding equipment as a part operating plant. The flow sheet used in operating plants that use a combination of grinding and gravity is shown in The use of flotation permits the recovery of finer size mica than can be produced by the gravity method. Therefore, the overall recovery of mica is much higher than that obtained using gravity. Flotation plants usually utilize acid cationic method, alkaline anionic method, and combination of the two methods. Commercial flow sheet configuration depends on the flotation method used as well as on the type of ore treated. The example of the operating plant flow sheet that uses cationic flotation method is shown in This flow sheet is relatively complex and involves several stages of fines before removal. Mica is also floated in two stages. The flow sheet that uses alkaline anionic–cationic flotation method treats ore containing feldspar as a major gangue mineral, in which case, acid cationic flotation cannot be used since feldspar also floats in the acid circuit with similar collectors. The flow sheet involves attrition scrubbing followed by desliming and mica flotation. Mica tailing is deslimed followed by mica iron flotation. The tailing is deslimed followed by feldspar flotation. Feldspar is floated in an acid circuit using cationic collectors after activation. The plant flow sheet using alkaline anionic–cationic flotation method is presented in In some cases the valuable mineral in the ore is feldspar, in which cases mica becomes a by-product. The plant flow sheet that uses a combination of acid cationic and alkaline anionic–cationic flotation method is used during the treatment of weathered micaceous pegmatite ore. The flow sheet involves split circuit mica flotation, where in stage one, coarse mica is recovered using the cationic acid flotation method. In the second stage, fine mica was recovered using the alkaline anionic–cationic method. The plant flow sheets using combination of acid and alkaline flotation method is shown in Commercial mica has different sizes and qualities depending on the application. Typical chemical composition of commercial mica is presented in