This is the first of two papers introducing a novel thermomechanical continuum constitutive model for cemented granular materials. Here, we establish the theoretical foundations of the model, and highlight its novelties. At the limit of no cement, the model is fully consistent with the original Breakage Mechanics model. An essential ingredient of the model is the use of measurable and micro-mechanics based internal variables, describing the evolution of the dominant inelastic processes. This imposes a link between the macroscopic mechanical behavior and the statistically averaged evolution of the microstructure. As a consequence this model requires only a few physically identifiable parameters, including those of the original breakage model and new ones describing the cement: its volume fraction, its critical damage energy and bulk stiffness, and the cohesion.A number of naturally occurring and artificial materials are classified as cemented granular materials (CGMs) ( All the CGMs described above share a common texture of grains being bridged by cement matrix that partially or completely fills the voids; for this reason, CGMs often share microscopic processes that control their macroscopic behavior. This paper focuses on lightly to medium cemented granular materials. The mechanical behavior of such materials is controlled by the grain properties and their (re-)organization, as for uncemented granular materials, plus the effect of the cement, which, even in small amounts, can significantly alter the stress distribution within the grains and therefore the mechanical response of the aggregate (e.g. In this paper, we propose a continuum constitutive model for CGMs, starting from the micro-mechanical observation of grain and cement failures. Each of these phenomena will be captured by a separate internal variable with meaningful statistical interpretations. The injection of physical understanding of the micro-mechanics underlying the macroscopic response minimizes the number of required parameters, which will here have a clear physical meaning and are all measurable. The formulation follows the thermo-mechanical framework, and thus the proposed model obeys the laws of thermodynamics. The choice of the internal variables is justified in In 1993, Gens and Nova noticed that there was a general lack of Some experimental works have focused on the influence of microscopic features on the macroscopic response, in particular the effect of cement content and type and the composition and fabric of the granular phase ( The addition of cement tends to increase brittleness at failure, softening and dilatant behavior. As the confining pressure increases, the material shows a transition to a more ductile, compressive behavior, accompanied by a more diffuse cataclastic flow ( Several constitutive models based on the elastoplastic framework have been proposed previously to represent the complex behavior of CGMs described above. In the last two decades several authors ( In recent times an increasing number of numerical models have been proposed that establish the overall material behavior by describing as much interaction as possible at the microstructural level. Outstanding results have been achieved through the use of Discrete Element Method (DEM, The choice of appropriate internal variables has always been a determining part in the construction of constitutive models. To be useful, the internal variables should be As shown in The role of the cement is inherently different from the one of the grains, as it endows the system with tensile resistance, reduces grain contact forces and enhances shear strength of the granular phase. Also, when cracks develop in the cement, its role in the system is redimensioned, in particular in lightly cemented granular material where its modest volume fraction renders the mechanical contribution of its fragments to the force network negligible to a first approximation. The ideal description for the evolution of the role of the cement seems to be therefore a progressive removal of the phase from the system. While continuum damage mechanics is in principle applicable, it seems unfit to capture the influence of particle-scale disorder, The proposed approach is therefore to take into account the evolution of the individual cement bridges connecting grains. Every time a bridge is partially cracked, we can in principle substitute it with another, with a smaller sectional area, but made of undamaged material, as sketched in The rate of fragment reorganization can be captured effectively by the rate of plastic strain, as it is responsible for the unrecoverable macroscopic strain that lends itself as an ideal measure of this process. The aim of the present work is the introduction of the simplest possible model capable of capturing the main features of CGMs, therefore scalar internal variables will be used to describe grain crushing and cement damage, disregarding, in first approximation, inherent and induced anisotropy of the failure processes. A suitable scalar measure of the breakage can be related to the evolution of the grain size distribution ( The internal variable By integrating the probability density function Assuming the commonly accepted simplifying hypothesis that this internal variable does not change along the grain size range (fractional independence of the Breakage variable) it is possible to deduce the current The assumption of fractional independence of In the current formulation no distinction is made between breakage induced by local compressive forces or by tensile fracture of interlocked asperities. While conceptually important, capturing this distinction would require additional state variables tracking the evolution of grain shape factors such as roughness and roundness. The cement size distribution may be evaluated through the analysis of X-ray tomography images or analogous techniques. The practical measurability is currently under study ( A logical choice of the scalar Damage variable, The well known influence of the evolution of the grain size distribution on the mechanical properties of the materials is commonly introduced within a continuum mechanics formulation through statistical homogenization. The effect of the evolution of the integrity of the cement bridges on the microscopic variables can be integrated analogously. If the specimen size is larger than the Representative Elementary Volume Cemented granular materials can occur in nature by deposition/growth of cement on already settled grains or by solidification of a grain/cement paste. In both cases the cement phase can be seen as a component bridging the grains and modifying the mechanical properties of the granular phase, capable of storing additional elastic energy. The simplest form of interaction in terms of elastic potentials is the additivity of the internal stored energies of the cement and the granular phase The description of the Helmholtz Free Energy stored within a granular material has already been introduced in Continuum Breakage Mechanics ( The elastic strain of the grain phase can be considered at the given scale as equivalent to the cement strain and therefore to the total strain, as in a system in which cement and grain phases work in parallel. A system in series might also be proposed, by assuming that the stress in the two phases is equal. Although the latter may well describe the single grain to cement contact, it is important to remember that the stress is distributed in a rather more complex way due to the statistically irregular connectivity between the elements. The hypothesis of strain compatibility is therefore adopted here; this is also consistent with the previous developments of Breakage Mechanics. The aim of this paper is to integrate the concept of breakage and damage to describe CGMs in the simplest way. Therefore from now on the material dependence on porosity or other possible internal variables will be neglected. The energy split function has been proven ( As for the grains, it is possible to express the Helmholtz Free Energy stored in the cement through statistical homogenization as Again we can divide the energy into a part describing the influence of total strain plus damage and one that scales the energy within the different cement sizes: We can suppose that the energy split function can be described by a non-dimensional power law The cement grading index Eq. Possible choices for A convenient form to represent the two laws of thermodynamics of rate independent materials in isothermal conditions is The rate of work can be evaluated through A convenient way to express the Helmholtz Free Energy of CGMs has been introduced in The inelastic processes in CGMs are, as previously described, grain crushing, cement damage and fragment reorganization. The rate of dissipation can therefore be seen as the sum of these three components: As CGMs are rate independent materials the dissipations are considered to be first order homogeneous functions of the internal variables, such that it is possible to evaluate the rate of dissipation as The physical meaning of those variables will be presented in the following. We note that, according to Eq. Employing a standard step, stress is identified as conjugated to the elastic strain (  As shown in To complete the description of the elastic potentials of our model, it is now necessary to define the stored energy for the reference size. The elastic energy is here divided into volumetric and shear components In From the above the total Helmholtz Free Energy is given as From As motivated in As in The plastic volumetric dissipation is here associated only with the evolution of grain crushing and not with the cement damage. While a release of degrees of freedom in the system is associated with an increment of breakage We assume a Coulomb-type increment for the rate of shear plastic dissipation for cohesive frictional materials, where the cohesion From Eq. In this section we examine the constitutive model using a synthetic sensitivity analysis to clarify the physical meaning of the newly introduced parameters and to make comparisons with Breakage Mechanics theory and its variables. From Eq. Imposing For As is well known, the addition of cement results in an expansion of the yield surface. In the present model such an effect can be described through an increase in the cement fraction The addition of cement is also known to increase the brittleness of the system. As shown in the An important experimental observation in CGMs is the brittle–ductile transition, with the increase of confining pressure. As shown in Eq. Constant effective pressure tests at different confining pressures, as sketched in Associated with the brittle behavior, CGMs show a dilatant behavior that can be captured through the evolution of porosity as shown in The effects of the relative magnitude of the critical energies of the two phases on the yield point and the inelastic volumetric response in isotropic compression is shown in The effect of the grading index A novel constitutive model for cemented granular material has been proposed in this paper. The unique choice of the internal variables allows us to track the evolution of the material structure along the loading path by connecting the microscopic processes to the macroscopic constitutive response through statistical homogenization. This perspective implies a clear physical meaning to the parameters, and thus reduces their number, which will facilitate their evaluation. The model introduced is based on typical physical observations for CGMs where the amount and stiffness of the cement maintains the granular nature of the material. Unlike materials with very high amounts of cement, those characterized by light cementation can be appropriately described within the current model as the formulation collapses into the classical Breakage Mechanics theory as The introduced model requires only 8 mechanical parameters and 3 geometrical indexes, all of which have a precisely defined physical meaning. This should be compared with the 13 mechanical parameters of well established models such as Arghya Das and Alessandro Tengattini wish to thank the University of Sydney International Scholarship scheme. Giang Nguyen and Itai Einav would like to acknowledge the To express the yield surface in pure stress space it is possible to deduce the following set of relations from