The perfect mixing model is calibrated to a dry grinding mill used to prepare iron powder for powder metallurgy applications. The calibration procedure was modified to account for possible error on both the mill feed and discharge size distributions, while the usual calibration criterion is based on the estimation error of the mill product size distribution. The calibration criterion was also modified to allow the simultaneous processing of several sampling campaigns to estimate common appearance, breakage and discharge rate functions. Calibration results are analysed in terms of reproducibility of model estimates and model capacity to predict the mill powder content as a function of the mill throughput and power drawn.Modelling of grinding mill and circuit is and continues to be a challenging theme for many researchers. Grinding models are mainly used in grinding circuit simulators for process optimisation Current modelling approaches for grinding mills are based on the population balance model This paper analyses the results of the calibration of the PMM on data obtained from sampling of a dry grinding circuit used to produce iron powder. The PMM is described in the first section. The studied grinding circuit and the calibration technique are presented in the following sections, and the application of the technique is illustrated with data of several sampling campaigns in the last section. The PMM describes the mill operation as transport and breakage events and is formulated for steady-state operation as, Giving a schematic representation of the PMM operation is difficult. One can view the PMM as a perfect mixer reactor in which grinding occurs while an extractor pulls out the particles from the reactor charge. This extractor does not behave as a classifier that would return the material which is not ready to become the product back into the grinding zone, as shown by the postclassification representation of the grinding mill shown in The appearance function is modelled using, In this study, the variation of the breakage rate with particle size is described by the empirical equation, The discharge rate constant function is modelled with an adapted Lynch model's for classifier The discharge rate constant function is usually estimated through a ratio with the breakage rate constant function identified as the The studied grinding mill is operated by Quebec Metal Powders (QMP) located in Tracy, Quebec, Canada, approximately 75 km east of Montreal. The plant produces iron powder by granulation of liquid iron with high-pressure water jets, ball milling and subsequent decarburization of the ground iron The air pressure at the mill discharge is kept lower than that of the feed end by a venturi action, allowing air to be sucked into the mill to transport the particles. The particles are recovered by cyclones and directed to deck screens whose fine product gives the grinding circuit product while the coarse particles are returned to the mill via screw conveyors. The grinding circuit feed rate is adjusted to maintain a power draw set point. If the set point is exceeded, the circuit feed rate is decreased and reciprocally if power drawn is lower than target. Common practice for ball milling is to control the power drawn by adjustment of the ball charge Several sampling campaigns were conducted on the grinding circuit to assess the mill operation. Sampling of the circuit was difficult as some strategic streams could not be sampled directly because of the pipe sealing required for the air transportation system. The air and material temperature is also above 100 °C, which imposes safety constraints on the sampling points selected, as shown in For some sampling campaigns, a purge of the mill was conducted by stopping the fresh feed to the circuit and accumulating the mill discharge into a bin. It requires approximately 2 h for emptying the mill. Once the purge is completed, the material in the bin is weighted to obtain a rough estimation of the powder load in the mill prior to the purge. Sampling the mill powder charge was not possible due to the high temperature within the mill. The standard procedure for the calibration of PMM to a grinding mill follows two steps. Laboratory grinding and/or impact tests are firstly conducted to estimate the appearance function of the ground material. The obtained appearance function is then combined with data obtained from sampling campaigns to estimate the other grinding mill model parameters, i.e., the breakage and discharge rate constant functions In this study, laboratory batch grinding tests were conducted to estimate a preliminary appearance function for the iron powder. The estimated parameters for the laboratory appearance function were used as initial guesses for the estimation of the plant mill appearance function. The plant data used for the calibration consist of the mill throughput, the mill feed and discharge size distributions and of the weight of powder in the mill when available. The calibration algorithm is based on the minimisation of the objective criterion, The criterion of Eq. The calculation of the data set criterion The estimated appearance, breakage and discharge rate functions ( The estimated size distributions with the load of powder within the mill calculated using, The current calibration procedure uses different sets of model parameters for different appearance, breakage and discharge rate constant function. Another option would be to isolate some special parameters and use them for all the sampling campaigns. For instance, The calibration process yields estimates of the breakage and discharge rate functions, as well as of the appearance function. The standard deviations of the estimates are calculated using a Monte Carlo procedure The calibration procedure is applied to the results of eight sampling campaigns. The general conditions of the sampling campaigns are described, and results of the calibration of individual and combined sampling campaigns are presented with a discussion concerning the robustness of the perfect mixing model. The considered sampling campaigns are described in Results of In a first analysis, the data from each sampling campaign was processed independently to estimate the corresponding appearance, breakage and discharge rate constant functions. The data redundancy with this approach is very low. The eight estimated appearance, breakage and discharge rate functions are shown in The above results show that, despite the degree of freedom of the calibration process for the individual campaigns, the shape and position of the appearance function remain fairly constant. Following this result, the calibration procedure was applied to the first three data sets by assuming a constant appearance function and allowing different breakage and discharge rate constant functions. The obtained least squares criterion is given in Sampling campaigns 1, 2 and 3 were conducted on the same day with the same feed material and same ball charge. Only the mill power drawn set-point was increased from 655 to 687 and to 720 kW leading to a 15% increase of the circuit fresh feed rate or 18% increase of the mill throughput. The current plant understanding relates this increase to an increase of the powder load in the mill. Unlike conventional mineral processing mills, the studied mill feed material has the same specific gravity than the grinding media. Under these assumptions, the appearance, breakage and discharge rate constant functions could be considered as invariant for the three sampling campaigns. The calibration with single appearance, breakage and discharge rate functions increases the criterion from 20.01 to 65.60 ( The calibration process was then repeated by using three different breakage rate constant functions and a common discharge rate constant function and three different discharge rate functions and a common breakage function. The same appearance function is assumed for the three data sets. The obtained criterion values are given in The need for variable breakage or discharge rate constant functions to model the considered sampling campaigns is rather surprising, as air vacuum at the mill feed was kept constant, and the ball charge or lifter conditions should not have changed because the tests were conducted during the same day. This result may indicate that the mill operation changes with the powder load in the mill. One possible explanation is that the mill charge position characterized by the toe and shoulder angles Previous results show that it is possible to combine data from several sampling campaigns to estimate the grinding mill model parameters without a significant deterioration in the quality of the fit. The main advantage of such a practice should be an increase of the parameter reproducibility due to a reduction of the degrees of freedom. Indeed, as per standard regression, an increase of the number of measurements should decrease the standard deviation of the estimated parameters. This corollary is however invalid if the data does not belong to the same process. Monte Carlo simulations were performed on the data from the calibration of the model to individual sampling campaigns 1, 2 and 3. Results of a 30 run Monte Carlo simulations are presented in The comparison between the individual and combined calibration results ( The Monte Carlo simulation results can also be used to estimate the covariance between the calibrated functions. The combined calibration procedure was applied to sampling campaigns 1, 2, 3, 4, 5 and 6 of  Processing of the data from sampling campaigns 7 and 8 also shows a discrepancy between the observed mill operation and the load of powder in the mill. Sampling campaign 7 was conducted with the mill running short of 5 tons of grinding media which is significant for the considered mill. Sampling campaign 8 was conducted the same day following the addition of grinding media to bring the grinding charge to its nominal value. The mill power draw was constant at 720 kW for both sampling campaigns. Under the hypothesis of constant weight of balls and powder for a given motor power, the missing grinding media during sampling campaign 7 should have been replaced by iron powder. The appearance and the discharge rate functions are assumed similar for both campaigns, while different breakage rate functions are used to account for the added grinding media. Results obtained under these processing conditions show an increase of powder of 27% from the under charged mill to the freshly charged mill. This result is not in agreement with the hypothesis of constant powder and ball charge at constant power drawn since the freshly ball charged mill should have a powder loading lower than the under charged mill. On the other hand, the larger throughput associated with the fresh ball charge should lead to a larger powder load in the mill because of the PMM discharge model. Processing of these sampling campaigns by allowing different discharge rate functions for the two data sets but with constant breakage rates also leads to a larger powder load for the freshly charged mill. These results lead to question the original assumption that the power drawn is directly related to powder load for a given ball charge or to question the validity of Eq. The perfect mixing model was calibrated on data from several sampling campaigns conducted on a dry grinding mill processing iron powder. Results show that the model represents fairly well the observed data, and that calibration can use the same appearance, and sometimes, breakage and/or discharge rates function without a significant loss in the quality of the fit. A sensitivity analysis shows that the reproducibility of the estimated model parameters is better when results of sampling campaigns conducted under similar conditions are combined. The introduction of mill powder load measurements in the calibration process improves the reproducibility of the calibrated model functions especially the discharge rate constants. The calibration procedure used in this study allows the estimation of the powder load in the mill, and observed results are not in agreement with the mill throughput and mill operating power drawn. This observation may imply to revise the perfect mixing model to account for a mill powder load that is not proportional to the mill throughput or to deal with a shift of charge position in the mill as a function of the operating conditions. This modification to the model is important if a power consumption model is to be used in conjunction with the perfect mixing model. The authors wish to acknowledge Quebec Metals Powder for its kind permission to publish the results of the study.