The copper, iron and sulfur speciation of chalcopyrite leached by moderate thermophile Sulfobacillus thermosulfidooxidans was investigated by combining synchrotron radiation X-ray diffraction (SR-XRD) and X-ray absorption near edge structure (XANES) spectroscopy. Leaching experiment showed that the leaching rate of copper was 73.6% after 20days bioleaching. Results of scanning electron microscopy of leaching residues showed that the surface of chalcopyrite was gradually corroded. Results of SR-XRD showed that orthorhombic form α-S8, jarosite and chalcocite were produced at day 4; the bioleaching residue contained jarosite, covellite and α-S8 besides chalcopyrite from day 8. The Cu, Fe and S K-edge XANES spectra quantitatively analyzed the copper, iron and sulfur species compositions of leaching residues, and the fitted results showed similar trend to SR-XRD results. According to both SR-XRD and XANES study, bornite and amorphous elemental sulfur μ-S were not found during bioleaching of chalcopyrite by S. thermosulfidooxidans. By conclusion, it indicated that iron-deficiency sulfide chalcocite first formed at the initiation of bioleaching with a low Eh value, and it then gradually transformed to covellite at a high Eh value. Meanwhile, α-S8 and jarosite were produced as the predominant intermediates. By combining SR-XRD and XANES, it was useful for better understanding the dissolution mechanism of chalcopyrite during bioleaching by qualitatively and quantitatively analyzing in situ the surface chemical composition of the minerals.Biohydrometallurgy is an emerging technology, which takes important role in copper extraction from low grade mineral sulfide ores ( According to the spectroscopic characterization, the oxidation state of chalcopyrite is a valence state character intermediate between Cu Previous studies also indicate that the release of iron into electrolyte was usually faster than copper, resulting in producing iron deficient secondary minerals ( One difficulty for analyzing the surface product during bioleaching of chalcopyrite is that some of the metal-deficient secondary minerals are less abundant and could be unstable transition states ( In the present study, the SR-XRD and the copper, iron and sulfur K-edge XANES on the surface of chalcopyrite bioleached by moderate thermophile The strain The standard mineral samples (chalcopyrite CuFeS For leaching experiment, During leaching of chalcopyrite, solution samples were taken out at 2-day intervals to monitor the leaching characters, i.e. cell density, [Fe The surface morphology of chalcopyrite was observed by the scanning electron microscopy (SEM) (Nova™ NanoSEM 230, FEI, USA). The samples for SEM observation were first fixed in a 2.5% phosphate-buffered glutaraldehyde solution for 2 The Cu, Fe and S speciation on mineral surfaces was studied by SR-XRD and XANES spectroscopy, respectively. Before analyses, the samples were thoroughly washed with sterilized ultra-pure water and dried in a vacuum oven (DZF-6020) at 30 The SR-XRD was recorded at beamline BL14B1 in Shanghai synchrotron radiation facility (SSRF), Shanghai, China, at a step of 0.01° and a dwell time of 0.5 The XANES analyses of Cu and Fe speciation were performed at the micro-beam X-ray absorption fine structure (micro-XAFS) beamline (BL15U1) in Shanghai synchrotron radiation facility (SSRF), Shanghai, China. The Cu XANES and Fe XANES spectra were recorded in fluorescence mode using a fluorescent ionization chamber at ambient temperature from 8960 to 9040 The characteristics of chalcopyrite leached by Results in The surface morphologies of chalcopyrite residues leached by The surface chemical component of chalcopyrite residues leached by Cu, Fe and S XANES spectroscopy was used to detect copper, iron and sulfur speciation changes on chalcopyrite surface ( The Cu, Fe and S K-edge XANES spectra of chalcopyrite residues leached by The Cu, Fe and S K-edge XANES spectra of these unknown samples ( Bioleaching experiment showed that the leaching characters changed over time. The rapid increase of pH value in the first two days for both bioleaching experiment and the sterile experiment was mainly due to acid leaching with the dissolved oxygen (Eq. Previous studies indicate that when the accumulation of copper ion exceeded a certain concentration, it could become toxic to the microbe and further affecting the bioleaching rate ( According to Covellite was also found as an important intermediate product in the bioleaching of chalcopyrite ( The passivation mechanism based on previous studies ( According to the present study based on SR-XRD and Cu, Fe and S K-edge XANES spectroscopy, during bioleaching of chalcopyrite by The surface of chalcopyrite bioleached by The authors declare that there are no conflicts of interest. We are grateful to the staff at beamlines BL14B and BL15U1 of Shanghai Synchrotron Radiation Facility (SSRF, Shanghai, China), and 4B7A beam-line of Beijing Synchrotron Radiation Facility (BSRF, Beijing, China) for their help in beamline operation and data collection. This work is supported by the