Mineralization of CCl4 with CuO has been studied by in situ X-ray absorption spectroscopy (XAS) in the present work. The least-square fitted X-ray absorption near-edge structural (XANES) spectra showed that 18.9–20.1% of CuCl2 was yielded in the mineralization of CCl4 with CuO at 513–603K for 20min. By in situ extended X-ray absorption fine structural (EXAFS) spectroscopy, the structural perturbation of CuO during mineralization was observed. The perturbation may be due to an insertion of Cl species into the matrix of CuO and formation of CuCl2. Bond distances of CuO (first shell) and Cu(O)Cu (2nd shell) were increased by 0.01–0.04Å with slight decreases of their coordination numbers (CNs) in the mineralization process. CuCl2 in the CCl4-mineralized product solids possessed CuCl bond distances of 2.10–2.12Å, which were greater than that of the CuCl2 model compound (2.05Å). The in situ XAS technique exemplifies a direct observation of perturbation of CuO by Cl species during the mineralization at elevated temperatures.CCl Methods for the disposal of CCl An effective and inexpensive method for mineralization of CFCs (e.g., CFC-11 and CFC-12) has been reported recently by Burdeniuc and Crabtree X-ray absorption near-edge structure (XANES) and extended X-ray absorption fine structural (EXAFS) spectroscopies are very useful in providing the chemical structure information (<4 Indeed, the main scientific issues concerning the chemical process ultimately depend on molecular-scale structure and properties. Basically, understanding the speciation of element embedded in complex matrixes can help the development of effective methods for the disposal of hazardous substances Mineralization of CCl The absorption edge was determined at the half-height (precisely determined by the derivative) of the XANES spectrum after pre-edge baseline subtraction and normalization to the maximum above-edge intensity. The standard deviation calculated from the averaged spectra was used to estimate the statistical noise and error associated with each structural parameter. Fractions of CuCl The EXAFS data were analyzed using the UWXAFS 3.0 and FEFF 8.0 programs The in situ XANES spectra of the CCl The yield of CuCl The By the least-square fitting of the in situ XANES spectra, 18.9–20.1% of CuCl The financial support of the National Science Council, Taiwan is gratefully acknowledged. We also thank Prof. Y.W. Yang and Dr. J.-F. Lee of the Taiwan Synchrotron Radiation Research Center for their help in the EXAFS experiments.