Gas nitriding and high-energy ball milling were adopt to prepare iron nitrides samples. The iron nitrides samples with different nitrogen contents and different magnetic properties were obtained through mixing with different ingredients with high-energy ball milling process. The samples were characterized by X-ray diffraction (XRD), scanning electron microscopy (SEM), high-resolution transmission electron microscopy (HRTEM), vibrating sample magnetometer (VSM) and vector network analyzer (VNA). The iron nitrides samples were nanostructured and contained lots of interfaces, boundaries and defects inside the particles. The electromagnetic wave reflection loss (RL) value was simulated according to transmission line theory by using the samples’ electromagnetic parameters. The sample with a saturation magnetization of 173.3 emu∙g−1 had the best RL value, which reached −63.31 dB at 17.93 GHz with a thickness of 1.77 mm. The samples with Ms value greater than 90.9 emu∙g−1 could effectively absorb electromagnetic waves in the Ku band. The absorption performance decreased with the decreasing Ms value. The nanostructure obtained by high-energy ball milling was discussed to be beneficial for improving the permittivity and the permeability of the iron nitrides samples in the Ku band. The electromagnetic wave absorption mechanisms were also analyzed. In addition, this study offers a reference for industrially producing electromagnetic wave absorbing materials with low cost.In recent years, with the expanding use of communication devices, radar systems and other electronic equipment, the electromagnetic wave absorbing materials have attract more and more attention. In particular, absorbing materials in the Ku band (12.4–18 GHz) play an important role in aerospace, military and medical areas Magnetic materials are usually used as absorbers, for having high saturation magnetization and high Snoek limit It is well known that the microstructure of the wave absorbing materials plays an important role in affecting the microwave absorbing properties. Many studies have confirmed that the decreased particle size of nanomaterials contributes to promoting the absorbing properties. These results indicated that the decreased particle size of nanomaterials can help inhibit the eddy current loss In this experiment, coarse grained iron nitride materials containing different phases were prepared by gas nitriding method. The materials were nanocrystallized with high-energy ball milling process. Different composites with various ratio of iron nitride phase were prepared, by mixing different iron nitride phase particles during the ball milling process. The magnetic and electromagnetic properties were characterized by VSM and VNA, respectively. The reflection loss values were simulated according to transmission line theory using the electromagnetic parameters. The relationship between the magnetic property and electromagnetic wave absorption performance was studied. Besides, the absorbing mechanisms of the composites were also discussed. The pure iron powders in this research were purchased from Sinopharm Group with chemically pure grade (>99.99%). The pure iron powders were nitrided in a tube furnace using ammonia gas as the nitriding media at 550℃ for 4 h. Different nitrogen potentials were adopted during the nitriding process to obtained different coarse-grained iron nitrides with different main contents. Coarse-grained iron nitrides named 4 N were prepared at the nitrogen potential of 0.3. Similarly, 3 N and 2 N were prepared at 1.4 and 3.6, respectively. Subsequently, coarse-grained iron nitrides with different compositions were blended and then subjected to SPEX 8000 mixer machine high-energy ball milling for 60 min. The motor speed was 1425 rpm. The ball to powder weight ratio was 2:1. The ball mill tank volume was 50 ml. The powder samples were placed into the ball mill tank at argon atmosphere. The sample obtained after ball milling the 4 N iron nitrides is named as S1, the sample after ball milling the 2 N is named as S4. The sample obtained after ball milling the mixture of 4 N + 3 N iron nitrides with a mass ratio of 1:1 is named as S2, the sample obtained after ball milling the mixture of 4 N + 2 N iron nitrides with a mass ratio of 1:1 is named as S3. X-ray diffraction (XRD X’ Pert Pro) was preformed to characterize the phase of as-prepared powders. Morphology of the as-prepared samples were investigated by scanning electron microscopy (SEM ZEISS Ultra Plus), transmission electron microscopy and high-resolution transmission electron microscope (TEM and HRTEM Tecnai F30). Magnetic hysteresis loops were collected using vibration sample magnetometer (VSM Lakeshore 7407) at room temperature with an applied field up to 8kOe. The electromagnetic parameters including complex permittivity and complex permeability were tested by a vector network analyzer (VNA Agilent E8501 ENA), using transmission/reflection waveguide method in frequency range of 12.4–18.0 GHz (Ku band). A rectangular sample with the dimension of 15.8 × 7.9 × 5.5 mm      Based on transmission line theory, to investigate the electromagnetic wave absorbing properties of iron nitrides with nanocrystallized, the relative complex permittivity (ε Overall, the observed ε' and ε“ presents a slightly fluctuation in the frequency range ( It can be observed from The dielectric and magnetic loss tangent (tan δ The dielectric loss of absorbing materials usually originates from conduction loss and relaxation loss It can be deduced from Eqs. (1)-(3) that It can been seen from Eq. As for the main magnetic loss mechanisms, it usually contains eddy current loss, hysteresis loss and residual loss In general, after ball milling process, the reduced sample size and lots of interfaces in the particles aid to obtain good dielectric and magnetic loss, by increasing the polarization and effective anisotropy field which be attributed to the defects and interior stress. The electromagnetic wave absorption performance of each sample was also investigated and can be appraised by the reflection loss (RL) value. According to the transmission line theory, the RL value can be calculated from absorber thickness and the ε Normally, the corresponding frequency and thickness of a RL value peak usually conform the quarter-wavelength law, which can be expressed as following When the electromagnetic wave transmits in the absorber, a phase difference is generated due to the reflection and refraction of the electromagnetic wave by the particles inside the absorber. When the phase difference of the electromagnetic wave is a quarter wavelength, a great loss of electromagnetic waves would happen. The impedance matching and attenuation coefficient are another two key factors that help understand the electromagnetic wave absorption mechanism. The impedance matching (|Z The attenuation coefficient (α) describes the electromagnetic wave dissipation. The α value can be calculated as following according to transmission line theory The α curves of the samples are shown in In summary, the excellent wave absorbing performance of the ball milling iron nitride particles with nanocrystallized is due to the small particle size, lots of grain boundaries and interfaces, defects and internal stress in the particles. The complex character in structure is beneficial for achieving good dielectric and magnetic loss. In addition, by adjusting the thickness of the sample, a good absorption property will be obtained at different frequencies in Ku band. Nanocrystallized iron nitrides particles were prepared by gas nitriding and ball milling. By adjusting the ratio of different iron nitride phases in the sample, iron nitrides particle samples with different nitrogen content and magnetic properties were obtained. With the nitrogen content increasing, the saturation magnetization decreased. The sample with a saturation magnetization of 173.3 emu∙g  The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. This research was supported by the