In this study, the effect of the step drill's geometries such as step angle, step size and cutting parameters such as feed and spindle speed on the exit burr height was investigated for burr minimization in drilling of Al–Gr composites which are fabricated through squeeze casting method. The experimental study was conducted as per the L27 orthogonal array of Taguchi method to find the optimum drilling parameters, and analysis of variance (ANOVA) was performed to investigate the influence of parameters on the burr height of composites during drilling. Confirmation tests were conducted to validate the test results. Results revealed that feed, step angle, step size and spindle speed were the significant parameters in the formation of exit burr.Metal Matrix Composites (MMCs) have emerged as a potential material particularly for automotive and aerospace industries. Since the demands on performance and functionality of components are increasing rapidly, the machining parameters have to be optimized in order to attain the good surface quality. Burr is an unwanted projection of material as a result of plastic deformation during drilling operation. Burrs could create many problems during assembling and inspection of precision components. Moreover it degrades the performance of precision parts. Burrs would lead to blockage of critical passages in pneumatic, hydraulic and electronic circuits, which would cause serious problems during service. Entrance and exit burrs are produced during the drilling of every hole. The entrance burr which is generally smaller than the exit burr can be removed easily by chamfering the hole. On the other hand the exit burr is of prime importance due to the difficulty in removing it. If the burr is formed inside a hole, special tools could be employed for deburring. The deburring process is usually done manually because of the difficulties in automation. Moreover, deburring operation increases the total manufacturing cost by 20% and requires a significant amount of time Akhlaghi and Zare-Bidaki Literature study Eutectic Al–Si alloy (Si-12.6, Fe-0.02, Al-rest by weight) was used as the matrix material and graphite particles (50–125 The micrograph of Al–7.5 The EDS of the surface of the composite specimen, which is shown in The drilling test was carried out on a vertical machining centre ( Taguchi's parameter design provides a systematic and efficient methodology for determining optimum design parameters which have an effect on the process and performance. The Taguchi method utilizes orthogonal arrays to study a large number of variables with a minimum number of configurations. By studying the effect of individual parameters on the results, the combination of optimum parameters can be determined. In the Taguchi method, the term ‘signal’ expresses the desirable value (mean) and the term ‘noise’ expresses the undesirable value (standard deviation) for the output quality characteristics. The mean S/N ratio for each level is the measure of quality characteristics deviating from the desired value and provides a measure of the impact of noise parameters on performance. Several types of S/N ratios are available based on the characteristics. In this study, “smaller is better” S/N ratio is used to predict the optimum parameters because a smaller burr height was desirable. Mathematical equation of the S/N ratio for “smaller is better” is represented in the following equation. In addition, analysis of variance (ANOVA) was used to study the influence of the parameters on burr height. The measured burr height values are presented in A multiple linear regression equation was developed to establish the correlation among the parameters on the response. The value of regression coefficient The regression equation, where It can be observed from Eq. The confirmation experiments were conducted as per the parameters which are given in The resulting equations seem to be capable of predicting the burr height to the acceptable level of accuracy. However if the number of observations of performance characteristics are further increased, these errors can be reduced. Ranking of parameters is presented in It can be observed that the feed is the significant parameter influencing the burr height in drilling. Higher feed increases the thrust force which enhances the plastic deformation, resulting in a larger burr formation. A measurement of thrust–time characteristics was taken by employing a computerized multi-component dynamometer. In order to analyze the influence of feed on thrust force and burr formation, an additional drilling test was conducted on the composite specimens by increasing the feed from 0.06 It can be seen from It can be observed that the mean thrust increased from 130.77  Burr height values were plotted with three different spindle speeds ( ANOVA results ( The effect of spindle speed on the burr height was examined by increasing speed from 600 The smaller step angle (40°) was found to be the optimum parameter in minimizing the burr height. This can be attributed to the fact that when the step edge passes the exit side of the work piece, the work material at the bottom side of the step edge remained rigid and the cutting operation continues since it withstands the thrust force until the step edge exited. Hence only a thin section of material which is left during the operation is subjected to plastic deformation which in turn minimizes the burr height.  It was found from main effects plot for S/N ratios ( This paper has presented an application of L27 orthogonal array of Taguchi method and analysis of variance for investigating the effects of step drill's geometries and cutting parameters on the exit burr height in drilling of Al–Gr composite. Based on this study, the following conclusions have been summarized. The results of ANOVA revealed that feed, step angle and step size were the most significant parameters followed by spindle speed in the exit burr height. It was found that the optimum parameters for minimum exit burr height were feed (0.06 Feed was found to have a significant influence on thrust force. The results uniquely revealed that an increase in feed increases the thrust force and burr height. The best combination values of optimum parameters were confirmed with the verification experiments. The closeness of the results of predictions based on calculated S/N ratios and experimental values shows that the Taguchi experimental design technique can be used successfully for both optimization and prediction. The authors declare no conflicts of interest.