The present work studies the effect of a commercially type of drag reducing agent on the crude oil production flow lines located in the Egyptian western desert (Fagour field) and owned by Khalda Petroleum Company. The drag reducing agent used in this study is a high molecular weight poly alpha olefin prepared by emulsion polymerization technique and supplied under trade name of LP-111. The results showed that this drag reducing agent (DRA) has great effects on the pressure drop and fanning factor. After the field application of 60ppm of the DRA, the pressure drop was decreased by 36% at the pipeline capacity of 18,804bbl/day. The fanning number and shear stress were decreased by the same percentage of 47%. The capacity of production line can be increased by 38% all over the two pipeline section due to the great reduction of pressure drop.
                  The rheological behaviors of tested waxy crude oil were studied at different temperatures (varies from 67 to 102°F) and different DRA concentrations (10, 20, 30, 40, and 50ppm). The results showed that at all constant DRA concentrations, the viscosity highly decreased until 80°F (above pour point by 15°F). However, by increasing the DRA concentration, the viscosity is increased at temperatures lower than 80°F. This is because the DRA is a high molecular weight polymer which participates in increasing viscosity by increasing its concentration. After 80°F, the DRA concentration has an insignificant effect on viscosity. So the effect of the DRA is not in reducing viscosity but mainly in reducing the degree of turbulence energy. The field studies were performed at a normal temperature of tested pipeline sections (100°F). The tested DRA has an improving effect on reducing the pressure drop of pipeline which leads to reduction in crude oil pumping energy or an increase in the pipeline capacity with a high efficiency of the DRA.drag reduction drag reduction agent pressure gradient for the drag solution pressure gradient for the solvent liquid velocity shear stress shear rate viscosity diameter temperature scale by celsius barrel fluid per day pound per square inch head loss due to friction (SI units: m) the length of the pipe (m) the local acceleration due to gravity (m/s a dimensionless coefficient called the Darcy friction factor Turbulent friction of fluids can be reduced by adding small amounts of certain polymers or surfactant Field experiments were performed on Khalda Petroleum crude (KPC) oil production line called Fagour pipeline located in western desert of Egypt. The physical properties of this crude oil are listed in The drag reducing agent used in this work is a high molecular weight poly alpha olefin prepared by emulsion polymerization technique and supplied under the commercial name of LP111. Drag reducing agent (DRA) injection is performed using an injection skid included a texsteam pump (see It is important to find the relation between the viscosity and shear rate of crude oil at different temperatures and different DRA concentrations. This relation is investigated in this work to determine the effect of DRA on fanning and Darcy friction factors. It is also important to determine if there is an effect of DRA on crude oil properties or not. So the influences of DRA concentration and temperature on the crude oil viscosity were investigated by the use of a Brookfield Viscometer DV The viscosity of crude oil determined by the use of a Brookfield Viscometer is a measure of the ratio of shearing stress to shear rate. The Brookfield Viscometer measures viscosity by measuring the force required to rotate a spindle in a fluid at specified temperature in relation to its shear rate. On the DV The rheological behaviors of crude oil were determined at different concentration of DRA. Crude oil samples for the viscometer were prepared starting by the collection of a blanked sample (treated oil from shipping line) without the DRA. After that, five sani glasses (100 There are two factors affecting the friction head loss calculation; namely the Darcy friction factor ( The friction head loss Fanning friction factor related to the shear stress at the wall can be calculated using the following equation: The relationship between the friction head losses and the fanning friction factor can be calculated using Eq. The efficiency of DRA under consideration is measured by calculating the pressure drop reduction related to the addition of DRA compared to the pipeline pressure drop with the DRA (see Eq.   The calculated fanning factor decreased from 0.0053 to 0.00281 and shear stress decreased from 5.2748 to 2.7907  Relationship between shear stress and shear rate of KPC crude oil treated with different concentrations of DRA (10, 20, 30, 40, 50 and 100  For crude oil injected with different concentrations of DRA, it is noted that the working temperature range (67–102  This work studied the effect of a commercial type of DRA on the flow characteristics inside a pipeline network of KPC crude at Fagour field. The results showed that that application of 60 The rheological properties of crude oil treated with varied amounts of DRA at different temperatures were investigated by a Brookfield Viscometer DV The efforts done in this present work show the usefulness of using DRA revealed in increasing the capacity of the pipeline network or in improving the power consumption of pumps. Deepest gratitude is expressed to