The aeration leaching process for the removal of metallic iron from reduced ilmenite is a crucial step in the manufacture of synthetic rutile by the Becher process. This process, carried out in a mechanically agitated reactor is a multi-phase system involving a complex interplay between mass transfer and chemical reactions. Experimental investigations on the kinetics of this process exhibit a constant rate period followed by a decreasing rate period. A process model, which takes into account gas–liquid mass transfer, solid–liquid mass transfer, intraparticle diffusion of dissolved oxygen, surface reaction and homogeneous liquid phase reaction has been developed to interpret this behaviour. The model also accounts for the influence of the precipitated iron oxide (inert micro-particles) on mass transfer rates, as well as on the overall rate of iron removal. The results indicate that the overall iron removal process kinetics can be considered as constituted by an external mass transfer-controlled period followed by an internal diffusion-controlled regime. The sluggish kinetics observed towards the end of the process is due to the intraparticle diffusion-controlled leaching of iron by dissolved oxygen.An efficient and environmentally acceptable iron removal step is still a distant goal in mineral conversion processes due to the widespread occurrence of iron as an impurity in almost all minerals. A number of alternative approaches have been suggested ranging from conversion to the iron oxides or derivatives by hydrometallurgical routes, or to the manufacture of metallic (pig) iron through pyrometallurgical smelting Iron removal and control constitutes a crucial step in the upgrading of ilmenite ore to high value products such as synthetic rutile and titanium dioxide. Ilmenite ore (40–60% TiO The iron removal strategy is the distinguishing feature among the competing processes for the manufacture of synthetic rutile Notwithstanding its advantages, the iron removal step in the Becher process is extremely sluggish (industrial batch reaction times of 14 h) and needs significant improvements in its productivity. The absence of an adequate engineering model has prevented the identification of rate-controlling steps and a systematic effort towards process intensification. Since the development of the Becher process in Australia during 1965 The oxygen leaching process for iron removal is essentially the electrochemical dissolution of metallic iron by cathodic reduction with dissolved oxygen in NH As reported by Becher et al. Recently, Jayasekera et al. During a typical plant run, Ward et al. Oxidative pressure leaching processes for the recovery of zinc, gold, copper, etc., involve similar rate processes as encountered in the oxygen leaching process considered here, and modelling studies of these processes have already been reported With a vision of identifying the controlling steps and obtaining a quantitative process model for the iron removal step in the Becher process, it was proposed to carry out experimental investigations and develop a model, which takes into account the controlling steps, and which predicts the rate, conversion and solution parameters as a function of the various operating variables, namely, air flow rate, power input, solid loading and particle size. The proposed model also takes into account the influence of the additional solid phase formed during the process through its effect on mass transfer rates. As a first step towards this objective, experimental investigations on the process kinetics and modelling studies were carried out for the initial constant rate period, employing non-porous metallic iron particles in a previous study The experimental investigations on the oxygen leaching process for iron removal were carried out in an agitated, sparged reactor of 0.25-m diameter. The details of the experimental equipment are given elsewhere The reduced ilmenite prepared in the laboratory contained particles in the size range of 60–300 μm. The three size ranges employed for carrying out the experimental investigations were +100–150,+15 0–180 and +210–250 μm. Chemical analysis showed a total iron content of the reduced ilmenite equal to 28.5% and a metallic iron content of 22 ±1%. Specific surface area measurements were carried out in a BET apparatus (Gemini 2360). The reduced ilmenite samples were degassed at 200°C for 4 h prior to the measurement. Specific surface area and pore volumes for different particle sizes were obtained The agitator speeds for the suspension of reduced ilmenite particles under various solid loadings and airflow rates were determined using the Zwietering criterion The model equations to describe the oxygen leaching process for metallic iron removal from porous reduced ilmenite particles under the conditions typical of an industrial operation involve the following simplifying assumptions: Liquid and gas phases are well mixed. The rate of electrochemical dissolution of iron is controlled by the oxygen mass transfer rate. The oxidation of ferrous ions is in the slow reaction regime. The rate of hydrolysis of Fe Ferrous ions undergo neither hydrolysis nor precipitation as iron oxides. Fe Heat removal through the walls of the reactor is negligible compared to the heat removal due to air sparging. From the measurements of wet and dry bulb temperatures of the exit gas from the reactor, the oxygen-depleted air leaving the slurry was found to be saturated and in thermal equilibrium with the liquid phase in the reactor. In contrast to non-porous metallic iron particles, reduced ilmenite contains the metallic iron phase which constitutes 20–23% of the total mass dispersed on the external surface, as well as inside the pores of reduced ilmenite From the above observations and measured rates of iron removal, the dissolution of metallic iron from the reduced ilmenite is suggested to be as follows: (a) At time (b) As dissolution proceeds, more active sites are opened, that is, a linear increase in active surface area occurs from a conversion (c) When the external deposit of iron becomes exhausted, iron dissolution starts from the internal surfaces at a conversion The following reaction sequence is proposed for the overall oxygen leaching process for iron removal based on the reported information on process chemistry. Reactions at the solid suface:  (a) Anodic reaction (b) Cathodic reaction Reactions in the solid–liquid film:  (a) Buffering action of NH (b) Complex formation Reactions in the bulk liquid:  (a) Dissociation of complex (b) Oxidation of ferrous ions (c) Hydrolysis and precipitation Formation of Fe  Taking an oxygen balance over the bulk liquid volume, OH H  Since the electrochemical dissolution of iron is controlled by the oxygen mass transfer rate to the surface, the rate of iron removal at any point of time is given by  The overall leaching and precipitation can be represented as The influence of inert micro-particles on the solid–liquid mass transfer to active particles has already been reported  At The electrochemical reaction being fast, the reaction is controlled by the diffusion of oxygen through the macro-pores to the grain surface. Since the reaction product is soluble, there is no “ash layer” as usually encountered in gas–solid reactions described by grain models Metallic iron constitutes about 23% of the reduced ilmenite particle. Hence, the radius of the unreacted core at any conversion The heat balance over the reactor volume can be represented as Solution viscosity, oxygen solubility and diffusivity of oxygen vary with temperature. The solubility of oxygen or the saturation concentration of oxygen in water The variations of the solid–liquid mass transfer coefficient The effect of temperature on Fe In chloride solutions, the rate equation for ferrous oxidation reaction is of the form From the experimentally obtained iron removal data, the conversion was computed based on the metallic iron content. Conversion vs. time plots for various particle sizes and solid loadings, both under isothermal and non-isothermal conditions are given in  Substituting The mode of dissolution of iron is the major factor contributing to the variation of iron removal rate throughout the process. Up to a conversion of about 0.4, iron dissolution takes place from the external surface of reduced ilmenite particle, and hence, it remains a constant rate period. When the external deposit of iron is exhausted, reaction starts from the internal surfaces. Since the reaction is controlled by the diffusion of oxygen, the reaction rate decreases steeply as the reaction zone moves inward. The precipitated iron oxide influences the overall rate of iron removal through its influence on gas–liquid and solid–liquid mass transfer rates. Up to a conversion of 0.4, from where the pore diffusion commences, the reaction is controlled by gas–liquid mass transfer under the conditions investigated in the present study. Hence, reduction in solid–liquid mass transfer coefficient due to inert micro-particles hardly induced any change in the iron removal rate during this phase. Since the amount of iron oxide formed during this period is relatively small (less than 2% by weight), negligible influence on gas–liquid mass transfer, and hence, negligible retardation of the iron removal rates were anticipated, which is in agreement with the results. During the internal diffusion control regime, resistance to internal diffusion is the dominant factor. Variation in temperature influences the rate of the overall process through the variation in solution viscosity, solubility and diffusivity of oxygen and rate of reaction. The results show that in the temperature range studied in the present investigation (30–55°C), the overall influence of temperature on the rate of iron removal is negligible. For example, for the condition shown in Experimental investigations and modelling studies were carried out to analyse the oxygen leaching process for iron removal from reduced ilmenite. Time-dependent variations of rate of iron removal, pH and temperature were studied as a function of power input, air flow rate, solid loading and particle size of reduced ilmenite. The influence of precipitated iron oxide on mass transfer rates and on overall rate of iron removal has been taken into account. The model considers oxygen mass transfer as the controlling mechanism throughout the process. It also considers that iron dissolution from grains within the reduced ilmenite particles takes place after the dissolution of external deposits of iron is complete. Hence, the overall iron removal process can be considered as constituted of an external mass transfer-controlled phase followed by an internal diffusion-controlled phase. The sluggish kinetics towards the end of the process is due to the dominance of the intra-particle diffusion of oxygen through the macro-pores between the grains in reduced ilmenite particles. 