Since about the late-1970s, stirred mills have entered into use in the mineral processing industry. Much work has focused on model developed for power, grinding and performance prediction. However, little effort is cited in the literature related to wear and particularly impeller wear.
                  In this paper, the focus will be on examining how two pressure profile models might affect stirred mill impeller wear profiles specifically in the gravity induced stirred mill case. The investigation will start with a re-visit of a mechanistic impeller wear model for stirred mills which includes some indications on how impeller wear affects mill power. Subsequently a review of a few pressure profile models analysis will lead to exploring the effect of the pressure profile on impeller wear. The paper will close with a discussion on how the model could be used to illustrate the effect of wear on any impellor design.Dating back to 1928 ( However, in terms of impeller wear in mineral processing applications, there are no references found in the literature for Metso’s SMD or for FLS’s VXPmill (formerly the Deswik mill). In the case of Metso’s Vertimill, only some indication on impeller wear can be found through a paper on VTM maintenance ( In an attempt to contribute to filling this void, a stirred mill impeller wear model was proposed ( In this paper, the focus will be on examining how two pressure profile models might affect stirred mill impeller wear profiles specifically in the gravity induced stirred mill case. The investigation will start with a re-visit of a mechanistic impeller wear model for stirred mills which includes some indications on how impeller wear affects mill power. Subsequently a review of a few pressure profile models analysis will lead to exploring the effect of the pressure profile on impeller wear. The paper will close with a discussion on how the model could be used to illustrate the effect of wear on any impellor design. The model for vertically stirred mill impeller wear, reproduced below, ties the shear power model with an abrasion wear model which is a function of a hydrostatic pressure profile in the mill charge. Stirred mill power can be estimated using a shear based power model ( Shear volume is determined by first identifying the parallel shear surface pairs in a given mill and then calculating the shear volume for each shear surface pair. In the case illustrated in The resulting shear volume is defined as: After determining the shear volume and the viscosity of the medium, it is possible to estimate the power consumption of lab scale and of industrial scale mills (see It is noted that a generalised definition of the shear volume is found in Archard’s abrasive wear model Thus the pressure ( Therefore, the applied force (F Furthermore, if “any given point down the charge” equates to “any given disk” described in the shear volume approximation described in Knowing the applied force acting on the impeller at any given charge depth, it then becomes possible to use the wear model to estimate wear at different charge depths on that shear surface for each time step as illustrated in Knowing how the impeller wears, it is possible estimated the power consumption as a function of it as illustrated in Above and beyond the hydrostatic pressure profile relationship defined by Eq. Using the parameters in Using Janssen’s pressure profile for the 1 Assuming that an affine transformation can be used to stretch out these profiles from the 1 Before addressing the possible means of using this model to develop a better understanding of impeller wear in a vertically stirred mill context, it is important to address some of the assumptions used to support the development of this impeller wear model specifically, shear based power, abrasion and affine mapping. The underlying assumption to the model used for stirred mills power prediction is that shear is the predominant mechanism present in a stirred mill. The model was validated by comparing model predicts with observed measures of power. However, it is also understood that shear is indeed not the only mechanism present in stirred mills where some level of impact events do occur. As a result, it is important to understand this difference in the application of the shear based power model to any stirred mill design. Wear in the paper is assumed to be only abrasive in nature. This follows from the use of the shear based power model. However, as the work of In Keeping in mind these distinctions, one can examine the potential use of this model to understand and potentially describe the power and wear behaviour of any stirred mill where the impeller is concentrically located in the mill chamber. From the shear power model, one can understand how different impeller types along with media size, volume, density and mill size can potentially affect power consumption. With the addition of an impeller wear model, one can expand this understanding to include how, for the same impeller and media materials and hardness, an impeller will wear and what design and operating parameters will affect it. However, before drawing any conclusion regarding impeller wear, it is important to take some time to actually validate the model with some industrial data and applications. The goal of this paper was to examine and understand how two pressure profile models might affect stirred mill impeller wear profiles specifically in the gravity induced stirred mill case. To this end, a mechanistic impeller wear model using a hydrostatic pressure profile was re-visited. Subsequently, a pressure profile model based on Janssen‘s work was applied and the result indicated that there was a marked difference in the impeller profile. Further work is required to validate this model with industrial data. Despite the need for industrial validation, the current state of the model allows one to explore the different design dimensions of an impeller and understand how they might affect power consumption and impeller wear. The authors would like to thank Metso for granting them permission to publish and present this paper.