The kinetics of aggregation of nanocolloidal particles in suspensions has been studied using computer simulations based on Discrete Element Method. This study presents the analysis of the influence of Hamaker constant, Brownian forces and particle concentration on the aggregation time of nanoparticles in high ionic strength suspensions. Particle adhesion and cohesion were simulated using the van der Waals force equation. Half the particles were assigned a Hamaker constant of 9.0×10−20
                     J and the other half of the particles had the Hamaker constant varied from case to case with values between 1.0×10−20 and 9.0×10−20
                     J. Aggregation times obtained from analysing the number of interparticle contacts and number of singlets in the suspensions have been used to characterise the speed of the aggregation process. The simulation results show that when the strength of the van der Waals interaction increases the aggregation time decreases following a power law. In addition, the presence of Brownian forces speeds up the aggregation process. Finally, the relationship between packing fraction and aggregation times for singlets and contacts has been very well expressed by power laws.The control of long term stability of particulate dispersions is of crucial importance to a wide variety of industries including mineral processing and waste water treatment, and commodities such as paints, pharmaceuticals, and consumer care products. Whilst experimental methods are routinely utilised to assess suspension stability, the ability to simulate suspension behaviour computationally is becoming increasingly important. This is particularly true of samples that are costly (e.g. pharmaceuticals) or hazardous (e.g. biologically active particles), or to probe conditions for which there are not yet well-characterised model experimental analogues. In the absence of steric stabilisation, polymer bridging, or strong solvent structural forces, the interaction energy between two colloidal particles can be expressed as the sum of attractive van der Waals force and the electric double layer repulsion according the well known Derjaguin–Landau–Verwey–Overbeek (DLVO) theory For two identical particles, the electrical double layer interaction energy, Furthermore, the electric double layer interaction is dependent on the electrolyte concentration through the Debye constant, Here, According to Eqs. Ionic liquids are salts that have melting points below 100 Computer simulations based on Discrete Element Method (DEM) have only been used in the study of nanocolloidal suspensions in the last decade Discrete Element Method (DEM) is a computer simulation methodology in which particles are assigned individual physical and mechanical properties. In DEM macroscopic properties are obtained from the microscopic behaviour of the particles. DEM was first developed for the study of rock mechanics The motion of particles in DEM is determined by Newton’s second law, where the equations of motion are integrated numerically using a finite difference method The only contact force considered in the simulations presented here is due to the elasticity of the particles. The elastic force experienced by two contacting particles is given by Hertz’ Law: In this work, the long range forces that govern the attraction between particles are van der Waals forces. Electrostatic forces are a second long range force that have been considered in previous work The van der Waals force is generally calculated from the equation given by Hamaker where Eq. The fluid in these simulations was assumed to be stationary. This assumption is reasonable as the particles are very small (100 Brownian forces describe the random motion of particles in a fluid. The direction is randomly determined and the magnitude of the force follows a Gaussian, or normal distribution, with variance given by A computer code written in Fortran 77 was developed for simulating the aggregation process of nanoparticles. Eleven systems were investigated. In each case half of the particles were assigned a value of Hamaker constant of 9 The particles (100 An initial packing fraction of 0.016 was considered for most cases (See The analysis of the kinetics of aggregation was performed by determining the evolution of the number of interparticle contacts with time, and the evolution of the singlets in the system. Different characteristic aggregation times were obtained from the evolution of the normalised number of interparticle contacts and the evolution of the number of singlets in the system. The evolution of the number of interparticle contacts, The evolution of the number of singlets with time was fitted by the solution provided by Smoluchowsky for a constant kernel The physical meaning of both characteristic aggregation times, The normalised number of interparticle contacts, The normalised number of contacts has been plotted in The quantification of the influence of Brownian forces on the characteristic aggregation time for contacts, As shown in   Power law relationships with negative exponents have been fitted for the dependency of aggregation times on Hamaker constant for Brownian and no Brownian cases ( Finally, the tendency of the singlet aggregation times in the presence of Brownian forces contrast to the equivalent result for contact aggregation times. In the latter the balance between attractive (van der Waals) and disruptive forces (Brownian) was evidenced by the near-constant values of The influence of the number of particles in the system on the kinetics of self assembly was analysed by comparing cases 1 and 9 ( Particle concentration as expressed by packing fraction also has an important effect on the aggregation time of the particles in suspension. Nevertheless, the main effect of changing the initial packing fractions is found in The final values of packing fraction for the aggregates are difficult to estimate due to the highly irregular arrangements of particles, as well as the difficulty in obtaining the volume occupied by the aggregates. Therefore, we have calculated the packing fraction distribution inside the aggregates, where the value of packing fraction within a spherical shell layer is plotted as a function of the distance of the layer from the aggregate centre of mass. The results of this analysis are shown in The values of packing fraction are slightly smaller for the aggregates formed in the case of initial packing fraction value of 0.016 and correlates well with the corresponding values of aggregate coordination numbers. It is interesting to note that despite the aggregates being relatively sparse in this case, the coordination numbers and packing fractions are close to the results for the denser cases with initial packing values of 0.066 and 0.128. So the main difference is that more aggregates appeared in cases of low particle concentrations, in contrast to the assembly of all particles into a single cluster in the denser situations. This fact explains why despite the drastic visual differences between the three systems, the coordination numbers are relatively similar. The fractal dimensions are also relatively large for the denser cases. As suggested in the literature The computer simulation results presented in this paper demonstrate the influence of Hamaker constant and Brownian forces on the kinetics of self-assembly of a nanoparticle suspension under the conditions of high ionic strength. Brownian forces clearly speed up the self-assembly process of relatively dilute systems. An increase in the value of the Hamaker constant decreases the aggregation time for contacts and individual particles. In addition, it seems that a maximum number of interparticle contacts can be achieved, suggesting that very dense particulate systems cannot be formed by colloidal aggregation alone. It is also important to note that the aggregation times for singlets are usually smaller than the aggregation times obtained from the evolution of the number of interparticle contacts. However, in order to clearly explain this behaviour further analysis will be required. The quantification of the influence of the initial packing on the aggregation times has been successfully achieved for the simulation results. In addition, it has been demonstrated that the value of packing fraction dramatically affects the final structure of the aggregates, in particular the fractal dimension. This suggests a change from cluster-cluster aggregation to particle–cluster aggregation modes. Nevertheless, a mechanistic model that could explain the empirical relationship found here will be performed in future. Future work will be focused on the analysis of the influence of a polydisperse particle size distribution and how the presence of an electrical double layer would modify the current findings.