Hydrogenated amorphous silicon carbon (a-SiC:H) films were deposited using pure SiH4 and C2H2 without hydrogen dilution by hot wire chemical vapor deposition (HWCVD) technique. The photoluminescence, optical, and structural properties of these films were systematically studied as a function of substrate temperature (T
                     s). a-SiC:H films deposited at lower substrate temperature (T
                     s) show degradation in their structural, optical and network properties. The hydrogen content (C
                     H) in the films was found to be increased with decrease of T
                     s studied. Photoluminescence spectra shift to higher energy and less FWHM at high T
                     s. Raman spectroscopic analysis showed that structural disorder increases with decrease in the T
                     s.Hydrogenated amorphous silicon carbon (a-SiC:H) alloy thin films are important for various applications like thin film solar cells, light emitting diodes (LEDs), radiation detectors, antifuse technology protective layers in xerography and creation of a biocompatible surface for biomedical application Absence of the deleterious electrons, ions and surface charges and High dissociation rate of source gases. The former relates to the avoiding of powder formation at high pressure and filament temperature and the latter leads to higher deposition rate Several previous attempts have been taken for PECVD, ECRCVD and other CVD deposited a-C:H, a-SiN:H, a-SiC:H and a-Si:H films The films were deposited simultaneously on Corning 7059 glass and c-Si <100> wafers in a HWCVD system, details of which have been described elsewhere The transmittance and reflectance of a-SiC:H were measured by using a Jasco V 530 UV-Vis spectrometer. The optical band gap was deduced from Tauc's equations. The infrared (IR) absorption spectra of the alloy films deposited on c-Si were recorded on a Nicolet 5000 Fourier-transform infrared (FTIR) spectrometer in the range 400–4000 cm Disorder of films is inversely proportional to deposition rate of the film. Dissociation rate, gas phase scattering and sticking coefficient of the film forming species on the substrate surface are important parameters, which decide the chemical composition, structure and other physical properties. At higher substrate temperature the sticking coefficient of radicals are less and vice versa. So an optimum substrate temperature needs to be identified to get device quality a-SiC:H films. In the present work  This may lead to the following reasons: Sticking coefficient & surface mobility of radicals are key factors which control the deposition kinetics. An increase of the High substrate temperature may lead to desorption of hydrogen and with further rearrangement of atom yield a denser material with Reduced sp    The variation of the network as a function of  An attempt has been made to ascertain the role of