Particle size reduction is a suitable method to enhance the bioavailability of poorly soluble drugs. The reduction effectiveness depends on compound properties like crystallinity, hardness and morphology. Sometimes, it is difficult to obtain small particles. To solve this problem a combinative method was developed: a combination of freeze drying with high pressure homogenization (so-called H 96 process). The freeze drying modifies the drug structure to obtain a brittle, fragile starting material for the subsequent homogenization step. Screening experiments with glibenclamide have shown a relation between the lyophilization conditions and the final particle size. Systematic investigations using design of experiment (DoE) were conducted to identify optimal process parameters. The influence of the independent variables drug concentration and organic solvent composition during freeze drying were tested by conducting a two factorial design of experiment. The model drug was dissolved in mixtures of dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO) and tert-butanol (TBA) in different concentrations, freeze dried and subsequently homogenized at high pressure. Using optimized process conditions the particle size after 20 cycles was very small: 164nm (z-average) and 0.114μm (d50%). On the contrary, with unmodified drug the results were 772nm (z-average) and 2.686μm (d50%). It was shown, that the structure modification of the drug by means of freeze drying can significantly improve the particle size reduction effectiveness of high pressure homogenization. The study confirmed also the usefulness of DoE for nanocrystal production.New developed drugs show very often poor water solubility, associated with an inadequate dissolution rate that results consequently in a low oral bioavailability. Particle size reduction is a viable way to formulate poorly soluble compounds showing dissolution rate dependent oral bioavailability ( Currently four different production principles for drug nanoparticles can be distinguished: chemical reactions, bottom-up or precipitation techniques, top-down or comminution techniques and combinative approaches. The latter ones combine bottom-up with top-down steps for an enhanced particle size reduction effectiveness ( Bottom-up technologies start with a molecular dispersion of an active pharmaceutical ingredient. Particles are formed by a constructive assembling of the molecules to larger structures ( Typical bottom-up techniques are the solvent–antisolvent method, supercritical fluid processes, spray drying and freeze drying. The last two are promising technologies for the pharmaceutical development. Spray drying has been widely employed as a formulation technique for flowable powders production, although relative low yields are potential disadvantages of spray-drying processes, especially on small scale equipment ( Currently, top-down technologies are clearly the most important particle size reduction methods. At the moment all marketed drug products containing drug nanocrystals are produced by using top-down techniques. Therefore these techniques could be considered as being already accepted by the industry ( From an industrial and economical point of view it is highly desirable to minimize the milling times or homogenization cycles. To overcome the limitations of the standard bottom-up as well as top-down techniques new combinational methods have been developed for the production of ultrafine suspensions. Combinative technologies, which combine bottom-up with top-down steps are a relatively new approach to improve the particle size reduction effectiveness. The technology described in this paper combines freeze drying (FD) as bottom-up step for organic solvent elimination and API structure modification with high pressure homogenization as classical top-down technique for particle size diminution ( As already mentioned above, freeze drying, especially from aqueous solutions, is a well-established pharmaceutical unit operation. Freeze drying is a promising technique for developing pharmaceutical powders with improved solubility properties, although the freeze drying process could be relatively slow ( The freeze drying process can also influence the structure and crystal behaviour of drugs, making them porous and bulky. These properties are interesting in the case of applying a combinative particle size reduction method. The efficiency of the secondary top-down step can be significantly increased when more fragile material is used ( Design of experiments (DoE) is a very useful tool for the identification of critical process parameters and to optimize the respective process conditions ( The presented research was conducted in order to establish a better understanding of the factors influencing the particle size reduction effectiveness of this novel combinative process. One objective was to identify the influence of the intermediate's attributes powder morphology and solid state characteristics on the minimal achievable particle size. Another objective was the identification of process conditions leading to the smallest particle size after the high pressure homogenization process. The interaction between the two factors solvent composition and API concentration in the solvent during the freeze drying step were therefore systematically examined by applying a two factorial customized design. The particle size as Micronized (jet-milled) glibenclamide and the surfactant docusate sodium salt (DSS) were purchased from Sigma Aldrich, Germany. The freeze drying solvents dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO) and tert-butyl alcohol (TBA) were both purchased from Merck KGaA, Germany. Liquid nitrogen was used for freezing. Demineralized water was supplied by a Millipore Milli Q-Plus system. Previous research in nanocrystal production with the H 96 process ( Freeze drying was performed using a lab scale freeze dryer Christ Alpha 2-4 (Martin Christ GmbH, Germany). API solutions were prepared according to the two-factorial design at five glibenclamide concentrations and at five DMSO:TBA solvent ratios. Therefore, different glibenclamide amounts, i.e. 0.5, 0.875, 1.25, 1.625 and 2 SEM was used to characterize the particle morphology of the jet milled starting material as well as the freeze dried API powders. A small fraction of each API powder sample was fixed on a double-sided conductive carbon tape and sputter-coated with 5 A computer-interfaced differential scanning calorimeter DSC 821e (Mettler Toledo AG, Germany) was used to determine the crystallinity of the various API powders. The samples were accurately weighed (approx. 1–2 PXRD (wide-angle X-ray scattering, WAXS) was used to study the crystallinity of pure micronized drug powders and of the freeze-dried modified drug powders. Diffraction patterns were measured by using a Philips X-ray generator PW 1830 equipped with a copper cathode ( The unmodified, micronized glibenclamide and the different lyophilized glibenclamide powders were further processed to nanosuspensions. The API concentration was kept constant at 1% (w/w) (i.e. 0.4 PCS using a Zetasizer Nano ZS (Malvern Instruments, Germany) was performed to determine the LD was performed with a Mastersizer 2000 (Malvern Instruments, Germany) to examine the particle size and particle size distribution of the nanosuspensions. The samples were given directly into the equipment filled with dematerialized water until the measurement-level (obscuration range) was reached. That means the medium in the cell was saturated with API from the added nanosuspension. For each sample five runs were made to determine the volume based diameters d50% and d90%, and finally the average was calculated as the mean value of the individual runs. The real refractive index was 1.616 and the imaginary refractive index was 0.001. In preliminary experiments, it was found that both the solvent composition and API concentration were key variables for the preparation of nanosuspensions according to the novel combinative method. They determined dominantly the macroscopic appearance of the freeze dried intermediates and appeared to be critical to obtain certain quality attributes of the nanosuspension, like a certain particle size and polydispersity index (PDI) ( Besides the investigations regarding the powder morphology also the solid state of all unmodified and modified API powders, respectively, was investigated. In contrast to the powder morphology no clear trend could be found regarding the resulting crystallinity. Depending on the setting of the parameters API concentration and solvent composition, freeze dried, modified drug powders can be obtained either in crystalline, partially crystalline or amorphous state. Nanosuspensions have subsequently been prepared from all modified and unmodified glibenclamide powders. The usage of DoE has allowed the identification of settings for API concentration (factor 1) and solvent composition (factor 2) that result in small particle sizes and narrow particle size distributions. Additionally interactions between the independent factors were investigated. Particle size and PDI data shown in   The results of the two RSMs were challenged in a confirmatory experiment. The “lower left” quadrant of the design (medium-high TBA content, low-medium API concentration) showed the most variation in the responses. Therefore three settings of this quadrant were processed in threefold. The resulting data is shown in  The experiments described in this paper were conducted in order to establish a deeper understanding of the factors influencing the particle size reduction effectiveness of this novel H 96 process. It was intended to identify whether the increased porosity of the modified API or the change of the solid state properties during the freeze drying process are contributing to a better process efficiency. The DoE principles were applied to plan all experiments and to conduct the different steps in a controlled and efficient manner. The systematic investigations were beneficial in terms of time and informative value of the results. The particle size and the particle size distribution were used as qualitative and quantitative measure for the quality of the resulting nanosuspensions. It was not in the scope of these experiments to derive a quantitative measure for the porosity. Therefore electron microscopic pictures were used to visualize the different appearances of the freeze dried intermediates. The morphological differences were so obvious, that it was not attempted to measure them quantitatively. Both, the solvent composition and the API concentration have influenced the morphological appearance of the intermediates. Though it appears that more porous structures are present toward lower API concentrations and DMSO contents, this does not seem to directly reflect an influence on the mean measured particle size. The morphological appearance of samples freeze dried from highly concentrated glibenclamide solutions (27 The systematic experiments of the DoE enabled the identification of some points which showed surprisingly tremendously improved particle size reduction effectiveness. Solid state investigations have revealed that the API in these experiments was amorphous as result of the modification step. In confirmatory experiments it could be shown that this change of the solid state properties and the resulting particle size after the high pressure homogenization step was reproducible. Therefore it is very important to keep the process conditions constant. A deviation from the process conditions could result in more crystalline material which would result eventually in a larger particle size after the homogenization process. Finally it can be stated that the influence of the porous appearance of the modified API powders seems to be less important than the change in the solid state properties of the freeze dried API. The apparently obvious interaction between amorphous solid state of the modified API and the minimal achievable particle size could only be investigated separately by applying DoE. The usage of DoE resulted also in the identification of process conditions which lead to an improved particle size reduction efficiency despite a crystalline character of the modified API powders. This is important with regard to the broad acceptance of this novel combinative technology. It is possible to obtain tailor-made solutions for poorly soluble APIs without the need to use fully amorphous systems, which could potentially recrystallize. A novel combinative particle size reduction method, the combination of freeze drying and high pressure homogenization, was investigated in detail. Systematical investigations according to DoE principles helped to conduct the experiments in a controlled and efficient manner. The investigations have revealed that both, the morphological appearance and the solid state properties are influenced by the solvent composition and the API concentration as a consequence of the freeze drying step. The best results in terms of particle size reduction and particle size distribution after high pressure homogenization could be obtained when the freeze drying step yielded amorphous, highly porous API powder. However, surprisingly acceptable particle size results could also be obtained when the modification step yielded crystalline, highly porous glibenclamide. Therefore, porosity seems to be an important parameter. However, why also crystalline drug yields so small sizes cannot yet be theoretically explained and requires further mechanistic studies. Since the result of the particle size reduction step depends clearly on the freeze drying process, a proper control of all process conditions is required to obtain reproducible results. DoE has clearly proved to be helpful in identifying the optimal settings for the successful processing of glibenclamide and can therefore be considered as an indispensable tool in optimization of process parameters. This work was financially supported by