Coastal setbacks are used to protect populations and infrastructure, and involve determining baselines and historic trends in shoreline movements. Assessing these movements can be difficult on coasts with especially complex geomorphology, such as due to rock and coral reefs. Reefs are often assumed to provide coastal protection and stability. However, little is known about the spatial variability of beach dynamics on beaches with reefs, over inter-annual and decadal time-scales. Spatial variability in inter-annual vegetation line and shoreline stability was assessed on three adjacent beaches at Yanchep, southwestern Australia, using 34years (1974–2008) of aerial photographs. Over 96% of the study area, beach width narrowed over the 34years. This trend was statistically significant on 83% of the middle beach, 43% of the northern beach, and only 29% of the southern beach. The maximum mean annual change in beach width was 1.7myr.−1 at the south end of the southern beach, the first mode of the Empirical Orthogonal Function (EOF) explained 45% of the variability alongshore, and correlated significantly (p<0.05) with the 90th percentile of annual wave height and annual mean sea level. Beach rotation and reef-controlled currents resulted in cellular beach morphodynamics, and vegetation line and shoreline movements varied greatly alongshore. On one occasion, the beach widened by more than 50m inter-annually while other areas eroded by 50m. The southern beach that was fronted by the most continuous and highest (supratidal) section of reef was the most temporally variable. Even the vegetation line here moved by up to 20m inter-annually, so cannot be assumed to be a ‘stable’ baseline for setback. The impact of reefs on inter-annual shoreline and vegetation line stability should be considered in future guidelines for determining coastal setback.Rapidly growing populations, urbanization, trade, recreation and exploitation of resources are putting pressure on the coast. The impacts will be enhanced with the projected acceleration in sea level rise. Coral reef islands are thought to be particularly sensitive to extreme events and sea level rise ( On coasts that are spatially complex, such as those with reefs (reef coasts), assessing historic trends in shoreline erosion or accretion, and the alongshore variability, is even more challenging. Many coasts have naturally-occurring rock and coral reefs ( In Western Australia, in the coastal planning policy (SPP 2.6; Hourly to daily measurements at Yanchep showed that current jets between the reef and the shore led to larger temporal variation in beach volume ( More relevant to the current paper, is an investigation of the morphodynamics at Yanchep, using monthly beach profiles, and 6-monthly bathymetric surveys that spanned 2010–2012 ( A database of aerial photos from Yanchep spanning more than 34 From 2001 to 2011, the population of Western Australia increased by 24%, and Greater Perth by 26% ( The southern limit of the study area is determined by a salient in the lee of calcarenite reefs; and the northern limit by a 75-m-long groin that is in a poor state of repair ( This paper focuses on three beaches at Yanchep shown in WA894: the southern beach located behind a reef that is elevated by 0.4 WA895: the middle beach behind a continuous, intertidal to shallow subtidal reef that is elevated up to 0.3 WA896: the more exposed, northern beach that begins at the northern tip of the continuous section of reef, and extends to the groin ( These beaches consist of well-sorted sand with median grain size (d The tide is mainly diurnal with a mean spring tidal range of 0.6 The wave climate of southwestern Australia is dominated by swell from the Southern Ocean. Offshore, mean annual significant wave height ( The inter-annual variability and long-term change in beach width at Yanchep was investigated using aerial photos, spanning from 1974 to 2008 ( Due to the low tidal range, and the relatively steep beach at Yanchep, the position of the instantaneous shoreline (the land-water interface at any one instant in time ( The instantaneous vegetation lines and shorelines were digitized to represent the extent of the subaerial beach ( From a series of 9 beach profiles ( Long-term beach behavior is driven by a combination of factors, including sediment availability, nearshore topography, sea level, storm surges, tides, wind and waves. Annual meteorological and oceanographic (metocean) conditions were represented by annual indices. Due to the dominance of south-southwest sea breezes ( Eighty four of the 87 transects (96%) had a negative trend in beach width (i.e., narrowing of the beach). This trend was significant at 95% confidence for 35 of 42 transects (83%) on the middle beach, 6 of 14 transects (43%) on the northern beach, and only 9 of the 31 transects (29%) on the southern beach ( At Yanchep, the first mode of the EOF explained 45% of the variability between beach transects ( The 90th percentile wave height peaked in 1980, 1983, and 1996 ( Temporal vegetation line and shoreline movements varied alongshore in mode (erosion or accretion) and magnitude ( The complex array of reefs at Yanchep had a strong influence on long-term trends in beach width. The majority of annual sediment transport occurred in the very nearshore at depths < While there can be no doubt that metocean conditions are drivers of inter-annual changes in vegetation line and shoreline positions, the statistically significant relationships between metocean conditions and the width on the reef fronted beaches of Yanchep were weak. The first mode of the Empirical Orthogonal Function (EOF) ( It may be assumed that it is more appropriate to use the vegetation line as a baseline for the development of setback lines, as they are assumed to have less temporal and spatial variation. For example, in the Caribbean Islands the line of ‘permanent’ vegetation is used as a baseline because it shows only slight temporal movement, except due to relatively rare extreme storms ( The high spatial variation in inter-annual vegetation line and shoreline movements was due to the combined influence of the reefs on both cross-shore and longshore sediment transport. The differences in the mode and magnitude of vegetation line and shoreline movements between the northern and middle beaches compared to the southern beach, were due largely to the influence of reefs and headlands on longshore sediment transport. This process is schematized in Such distinct zones of sediment transport based on shoreline change rates were also observed at Kailua Beach, Oahu, Hawaii. Kailua Beach is broadly-embayed and fronted by a wide fringing coral reef that varies topographically alongshore. At Kailua, while the mechanism is different than at Yanchep, there were four distinct zones of alternating modes of seasonal erosion and accretion, reflecting the alongshore variability in the reef and alternation of alongshore erosion and accretion ( To summarize the implications of the above for determining coastal setback on reef coasts: (1) reef beaches should not necessarily be considered as more protected or stable than non-reef beaches; (2) coastal setback distances should take into account the potential for high spatial variability in shorelines, vegetation lines, and beach width on reef coasts, including on inter-annual and decadal time-scales. This may be implemented through alongshore-varying setback distances or by using estimates of the maximum erosion rate/trend in the area of interested, which may be behind reefs; and (3) the vegetation line on reef beaches may not be a stable baseline from which to determine coastal setback, with potentially significant inter-annual variability that needs to be considered. To get a more complete understanding of the magnitudes, alongshore variability, and forcing of morphological changes at the coast, more data are required with increased spatial and temporal coverage and resolution. Recent advances in imaging and remote sensing technologies for data collection, combined with improved methods of analysis, has the potential to provide such data in a cost effective way e.g., through stationary video camera images of the coastal zone such as ARGUS and similar systems ( Reefs should not be considered to always ‘protect’ the coast and promote coastal stability. At Yanchep, the southern beach that was fronted by the most continuous and highest (supratidal) section of reef varied the most inter-annually. Even the vegetation line here moved by up to 20 This research was undertaken partly at the University of Western Australia: Thanks to the Samaha Research Scholarship, and the Western Australian Marine Science Institution (Project 6.1) for funding. Thank you also to Matthew Eliot for providing data of annual wind anomalies, and the Department of Transport for facilitating access to aerial photos. We also thank the two anonymous reviewers and Editor Wells for their constructive comments. Aerial photos can be requested from Landgate, Western Australia. Digitized shorelines and vegetation lines are available from S L. Gallop. Processed sea level data are available at