A leaching process for platinum contained in a magnetite ore was studied, as an alternative process to cyanidation and aqua regia digestion. The proposed process employs concentrated chloride solutions and ozone gas injection during the entire leaching process. The effect of pH, chloride concentration and temperature was analyzed. Under atmospheric pressure at a temperature below 30°C, after 3h of leaching, metal extraction >90, 70 and 50% was attained for Pt, Pd and Au, respectively. The apparent activation energies for Pt, Pd and Au were found to be 44, 39 and 23kJ/mol, respectively. The magnetite mineral matrix was not attacked during the leaching of platinum group metals.Since ancient times, precious metals have caught the curiosity of humankind at all levels, from those who used them as ornamental objects, to those who flaunt them as an economic power symbol to the scientist that marvels at their unique and sometimes disconcerting properties. Among the precious metals are included metals of the platinum group (PGM), which in recent decades have become very important in areas such as catalysis, bio-engineering and nano-science. The main sources of these metals are mineral reserves, although recently their recovery from recycling, mainly of catalytic converters, has become important. Most commercial processes for treating ores containing PGM (in this paper gold is considered part of this group) include in this processing routes beneficiation, pretreatments and hydrometallurgical recovery. The first stage is commonly known as the “MF2 cycle” and was developed for the South African deposits; the name implies the use of Milling and Flotation units in series, which require at least two cycles. The second stage includes different processes where calcination, smelting and refining are combined. However, there are no uniform plant routes and each producer has his/her own processing methodologies ( Currently, the main (or at least the most common) industrial path includes in one of its stages pyrometallurgical processes, that is the smelting of the materials at temperatures above 1500 The final recovery step combines the most advanced hydrometallurgical processes in complex circuits which may include pressure leaching and high temperatures. Most involve up to three leaching-washing cycles of the mineral slurries. Although each plant is designed according to the mineralogy of the reserves ( In the past forty years there have been numerous attempts to develop new technologies for the recovery of PGM; most are protected by patents and some are currently in use in the metallurgical industry. These alternative processes have sought out other chemical systems: employing ozone, chlorides and mixtures of inorganic acids; some use aqueous solutions of sodium chloride and mineral suspensions to extract gold ( In the last decades, ozone has become an alternative oxidizing agent in hydrometallurgical processing. The advantages stem from the fact that its production is relatively easy, it can be added to the aqueous solution by direct injection, it also has high oxidizing power (2070 This paper presents a study of PGM extraction from a magnetite ore by leaching at near room temperatures, using gaseous ozone as oxidant in contact with concentrated chloride solutions. This system and conditions were chosen on the basis of their selectivity for the precious and PGM. All experiments were performed with a 20 The source of chloride ions for the leaching tests was analytical grade sodium chloride (J.T. Baker). The pH of the solutions was adjusted with a dilute solution of hydrochloric acid (J.T. Baker). In this paper, the terms brine or leaching solution are used indistinctly to refer to the aqueous chloride mixture. All aqueous solutions and calibration standards were elaborated using deionized water (Millipore, Milli-Q). Preliminary leach tests were performed to determine the typical potential of the slurry. The characteristic potential of the pulp varied between 520 and 600 All leaching experiments were performed in an unbaffled jacketed reactor (Pyrex 6957), with isothermal flow of an aqueous mixture of commercial ethylene glycol (30% v/v) at the required test temperature. The slurry density was 100 Leaching experiments were carried out following a systematic procedure. First, the brine was added to the jacketed reactor and the coolant flow conditions were adjusted to reach the required leaching temperature; the ozone sparging was then started and simultaneously the brine potential measurement was initiated (HANNA – HI 4212). The corresponding amount of mineral was added once the potential of the slurry reached its maximum, stable value; the potentials for each temperature were as follows: 1230 The quantification of the filtered digestion, leach liquors as well as aliquots for monitoring processing was performed using atomic absorption spectrophotometry. Calibration standards were made from analytical grade standards (Pt: JT Baker, Au and Pd: HYCEL). Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) tests were performed in order to observe changes in the surface morphology of the leached ore at different times (LEO 430 - Digital Scanning Electron Microscopy). Conditions in the filament were: 15 X-ray diffraction (XRD) was used to characterize the mineral matrix. The equipment used was a PANalytical X'pert-Pro diffractometer, equipped with an X-ray source with cobalt anode in the Bragg-Brentano assembly. The analysis of the information obtained was executed using the PANalytical HighScore Plus© (Vers. 3.0.3 2011) software. All of the thermodynamic data were obtained from the NIST database (Database 46 – Vers. 8.0.) and their corresponding diagrams were designed using the MEDUSA © (Making Equilibrium Diagrams Using Simple Algorithms) software ( The ability of halogen elements to combine with the precious metal ions in aqueous solutions is well known. In order to determine the thermodynamic potential and pH conditions favorable for PGM dissolution (reactions 1–5) between dissolved ozone in the brine ( The predominance diagrams for PGM ( The metal which can be considered thermodynamically more flexible corresponds to gold. In this case, there is no limit of stability pH dependent, at least in the range between 1 and 7. The AuClOH One of the major disadvantages of PGM is that they occur in mineral matrices in minor proportions (< Therefore, to prevent chemical attack of the matrix magnetite the iron predominance diagram was analyzed ( The PGM extraction is favorable in a relatively broad pH range, depending on the potential, between 1.5 and 7 ( Under the selective leaching conditions, chlorine gas is not formed ( The characterization performed confirmed ( Additionally, it could be established that the ore sample is composed mainly of magnetite ( The aqua regia dissolution results for the different size fractions can be reported as the dimensionless leachability index (I By contrast, for both the palladium and gold, the highest content of leachable metal ( A similar procedure was applied to establish the effect of stirring ( In this manner, it was possible to demonstrate a relationship between the stirring rate and the amount of PGM extracted at the solution at the end of each assay. For platinum and palladium, the minimum stirring rate required is 400 Because of its importance, all of the leaching tests, with chlorides and ozone were performed on particle sizes and at conditions where platinum and palladium extractions are favored (i.e. between 74 and 149 Preliminary tests showed that the natural pH of solutions with concentrations of 1 Leaching tests were performed at natural pH, using three chloride concentrations: 1, 3 and 5 The PGM quantification in the leach solution was found to be quite difficult since dissolved platinum, palladium and gold mutually interfere with each other, preventing correct measurement. In order to assure the mass balance of the metals, these were analyzed in the leach residue, after aqua regia digestion, using the standard addition method. The behavior of platinum extraction indicates a favorable effect of increasing the chloride ions concentration in the pulp. A larger amount of chlorides substantially enhances the maximum leaching extraction after 3 In a similar manner, palladium and gold are favored when the chloride concentration is increased in the leaching solution. However, the behavior respect to the percentage of extraction, is not necessarily proportional to the concentration, because the chemical characteristics of solutions (brines) are modified by elevated chloride concentrations (high ionic force) ( Applying a similar methodology to that used in the previous sections, most of working conditions were held constant; only the initial pH of the leaching solution was adjusted to values between 1.5 and 5. After leaching for 3 Size fraction: 74–149 Although the leaching process was designed to seek greater selectivity, without attack of the mineral matrix, in the liquor there is evidence that a very small amount of iron dissolves into solution. Even if the leached iron amount is almost negligible (always below 0.03% by weight), this small amount of iron, in its ionic state, may be important in the oxidation process with ozone, since it could participate in Fenton-type reactions ( Kinetic studies were carried out to analyze the PGM leaching phenomena at pH At room temperature (20 An important aspect to consider is the dependence of the ozone solubility on the solution temperature ( The influence of temperature is similar for the extraction of the three PGM ( One way to establish, at least in a qualitative manner, the amount of ozone in solution is to monitor the average potential for each batch leaching experiment ( Only a limited amount of ozone that could dissolve in the solution at this temperature is used in the selective oxidation of a small part of the platinum. This implies that this amount of platinum is easier to oxidize either by its association in the mineral, or by release through grinding. The remainder of the platinum (about 80%) requires a larger amount of oxidizing agent to be dissolved (higher potential) and cannot be removed at this temperature. Palladium and gold extractions decrease drastically at 30 Another scenario is to decrease the temperature ( Since there is a sufficient and constant amount of dissolved ozone in the brine at the three lower temperatures and all chloride-metal complexes formed during leaching are soluble, it is therefore possible to apply the reaction-controlled shrinking core model (SCM) to the PGM extraction results to describe the leaching kinetics ( Although the experimental data for gold show considerable experimental error, the activation energy was determined for the leaching process of all three metals by constructing an Arrhenius-type diagram ( Characterization studies were performed on the solid residues of the different leaching experiments at 20 The PGM (platinum, palladium and gold) leaching from magnetite ore is possible in the presence of chlorides using ozone as the oxidizing agent. There is a marked beneficial influence of the chloride concentration, being beneficial when it increases. The pH of the leaching solution may influence the extraction of PGM from the magnetite ore in two aspects: the amount of H The PGM leaching from magnetite ore can be described by reaction-control kinetics, with an acceptable adjustment to the shrinking core model. The apparent activation energies for PGM leaching in brines at pH A decrease in the temperature of leaching system produces an improvement in the ozone solubility in the brine, measured as an increase in the pulp potential. However, it also represents a decrease in the rate of leaching of PGM. With increasing temperature, the solubility of gas in the liquid drastically diminishes and the metal extractions lessen. PGM leaching from magnetite with brines at pH The authors wish to thank the Consejo Nacional de Ciencia y Tecnología (CONACyT) for the postgraduate scholarship granted to R. Torres (# 300856).  