In this paper the results of size, chemical and mineralogical characterizations as well as the concentration tests performed with a slimes sample of iron ore from a dam at the Quadrilátero Ferrífero in the state of Minas Gerais, Brazil are presented. The sample was constituted by 75 % of slimes (particles –10μm). The main minerals identified by X-ray diffractometry and thermal analysis were: goethite, hematite, quartz and kaolinite. The sample grades were: Fe (∼51.4wt.%.), SiO2 (∼15.1wt.%), Al2O3 (∼3.4wt.%), P (0.097wt.%) and LOI (∼7wt.%). During the optimized bench testing condition of selective flocculation/magnetic separation (pH=10.5, sodium silicate and corn starch =50g/ton, magnetic strength =3575G) by experimental statistical planning design, the mass recovery was of 48.4 %. There was an increase of 8 % in Fe grade and a decrease of 50 % in both SiO2 and Al2O3 grades when compared with the feed. Agglomeration studies with the obtained concentrate will be performed in future.The world wide increasing demands of iron ore products in addition to the depletion of high-grade iron ore deposits enables the exploitation of low-grade iron ores with complex mineralogy. These ores have to be comminuted, classified by size, and concentrated in order to obtain products according to the quality demands for both the iron and steel industries, which represent about 90 % of the total iron ore world production The tailings discharged from the industrial process described before can represent up to 40 % of the feed input in these operations (around 275.5 million-ton in Brazil just in 2014). Depending on Fe grades of discharged tailings it could be worthwhile to reprocess these materials in order to recover the Fe, which can be used in the iron and steel industries or to apply them without concentration operations for others finalities such as brick manufacturing, concrete production, radiological protection and pigment in the production of paint for buildings Inverse cationic flotation, using starch as iron minerals depressant and amine as siliceous gangue collector, is used to concentrate fraction sizes −105 In this work, characterization studies (physical, mineralogical, chemical and physicochemical) in an iron ore slimes sample were performed. Afterwards, selective flocculation/magnetic separation tests of this sample were conducted with the objective to recover it, so it could be blended with the flotation concentrates used in the pelletizing process. The iron ore slimes sample used in this work was collected at 21 points (the depth varied from 0.36 to 1.18 The reagents used were: NaCl (trademark: Synth) to control the ionic strength of electrophoretic mobility determinations; NaOH (trademark: Synth) and HCl (trademark: Synth) to adjust the pH of solutions and pulps; sodium metasilicate ((Na Particle size analysis of the sample was performed by the particle size analyzer Cilas model 1064. The sodium metasilicate solution (250 The main mineralogical phases of the iron ore slimes sample were determined by X-ray difractometry (powder total method). A PanAlytical X- ray diffractometer model X’expert The grades of Fe Electrophoretic mobilities of iron ore slimes conditioned with and without sodium metasilicate at pH values 7 and 10.5 were performed by zetameter Zetasizer Nano Series – Malvern Instruments. For all measurements, 10 The experimental procedure of electrophoretic mobility determinations was performed as follows: 0.1 For the selective flocculation/magnetic separation tests carried out with studied iron ore slimes, a complete factorial planning design with two replicates was used to study the effects of the following factors: pH (7 and 10.5), magnetic field (3575 e 5465 For selective flocculation tests, 5 % pulp density was prepared with the addition of 75 For the magnetic separation tests, a magnetic separator Carpco Inc. model WHIMS 3  The specific weight of studied slimes was of 4.17  The identified minerals in X-ray diffractogram (  The mineralogical studies of iron ores from the Alegria deposit where the mines of Samarco and Vale Mining companies are located, goethites (botryoidal and earth) with high grades of Fe  The isoelectric point (IEP) of hematite, reported in literature, varies from 4.8 to 7.4, and for goethite it varies from 6.7–8.2 At pH 7 the dominant sodium metasilicate specimen is [Si (OH)   The magnetic field (B) in magnitude range tested in this work, individually, did not have significance for any response variables analyzed. Only pH (A) had significance for Al In the optimization tool of the Minitab 17 software (goal: maximize Fe grade and minimize SiO Based on the characterization studies and selective flocculation/magnetic separation performed with an iron ore slimes sample, it was concluded that 75 % of the particles were below 10 The authors declare no conflict of interest. The authors would like to thank the