An outline of the directions and topics of future cake filtration research is presented. The proposed topics include the formulation of more accurate and efficient procedures of determining filter cake characteristics from experimental data, more complete analysis of cake formation and growth, the effect of accurate and non-intrusive measurements of the evolution of cake thickness histories. The selection is based on practical needs, intrinsic significance or both. The relationships between these proposed topics and some current and past research are also discussed.Cake filtration, as a solid–liquid separation process, is widely used in the chemical and process industry. In the earlier part of the last century when the chemical engineering profession was first established, it was also a popular topic of investigation. Among the earliest publications attributed of W.K. Lewis, an illustrious chemical engineer commonly credited for developing the chemical engineering profession, was an article on cake filtration This earlier interest and the effort devoted to cake filtration study, unfortunately, were not sustained and continued. By the second half of the last century, the development of cake filtration technology was left mainly to equipment manufacturers which tended to be small scale operations with only modest technical capabilities. Cake filtration research, even in universities became a minor field of endeavor. Among many academic engineers, there was the feeling that the field was well-studied and there remained few important problems worthy for further investigations. Resurgence of interest in separation technology in recent years has led to a revival of cake filtration studies. Problems arising from waste management and disposal, demand for more efficient mineral beneficiation and resources recovery, fabrication of new classes of materials and production of fine chemicals and pharmaceuticals can often be resolved with better filtration technology; the development of which requires a more insightful understanding and better information of the various aspects of the filtration process. As a field of study, cake filtration has begun to attract attention from investigators with various backgrounds different from those of chemical and process engineering. New perspectives about and different approaches to the solution of cake filtration have begun to emerge. In light of the new and more promising situation, we offer in the following a broad outline of the need and opportunities of research in cake filtration. Generally speaking, cake filtration may consist of several stages of operation. For batch operation, the process proceeds in the order of cake formation, cake consolidation and possibly cake washing. For operations using rotary and belt filters, the process may involve cake formation and dewatering by airflow. For cross-flow cases, cake formation may occur in the earlier stage of the process and media cleaning may or may not follow. In all cases, cake formation and growth undoubtedly are the most important part of the process. Accordingly, it is this aspect of cake filtration study which we will address in the present article. It is well understood that any prognosis about the future is likely to be fraught with failures and what is stated below should be strictly regarded as the author's personal opinion. Designing and scaling-up filtration systems depend largely on the availability and accuracy of the relevant experimental data. One may therefore argue that a major part of the future effort in cake filtration research should be directed at improving the existing and developing new procedures of determining cake properties. The efforts should be aimed at both enhancing the accuracy of the results and reducing the time required to conduct the experiments. The relevant quantities characterizing cake characteristics are the cake porosity, Further integration of It is clear that both (  The commonly used procedure of plotting Fathi-Najafi and Theliander A possible procedure for evaluating ( The physical parameter which characterizes cake formation is the specific cake resistance which is assumed to be a function of the compressive stress. Although the stress-averaged The so-called compression–permeability cell (C–P cell) measurement offers a conceptually simple, independent method of determining Generally speaking, C–P measurement is relatively simple to conduct. Independent determination of The purpose of the C–P cell measurements is, of course, to obtain cake solidosity and specific resistance data (as a function of the compressive stress) to be used in design and simulation. In cake filtration, compressive stress arises from the cumulative effect of fluid drag acting upon the particles constituting a cake. A relationship between the pressure of the pore liquid, A more careful examination reveals that the Comparisons between the specific cake resistance obtained from the filtration experimental results and those from the C–P cell measurements using the various In the chemical and process industries, cake filtration is commonly applied for separating solid from fluid or the recovery of filtrate. Filtration performance therefore can be described by the relationship between the cumulative filtrate volume, A fundamental question concerning cake formation and growth is cake definition. Put it in another way, is there a threshold value of Determining A different approach of experimentally determining In addition to the studies mentioned above, a number of methods of observing cake growth have been developed principally for cross-flow membrane filtration. Takahashi et al. The information of By definition, the particle mass fraction of the feed suspension, Accordingly, from the data of It has long been recognized that cakes formed from the same suspension but with different pH values may differ significantly in their solidosities and permeabilities A rigorous approach to the study of the particle–particle interaction effect in cake filtration can be made by first analyzing the fluid–particle and particle–particle interactions on the particle level. The result of this analysis can then be averaged to obtain a macroscopic description. The two key steps involved are the identification and quantification of the interactions and the construction of an appropriate averaging process. Questions regarding the latter have been mentioned before [see the various relationships between Explicit expression of the interaction forces between two particles mentioned above are readily available. To obtain the compressive stress, the sum of a large number of such pair interactions must be considered. Expressing the force expression in continuum variable, however, is not a simple undertaking. The efforts of Koenders and Wakeman have only yielded expression of limiting situations with undetermined coefficients. The practical utility of their work is therefore rather limited. To be practically useful, the knowledge and capability of directly relating the constitutive relationships with the solution and electrokinetic variables of suspension is desired. In the following sections, we will briefly explore the possibility of acquiring such a capability based on the work of Bowen and Jenner As stated before, Bowen and Jenner assumed the compressive stress may be expressed as  In more recent years, analysis and simulation of cake formation and growth have been a popular subject of study as evidenced by the relatively large number of publications of this type in the literature. It is not our purpose here to offer a detailed review and critique of these studies. Rather, the discussions given below will be restricted to a brief summary as background to the suggested future studies. A review of the earlier investigations indicate that all the analyses were based on the solutions of the volume-averaged equations of continuities of the fluid and particle phases. Their major differences reside mainly in the following areas. (1) The continuity equations may be given in either physical (spatial) coordinate or material coordinate. When the latter is used, the governing equation can be reduced to a form similar to the diffusion equation. (2) Different parameters were used to characterize cake properties. However, there is correspondence between these different sets of quantities; thus making it moot to claim superiority of one set of quantities over others. (3) Different physical domains were used in the analyses depending upon the mode of operation; continuous or batch. As a result, cake compaction and/or the presence of a suspension phase may or may not be included. These differences also led to the use of different boundary conditions. (4) The question whether there is a discontinuity in solidosity across the cake/suspension interface is unsettled, and formulation of the moving boundary condition due to this discontinuity was not always done properly. (5) Most of the analysis were made numerically. Some investigators have attempted analytical solutions but with only limited success. That there are a relatively large number of studies dealing with the same subject but using seemingly different notations and often with spurious claims have caused confusion especially to potential users of the results. Studies aimed at reconciling these results and their comparisons (in terms of user-friendliness and accuracy) are therefore needed. Other studies which are worthwhile include the incorporation of the simulation as part of a parameter search algorithm which can be used to evaluate the parameters of the constitutive relationships from experimental data. Because of the relatively large number of parameters to be determined, a two-stage search which first determines some approximate values followed by refinement may be required. Another problem which may warrant attention is the development of approximate analytical solutions which yield results more accurate than those of the conventional theory but do not require excessive competition. For example, Landman et al. As a more fundamental approach to the analysis of cake formation and growth, the use of computer simulation based on particle dynamics consideration offers significant possibilities. In principle, computer simulation allows the monitoring of the movement of individual particle and the determination of liquid flow field within a forming cake, taking into account all the forces involved including the particle–fluid, particle–particle interactions. It is therefore possible to obtain results of filtration performance as well as the evolution of the cake structure from simulation. Lu and Hwang The brief presentation given above is to demonstrate that cake filtration is indeed a fertile field of research in spite of its being a subject of study and engineering practice of long standing. Its rigorous study based on micromechanical approach requires interfacing knowledge and information of several disciplines. It is therefore not surprising that investigators active in the field nowadays have various educational and professional backgrounds. An important factor to be recognized is that regardless of the specific topics of research one may undertake, the study must have consequences in practice. Thus, it is important that analysis of cake filtration should yield results not only in predicting filtrate performance, but also provide basis for data interpretation and process control. There should also be close interaction between analysis and experiments. In this regard, establishing a database of cake filtration work accessible to the public should be highly desirable. Cake filtration research offers opportunity of not only obtaining results useful and significant in themselves but providing experiences which are essential to engineering graduate education. In this context, one can only hope that in the not too distant future, more interest in its study will be developed in universities and educational institutions.  effective area occupied by one particle particle radius separation distance configurational electrostatic force London van der Waals Force hydration force cake permeability cake thickness wet to dry cake mass ratio operating pressure liquid core pressure compressive stress value of filtration velocity medium resistance particle mass fraction of feed concentration time cumulative filtrate volume specific cake resistance average specific cake resistance pressure drop across filter cake pressure drop across medium cake porosity cake solidosity solid volume fraction of suspensions value of average cake solidosity filtrate viscosity filtrate density particle density The author wishes to thank R. Bai, B.V. Ramarao and R.B.H. Tan for their comments and criticisms during the course of this work.