Both bacteria and fiber can promote self-healing of cracks in concrete by accelerating calcium carbonate precipitation. Calcium carbonate in bacterial concrete grows from section surfaces of cracks, which might be altered after incorporating fibers. Therefore, this paper investigated coupled effect of PP fiber, PVA fiber and bacteria on self-healing efficiency of concrete. Optical density of bacteria cultivated in medium containing fiber was measured by using multifunction microplate reader, results showed that PP fiber and PVA fiber resulted in decrease of bacteria concentration. In addition, calcium carbonate induced by bacteria was synthesized in solution with fiber and characterized by using X-ray Diffraction, FTIR and particle size analyzer. Results revealed that the polymorphs of calcium carbonates were all calcite, while calcite generated in solution with PVA fiber showed lager particle size. In bacterial fiber reinforced concrete, crack width of 300–500 μm was obtained and autogenous healing performance was evaluated. The results showed that although repair ratio of crack area for specimens with bacteria and fiber was slightly lower than that with bacteria only, water tightness and flexural strength regain ratio were improved evidently. By measuring the amount of calcium ions in repair medium and observing calcium carbonate distribution in the cracks, it could be concluded that PP fiber and PVA fiber were conductive to calcium leaching and calcium ions utilization. Deposition was attached on surfaces of fibers and can even be observed on PVA fibers inside of cracks, which was due to effect of polarity groups and cell structure of polyvinyl alcohol fiber on calcium carbonate nucleation. Therefore, the study suggests that coupled effect of PP fiber, PVA fiber and bacteria has potential to enable excellent self-healing performance in concrete.With increase in population and urbanization, it is necessary to provide safe structure and materials nowadays. Concrete is most widely used material in construction with an increasing demand due to its strength, durability and low cost. However, concrete cracks under high local stress caused by various mechanical, physical and chemical processes such as external loading, shrinkage, temperature gradients, and expansive reactions Self-healing phenomenon in concrete has been known for many years Another mechanism of self-healing in cement-based materials is autonomous healing based on mineralization, which shows high self-healing efficiency especially under roles of bacteria Capturing calcium ions in the cracks and providing nucleation sites to increase growth directions and positions of precipitation inner of cracks might be possible solutions for the aforementioned problems, which might be achieved by incorporating fibers into microbial concrete. Reinforcing fibers in the cement matrix can enhance the self-healing performance of concrete In recent years, some researches have reported that high healing effect of cracks could be achieved in the fiber reinforced bacterial concrete. Sini Bhaskar et al One type of carbonic anhydrase alkali-resistant bacteria As previous results showed that PP fiber and PVA fiber could be conductive to the self-healing performance of concrete, as mentioned in introduction section. And PP fibers and PVA fibers are normally used synthetic fibers in concrete. Therefore, PP and PVA fibers are selected for investigating their coupled effect with bacteria on self-healing efficiency of concrete herein. Monofilament polypropylene microfiber (-length 6 mm (PP1) and 9 mm (PP2)) were used. The elastic modulus of PP fibers was 3.5 GPa and the diameter was 38 μm. Polyvinyl alcohol fiber (PVA) with length of 6 mm (PVA1) and elastic modulus of 37.4 GPa was also chosen due to its effect of facilitating the precipitation of healing products PP fiber and PVA fiber were immersed in anhydrous ethanol solution for 24 h and then immersed in deionized water for another 24 h. After being removed, they were rinsed by deionized water to remove residual ethanol after which they were put in the oven at 50 °C for three days. Afterwards, 1.67 g PP1, PP2 and 2.37 g PVA1 (with the same volume fraction of 0.73%) fiber were added into 250 ml liquid medium before inoculation, respectively. Inoculated medium was cultivated at the same conditions as previously described in Section 2.1. The optical density at a wavelength of 600 nm (OD Four mixes were prepared in this study. One solution was without fiber as control and another three mixes were incorporated with 2 g PP1, 2 g PP2 fiber and 2.76 g PVA1 fiber (volume fraction of 0.73%) respectively. 100 ml bacterial medium was prepared by mixing 100 ml calcium nitrate solution with a concentration of 1 mol/L and different types of fiber. Then, the suspension was continuously stirred with a magnetic stirrer at 25 °C for three hours and left standing for another two hours. The calcium carbonate was obtained by filtering the suspension in medium without fiber with double circle qualitative filter paper and scraping the precipitation on the fibers after which it was put in oven at 105 °C for three days for further testing. To determine the components of the samples, calcium carbonate was subjected to X-ray diffraction analysis (D8-Discover, Burker, Germany). The X-ray target was copper. Calcium carbonate was manually ground and then passed through 200μ sieve. The 2θ scanning ranged from 10°to 90°with a step of 0.02°. The same sample after being subjected to XRD was used to measure its FTIR spectra at a wave band from 3500 to 500 cm 3 g calcium carbonate was added to 100 ml anhydrous ethanol solution and dispersed with ultrasonic for 5 min. A laser particle size analyzer (Microtrac S3500, Microtrac Inc, America, minimum measured value = 0.04 μm) was used to record the cumulative volume fraction at different sizes and particle size distribution. The dispersion was added to ethanol dispersant of the analyzer by drops until particle volume reached a suitable range provided by system. To compare the influence of further hydration after cracking, mix of the plain mortar was designed, which was comprised of Type II Portland cement (CEM II 52.5N), Chinese standard sand (fineness modulus of 3.0, and the gradation conforms to ISO 679) and tap water in the ratio of 1:2:0.45. The chemical composition of cement is shown in Calcium nitrate was first dissolved in bacterial medium. Cement and sand were dry-mixed for 30 s after which the self-healing agent was added to the mix. The mixing was continued for 1 min during which the rest of the water was added and mixed for 2.5 min at high speed (autorotational speed of the blade was (285 ± 5) r/min, revolution speed of the blade was (125 ± 10) r/min). Once the mix was homogenous, fibers were added and the mixing was continued at high speed for another 3 min. For the control samples, cement, sand and water were mixed for 4 min. The fresh mixes were cast into moulds with dimensions of 40 × 40 × 160 mm by placing on a vibrating table for sufficient compaction. The moulds were covered with plastic wrap immediately after mixing to prevent fresh mix from moisture loss. After curing for 24 h, specimens were demolded and kept in standard curing room (20 ± 1 °C, RH ≥ 95%) for further curing. In order to maintain the relatively high activity of non-encapsulated bacteria, the prisms were taken out from the curing room just after one week, as previous results showed that crack sealing efficiency could decrease with the extension of cracking age and the self-healing efficiency was relatively obvious for specimens cracked after curing for 7 days Every batch of three treated cracked specimens with the same mix were immersed in 1500 ml deionized water in a 15 × 15 × 17 cm transparent plastic crisper vertically and the size of the bottom surface of the specimen was 40 × 40 mm (with the height of 160 mm), at 25 ± 2 °C. Other undamaged specimens were placed in the same condition to the cracked samples and concentrations of calcium ions of water media both for crack-free and cracked concrete were measured by using a calcium ion meter (MP523-03, SANXIN, China, accuracy class = 0.08) every seven days over a 28-day period. Specimens were removed from water every seven days and stored at 25 °C and 60% RH for three hours, then the crack surface in contact with water was photographed by using stereo microscope. 3–4 positions distributed uniformly along the crack length were taken images in each prism. The photos of crack surface was binarized by setting the crack area threshold gray level for (50 ± 1), using software named Image-J. After which the area of crack surface was calculated as a percentage of the total cross-section of the sample. The image processing of surface cracks before and after healing were carried out and the area repair ratio was expressed by Crack-free and cracked concrete specimens were placed in a desiccator and put in an oven at 50 °C for three days. Then, samples were stored at 25 °C for 10 days. The test was carried out in a room with 25 °C and 60% RH. The procedure of water absorption test was conducted based on ASTM C 1585 Un-damaged specimens after curing for 35 days and cracked samples (cracked after curing for 7 days) after healing for 28 days were tested by central-point loading after being taken out from water, according to ASTM C293 After immersing in water for 28 days, samples of fillers in cracks were collected to observe the morphology of the precipitation by using for SEM (FEI 3D, FEI, America). Samples were dried in an oven at 50 °C for three days under vacuum and gold-coated with a high-resolution sputtering coater (Q150T S) prior to examination. An energy dispersive spectrometer (EDS) connected with SEM was used to detect the components of precipitation. From Initially rapid increase of OD FTIR analysis is used to identify the molecule groups of particles. In order to confirm the polymorph of precipitation, XRD analyses were carried out on samples synthesized in solution with fiber or not. To investigate the changes of particle size of calcite, particle size measurements were performed. In summary, existence of fiber would not influence the polymorph of calcium carbonate induced by bacteria, but PVA fiber could contribute to the increase of particle size of calcium carbonate and the reasons would be discussed in Section 3.4.2. Photos taken by stereo microscopic and their binarization images of crack surfaces were shown in Specimens with PP1 fiber showed the area repair ratio of 20% in first 7 days and then the area repair ratio increased slightly, reaching 26%, which is lower than that of control samples after 28 days, as PP1 fiber might lead to the decrease of particle size of calcium carbonate, concluded from Repair ratio of crack area of mortars with PP1 fiber and bacteria reached 37% at 7-day and 32% crack area healing ratio was obtained without too much fluctuation after 21 days. Higher repair ratio of crack area could be found in the specimens with bacteria and PP2 fiber, achieving 43.1% crack area closed. The specimens with PVA fiber and bacteria contained the highest value of area repair ratio among the samples with both bacteria and fiber. Its value was 55.2% after healing for 7 days and rose slowly to 64.6% at the 28th healing day. It was noting that the area repair ratio of samples with bacteria and fiber was higher than that of samples with corresponding fiber only, but lower than that of samples with bacteria only. This could be resulted from two aspects based on the bacteria and fiber respectively. One is that more calcium carbonate induced could be generated after incorporating bacteria into fiber-reinforced mortars. Another is that fiber, could inhibit the activity of bacteria, especially for PP fiber. In addition, some calcium ions dissolved from inner of cracks could be captured on surfaces of fiber, resulting in relatively low concentration of calcium ions on surface of cracks to deposit calcium carbonate compared with specimens incorporated bacteria only. Furthermore, the reason why area repair ratio of specimens with bacteria and PP1 fiber was lower than that of specimens with bacteria and PP2 fiber could be due to larger particle size of calcium carbonate influenced by PP2 fiber than that influenced by PP1 fiber, as shown in  Specimens with bacteria and fiber showed lower capillary water absorption than specimens with corresponding fiber or bacteria, which indicated that incorporation of bacteria and fiber leaded to significant improvement in water tightness of cracked concrete. However, reduction of capillary water absorption rate caused by bacteria and PVA1 fiber was lower than that caused by bacteria and PP fiber, which was not consistent with the self-healing results of crack area reduction. It could be due to difficulty of carbon dioxide transportation from sealed crack surface to inner of cracks, for specimens with bacteria and PVA1 fiber.  Moreover, the variation rate of the coefficient of sorptivity, R  For cracked specimens after healing for 28 days, it could be clearly observed that only specimens with fiber revealed flexural strength, which could be due to the role of transferring the stress across the cracks and preventing crack propagation R In summary, coupling effect of bacteria and PVA1 fiber resulted in relatively high closure rate of crack area, while specimens with bacteria and PP1 fiber and with bacteria and PP2 fiber showed higher self-healing effect on water tightness recovery and flexural strength regain, respectively. The morphology and composition of filling product in cracks were analyzed, as shown in As shown in Concentration of calcium ions in curing media for un-damaged specimens at different ages of 7, 14, 21 and 28 days are presented in For samples with bacteria and PP fiber, the concentration of calcium ions increased continuously from 0 d to 21d and decreased in following days, while content of calcium ions in curing media for samples incorporated PVA1 fiber and bacteria kept rising. It means that the amount of calcium used was higher than calcium leaching amount only after 21 days for specimens with bacteria and PP fiber, which even didn’t occur in specimens with bacteria and PVA1 fiber. It is worthwhile to note that the highest concentration calcium ion (64.4 × 10  As shown in As shown in  Differences between PP fiber and PVA fiber on improving self-healing capacity could be mainly due to two reasons. One reason is the difference of molecular structure. By conclusion, both bacteria and PVA fiber could provide nucleation sites for calcium carbonate, inducing calcium carbonate precipitation. It could explain the superb ability of utilizing calcium ions in specimens with bacteria and PVA1 fiber and the difference of particle size for calcite synthesized in solution with PVA fiber and without. Furthermore, mechanism of coupled induction effect of bacteria and PVA1 fiber on calcium carbonate might need further research in the future, for example, by measuring the change of calcium concentration in the solution during mineralization process. This paper studied that coupled effect of PP fiber, PVA fiber and bacteria on self-healing efficiency of concrete. PP1 fiber (6 mm), PP2 fiber (9 mm), PVA1 fiber (6 mm) and a type of bacteria were adopted. Bacteria activity in medium containing different types of fiber was investigated and composition, molecule groups and size of mineralization product generated under conditions with fiber were analyzed. Crack width of 300–500 μm was obtained and the repair effect was evaluated by crack area repaired, capillary water absorption reduction and flexural strength regain. Moreover, calcium ions in the repair medium were measured and images of fibers in different positions were taken in order to analyze the mechanism of combined effect of bacteria and fiber. Conclusions can be drawn as follows: Three types of fiber all inhibit bacteria growth and reduce bacterial concentration, especially for PP1 fiber, but the inhibition effects were limited. Incorporation of PP1 fiber, PP2 fiber and PVA1 fiber doesn’t alter the composition and molecule groups of calcium carbonate, which is calcite. Incorporation of PVA1 fiber increases the size of calcite, while the sizes of calcite synthesis in the solution containing PP fiber or not don’t show slight decrease. Samples with bacteria and fiber show higher repair ratio of crack area compared to samples with corresponding fiber only, while highest crack repair ratio is shown in specimens with bacteria. Incorporation of fiber and bacteria showed significantly reduced capillary water absorption and coefficient of sorptivity in repaired specimens, especially for specimens with bacteria and PP1 fiber. It’s attributed to precipitation of calcium carbonate, induced by bacteria and partially deposited on fibers. Inclusion of fiber and bacteria contributes to regain of flexural strength, which is mainly resulted from crack-bridging ability of fiber. Highest flexural strength regain ratio is achieved by incorporation of PP2 fiber and bacteria. Specimens with PP1 fiber, PP2 fiber or PVA fiber and bacteria show high calcium leaching and calcium ions utilization abilities. Reduction of fiber diameter during crack creation might increase pores around fibers, encouraging calcium leaching from the matrix to cracks, then dissolved calcium ions could be captured by fibers, especially for PVA fibers. Therefore, more calcium carbonate deposited in crack interior also was observed in mortars with bacteria and fiber, compared to control samples and samples with bacteria only. Calcium carbonate precipitates on surfaces of cracks and fibers, while deposition on fibers inner of cracks could be only observed on PVA1 fibers. Induction effect of bacteria and PVA fiber on calcium carbonate nucleation might be the reason. In the future, investigation on influence of fiber and bacteria on self-healing efficiency of internal cracks might be conducted by using emerging technology, such as X-ray computed technology. The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. The financial help of the