Gravity segregation of intermetallic compounds in the melt of A380 aluminum alloy has been investigated in both un-modified and Sr-modified states. Sedimentation was investigated at 630°C for settling times of 30, 90, and 180min in an electrical resistance furnace. The effect of settling time and height of melt on the amount of intermetallic compounds was studied by using image analysis. Sr-modification decreases the volume percent, size and number of settled intermetallics at the floor of the melt for all holding times. Distribution of alloying elements in Sr-modified melt is, also, more homogenous than un-modified melt. Kinetics of formation and segregation of intermetallic particles at the temperature of 630°C have been modeled by Avrami and Stokes’ equations. It has been shown that Sr-modification delays the formation and settling of intermetallic compounds in the melt.Aluminum alloys contain some impurity elements such as iron, manganese and chromium The harmful effects of Fe can be minimized by various techniques such as the melt superheating or addition of Mn, Sr, and K elements Gobrecht Cooling the melt to a lower temperature than a specific one (called sludge formation temperature) will cause the formation of primary intermetallic particles. Sludge formation temperature rises with increase in segregation factor of an alloy On the other hand, the effect of strontium as a modifier element in modification of eutectic silicon and Fe-intermetallics has been well known In this research, the kinetics of formation and segregation of intermetallic particles in the melt of A380 aluminum alloy has been investigated by a systematic work. The effect of Sr-modification on the kinetics of sedimentation of intermetallics has also been studied. Experimental settling velocities have been compared to theoretical ones obtained by Stokes’ law. Avrami model has been developed for un-modified and Sr-modified melts to estimate the volume percent of intermetallics exist at different holding times and at a constant temperature of 630 A380 aluminum alloy ingots with chemical composition given in The ingots were melted in a SiC crucible in an electrical resistance furnace. Melting was done under coveral flux to prevent oxidation. Modified melt was prepared by addition of 0.04 Sludge formation temperature for A380 aluminum alloy is about 650 Morphology and chemical composition of intermetallic compounds were investigated by optical microscope and scanning electron microscope equipped with an EDS analysis system. The volume fraction, size and number of intermetallic particles were measured by an image analysis software and mean values are reported in the paper. Microstructure of A380 alloy consists of primary aluminum phase, eutectic silicon and intermetallic compounds.   Sr-modified alloys show a similar behavior. As the holding time and distance from top of the mold increases, the settling of intermetallics becomes more obvious. However, in modified alloys, settling kinetics is different from un-modified ones and will be discussed later.  The height of sedimentation at the bottom of the mold for un-modified melt is higher than Sr-modified one as it is shown in  In the previous section it was shown that intermetallic particles settle to the floor of the mold and increasing holding time increases the amount of segregated phases. Since the intermetallic compounds consist of alloying elements such as Fe, Mn, Cu, and Cr, it is expected that the concentration of these element vary with the distance from top of the mold.  Following equation can be used to compare the settling tendency of alloying elements at different locations of the melt: Another useful parameter called relative concentration gradient of an element ( As described, Sr-modification decreases the volume percent and size of segregated intermetallic compounds accompanied by a decrease in concentration gradient of alloying elements. In the following sections, the kinetics of formation and settling of intermetallic compounds in Sr-modified and un-modified melts have been discussed and modeled by Avrami equation and Stokes’ law. Since the nucleation and growth of intermetallic compounds is a diffusional transformation, Avrami equation can be utilized for estimation of the volume percent of intermetallic compounds which form in the melt at different holding times and at a constant temperature. To calculate the constants of Avrami equation “ Using these equations makes it possible to estimate the volume percent of intermetallic compounds after holding the molten metal at 630 The settling velocity ( In order to find volumetric flow rate of intermetallics at each settling time, the difference between volume of intermetallics at the top and near the bottom of the mold (distance of 20 and 210 The difference between volume percent of intermetallics at the locations 20 and 210 And hence the volumetric flow rate is The effective area is the cross-sectional area of intermetallics on which the drag force operates. The average area percent of intermetallics for settling time of 30 Finally the settling speed of intermetallic in un-modified melt for settling time of 30 Experimental settling speed at the other times and for Sr-modified melt can be calculated in a similar way and the results are given in Theoretical settling speed of intermetallic particles can be calculated by Stokes’ law. The Stokes’ law predicts the maximum settling velocity attained by a spherical particle falling through a stationary fluid. This velocity is given by the following equation: The values of constants used for the calculations are given in  The Reynolds number ( E.g., at settling time of 30 And therefore, Stokes’ law can be applied with confidence to the present system. Experimental and theoretical settling speed of intermetallic particles in Sr-modified melt is lower than un-modified one. Sr-addition delays the formation of intermetallics and reduces the size of them and hence, decreases the settling speed. It is found that the growth of intermetallic compounds is highly sensitive to the amount of strontium The following conclusions can be drawn from the results of the present investigation: The volume fraction, size and number of intermetallic compounds in Sr-modified melt are less than un-modified melt at a constant holding time. The volume, number, size and the height of segregated particles at the floor of the melt is decreased by Sr-modification. Concentration gradient of alloying elements is decreased in Sr-modified melt and distribution of alloying elements becomes more homogenous. Avrami equation has been developed for Sr-modified and un-modified A380 alloys to estimate the volume fraction of intermetallics in the melt at different holding times and a constant temperature of 630 Strontium addition delays the formation of intermetallic compounds in the melt and also decreases the settling velocity of intermetallic particles.