Objectives
                  To investigate plasma osteopontin (OPN) and osteocalcin (OCN) levels in dental patients with carotid artery calcification (CAC) and determine the correlations between these proteins and renal function and tooth loss.
               
                  Methods
                  The health parameters and number of teeth of 99 participants were recorded. Panoramic radiographs were taken for CAC evaluation, and OPN and OCN levels were measured.
               
                  Results
                  None of the participants had overt kidney disease, and 14 (14.14%) had CAC. The age, sex, and health profiles of patients with CAC were not different from those without CAC. The OPN and OCN levels in participants with CAC were higher than in those without (p = 0.026 and p = 0.025, respectively). The OPN levels were correlated with the estimated glomerular filtration rate (eGFR) (p = 0.021) and tooth loss (p = 0.027). The OCN levels were correlated with the eGFR (p = 0.002), tooth loss (p = 0.023), blood urea nitrogen (p = 0.040), and creatinine levels (p = 0.031). The median tooth loss in individuals with an eGFR <60 mL/min/1.73 m2 was higher than that of individuals with an eGFR ≥60 mL/min/1.73 m2 (p = 0.033). In individuals with CAC, tooth loss correlated more strongly with the eGFR, and the correlation between OPN and OCN levels was more apparent.
               
                  Conclusion
                  Dental patients with CAC and increased tooth loss have a greater tendency for decreased renal function, which may be associated with OPN and OCN; thus, these patients should be referred for investigation.Vascular calcification (VC) appears with increased prevalence in atherosclerosis, cardiovascular disease (CVD), and chronic kidney disease (CKD). Recent investigations have shown that VC is a complicated pathological process in which one of the main factors is low-grade inflammation, which contributes to endothelial dysfunction Osteopontin regulates numerous biological activities, including bone matrix remodeling, tissue calcification, production of various pro–inflammatory cytokines, and it can also promote macrophage adhesion, migration, and vascular smooth muscle cell proliferation Osteocalcin, expressed by osteoblasts, is mostly found in the bone matrix; OCN plays an essential role in energy metabolism and supports β-cell proliferation, insulin secretion, and insulin sensitivity. The main functional role of OCN is its pro-osteoblastic effect or bone-building function The findings that OPN and OCN are involved in inflammation and mineralization have generated interest in the roles of OPN and OCN in carotid artery calcification (CAC). Our previous study revealed the association between CAC and tooth loss in dental patients This study was carried out at the Golden Jubilee Medical Center, Mahidol University. The study was approved by the Ethics Committee of Mahidol University and Tokyo Medical and Dental University, and it also conformed with the Declaration of Helsinki (reference number: MU–IRB 2011/134.3006, TMDU–IRB 2012/860). Subjects fulfilling the required inclusion criteria were enrolled after providing written informed consent. This study investigated the same group of Thai patients who had their annual health check-up as in our previously published study Members of the CAC group had been diagnosed from panoramic extra-oral radiographs (PAN) in the previously published study Renal function was evaluated from medical chart records and was determined by the estimated glomerular filtration rate (eGFR). In order to initially evaluate abnormal renal function, participants were divided into two groups according to whether their eGFR levels were higher or lower than 60 mL/min/1.73 m The number of teeth lost was recorded by one examiner (ST). Blood was collected and centrifuged to obtain plasma on the same date that venipuncture was performed for blood chemistry, and a 1 mL aliquot was frozen and stored at −80 °C for the measurement of bone-related protein levels. Plasma was thawed at room temperature for protein measurement by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA). The human OPN and OCN commercial ELISA kits (ab100618 and ab195214; Abcam®, Chuo-ku, Tokyo, Japan) were used to measure OPN and OCN, respectively. Each plasma sample was analyzed in duplicate, and all assays were conducted according to the manufacturer's instructions. The plasma samples were diluted 5–10 fold with the assay diluent provided in the kit to obtain an absorbance value within the range of the standards used. Recombinant human OPN samples ranging from 0 to 18 ng/mL were used as standards. Exactly 100 μL of diluted plasma sample or standard was added to a microplate pre-coated with anti-human OPN antibody. The microplate was sealed with the cover provided in the kit and incubated for 2.5 h at room temperature on a plate shaker set to 400 rpm. The solution was discarded, and the wells were washed four times with the wash buffer, inverted, and blotted off the plate against clean paper towels. Then, 100 μL of biotinylated OPN detection antibody was added, and the microplate was incubated for 1 h at room temperature on a plate shaker set to 400 rpm. The solution was discarded, and the microplate was washed four times with wash buffer and blotted off the plate using paper towels. After addition of 100 μL of diluted HRP-conjugated streptavidin, the microplate was incubated for 45 min at room temperature with gentle shaking. The microplate was then washed four times, and 100 μL of tetramethylbenzidine (TMB) substrate was added followed by incubation for exactly 30 min at room temperature in the dark on a plate shaker set to 400 rpm. Finally, 50 μL of stop solution (2 M sulfuric acid) was added, and the intensity of the color was measured immediately. The absorbance of each well was read using a microplate reader (SOFTMax™ Molecular Devices Corp., CA, USA) at a wavelength of 450 nm. A standard curve was prepared with software in log–log mode, and a linear graph was plotted. The amount of OPN present in the plasma samples was calculated from the regression equation obtained from the curve. Similarly, plasma OCN levels were determined with SimpleStep ELISA® (Abcam®, Cambridge, UK), which employs an affinity tag labeled capture antibody and a reporter conjugated detector antibody which immunocapture the sample analyte in solution. This entire complex (capture antibody/analyte/detector antibody) is in turn immobilized via the immunoaffinity of an anti-tag antibody coating the well. Samples of 50 μL, at 100-fold dilution, or 0–10 ng/mL standards were added to the wells, followed by 50 μL of the antibody cocktail, and were incubated for 1 h at room temperature on a plate shaker set to 400 rpm. After three washes, 100 μL of TMB substrate was added to each well and incubated for 10 min in the dark on a plate shaker set to 400 rpm. Finally, 100 μL of stop solution was added to each well, the microplate was placed on a plate shaker for 1 min to mix, and the optical density was recorded at 450 nm. A four-parameter logistic provided the curve fit, and the amount of OCN present in the plasma samples was calculated. All statistical analyses were performed using IBM SPSS Statistics for Windows, Version 22.0. (IBM Corp, Armonk, NY, USA). Descriptive statistics were used to present information on all variables. Continuous data are expressed as median and interquartile range, and categorical data are expressed as frequency and percentage. The results are reported according to the presence or absence of CAC, and comparisons of categorical variables between the groups were performed using the Fisher's exact test. All continuous variables were assessed for normality using the Kolmogorov–Smirnov test. Serum OPN and OCN levels were compared between study groups using Mann-Whitney U test. Spearman's correlation coefficients were used to determine the correlation between OCN and OPN levels and clinical and biochemical parameters. Two-sided significance and a value of Age, sex, and other health profiles of patients with CAC were not significantly different from those without CAC. The participants with CAC had higher plasma OPN and OCN levels than those without CAC ( The number of teeth lost was negatively correlated with the eGFR (r = −0.194, Our study revealed a plausible role of OPN and OCN in the pathogenesis of VC, in that higher levels of OPN and OCN were found in participants with CAC than in those without CAC. We also demonstrated a significant correlation between plasma OPN and OCN and lower renal function, as well as tooth loss, in participants without incident CVD. Additionally, increased tooth loss was observed in individuals with lower renal function. Osteopontin is implicated in both the inflammation and mineralization processes that lead to VC. It is also associated with vascular function and has been reported as a surrogate marker of atherosclerotic lesions, especially in calcified plaques, and contributes to the pathogenesis of asymptomatic atherosclerosis and coronary artery disease No clear association was established between plasma OCN and VC or atherosclerosis, although the presence of OCN-positive cells and histological staining had a consistent positive correlation with calcification or atherosclerosis Vascular calcification, a common finding in CVD, is often detected in patients with CKD. Various studies have identified circulating proteins that may be responsible for extraskeletal calcification and dysfunction in mineral metabolism, both of which are features of CKD-mineral bone disorder Our results regarding plasma OCN are consistent with the study of Mihai et al. which revealed an overexpression of OCN and OPN in CKD patients versus the control group. Circulating OCN levels were increased 4.6-fold in stage 4 CKD, and 2-fold and 1.3-fold in stage 3 and 2 CKD, respectively Our study disclosed a positive correlation between tooth loss and plasma OPN and OCN levels, in that the greater the number of teeth lost, the higher the levels of these proteins. To the best of our knowledge, no previous study has reported an association between plasma OPN and OCN levels and tooth loss. Some studies have investigated plasma OPN levels in subjects with chronic periodontitis, a chronic bacterial infection that results in the destruction of alveolar bone and subsequent tooth loss Potentially significant associations between periodontitis and renal function have been reported A high prevalence of VC and a high incidence of cardiovascular events are two key complications of CKD This study has some limitations. Its cross-sectional design precludes inferences about the contribution of renal impairment on CAC and the effect on future cardiovascular risk. Another limitation is the small study size because of the rigorous inclusion criteria. We were only able to include a small number of patients with CAC, although all patients underwent measurement of eGFR. Future studies involving a larger number of subjects are required to improve the statistical power. Because the study participants were involved voluntarily, extending our results to a general population might be difficult. All patients were Thai, limiting the power to assess individuals of non-Asian ancestry. Future studies should confirm the predictive value of OPN and OCN in a larger cohort to establish reliable markers of renal function and oral inflammation to avoid the errors of the medical evaluation of CVD. Furthermore, future studies pertaining to circulating levels of OPN and OCN in human pathology should be considered in terms of their influence on renal function and oral inflammation. Our study found significantly increased plasma levels of OPN and OCN in dental patients with CAC, and a correlation between plasma OPN and OCN levels and increased tooth loss and lower renal function. Dental patients with increased tooth loss and CAC may benefit from prediction of lower kidney function and higher CVD risk based on non-invasive panoramic extra-oral radiographs, and increased plasma OPN and OCN levels might play an important role in these associations. The early detection of decreased renal function can help to prevent the progression of renal disease or eventual cardiovascular events.  The authors express their appreciation to Dr. Suteera Techatanawat, Department of General Dentistry, Faculty of Dentistry, Srinakharinwirot University, for providing experiment help. We also thank Helen Jeays, BDSc AE, from Edanz Group ( The study was approved by the Ethics Committee of Mahidol University and Tokyo Medical and Dental University, and it also conformed with the Declaration of Helsinki (reference number: MU–IRB 2011/134.3006, TMDU–IRB 2012/860). The authors declare that there is no conflict of interest regarding the publication of this paper. The following is the Supplementary data to this article: Supplementary data to this article can be found online at