Abstract
                  Variations in sampling time, or sampling jitter, is a common insidious industrial control problem. This work investigates how the stochastic sampling jitter adversely affects the performance of control loops using control performance assessment (CPA) tools. It is analytically shown that sampling jitter may both improve or deteriorate the control performance, and through simulation, it is demonstrated that the estimates of Harris index from the time invariant ARMA model are reliable, provided the sampling jitter is relatively small. Furthermore we propose a method to analyze the effects of sampling jitter, when the jitter is unknown and not directly measurable. From the simulations of 15 typical processes, it is shown that the proposed method is reliable for most of the investigated cases.Control performance assessment, or CPA, is a technology to diagnose and maintain operational efficiency of control systems developed in a direct response to address this increasingly important economic problem. CPA based on linear models is routinely applied in the refining, petrochemicals, pulp and paper and the mineral processing industries as noted by While most of the research and commercial activity in CPA has been based on the assumption of a linear plant model to date, those researchers investigating nonlinear systems fall into one of two groups. The first group focused on the diagnosis of a common specific nonlinearity, namely valve stiction ( However nonlinearities are not just restricted to the plant or manipulator dynamics, they can stem from the actual system architecture. For example, many real-time systems are implemented as distributed control systems where the digital feedback control of continuous plants is implemented over a communication network or field bus. While the controller supposedly works at a fixed nominal sampling period, Historically the low sampling rates typical in many chemical process control applications have meant that the jitter problem was arguably insignificant and therefore overlooked. However with the increased use of wireless communications between sensors, controllers and actuators (exacerbating the potential jitter problem), and the increased desire to control fast-acting processes such as steam turbines, micro-reactors, and high-speed production such as paper making we believe that this will become an important issue in chemical process control. We also note that some techniques popular in chemical process control such as MPC are now finding applications in embedded systems such as position control and robotics, and consequently the division between chemical process control and mechatronics for example will become increasingly blurred in the near future. While this paper is restricted to SISO systems, the jitter problem is more likely in computationally heavy multivariable applications. Systems exhibiting irregular sampling rates due to jitter have been addressed in many research areas such as signal process and control. Jitter detection and measurement were addressed in We should point out that the focus of this research is significantly different to that reported in Formally to estimate the performance index, the time varying ARMA model must be estimated which requires the knowledge of the unobservable jitter magnitude. In this paper, we proposed a method to evaluate the jitter effect on the control performance from the observable operating data. The layout of the paper is as follows. Section In the following development we must make some assumptions regarding the control system of interest, specifically the shape of the probability distribution (PDF) of the sampling jitter. The obvious PDF forms are Gaussian about some nominal sample rate or uniform, but in many cases it is may be more realistic to have a bimodal distribution, or at least a distribution with a significant right-hand tail. The motivation for these types of distributions is due to the fact that at the times when significant control calculations are needed is when good control is also needed. Some controllers with a constant structure and operation count (such as PID) are independent of state (except when transferring from auto to manual), while others such as MPC take longer to solve the embedded optimisation problem when recovering from upsets, or moving to a new setpoint. The embedded MPC controller in For the remainder of this paper, we will assume uniform sampling with jitter, where the sampled signal, We will make the following assumptions about the control system: The timing of the process output measurements are disturbed by sampling jitter. The control signal is applied to the process as soon as the data arrives. The jitter sampling period The timing of signals in the control system with the sampling jitter problem is illustrated in Given a single-input single-output (SISO) continuous time (CT) system The discrete transfer function is Control performance assessment (CPA) is widely applied in the refining, petrochemicals, pulp and paper and the mineral processing industry to diagnose and maintain operational efficiency as reviewed in Although descriptive statistics such as the mean and variance of manipulated and controlled variables and the percentage of constraints occurrence time can be used as a simple tool for CPA, a comprehensive approach for control performance assessment usually includes the following steps ( The first control performance benchmark was proposed by If the sampling period is constant, the linear time-varying (LTV) system in Eq. The first term on the right-hand side in Eq. The control signal which results in the minimum achievable variance in the output can be obtained by solving the following relation: The popular performance index, the Harris index, can be calculated as If the process is controlled by a linear feedback controller, in the case of linear process with additive disturbances,  Indirect estimation Using an ARIMA model ( Using a Laguerre network ( Direct estimation ( fitting a time series model of the form: With above methods, a number of performance indices can be estimated. They can used at the design stage to compare the performance of different controllers. However, they are often used as part of a monitoring and diagnosis scheme for control systems. The methodology has been extended to SISO non-minimum-phase systems ( Firstly, let us obtain the minimum variance performance lower bound (MVPLB) for the time-varying system in Eq. The MVPLB in the mean square sense can then be expressed as, If the process in Eq. The identification and estimation of this time varying ARMA model is a complex task which usually needs some prior information. Consequently in this paper, we will simply use the time invariant ARMA model to fit the outputs from the time varying system described in Eq. Let By subtracting Since the sampling jitter will affect the coefficients of the polynomials Rearranging Eq. The variance of the output The variance of the output It is obvious that the variance of To estimate the effects of jitter on the control performance for routine operating data, we need to know the process model, controller and disturbance model in Eq. A Box–Jenkins model is identified from the input/output data assumed at nominal sampling time A continuous process model is approximated from the discrete Box–Jenkins model obtained in step (i); Various discrete process models are generated using different sampling periods; The impulse weights in Eq. The procedure is illustrated in If SSWJE increases rapidly while the sampling period increases, the jitter will significantly adversely effect the control performance. The jitter problem must then be addressed in order to improve the controlled performance. Conversely, if the SSWJE increases only slowly or decreases while the sampling period increases, control engineers do not need to consider the jitter problem for the control performance improvement. In this section, the proposed method will be applied to a collection of dynamic systems that together represent the behaviour commonly encountered in the process industries. Fifteen different processes (P1–P15) collected from the test in set provided in Three additive ARMA disturbance models were also considered: First consider process model 1 with disturbance model 1 with the sampling period ranging between It is evident in The estimates of jitter effects on the control loop on P1 and P3 are plotted in For a given amount of jitter, It shows that the curve estimated from the estimated Box–Jenkins model from the larger value of The same procedure is applied to the remaining 14 systems given in The contribution of this work is to propose a control performance assessment strategy for linear systems with a sampling jitter problem. The effect of jitter on the control performance is directly estimated from the operating input/output data. Instead of identifying the time-varying ARMA model, we suggest to use the time-invariant ARMA model as an approximator to the time varying ARMA model for the CPA analysis. This strategy is tested on 15 typical processes and the results show that the proposed method is valid for most of the selected processes. For this study, the sampling jitter is assumed uniformly distributed, although more general distributions of the sampling jitter will be investigated in the future. Financial support for this project from the Industrial Information and Control Centre, Faculty of Engineering, The University of Auckland, New Zealand is gratefully acknowledged.