Cyanide compounds are widely used in gold ore processing plants in order to facilitate the extraction and subsequent concentration of the precious metal. Owing to the high cyanide concentrations employed in gold processing, effluents generated have high contents of free cyanide as well as metallic cyanide complexes, which lend them a high degree of toxicity. The process under study, developed in laboratory scale with the use of a distillation apparatus, consists of highly decreasing the pH of the solution by adding sulfuric acid. Thus, the cyanide present in either free form or as a metallic complex is made volatile and the resulting cyanide gas is absorbed in an alkaline solution for reutilization. This work aims at recognizing the chemical relations between the cyanide and metals during distillation. The regeneration of cyanide from gold processing proved to be a viable procedure. Cyanide recoveries pointed to the fact that if a method for reutilization of cyanide contained in mining effluents is employed, the precious metal processing will become more efficient. Also, the environmental conditions in the area of the operation will be improved.Cyanide compounds are widely used in the minerals industry in order to extract precious metals, mainly gold and silver from sulfur-bearing gold ores. At the end of the processing, free-cyanide enriched solutions, easily dissociable cyanide compounds, and metallic cyanide complexes are generated. From an economic standpoint as well as in terms of the performance of the ore processing plant, the recycling of the reagents used may, in many cases, be an important factor, which will even dictate the feasibility of the whole operation. In the specific case of hydrometallurgical plants, expenditures with cyanide recovery will account for a significant portion of the processing cost – estimates point to a cost of roughly US$0.70 and US$1.50 per kilogram of recovered cyanide. Therefore, the use of a procedure to recover cyanide may be a good option since the market price of cyanide is between US$1.00 and US$ 1.50 on average ( Regarding environmental issues, benefits reached when the concentration of cyanide compounds and complexes is reduced in mineral processing effluents are evident. The usual destination of these rejects is a settling pond, where they are submitted to slow and unsafe natural degradation processes. In normal conditions, cyanide can be reduced by natural degradation mechanisms, by means of exposure of the cyanide solution to solar radiation in large settling ponds. Since the natural degradation process needs proper climatic conditions to be efficient, the use of a procedure involving chemical oxidation to accelerate the destruction of cyanide is often mandatory. Although feasible, oxidation processes for cyanide degradation in settling ponds are expensive and can bring about environmental problems. Despite the willingness of mining companies to spend a lot of money on the breaking down and replacement of cyanide compounds, a by-product of the cyanide oxidation, i.e., CNO For the distillation tests, 250 ml of solution were placed in a Claissen container. A 1:1 sulfuric acid solution (5 ml) was then added, aiming at the dissociation of the metallic cyanide complexes, thus enabling the formation of HCN and the liberation of metals in solution. The samples were distilled for periods of time between 30 min and 1 h. Cyanide gas was entrapped in an absorption tube containing a 50 ml solution of NaOH (1 M) plus 50 ml of distilled water, from which samples of 10 ml were taken for the determination of the cyanide content via titration. Free-cyanide content was determined directly via titration, whereas the total cyanide was measured by means of titration after distillation, according to standard analytical methods ( Synthetic effluents stoichiometrically prepared from standards of metallic cyanide complexes were employed in this work. Metallic cyanide complexes show different stability levels depending on the chemical conditions of the medium where they are present. According to Among the metallic cyanide complexes studied in this investigation, the silver cyanide complex presented the best total cyanide recovery after distillation. An agent to promote acidification (sulfuric acid) was used in three distinct concentrations (1, 6 and 12 N) to assess the influence of the acid concentration on the recovery of cyanide present in solution (see For CN  When With regard to the zinc cyanide complex, the concentration of sulfuric acid and cyanide in the complex has no relevant influence on the improvement of the total cyanide recovery. According to There is a similarity, as far as cyanide recovery is concerned, for both silver and zinc cyanide complexes: recoveries tend to decrease when the initial concentration of cyanide is increased. This fact, combined with the low stability offered by the zinc complex in highly acid media, makes it compatible with processes that aim at the reutilization of the cyanide. Referring back to Copper cyanide [CuCN] presented a distinct behavior, as can be observed in A few difficulties were encountered during the preparation of a standard solution, from which samples were taken for the distillation tests, due to the fact that copper cyanide is rather insoluble. To overcome this problem, a magnetic stirrer was used to make the solution homogeneous before sampling. In this way, mistakes in the initial concentration (i.e., fast precipitation of the compound) of samples to be directed to the distillation process would be prevented. For initial cyanide concentrations lower than 50 mg/l in the CuCN, values of total cyanide recoveries are above the 80% plateau when the most concentrated acidifier is used, above 70% with the use of In order to obtain reasonable total cyanide recoveries for concentrations higher than 50 mg/l, the use of a stronger acidifier is recommended. Beyond concentrations of 150 mg/l, total cyanide recoveries drop drastically. This decrease in recovery can be attributed to the presence of solid particles of the material in suspension, which are less susceptible to the acid attack. The difficulty in obtaining satisfactory cyanide recoveries through the AVR method in effluents of hydrometallurgical plants that process copper-bearing gold ores is well known and documented (  After the distillation tests, a precipitate, which probably contains the portion of non-liberated cyanide and, therefore, not computed as total cyanide, was observed at pH 1–2. According to Synthetic solutions constituted by potassium aurocyanide at different initial concentrations resulted in low values of total cyanide recoveries, even for low initial cyanide concentrations. With regard to the gold cyanide complex, the concentration of the acidifier has a certain influence on the total cyanide recovered. Most probably, though, it is not beneficial to take advantage of this behavior, because the amounts of cyanide recovered do not make up for the expenditures on sulfuric acid. The mercury cyanide complex proved to be the most resistant in terms of releasing cyanide in acid solution, even when a highly concentrated acidifier was used, H The high stability of the mercury cyanide complex in extremely acid media was confirmed by the distillation tests performed with solutions with increasing initial cyanide concentrations ( The total cyanide present in a solution of a given process corresponds to the inorganic cyanide (i.e., hydrogen cyanide, ionic cyanide or inert metallic complex). On the other hand, the free cyanide is associated with the hydrogen cyanide, ionic cyanide or certain inert metallic complexes in equilibrium with the hydrogen cyanide. The alkaline cyanides and certain metallic cyanides, such as cadmium, nickel and zinc cyanides, are readily converted to the hydrogen form during distillation in an acid medium. Other metallic cyanides, such as iron, cobalt, thallium, mercury and silver cyanides, are more resistant to decomposition into ions. Free cyanide produces complexes with several metallic species, especially transition metals, which show a broad variation in both stability and solubility: Metallic cyanide complexes are products of the reaction between simple metallic complexes and cyanide ions. Acid conditions may cause the dissociation of the complexes, due to the formation and subsequent liberation of HCN by volatilization, which, in turn, bring about an increase in the mobility of the cations of heavy metals. Complexes may be grouped into three main categories according to their stability: ( Free: HCN, CN WAD: Strong: This classification is largely employed in the analysis of process solutions since it helps to describe the behavior of cyanide species. Additionally, it greatly simplifies the analytical procedure since there is no need for detailed analytical information on each cyanide complex present. Metallic cyanide complexes may originate double salts with a variety of cations such as Na, K, Ca, NH Metallic cyanide complexes show different behaviors during distillation in highly acid media with distinct stoichiometrically determined initial cyanide concentrations. This fact can be easily explained by the distinct solubility degrees inherent in these complexes. Based upon Thus distinct total cyanide recoveries obtained by distillation of stoichiometric solutions with different degrees of concentration of metallic cyanide complexes can be explained by how easy or difficult it is to make the metallic cyanide complex unstable in highly acidic media. The silver cyanide complex, when submitted to distillation in highly acidic medium, readily released cyanide. This silver behavior in cyanide solutions is very important since this metal is almost always associated to gold occurrences. According to the diagram in Contrary to the behavior shown by silver cyanide complexes, cyanide released from CuCN in acid solutions is not straightforward. According to the diagram in Instead of copper cyanide complex, CuCN was used in this investigation. However, since the stability constants of both compound and complex are very close [CuCN:log  The predominant form of copper cyanide present in very low pHs is CuCN, which shows very low solubility and precipitates even in extreme conditions of pH, that is, between 1 and 2. In this situation, a significant portion of it is not favorable to acid attack and, in higher concentrations, the recovery of the process is lowered. With respect to the potassium ferrocyanide, cyanide recovery is high at low concentrations and becomes constant with the increase in concentration of the complex when the distillation process is carried out. Both Fe(II) and Fe(III) complexes are very stable, even in extremely acid conditions ( Like the ferrocyanide complex, gold and mercury cyanides are highly stable and present low cyanide recoveries in very low pHs ( Cyanide regeneration is a feasible process. By using standard solutions of metallic cyanide complexes, high values of total cyanide recoveries were obtained in this study. The distillation of solutions constituted by iron, zinc and silver cyanide complexes in different concentrations presented high values of cyanide available for recycling. Conversely, intermediate values were achieved for copper cyanide complexes and very low ones for gold and mercury cyanide complexes. The results from this work suggest that a high recovery of cyanides can be obtained in hydrometallurgical gold plants.