Sorption-induced strain of coal is vital to the prediction of coal bed methane production and stimulation. Previous studies have addressed the relationship between strain and equilibrium pressure and the relationship between strain change and permeability evolution. However, the strain variations with respect to time and the comparison between the asynchronous difference of dynamic characteristics of adsorption swelling and mechanical compression were rarely explored. In this study, we investigated the anisotropy characteristics of strain change over time as well as the influence of the gas species, gas pressure, and pore structure on the dynamic strain variations by using the low temperature liquid nitrogen adsorption method and a self-designed coal strain measurement apparatus. Our results show that gas diffusion rate has a strong influence on sorption-induced strain of coal. Both mechanical compression and sorption-induced strain exhibited an asynchronous effect with respect to saturating time. We then propose a time-depended volumetric deformation model for coal to analyze the mechanism of the asynchronous effect during sorption. This study sheds light on the dynamic process of coal bed methane production and reveals restrictions of current permeability models.Coalbed methane (CBM), or coalbed gas, which is a kind of clean and efficient energy, plays an important role in energy consumption in countries such as the USA, China, Canada, etc. The storage and transport behavior of gas in coal is highly related to the coal pore-fracture structure which is generally considered to be a dual-porous system composed by macro fractures and micro matrix pores. Of the above two effects, the former is analogous to thermal expansion for elastic porous media, while the latter depends on pore pressure, i.e. mass diffusion. Previous studies on sorption-induced strain regard the two effects as two synchronous processes and mainly focus on the measurement and modeling of strain versus equilibrium gas pressure. Coal strain measurement during CH In addition to performing the experiments, scholars also proposed several mathematical models related to sorption-induced strain. The strain was normally modeled similar to thermal expansion and written in the form of Langmuir-shape models such as the Pan & Connell (PC) model, This study is focused on the asynchronous characteristics of strain variations with time, including differences in adsorption swelling and mechanical compression and differences in gas-type-based, direction-based and pressure-based swelling. The research results lay an experimental foundation for time-dependent permeability modeling which lacks research in previous literatures. In addition, they may help explain why diffusion flow or sorption-induced strain determines the gas production rate in the late production stage, and facilitate the evaluation of the effective drainage period for a specific well. Sorption-induced matrix swelling/shrinkage shares a similar mechanism with thermal expansion for elastic porous media ( Strategically, the common adsorption strain models usually link the surface potential to the strain variations, including the linear sorption-induced strain variation and the linear mechanical strain variation: Surface potential For an ideal gas, the surface potential for compressible solid adsorbent can be written as Mechanical strain The linear mechanical strain caused by stress can be written as Considering the above two mechanism, three representative models for modeling volumetric deformation, i.e., the PC model, The PC Model: Under low pressure, Eq. The LH Model: The VM model: It can be found from a comparison between Eq. Then, it can be inferred that the LH model is a simplification of the PC model in the whole pressure range. The difference occurs, because The surface potential in VM model, distinguished from those in the PC and the LH model, is a function of chemical potential (Eq. As described by Vandamme, According to elastic mechanics, the relationship between the bulk modulus Then Eq. Eq. Eq. Therefore, the LH model and the VM model are basically identical when the fitting method is used. The linear strain variations for the two models can both be expressed by Eq. Based on the above analysis, the essences of the three commonly used models resemble, despite different meanings represented by some factors. The relationship among the three models is described in The pseudo-first-order model is usually used to describe the chemical/physical adsorption equilibrium process, including the gas mass transport behaviors and the heat transfer behaviors. Considering the asynchronous characteristics of strain variations, the two components (i.e., sorption-induced strain and mechanical strain) in Eq. Two coal samples ( The low temperature liquid N A schematic diagram of the experimental setup for measuring the matrix volumetric strain under unconstrained conditions is illustrated in Compared with the generally used mercury intrusion experiment, the N According to above experimental results, the ink-bottle-shaped pores appearing in the Illinois sample may cause difficulty in gas transport, consequently leading to a longer strain equilibrium time. However, the Illinois sample is actually observed to consume a shorter strain equilibrium time, probably because the difficulty in gas transport is also determined by pore width, pore length and other surface characteristics of adsorbent in addition to pore shape. A larger pore width indicates smaller adsorption energy, representing that the constraint from pore wall is much weaker and gas transports more easily. A greater pore length suggests longer diffusion paths, which directly influences the strain equilibrium time. The BET specific area of the Illinois sample is 116 times larger than that of the Pittsburgh sample and the mean pore width of Illinois sample is about 4% of that of Pittsburgh sample. Hence, the Illinois sample is with greater adsorption energy and a higher gas diffusion rate for gas. The influence of gas species on matrix deformation has been reported in several laboratory experiments.  He He is widely used to quantify the mechanical elastic strain of coal. CH  CO With respect to the CO True swelling strain, which is the strain only induced by sorption, can be calculated by subtracting the mechanical strain from the CH The asynchronous characteristics of strain variations mainly include the response time and the lasting period for different physical processes. Difference in these two characteristics can help us understand the restriction of classical permeability models. It is interesting that for the non-sorptive gas, He, the major compression occurs in the initial period of injection, while for the sorptive gases CO The reason above asynchronous effect occurs probably for two reasons. First, a large swelling strain can be induced by a small amount of gas (especially CO  Strain variations with time are anisotropic in directions. It is known from For the strain gauge, by measuring the electrical resistance difference during deformation, the strain difference ( Pressure influences strain in two aspects. First, pressure changes the equilibrium value of strain. According to the adsorption-induced strain part in Eq. The unipore diffusion model, first proposed by Crank, has been widely used to fit the sorption data for diffusion coefficients. Derived from the classic Fick's diffusion model, it is similar to the path-controlled diffusion model used by Liu et al. Diffusion of gas molecules in porous media is a combination of several types of diffusions, i.e., surface diffusion, Knudsen diffusion, transient diffusion and molecular diffusion or jump-controlled diffusion and path-controlled diffusion. The differences in The fitting results of Study of time-dependent strain characteristics is of meaningful application both in permeability modeling and experiments, which is economically and practically important in areas such as CBM, CMM and ECBM. This research investigated the time-dependent characteristics of coal strain induced by the non-sorptive He and the sorptive gases CH The sorption-induced strain variation with time is subject to the direction of bedding planes. The swelling effect in the direction perpendicular to the bedding planes is stronger than that in the direction parallel to the bedding planes. For the Illinois and Pittsburgh samples, the zz direction possesses a higher strain increasing rate with pressure for both CH The strain for He injection experiences a sharp drop due to compression and then rises slowly to an equilibrium state with gas transport within the matrix. After the initial drop, the strains for CO Smaller pores with larger adsorption energy lead to a higher strain increasing rate with time. The BET specific area of the Illinois sample is 116 times larger than that of the Pittsburgh sample, and the mean pore width of the Illinois sample is about 4% of that of the Pittsburgh sample. This finding is consistent with the result that the Illinois sample is corresponds to a shorter strain equilibrium process. The essential relationship among commonly used volumetric deformation models is obtained. Based on that, two time-related parameters The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. This work is supported by the