Synchrotron high-energy X-ray diffraction has been used to determine the atomic structural details in three selected melt-spun Al-based metallic glasses with different glass-forming abilities (GFAs), Al86Ni7Y4.5Co1La1.5, Al86Ni6Y6Co2 and Al84Ni9Y7. The atomic pair species, pair fractions and their corresponding bond distances have been established for each metallic glass. These results address the GFA of Al-based metallic glasses from the topological perspective, and explain the structural origins that are responsible for the excellent GFA of Al86Ni7Y4.5Co1La1.5. Despite these advances, understanding of the Al-based glasses at the atomic level is still limited, particularly for Al-based BMGs. The focus of this study is to identify and understand the atomic pair structures in three representative Al-based MGs, to provide new insights into the GFA of Al-based MGs, particularly from an topological perspective. Three Al-based MGs, Al The synchrotron radiation was carried out at the SPring-8 high-energy X-ray diffraction beamline BL04B2   The PDF spectrum ( The radial distribution function (RDF),  Based on the information revealed by The Al–Al pair is predicted to be ∼50%, while the Al–Ni pair and the Al–Y pair to be both ∼20% in each glass. The Ni–Ni and Y–Y pairs detected from Al The structural information shown in The packing efficiency can be estimated by analyzing the atomic pair profiles. Miracle et al. Eq. The packing efficiencies of the Al–Al, Al–Ni, Al–Y, Ni–Ni, Ni–Y and Y–Y pairs were similarly determined to be 0.975, 0.836, 0.969, 0.975, 0.959 and 0.975, respectively. These results reveal that an Al-based MG will show a higher packing efficiency when it contains more atomic pairs of Al–Al, Ni–Ni and Y–Y and a lower packing efficiency when it contains more Al–Ni pairs. The total packing efficiency can be estimated by applying the addition rules to the six types of atomic pairs considered, The Al The thermodynamic status of each selected MG can also be assessed from the atomic pair configuration obtained above. This can be realized by evaluating the heat of mixing (Δ In summary, the Al–Al and Al–Y pairs are the two major atomic pairs in all three glasses analyzed. However, the local atomic structure of the Al 