Effect of intensive grinding on the dissolution of celestite in acidic barium chloride and sodium chloride solutions was studied by investigating structural changes occurred during milling. Complete dissolution of the celestite was achieved within 25min by milling in a planetary ball mill in which ball to ore ratio is 10. But, increasing grinding time and ball to ore ratio diminished the dissolution rate. X-ray amorphous phase content and XRD breadths increased and XRD line reflection intensity decreased with increasing of grinding time, and celestite does not undergo a considerable phase transformation during milling. SEM micrographs showed that how prolonged milling results in an increasing degree of agglomeration and a reduced amount of fines. Additionally, the ground samples were heated at elevated temperatures and then re-ground under earlier grinding conditions. Structural, morphological and dissolution characteristics of the samples obtained by each of the three treatments were also evaluated. It was concluded that high energy milling for short times increases the dissolution rate of celestite. But, increase in the particle size due to agglomeration or compactness of the particles as a result of impact stress predominant in planetary ball milling decreased the leaching rate, as grinding time and ball to ore ratio in the mill were increased.Celestite (SrSO Grinding has been used to make suitable size of particles in order to control the reactivity of the raw materials. It is known that dry grinding leads to random delamination of the silicate layers, to a strong structural alteration with important particle size reduction and to increase of surface area ( There are no reports in the literature on the effects of intensive grinding or mechanical activation on the crystalline structure of celestite mineral. The main purpose of this study is to investigate the effects of intensive grinding on celestite by applying high energy milling in a planetary ball mill. In order to evaluate the effects of intensive grinding, dissolution of ground and unground celestite in acidic chloride solution was compared. The material used in the study was a celestite concentrate obtained from Barit Maden TAŞ (Sivas) in Turkey. The chemical composition of the celestite concentrate is as %: 95.50 SrSO A Fritsch (Idar-Oberstein, Germany) Pulverisette 6 planetary ball mill was used for milling. Ball to sample ratio was adjusted to 10, 20 and 40 by using 70, 35 and 17.5 For dissolution of the samples, the method inspected by Strontium in the solution obtained after a dissolution experiment was determined by a SensAA Model flame atomic absorption spectrophotometer (GBC Scientific Equipment, Australia). Particle size analysis was performed using Mastersizer 2000 model particle size analyzer (Malvern Instruments Ltd, UK) operates in wet mode using distilled water. Particle size measurement was allowed to continue in anticipation of a relatively steady particle size distribution was established. The X-ray diffraction (XRD) measurements were carried out using a diffractometer X’Pert (Philips, Netherlands) over the 2 For dissolution of celestite in acidic barium chloride solution, the following equilibrium reaction is proposed by From this point of view, H with the formation of strontium tetrachloride complex,  Reaction kinetics in leaching processes largely depends on the particle size. Ground celestite samples were subjected to particle size analysis. For the feed material and each of the sample ground at different grinding condition, particle size which occupies 80% of the materials ( According to To appreciate the disordering in the bulk of minerals as a consequence of mechanical activation, the method of X-ray diffractometry is frequently applied ( The peaks belong to gypsum disappear within 1 For quantification of the degree of milling intensity, the relative intensity loss ( SEM analyses were performed to observe morphological characteristics of the ground samples. As seen in To facilitate the effects of heat treatment on the structure of extensively ground celestite, the samples which were previously ground for 1 and 45 The samples ground and treated at 1000 The aim of this study was to investigate the effects of intensive grinding on a celestite concentrate by applying high energy milling and to examine the extent of intensively ground celestite dissolution in acidic chloride solution. Complete dissolution of the celestite was achieved within 25 Consequently, it was concluded that crystal structure of celestite is not easily disturbed even under insensitive grinding conditions, and agglomeration or compaction occurred by increased stress energy dominates on the decrease in the dissolution kinetics of celestite. The authors would like to thank Gökhan Uçar, Ali Aras, Mustafa Birinci and Petra Sommer for their technical support during characterization of the materials, and Dr.-Ing. Volker Vogt and Dr.-Ing. Jörg Kähler for their helpful support during study at the Clausthal University of Technology. The financial support for the project under grant İÜ BAPB 2006/50 by İnönü University is gratefully acknowledged. The research activities were also supported financially by the Scientific and Technical Research Council of Turkey (TÜBİTAK-BİDEB, Turkey) and German Research Foundation (Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft, DFG, Germany) to whom thanks are due.