Taguchi design of experiments methodology was used to determine the most influential spark plasma sintering (SPS) parameters on densification of TiB2–SiC ceramic composites. In this case, four processing factors (SPS temperature, soaking time, applied external pressure and SiC particle size) at three levels were examined in order to acquire the optimum conditions. The statistical analysis identified the sintering temperature as the most effective factor influencing the relative density of TiB2–SiC ceramics. A relative density of 99.5% was achieved at the optimal SPS conditions; i.e. temperature of 1800 °C, soaking time of 15 min and pressure of 30 MPa by adding 200-nm SiC particulates to the TiB2 matrix. The experimental measurements and predicted values for the relative density of composite fabricated at the optimum SPS conditions and reinforced with the proper SiC particle size were almost similar. The mechanisms of sintering and densification of spark plasma sintered TiB2–SiC composites were discussed in details.Non-oxide structural ceramics are ideal candidates for high temperature applications due to their high strength and refractoriness. The introduction of different non-metallic sintering additives such as B Several techniques are widely used for densification of TiB In this paper, the influence of the sintering temperature, applied pressure, soaking time, and the size of the SiC particles on the densification behavior of the spark plasma sintered TiB The Taguchi method engages the orthogonal arrays for the design of experiments to save the time and improve the data which can be extracted from the experimental results. This technique statistically determines the influence of various processing factors and identifies the functional correlations between the input and output parameters. Employing the statistical design of experiments helps foresee the optimal processing conditions in order to fabricate a product possessing the requested attributes In the present research, in order to obtain a high relative density, the-higher-the-better option is adopted. The Taguchi methodology uses the signal to noise ratio (S/N) for computing the deviation of the performance characteristics from the target values. S/N ratio displays the relation between the desirable (signal) and undesirable (noise) values for the output property. Taguchi method evaluates the effect of each parameter on the entire process and the contribution of parameters can be extracted by employing the ANOVA analysis Commercially available powders of TiB The mixtures were ball-mixed at 90 rpm for 60 min. Next, ethanol was evaporated on a rotary heater (HMS 14, Tebazma, Iran) at 90 °C. The dried powders were ground using an agate mortar and pestle, then sieved to produce uniform granules (100-mesh). Each powder mixture was placed inside a graphite die (inner diameter: 30 mm), which was lined with a graphite foil. The sintering process was carried out using a spark plasma sintering apparatus (SPS-20T-10, China) at different temperatures (1600, 1700 or 1800 °C) under different pressures (10, 20 or 30 MPa) for different soaking times (5, 10 or 15 min) in vacuum, based on the Taguchi design ( The phase analysis was performed by a Philips PW1800 X–ray diffractometer (XRD) using a Cu lamp (λ = 1.54 Å). The bulk densities of the as-sintered composite samples were measured based on the Archimedes method with distilled water as the immersing medium. The relative density was estimated with respect to the theoretical value, calculated by the rule of mixtures. The microstructural characterization of the raw materials, the polished surfaces, and fractographs of the as-sintered ceramics were carried out using a Zeiss Sigma/VP field emission scanning electron microscope (FE-SEM). The chemical analysis was simultaneously carried out using FE-SEM by a DXP–X10P energy dispersive spectroscope (EDS).    It was reported that the densification behavior of ZrB  TiO By increasing the sintering temperature, B During the sintering process, the reaction between SiC and oxide impurities (TiO Elimination of the gaseous products from the samples immediately occurred because of the vacuum condition of SPS process. By increasing the temperature from 1400° to 1600°C, the residual volatile B The diffraction peaks of initially added TiB  ANOVA of the relative density is shown in The optimal manufacturing conditions and performance for the relative density of TiB Based on the data in The effects of four manufacturing variables, i.e. the SPS temperature, the dwell time, the externally applied pressure, and the SiC particle size on the densification behavior of TiB