Cyclonic micro-bubble flotation column (FCMC) has been widely used in Chinese coal preparation plants. It shows a good separation performance of fine coal slimes. Joining inclined plates into Reflux Flotation Cell and Reflux Classifier shows better performance than conventional Reflux Flotation Cell and Reflux Classifier. In this investigation, the inclined plates were also joined into the froth zone of a cyclonic micro-bubble flotation column in order to reduce the concentrate ash. Both the dip angle and spacing of inclined plates were discussed, and the lowest concentrate ash could be obtained while the dip angle was 70째 and the spacing was 15mm. Throughout this paper, it was found that both the concentrate yield and ash were significantly affected by the inclined plates and their existence form.Flotation column is a type of efficient equipment for the upgrading of fine coal particles. In general, flotation column contains froth zone and collection zone (pulp zone). Froth zone is usually considered as concentration zone while collection zone is grab picking zone. Fine coal particles are separated and concentrated by these two zones. It is necessary to indicate that cyclonic micro-bubble flotation column (FCMC) created by Professor Guangyuan Xie in China University of Mining and Technology contains an additional zone named cyclonic zone ( In FCMC, froth zone is also a key zone like other flotation columns, such as Jameson flotation column and Hydrochem flotation column ( Galvin and his research team inserted the inclined plates into Reflux Flotation Cell and Reflux Classifier in order to obtain good performance in classification and flotation separation ( Coal samples were supplied by Coal Preparation Plant in Shandong province, China.   In this investigation, the dip angles of inclined plates were 60, 70 and 80째. The spacing of inclined plates was 15, 20 and 25  Besides the effect of circulation pump pressure, the spacing of inclined plate also has a significant effect on separation performance of FCMC.  The dip angle of inclined plate has an optimum value for the rising or falling of the coal particle. The moving direction of coal particle is determined by the density of coal particle and the dip angle of inclined plate (  Both the concentrate yield and ash increase with the circulation pump pressure. It indicates that the circulation pump pressure plays a very important role in the separation performance of FCMC. Both the concentrate yield and ash increase with the spacing of inclined plate. Larger spacing is beneficial to the transport of clean coal particles into the surface of froth zone. Clean coal particles are easier to overflow and become the concentrate. The dip angle of inclined plate has a significant effect on separation performance of FCMC. The concentrate yield and ash are the lowest at the dip angle of 70째. Throughout this investigation, the lowest concentrate ash can be obtained at the dip angle of 70째 and the spacing of 15 This work was supported by the