The micro/nano-scale phenomena affecting the bubble size observed in a mechanical flotation cell were investigated using an extensive dynamic surface property study with commercial laboratory instruments. The results highlighted two distinct dynamic surface properties: a rapid adsorption/desorption rate leading to undetectable dilatation surface elasticity, and a slow adsorption/desorption process taking place within minutes and leading to a significant increase in the dilatation elasticity of the interface. The latter is observed in highly surface-active reagent grade Polypropylene Glycol and in commercial Dowfroth 250 frothers while the rapid adsorption/desorption rate is a characteristic of weakly surface-active reagent grade 1-Pentanol and commercial Dowfroth 200.
                  The bubble size distribution and therefore the Sauter mean diameter results also highlighted the unambiguous similarity in the effect of frother on bubble size between the I-Pentanol and the Dowfroth 200 and indeed between the Polypropylene Glycol and the Dowfroth 250. The present paper examines the similarity between the two groups in order to gain understanding on how the dynamic surface properties affect the bubble size in two-phase systems.Gas dispersion parameters; namely, superficial gas velocity ( The bubble size observed in mechanical flotation cells depends on the balance between bubble coalescence and breakup rates in the cell ( The coalescence and the breakup properties of the liquid films change in the presence of flotation frothers. Flotation frothers are surface-active molecules used to stabilize the air/liquid interface. Stabilization occurs due to the adsorption of the molecules on the surface of air bubbles dispersed in the liquid phase. This molecular scale effect of flotation frothers on air/liquid interface with the characteristic length of 10    Molecule adsorption at the surface of freshly created air bubbles diminishes the surface tension ( At the surface of a bubble moving under quiescent or laminar flow conditions, we can assume a quasi-equilibrium surface coverage, where at any surface unit area the surfactant concentration remains constant in a sense of Eulerian frame of reference. This approximation will not be true if the bubble moves in turbulent conditions. Due to the Kolmogoroff eddy cascade, there will be local random momentum transfer causing bubbles to oscillate and change shape leading to temporal surface excess and disturbing of local surfactant equilibria and arrangement. These phenomena in turn cause surface stresses counteracting the deformation ( Turbulence causes dynamic conditions, where the molecular level behaviour of surfactants at interfaces becomes much more important. The presence of the surface-active molecules changes the dynamic properties of the interface, and consequently affects the bubble size and froth stability during flotation process ( This study aims to clarify the physical picture for understanding the effect of frothers on the properties of air/liquid interface in the presence of random momentum transfer. The changes in dynamic surface properties (DSP) of the air/liquid interface affect the bubble size distribution observed in mechanical flotation cell, and consequently the Sauter mean diameter ( The cylindrical mechanical flotation cell, presented by The bubble size was measured with the McGill Bubble Size Analyser (MBSA). The sampling tube was positioned in the quiescent zone of the flotation cell. The concentration of the frother solution was set separately for the cell and for MBSA ( Three picture series were taken at each frother concentration. The picture series were taken using the burst-shooting mode (one picture per second) for a time period of 105 The 3-parameter model, introduced by Each dynamic surface property measurement was performed at constant temperature (21 Dynamic surface tension ( Short-term Long-term Viscoelasticity of air/liquid interface was also measured with the Theta optical tensiometer coupled with the PDM. Bubbles were formed into the test solution via a hooked stainless steel capillary. The bubbles were pulsated with the regulated frequency of 0.7 The ability of the film to increase tension during stretching is called surface elasticity as defined by The Gibbs elasticity is valid only when the air/liquid interface is in equilibrium with bulk phase under deformation. In dynamic conditions the Marangoni or dynamic surface elasticity is applicable ( Langmuir–Blodgett Trough (LBT) was used to measure surface pressure. Two oscillating barriers were employed to control the molecule density at air/liquid interface and therefore the surface pressure. LBT has been traditionally designed to characterize the rheological properties of insoluble monolayers at air/liquid interface. During the present study the frothers used were water-soluble, hence the decrease in surface area did not necessarily cause increase in surface pressure due to the possibility of desorption, consequently the results only hint the adsorption/desorption properties of the interface. The measurements where made in 250  Sample solutions for dynamic surface property measurements were prepared from ultra pure water (upw), with 18.2 The effect of the five flotation frothers on the Sauter mean as a function of concentration ( The size distribution of bubbles in commercial frother solutions was examined at Sauter mean diameter of 1.47 As Solutions containing DF250 or PPG425 behaved differently. The increased frother concentration increased the number frequency of The effect of NF240 on the bubble size distribution is plotted in The lack of small bubbles observed in weak agent solutions could be the result of more frequent bubble coalescence, which would be in a good agreement with the finding of The effect of increasing frother concentration on dynamic surface tension as a function of bubble lifetime (ST– In DF200 frother solutions the surface tension had a negligible time and concentration dependency suggesting a quick and only diffusion controlled adsorption mechanism. A similar consistent effect was observed in the case of 1-Pentanol. The effect of the DF250 and PPG425 frother solutions ( The behaviour of the NF240 was in between the above-mentioned two frother groups. The time and concentration dependency of the short-term The dilatation surface elasticity results are shown in The change in dilatation elasticity of air/liquid interface was easily noticeable in the presence of DF250 and PPG425 ( Dilatation surface elasticity as a function of time of NF240 frother solution is shown in The effect of frother type and concentration on dynamic surface pressure as a function of surface area variation is plotted in In DF250 and PPG425 frother solutions the surface pressure increased during the contraction of surface area and decreased during surface area extension ( The effect of contraction and extension of the interface with NF240 frother solution was similar to that of DF250 and PPG425 ( The DSP results highlighted a sharp difference between the highly- and the weakly surface-active frothers. The difference between the two groups was also noticed during bubble size distribution measurements. To quantify the dynamic surface properties leading to a particular The equivalent At the early bubble lifetime the surface tension does not diminish appreciably in spite of the adsorbed molecules ( The identical dynamic surface properties were compared to The bubble size distribution measured at these identical dynamic surface property values is plotted in The above results highlight, that even if equivalent Equivalent Sauter mean obtained with different frothers in mechanical flotation cell does not imply equivalent bubble swarm composition therefore the measured gas dispersion parameter can be misleading. The measurements show that the adsorption/desorption properties of frothers affect the air/liquid interface properties, and consequently determine the bubble size distribution. The effects of weakly surface-active 1-Pentanol and DF200 on the dynamic surface properties of the air/liquid interface are similar and the bubble size distribution and In the presence of weakly surface-active reagents, the molecule exchange occurs rapidly at the air/liquid interface due to the quick diffusion controlled adsorption/desorption (“revolving door” effect). The The bubble size distribution curves indicate different coalescence and/or breakup properties between the weakly and the highly surface-active molecules. The difference is less likely the results of the distinct static coalescence property as it could be concluded from the bubble size distribution results. If static coalescence (the coalescence occurs in the absence of random momentum transfer) determines the difference in bubble size distribution than the modality of size distributions would be similar in each case below the CCC. The dynamic coalescence (the coalescence occurs in the presence of random momentum transfer) could be a potential explanation for the phenomenon; nevertheless in dynamic conditions, turbulence plays a more important role in determining the coalescence properties of the system and therefore the bubble size than the frother type ( The identical DSP results suggest that the surface elasticity does not play such as crucial role in controlling the bubble size as was presumed by The marked difference in molecular structure between the reagent grade frothers (1-Pentanol and PPG425) could explain their discrepant effect on the dynamic surface properties of the air/liquid interface and on The authors would like to thank Ms. Laura Tiainen, Ms. Iita Kejonen and Mr. Toni Mattsson for the help with dynamic surface properties measurements. The authors acknowledge Mr. Bosco Martinez and Mr. Ted Nuorivaara for their assistance in the CCC measurements.