Silicomanganese alloy is produced by carbothermal reduction of oxide ores in electric submerged arc furnaces. The (SiMn) slag is produced by silica and other basic oxides associated with the ores. At the end of the electric arc furnace, slag is separated from the alloy by density and poured into a pit where it is slowly air cooled to room temperature. The most common method for disposing of this slag is dumping in landfill. Around 1.2–1.4 Slags have often been considered as only slightly reactive materials because of the low-solubility of their solid phases. However, more recent studies have shown that slags could be reactive and may be a source of environmental pollution when sent to landfill. Thus, in areas contaminated by smelting activities, high amounts of heavy metals can often be detected in the soil and/or groundwater. Mn is present in the slag under study here and is known to be an environmental pollutant due to its potentially toxic effects ( SiMn slag consists of oxides such as SiO Due to their chemical and mineral composition, slags have cementitious and/or pozzolanic properties; hence, the majority of research on the use of SiMn slag is in the field of cement ( It is important to find a possible way of recovering manganese in order to minimize its environmental impact. However, very little data is available on the use of silicomanganese slag as a source of manganese. The aim of the present research is thus to propose a hydrometallurgical method to recover the manganese present in slag in order to obtain a liquor suitable for manufacturing manganese electrolytic. The experimental parameters affecting the leaching and purification processes were studied and optimized. The proposed hydrometallurgical process avoids high temperature reduction roasting (800–1000 The sulfate process is used in hydrometallurgy due to the lower cost of H Furthermore, electrodeposition of manganese has been widely studied in sulfate solutions ( The silicomanganese slag was crushed and thoroughly homogenized. Representative samples were then taken for characterization and the subsequent leaching test. The chemical analysis of the slag was determined by atomic absorption spectroscopy (Perkin Elmer A Analyst 200) after acid digestion, while a gravimetric technique was used to analyze sulfate content. The mineralogical composition was examined by XRD analysis (Philips X'Pert Pro system with CuKα radiation). Particle size distribution was determined by screening, the results of which are given in Leach solutions were prepared by adding a suitable amount of sulfuric acid to distilled water to obtain the required acid concentration. The first leaching tests were carried out in a 100 Time (15 to 60 Several experiments were carried out under more drastic conditions: an amount of H The next step was to prepare several liters of a solution with a high concentration of manganese in order to carry out electrolysis. Several tests using 50 The solid residue obtained after filtration was dried and characterized by X-ray diffraction. Besides other impurities, the leach liquors contain manganese, zinc, cobalt, copper, calcium and potassium. As manganese has a high negative value in the electromotive series, the levels of other metals with a less negative potential should be very strictly controlled. The separation of impurities such as Zn, Ni, Co and Cu from manganese can be carried out via sulfide precipitation. The precipitation and separation of metal sulfides are based on the different sulfide solubility of metals at a specific pH and temperature. Gaseous hydrogen sulfide (H The zinc and other impurities in the solution were precipitated using a Na Precipitation assays were carried out at room temperature in a 250 The predominant electrochemical reactions at the electrodes are as follows: Cathodic reactions: Anodic reactions: The electrodeposition of manganese was performed using a laboratory setup. The electrolytic cell was made of methacrylate, the cell dimensions being 26 Three different solutions were prepared: Catholyte: 13 Anolyte: 12 Catholyte feed: 31 The catholyte feed solution flowed by gravity from the feed tank to the electrolytic cells. A concentration of 12 to 14 Electrolysis was carried out for 3 Manganese is deposited on the surface of the cathode in the form of flakes, while small amounts of manganese dioxide accumulate on the anode. The deposited plate was carefully scraped off the cathode surface. The chemical analysis of the slag was determined by atomic absorption spectroscopy following acid digestion, while a gravimetric technique was used to analyze the sulfate content: 10.84% MnO, 41.64% SiO In the XRD characterization using a Philips X'Pert Pro system, ICDD PDF-2 (2004), the major crystalline phases present in the slag were found to be Sanidine (K(AlSi Several leaching tests were carried out to determine the optimum conditions for manganese extraction. Assays were performed using a sulfuric acid concentration of 10% by mass. As can be seen in The effect of acid concentration (10, 20 and 30% by mass) was carried out at room temperature employing a stirring speed of 500 Significant improvements in the dissolution of manganese are not seen when the concentration of sulfuric acid was varied between 10% and 30%. A similar pattern had already been found for another manganese residue treated with sulfuric acid ( Sixty percent of the manganese was dissolved in all the tests performed using the stoichiometric amount of acid. A slight increase in Mn extraction (76.03–77.51%) was obtained when using sulfuric acid 10% by mass with excesses of acid above the stoichiometric amount (10–30%). Leaching tests were performed within a temperature range of 20–100 As can be seen from The percentage of manganese extracted increased about 27% from room temperature to 100 As a concentrated solution of manganese sulfate is needed to perform the electrolysis, some tests were carried out under more drastic conditions – roasting-leaching treatment – in a furnace at 200 As can be seen from  The leached residue obtained after the sulfation–leaching treatment contained appreciable amounts of calcium sulfates, The presence of calcium and potassium sulfates was expected because the material leaving the furnace is leached with water, CaO and KOH to increase pH and precipitate Fe, Al and silica, which can occur in an acidic medium. Among other pollutants, the liquor from the sulfation-leaching process contained a small amount of Zn, Ni, Co and Cu. Different tests were carried out using Na Increasing the amount of Na Finally, 8 The manganese obtained after 3 A process has been developed for separating and recovering manganese from silicomanganese slag, obtaining a solution that can be used for the subsequent production of electrolytic manganese metal. The process involves several steps: dissolution of the manganese, purification of the leach solutions, and electrowinning. Sulfuric acid leaching and purification conditions were optimized. Silicomanganese slag is treated with sulfuric acid (10% by mass) in a furnace at 200 The removal of Zn, Co, Cu and Ni to values below 2 The purified liquor is suitable for electrolysis. α–manganese is obtained with a purity of 99.99%. The developed process is able to recover most of the manganese (94%) in the residue.