Ten moist, powdered European shale samples were analyzed for their sorption properties by volumetric method. The adsorption capacities were correlated to the shale organic types and maturity. The pore-size distribution obtained from low-pressure CO2 micropore adsorption was also correlated with the porosity and shale organic types. Furthermore, pore volume and average pore width were taken into consideration to determine the dominant parameters controlling adsorption. To identify the discrepancy between available and actual pore space for adsorption, helium and krypton gases were used for void volume estimation. Methane adsorption isotherms follow Langmuir Type I behavior and, in general, showed a positive trend with Total Organic Content (TOC) and Hg-porosity although some deviations were also observed. Low to moderate level of hysteresis between adsorption and desorption isotherms for some samples was visible, which may be attributed to the experimental uncertainty and existence of heterogeneous pores for shale-methane interaction. The low-pressure micropore adsorption analysis indicated dominance of nanopore and very fine micropores in the shale matrix structure along with associated microporosity of the clay materials. The observed “negative” adsortion or “decline” in adsorption isotherm are related to the mismatch of the available pore spaces for helium and methane. In general, He-calibrated isotherms showed higher levels of adsorption than the corresponding Kr-calibrated isotherms although the unit void volume for all samples follow a negative trend with the maximum methane capacity.Shale gas reservoirs are fine-grained, unconventional gas reservoirs where gases (mainly methane) are stored in the porous spaces in free state and also into the internal structures of the shale matrix in adsorbed state ( The methane adsorption capacity of shale is generally measured by the isotherm experiments conducted in the laboratory, following the gravimetric or volumetric methods employing the mass-balance equations, same as that used in case of coal. Earlier studies of methane adsorption on shale reported that the adsorption isotherm follow the Langmuir Type I behavior and total organic content of shale mainly govern the gas sorption capacity ( Although mass-balance equations are universally applied for calculating the sorption capacity, the same equations may be difficult to apply for calculating adsorption in shale samples, which sometimes may yield negative calculated methane excess adsorption ( This paper presents the results of pure methane adsorption/desorption characteristics on a set of shale samples and highlighting these deficiencies. The powdered and moist shale samples prepared for adsorption, were calibrated both with Helium and Krypton (which has almost similar molecular diameter as of methane) to observe the change in void volume estimation and then the pure methane adsorption capacities of the shale samples were measured following the volumetric isotherm tests. Finally, all the sorption capacities were correlated with shale composition, pore-size distribution, and other parameters governing the methane adsorption. The shale samples were received mostly in powdered form with a few small lumps and upon collection, the samples were wrapped in bubble wrapper to preserve the in-situ moisture. For TOC, standard rock evaluation tests are performed using ∼100 mg of pulverized rock samples. The samples were heated in stages at a temperature ranging from 100 °C to 850 °C and the corresponding results are recorded in a form of “peak” ( The methane sorption capacity of the shale samples was measured using a high-pressure manometric gas-sorption apparatus, the description of which is given by The “Absolute” sorbed values were calculated from the experimental “Excess” values using the equation ( The experimental uncertainties at every step of the isotherm measurements were calculated using the theory of error propagation ( Low-pressure CO The general information of the samples and information on their associated elemental composition as received from source of the samples are shown in The absolute methane adsorption characteristics of ten shale samples after calibrating the void volume in the sample cell with Helium are shown in In general, the isotherm graphs follow the Langmuir Type I sorption behavior for both the sets, matching well with the available gas sorption studies on shales ( For the Kr-calibrated shales, as shown in It must be mentioned here that for some shale samples, adsorption isotherm graphs follow a “decline” in middle to high-pressure range ( It is well known that gas is adsorbed into the internal pore structures. To get a better idea about the shale-methane interaction, the Hg-porosity values of the samples are correlated with TOC content and the methane adsorbed capacity and the graphs are shown in Studies conducted on the shale pore structure revealed that both inorganic and organic constituents are stored into the micro-/nano-pore spaces of the shale ( To identify if there is any dependency of the clay material on porosity and gas adsorption, the corresponding Hg-porosity values and the maximum methane adsorption capacities were plotted with the clay composition and the results are shown in In total, He-calibrated samples show a mild correlation between the Langmuir volume and the clay content. However, for Kr-calibrated samples, the relationship is not clear. It was reported that with maturity of shale, methane adsorption capacities also increased due to an increase in the micoporosity by disintegration of organic matters ( To identify the factors behind the “negative adsorption” (as discussed in Section Generally, the available pore volume of a sample with He-calibration is more than that for Kr-calibration of the same sample. This is due to the fact that the molecular diameter of Helium is ∼28 nm, whereas that for Krypton is ∼40 nm ( For some of the graphs of He Among the ten shale samples, eight He-calibrated shale samples were subjected to complete methane ad-/desorption and the corresponding results are shown in Among the thirteen shale samples, six shale samples were chosen for the low-pressure CO When the micropore volume is correlated with the maximum micropore adsorption and the available surface area within the pores, as shown in The pore-size distribution analysis, shown in Earlier, low-pressure micropore adsorption studies on pore-size distribution of shale stated the complexities and not-so-clear characteristics on shale-adsorbate interactions within the pore. It was reported that the pre-requisite of drying the samples in high vacuum pressure could alter the pore fabric ( To consider the overall accuracy of the methane adsorptions isotherm tests on shale, reproducibility tests for void volume calibration are conducted on same F1 sample by helium and the volume ratio results are shown in Pure methane sorption isotherm and low pressure CO The methane absolute adsorption capacity of the European shale follows the Type I Langmuir isotherm. Whereas, low-pressure CO Langmuir volume shows an increasing trend with the total organic content for the He-calibrated samples, but the correlation does not exist for the Kr-calibrated samples. It is also observed that other than TOC, factors like maturity of the organics, clay content, porosity and associated pore-network also impact the adsorbed volume. Low to moderate hysteresis present in the sorption isotherm, which may be due to the changes in methane-shale interaction characteristics and heterogeneous porosity, internal structural composition of shale. Negative adsorption may occur due to the mismatch in available space for adsorption and actual availability of pores to the adsorbate gas. The reasons may be the difficulties associated with determination of the heterogeneous, nano-range pore-size distribution limit any specific conclusion for the negative adsorption. Void volume calibration is crucial for any sorption measurements and can vary the sorption capacity when pore-diameter of the calibrating gas and the adsorbate varies significantly. The authors thank Prof. Quentin Fisher ( The following is the Supplementary data to this article: Supplementary data to this article can be found online at