Hollow grouted rock bolts are widely used to reinforce the surrounding rock mass in underground engineering, such as deep roadway of coal mines, deep tunneling. The anchorage capacity of hollow grouted rock bolts greatly influences the support quality. However, the anchorage capacity of hollow grouted rock bolt is usually destructively measured. In this paper, the grout ratio, defined as ratio of the grouted volume to the over-coring volume of anchorage, is introduced to measure the anchorage capacity. The quantitative relationship between the grout ratio and anchorage capacity of hollow grouted rock bolt by pull-out tests is established. Then, the non-destructive inspection on grout ratio of anchorage for hollow grouted rock bolts by stress wave reflection method is theoretically and experimentally investigated. By combining the two steps, a new non-destructive inspection method on anchorage quality of hollow grouted rock bolts is proposed. The results indicate that: (i) The anchorage capacity increases with the grout ratio increases up to 75% beyond which the benefits are lessened. (ii) The stress wave propagating along the bolt rod reflects and transmits at each interface impedance mismatch. The reflected signals can be used to identify the start and end of anchorage, and void part in anchorage. (iii) The results of wavelet transform analysis indicate the low-pass filters employed to reflected signals can be used to identify the start of anchorage, while the high-pass filters can identify the void part and the end of anchorage. (iv) A new supporting capacity monitoring method combined with pull-out tests and non-destructive method on hollow grouted rock bolts has been proposed, which can be used to inspect the on-site hollow grouted rock bolts in roadway on a large scale.Coal plays an important role in the development of China’s national economy, accounting for about 60% of the country’s primary energy consumption ( Rock bolts have been widely used to reinforce surrounding rock mass in tunneling, mining, and other underground engineering for many years. There are many different rock bolts, such as mechanical rock bolts, grouted rock bolts, self-drilling rock bolts, energy-absorbing rock bolts, etc. A specific rock condition needs the suitable type of rock bolts ( There are few literature reviews about failure modes of hollow grouted rock bolts. The structure of hollow grouted rock bolts is similar to conventional fully grouted rock bolts. Therefore, its failure modes can be drawn expertise of fully grouted rock bolts ( Various studies have been conducted on the inspection of rock bolt grouting defect with nondestructive testing technology. The current methods mainly include vibration methods ( The hollow grouted rock bolts differ in shape, and grouting material compared with the conventional grouted rock bolts. Thus, additional research applicable to anchorage quality are required. In this paper, the pull-out tests for anchorages with different grout ratio of commonly used hollow grouted rock bolt in Chinese coal mines were conducted to establish the quantitative relation between the grout ratio and anchorage capacity. Then a non-destructive test by stress wave reflection methods was investigated to accurately inspect the different grout ratio. Finally, a new non-destructive inspection method combining pull-out tests on grout ratio was proposed to detect anchorage quality of hollow grouted rock bolt in the field. In the field, if grouting process was not properly controlled, it would result in poor anchorage capacity. Voids in grout section give zero anchorage strength and decrease anchorage capacity. It is easily recognized that anchorage capacity decreases with voids increase. However, their quantitative relation has been rarely studied. In this section, the grout ratio, defined as ratio of the grout to over-coring volume of anchorage, is adopted to measure the anchorage capacity in laboratory scale. Note that the over-coring volume is represented by the volume of steel tube used to drilling borehole. The LAW500 horizontal pull-out testing machine (shown in The most commonly specimen preparation method for rock bolt pull-out tests is to pull bolts from cylindrical samples made up of cement-based or concrete materials ( The pull-out tests began with No.1 specimen loaded to the horizontal pull-out testing machine. During the loading process, the rock bolt center should pass through the center of the concrete column because the uncentering could easily break the specimen due to the unbalanced torque. The computer recorded the load-displacement curve of anchorage during the loading process until the bolt rod or the anchorage was failure. Repeating the above steps for No.2 to No.5 specimens, five groups of load bearing capacity data were obtained shown in Elastic stress wave is of particular interest to evaluate defects inside industrial and civil elongated structures due to their ability to propagate over long distance ( Although the hollow rod with grout filled are two-layer medium, the wave propagation characteristics, especially the wave velocity, are largely affected by equivalent Young’s modulus and density of the composite ( The left and right composite rods of interface The displacement induced by incident wave is can be referenced to elastic longitudinal waves in thin rods as follows ( Solving the Eq. Similarly, the reflection wave and transmission wave could be obtained by the following equations: By substituting particle velocity Combining the Eqs. The Eq. Due to the Substituting the first line of Eq. Then integration of the Eq. Similarly, substituting the second line of Eq. The reflection and transmission coefficients of the displacement and velocity could be calculated, as follows: The Eq. For For For For The above discussion demonstrates the inspection on void and grouted part could be determined by sign characteristics of the reflected wave at impedance mismatch, which indicates that relevant non-destructive equipment can be applied to excite an elastic stress wave in the proximal end of hollow grouted rock bolt and collect the wave signals, then loaded to PC to analysis. The detailed process is shown in The former section theoretically illustrates that hammer impact and a transduce installation in the proximal end of hollow grouted rock bolt to collect the reflected signals of elastic stress waves at impedance mismatch, the wave propagation velocity and travel time difference could be obtained, and thus to calculate the length of void and grouted part. However, in most Chinese coal mines, the length of void and grouted part is no more than 2 m. When an excitation is applied in the proximal end, particle movement has not stopped while particle motion caused by reflected wave has started. Which makes more than one reflected waves and transmitted waves. The multiple reflected signal cannot be recognized directly due to short length of anchorage and fast velocity of elastic stress wave. Therefore, it is necessary to filter signals to remove the additional reflected and transmitted wave signals (defined as noisy part). The distance, velocity and accelerator amplitude of first arrival reflected signal are most obvious. Therefore, an idea of removing noisy part is to set a threshold to delete the signals under lower threshold and retain the signals with higher threshold. The application of conventional signal processing method, such as Fast Fourier Transform FFT, does not always give a good performance because of accuracy and large sample size of signals. Furthermore, it has a fixed length of window and cannot be used in a transient state. Wavelet transform provides information about a signal that a Fourier transform or short time Fourier transform has difficulty in extracting because wavelet analysis is a localized transform in time or frequency domains ( A wavelet theory can be defined as follows: Therefore, wavelet transform analysis on multiple reflected signals by Matlab software is well used to set a translation parameter to locate first arrival reflected signals and then set scale parameter to remove noisy part. The Discrete Wavelet Transform (DWT) is developed mainly for quick in shifting, filtering, and easy to be implemented. Therefore, the DWT is employed to locate the first arrival reflected signals, and then decompose the noisy part. The decomposition of multiple reflected signals is obtained by filters of different cut-off frequencies. The signals are passed both, through a series of high-pass filters A nondestructive method using elastic stress wave was adopted to evaluate the grout ratio of anchorage. The non-destructive tests include the signal collection and analysis. Firstly, the piezoelectric accelerometer was set in the proximal end of the hollow grouted rock bolt. Then the plastic hammer was used to generate the guided stress waves along bolt rod, and the piezoelectric signal collected by accelerometer was converted to digital formation by signal conversion equipment. Finally, the digital signals were loaded to the PC and analyzed by the wavelet transform. To determine velocity in void part, three hollow grouted rock bolts filled with cement-mortar in hollow part with outer diameter of 25 mm, inner diameter of 20 mm and 2400 mm in length was firstly collected. The obtained signals were marked with The travel time of the elastic stress wave along the bolt rod in air was determined by estimating the time difference between the peak of impulse and peak of reflected wave from the end of the bolt rod. Thus, the wave velocity of bolt rod in air is the ratio of twice the length of the bolt rod and travel time. The travel time of the elastic stress wave along the bolt rod in anchorage was determined by estimating the time difference between the bottom of reflected wave from the start of anchorage and peak of reflected wave from the end of the anchorage. Thus, the wave velocity of bolt rod in anchorage is the ratio of twice the length of the anchorage and travel time. The cross-section area A, density ρ, Young’s modulus, To determine wave velocity in the void part, the measured signals of To determine the wave velocity in anchorage, Based on the wave velocity of void and grouted part, the length of void part of No.2 to No.5 specimens can be calculated by half multiplying each time difference with corresponding velocity. Through trial-error method on The wave velocity is another effective parameter to evaluate the grout ratio. Here, the measured and calculated wave velocities in the other studies and in this study are plotted in  The results of the study show that the velocity and travel time in void and grout part of stress wave can be used as an indicator for identifying the grout ratio in anchorage of hollow grouted rock bolt. This study was performed as a fundamental investigation to demonstrate the ability of stress waves combined with wavelet transform. In this study, the void part was idealized as the uniform distributed in drill hole. However, various types of defects can be generated in the field, such as necking, bulging, soil inclusions, and irregular-shaped voids. A further direction of this study will be to provide more information regarding the characteristics of stress waves propagating on surrounding rock mass with various types of defects. In addition, further studies on the effects of the material properties of grout and surrounding rock mass, geometric-characteristics are required. This paper aims to detect the anchorage capacity of hollow grouted rock bolts accurately, randomly, and on a large range in field applications by non-destructive method, thus give feedback to evaluate the roadway stability. Therefore, a new non-destructive test method combining with pull-out tests and non-destructive tests by stress wave reflection methods is proposed. The process is shown in In this paper, a new non-destructive testing method on grout ratio of hollow grouted rock bolt combined with destructive test has been put forward. Based on the theoretical and experimental results, the following conclusions could be drawn: The anchorage capacity increases with the increase of grout ratio. The slope of the anchorage capacity decreases gradually when the grout ratio is bigger than 75%. The grout ratio of 75% are set as the standard value of anchorage quality. The theoretical results of sign variation of elastic stress wave at each impedance mismatch indicates that when the stress wave propagates from the small impedance to the large one, the sign of reflected wave and the incident wave are opposite while the transmitted wave and the incident wave are same. When the elastic stress wave is transmitted from the large impedance to the small one, the reflected wave has the same sign with the incident wave. The experimental results of nondestructive test on grout ratio from 50% to 100% shows well corresponding to the theoretical analysis. The identification process of the travel time difference between each impedance mismatch indicates that the low-pass filters with 5 scaling employed db5 mother wavelet could be used to identify the hollow grouted rock bolt filled grout in air, start of the anchorage. The high-pass filter with 5 scaling employed db5 mother wavelet can identify the void part and end of the anchorage. A new non-destructive test method for field application combined with pull-out tests and non-destructive tests by stress wave reflection method is proposed, which could provide a promising test method for monitoring anchorage quality of hollow grouted rock bolt in engineering application. This research is supported by the