Relatively poor results have been reported with open reduction and internal fixation of complex fractures around the knee in elderly osteoporotic patients, and primary total knee arthroplasty (TKA) has been proposed as an alternative solution. While limiting the number of procedures, it meets two prerequisites: (1) to save the patient's life, thanks to early weight-bearing, to limit decubitus complications; and (2) to save knee function and patient autonomy, thanks to early knee mobilization. There are 3 main indications: complex articular fractures in elderly patients with symptomatic osteoarthritis prior to fracture; complex articular fractures of the tibial plateau in elderly patients whose bone quality makes internal fixation hazardous; and major destruction of the distal femur in younger patients. Although admitted in emergency, these patients require adequate preoperative management, including a multidisciplinary approach to manage comorbidities, control of anemia and pain, and assessment and management of vascular and cutaneous conditions. Preoperative planning is crucial, to order appropriate implants and materials that may be needed intraoperatively. Surgical technique is based on the basic principles of revision surgery as regards choice of implant, steps of reconstruction, bone defect management and implant fixation. For complex fractures of the distal femur, primary temporary reduction is a useful “trick”, to determine the level of the joint line and femoral rotation. Complementary internal fixation may be required in case of diaphyseal extension of the fracture and to prevent inter-prosthetic fractures. In the literature, the results of primary TKA for fracture are encouraging and better than for secondary TKA after failure of non-operative treatment or internal fixation, with lower rates of revision and complications, earlier full weight-bearing and better functional results. Loss of autonomy is, however, frequent, and 1-year mortality is high, especially following complex femoral fractures in the elderly.Arthroplasty is commonly used to treat acute fracture of the proximal femur, complex proximal humerus fracture or elbow fracture Most complex knee fractures in the elderly are treated by internal fixation or even non-operatively The present study hypothesis was therefore that knee arthroplasty could be a solution for acute fractures around the joint in elderly osteoporotic patients, in order to limit decubitus complications and preserve knee function. We shall therefore seek to answer the following questions: what are the fundamental principles of this treatment? what are the indications? how to prepare for and plan surgery? what are the technical specificities? what postoperative management is needed? what are the expected results? The indications for first-line arthroplasty in complex epiphyseal shoulder and elbow joint fractures are now well established, with the same rationale as for displaced femoral neck fracture in the elderly Thus, in the knee, reconstruction using arthroplasty is sometimes the only surgical option that fulfils the two requirements of saving the patient's life thanks to early resumption of full weight-bearing and saving function thanks to immediate unrestricted joint mobilization Incidence of complex epiphyseal knee fracture is much lower than for fracture of the femoral neck, proximal humerus or elbow, accounting for around 1% of annual emergency admissions Internal fixation of complex knee fracture in elderly patients shows loss of reduction in 30–79% of cases for the proximal tibia, with patient age, osteoporosis, comminution and initial displacement as risk factors To minimize the number of procedures and optimize functional results, Wolfgang To sum up: the results of internal fixation are often poor in complex articular fracture around the knee in elderly osteoporotic patients; primary arthroplasty can be an interesting solution, fulfilling two treatment requirements while reducing the number of procedures, saving the patient's life thanks to early resumption of weight-bearing, limiting decubitus complications, and saving function, thanks to immediate unrestricted joint mobilization, minimizing loss of autonomy. There are three major indications: complex articular fracture in elderly patients with symptomatic osteoarthritis prior to the fracture; complex fracture of the tibial plateau in elderly patients where articular involvement makes internal fixation hazardous; and complete femoral metaphysis destruction in younger patients This is the most frequent situation This situation is also quite frequent This is the most debatable and least frequent indication. To date, no authors have recommended it, although some teams suggest it for extremely complex high-energy fractures sustained in road accidents by young subjects ( This indication is very rare, even in centers treating polytrauma, and first-line arthroplasty can be considered only when a major bone defect might require a so-called tumor-prosthesis implant (as used after tumor resection) or fusion using a modular or customized intramedullary nail. The integrity of the extensor mechanism should be checked and, in case of open fracture, skin cover and healing must be perfect before considering any arthroplasty. There is a major risk of infection, and long-term prognosis is not good, which limits indications. Therefore, these cases should be discussed on a case-by-case basis; reconstruction by implant should be chosen only if no conservative solution seems available. There are three main indications: complex articular fracture in elderly patients with pre-existing osteoarthritis; complex tibial plateau fractures in elderly patients where articular and metaphyseal destruction makes internal fixation hazardous; complete destruction of the distal femur in younger patients. These patients are admitted in emergency, but need to be prepared and managed as for scheduled surgery: local and general preparation of the patient. The surgical team itself should also be ready and it is important to order adequate implants and ancillary instrumentation so as not to delay treatment. These patients, admitted in emergency, require rigorous ortho-geriatric management, taking full account of comorbidity These elderly patients often have fragile skin, with hematoma and sometimes contusions related to the trauma, for which strict preoperative surveillance is required. Open fractures are rare in low-energy trauma in elderly patients. Open fracture may, however, be observed in massive distal femur destruction in young poly-trauma patients, and any doubt as to the feasibility of adequate skin coverage contraindicates arthroplasty. Associated vascular lesions are rare, but should be systematically screened for before surgery. Venous insufficiency, on the other hand, is not unusual and may contraindicate surgery if there is any doubt concerning satisfactory skin healing due to poor vascular condition ( Surgical planning determines the precise needs for material. Not all centers have permanent access to segmental reconstruction implants (tumoral reconstruction implants), rotating hinged implants or revision implants with metal augmentation systems. Thus, although these patients are admitted in emergency, surgery has to be accurately planned as quickly as possible, taking account of the time needed to procure equipment. Key-points: despite emergency admission, these patients need strict preoperative planning, including multidisciplinary management of comorbidity, control of anemia, and analysis of skin and vascular condition, and optimal preoperative planning. These first-line arthroplasties require thorough knowledge of the basic rules of revision surgery To have this experience is mandatory, to keep surgical time as short as possible in these fragile elderly patients In France, emergency traumatology surgery is usually performed by junior surgeons; first-line TKA for fracture, however, should be performed by or with the help of an experienced surgeon. It is essential to be prepared for this operation, which should be performed as scheduled emergency surgery, to optimize surgical conditions The three main stages of TKA revision with joint reconstruction described by Vince The choice of implant and constraint depends on the fracture level and degree of metaphyseal destruction. Schematically, when the fracture involves the tibial or femoral collateral ligament insertions, a rotating-hinge implant should be used ( In case of severe metaphyseal destruction up to the diaphysis, a segmental mega- prosthesis should be used, especially on the femoral side. In prosthetic revision in younger patients, it is still relevant to seek to minimize constraint, but in complex fractures the essential is to obtain a pain-free, mobile but also and above all stable Preoperative analysis is thus crucial. Excellent preoperative radiographic views are necessary. CT with 3D reconstruction can be helpful if good-quality X-rays are difficult to obtain due to pain, and/or to improve fracture analysis Patient positioning is as for TKA revision, according to the surgeon's preference. Due to the fracture, it is often difficult to use supports to obtain a stable knee at 90°. We do not use a tourniquet, to be able to release the extensor system and obtain adequate exposure, especially for mega-prostheses. We recommend using tranexamic acid, even in these elderly patients, as contraindications are increasingly rare, and cell-saver The approach should be the one the surgeon adopts for revision TKA. We use the extended sub-vastus approach in revision TKA and also in primary TKA for acute fracture The main difficulty in tibial fracture is to achieve a stable base-plate, associated to appropriate fixation There are, however, a few points worth detailing, according to the type of fracture. The medial plateau is respected and it is easy to reconstruct the tibial base, maintain joint-line level and determine rotation. Lateral defect filling is important for stability. This is the most complex case, due to the instability of the tibial base, requiring temporary reduction (described in detail in section 4.5.1 below, for the femur), to determine joint-line level and tibial rotation and to select the best option to treat tibial bone loss. Use of a cone or other filling device, stabilized by a cemented stem, is essential for early resumption of full weight-bearing. It is important to analyze the X-rays (and CT scans, if any) carefully, so as to include management of the associated anterior tibial tubercle fracture in the preoperative planning. This fracture may be considered as a contraindication; however, appropriate internal fixation can be considered, by screws and/or cerclages using steel wires passed behind the tibial stem before cementing, as in anterior tibial tubercle fixation during extensor mechanism allografting. The choice of constraint is essential. The ligament insertions can usually be spared; however, postoperative stability is more important, and for this an LCCK or a rotating-hinge implant might be a good choice to ensure an adequate postoperative stability. Megaprosthesis implants are unsuitable for the tibia due to the difficulty of restoring extensor mechanism continuity. This highlights the importance of conserving the epiphysis in proximal tibial fracture. As in prosthetic revision or reconstruction after tumor resection, two key issues comprise restoration of the joint-line and femoral rotation In revision surgery, the joint-line is classically supposed to lie about 25 The level of the tibial cut in the non-fractured epiphysis is easy to determine, as for a primary prosthesis, and this cut can be performed using a classical cutting jig sliding on the intramedullary stem of the conventional ancillary instrumentation In complex femoral fracture, the rotation of the future femoral implant can be hard to determine Even in cases of complex fracture of the tibial plateau, tibial rotation should be determined based on the remaining classical bony landmarks, and notably the tibial tubercle, while ensuring congruence with the femoral component in extension. In complex femoral fracture, the classical femoral component measurement instruments may be unusable, due to articular comminution As in TKA revision and beyond classic classifications, two types of defect can be considered: segmental defects, reconstructed using structural graft In our own experience, porous tantalum cones are particularly adapted when a conventional implant is used The ultimate stage of segmental bone defect is complete metaphyseal and epiphyseal destruction in severely comminuted fracture, in which case a tumor prosthesis may be needed ( The principles are those of prosthetic revision The literature reports no superiority between a long uncemented stem with diaphyseal engagement and a shorter cemented stem in revision TKA ( Thus, long stems are used for trials, to control alignment as described by Vince When a tumor prosthesis is used, the stem should be long and fully cemented, to optimize the stability The decision to perform complementary internal fixation is taken at end of procedure and is also important, due to sudden changes in bone elasticity caused by prosthetic implants in osteoporotic patients. It allows immediate resumption of full weight-bearing without risk of postoperative periprosthetic fracture In these complex fractures, diaphyseal fracture extensions are frequent and should not be ignored during adjacent metaphyseal reconstruction. Metallic cerclages associated to cemented stem fixation allows immediate resumption of weight-bearing and reduces the risk of periprosthetic fracture ( Ipsilateral hip prostheses lead to a risk of interprosthetic fracture in the bone segment between the two stems, which could be a dramatic complication. Internal fixation using a plate is then recommended, to bridge the area between the TKA and THA stems for a length at least twice the diameter of the diaphysis ( Key-points: the surgical technique is based on the basic principles of revision surgery regarding choice of implant, steps of reconstruction, bone defect filling and implant fixation; primary temporary reduction is an especially useful “trick” in complex femoral fracture, to determine the level of the joint-line and the femoral rotation. The principles of postoperative management of elderly patients apply here: remedying blood loss, preventing decubitus complications, managing anticoagulation and treating the commorbidities Pain management should be up-to-date, multimodal, avoiding morphine derivatives so far as possible. A combination of local injection at end of surgery and the use of an adductor canal catheter is particularly effective The main issue is resumption of full weight-bearing, which should be immediate whenever possible. For this, surgical technique respecting the above reconstruction principles is crucial: performing optimized metaphyseal reconstruction using tantalum cones and short cemented stems with complementary internal fixation, as for revision TKA procedures, allows immediate resumption of weight-bearing tumor prostheses also allow immediate resumption of full weight-bearing Key-points: the classical principles of multidisciplinary postoperative management, including geriatricians, apply: remedying blood loss, preventing decubitus complications, managing anticoagulation, and treating comorbidities; current reconstruction techniques allow immediate resumption of weight-bearing in most cases. Results for first-line arthroplasty for fracture are encouraging, and notably better than for arthroplasty secondary to failure of conservative treatment such as internal fixation Complications rates of TKAs for recent fractures range between 8% and 42%; revision rates are low, and functional results are usually satisfactory In these often fragile patients, there are also general complications potentially related to 3 successive operations (internal fixation, hardware removal, then TKA implantation) and a period of non-weight-bearing or protected weight-bearing following the internal fixation The French Hip and Knee Society (SFHG)’s multicenter series of TKA for acute fracture is the largest published to date there were 2 local complications: 1 skin complication, and 1 anterior tibial tubercle avulsion no implant revisions were needed; one patient died; 1 showed cardiac complications and 3 showed deep venous thrombosis, including 1 complicated by pulmonary embolism. Thus, general complications were predominant, again in agreement with the literature functional results were satisfactory, with good recovery of range of motion. However, Parker score The most recent published series is a French retrospective study of 21 TKAs in patients with a mean age of 79 In our series, awaiting publication, of 23 cases with a mean age of 78 tumor prosthesis; rotating-hinge prosthesis with double-cone bone defect reconstruction. Comparison of surgery time and blood loss was very much in favor of the segmental prosthesis, without increased complications and with systematic resumption of weight-bearing, compared to only 75% of cases after complex metaphyseal reconstruction. The segmental prosthesis procedure was thus technically simpler, quicker and more reliable in case of massive destruction of the distal femur. Key-points: results in first-line arthroplasty for fracture are encouraging, and better than in arthroplasty secondary to failure of conservative treatment, with lower revision and complications rates, earlier resumption of weight-bearing, and better functional results. Reconstruction using TKA in case of complex articular fracture of the knee is an interesting surgical option, limiting the number of surgeries while meeting two imperatives: saving the patient's life, thanks to early resumption of weight-bearing, limiting the decubitus complications; saving function, thanks to immediate unrestricted joint mobilization, limiting loss of autonomy. Results in the literature confirm the benefit of this attitude. Multidisciplinary perioperative management is essential in elderly patients. The surgical technique requires excellent knowledge and experience of the principles of prosthetic revision. It is complex, and should be performed on a delayed emergency basis, to optimize planning and logistic preparation. Published series are as yet limited, due to the rarity of these fractures and less widespread awareness of this approach; better definition of indications and principles should extend experience and further improve results. S. Parratte reports personal fees from Medical education and consultant for ZimmerBiomet, personal fees from Consultant for Stryker, personal fees from Medical education and consultant for Arthrex, personal fees from Consultant for Graftys, outside the submitted work. J.N. Argenson and M. Ollivier have no conflict of interest for the current work. J.N. Argenson has royalties from ZimmerBiomet ans Symbios. M. Ollivier reports personal fees for medical education and consultant for Stryker and Arthrex.