In pan-facial trauma, reconstruction of the NOE complex and the mandibular condyles are of utmost importance. Reconstruction of facial symmetry after NOE fractures is still a great challenge in facial reconstruction. The objective is the three-dimensional reconstruction of the fracture area with a wide exposure of a coronal incision and a conjunctival approach. Seldom pre-existing lacerations are a need. If an access to the posterior part of the orbit is necessary, temporary marginectomies of the orbital rim can be indicated. CSF leaks can be managed endoscopically. However, treatment under vision by the neurosurgeon is a standardized common procedure in our interdisciplinary skull base approach. In comminution of the frontal sinus, cranialisation of the sinus is our frequent alternative to reconstruction or obliteration. For sequencing of the bony fixation, the nasal buttresses and the orbital frame must be reconstructed, in a first step. Adequate fixation can be achieved with the 1.0, 1.3, 1.5 craniofacial plating system. As a second step, the defects of the orbital walls are bridged. Special consideration has to be made to the “key area” of the postbulbar orbital walls. It is an important area for the position of the ocular globe. If the walls are comminuted and the bony support is completely lost, calvarial split bone grafts in a cantilever technique are used for reconstruction. Navigated preformed meshes are positioned, additionally. The management of the medial canthal ligament and the nasal skeleton needs special recognition for eg. by using prefabricated wires. Orbital true-to-original reconstructions and the secondary reconstructions were more precise than the reposition of the zygomatic bones. The postoperative acquired surface scans resulted in mean distances from 0.89 to 1.784 Conclusion: The natural asymmetry in humans influences the accuracy of preoperative planning procedure, when the mirroring tool is used. The accuracy transforming the preoperative planning to the surgical reconstruction using CAS depends on location, surgical approach and matter of reconstruction. The importance of navigation and intraoperative cone beam control will be highlighted especially in pan-facial fractures.