This paper presents a simulation study on pre-cooling of inlet air using Munters media to enhance the performance of a Natural Draft Dry Cooling Tower (NDDCT) on hot and dry days. The ambient humidity was kept constant at 30% while the ambient temperature ranged from 10° to 50 °C during simulation. Three Munters media (CELdek7060, CELdek7090 and CELdek5090), each with three thicknesses, were employed to pre-cool the tower inlet air. Results show that NDDCT can benefit from pre-cooling with wetted media when the ambient air is hot and dry. The trade-off between the air pressure drop across the media and the benefit of evaporative pre-cooling of the inlet air was also examined. It was found that there is a critical ambient temperature below which pre-cooling application does not benefit NDDCT performance. The value of this critical temperature is a function of the tower design and the selection of wetted media. Amongst the studied media, only the pre-cooling with 0.10 m and 0.15 m CELdek7060 is to be useful in the studied case. The dependence of heat rejection improvement of the proposed tower on medium thickness is weak. Besides, thicker medium does not necessarily bring more benefit.effective reduced flow area defined in text, m inside cross-sectional flow area at elevation ➂, m inside cross-sectional flow area at tower exit, m total surface area on the air side, m fin area, m total surface area on the water side, m empirical constant a parameter defined in text constant specific heat of air, J/(kg K) specific heat of water, J/(kg K) fin root diameter, m the effectiveness of the finned surface LMTD correction factor friction factor inside the tube defined in text gravitational acceleration, m/s air-side heat transfer coefficient, W/(m effective heat transfer coefficient, W/(m volumetric heat transfer coefficient, W/(m water-side heat transfer coefficient, W/(m loss coefficient the downstream loss coefficient inlet contraction loss coefficient = 0.05 thermal conductivity of fin, W/(m K) thermal conductivity of air at mean temperature through the heat exchanger, W/(m K) thermal conductivity of water, W/(m K) Nusselt number of water, Nu characteristic heat transfer parameter defined in text, m Prandtl number of water, Pr Prandtl number of air at mean temperature through the heat exchanger pressure differential between the outside and inside of the tower at the mean heat exchanger elevation, Pa pressure drop across Munters media, Pa pressure drop, loss coefficient at tower supports pressure drop, loss coefficient due to separation and redirection of flow at the lower edge of tower shell pressure drop, loss coefficient at heat exchanger supports pressure drop, loss coefficient of contraction loss at heat exchanger pressure drop, loss coefficient due to form and frictional losses at heat exchanger pressure drop, loss coefficient of expansion loss at heat exchanger pressure drop, loss coefficient in kinetic energy at the outlet of the tower Reynolds number of water, Re characteristic flow parameter defined in text, m air dry-bulb temperature before Munters pre-cooling, K air wet-bulb temperature before Munters pre-cooling, K air dry-bulb temperature after Munters pre-cooling, air temperature before heat exchanger, K log mean temperature difference, K fin thickness(mean), m overall thermal resistance, K/W air velocity, m/s average water velocity in heat exchanger tubes, m/s air relative humidity before and after Munters pre-cooling, % Log Mean Temperature Difference Natural Draft Dry Cooling Tower Natural Draft Dry Cooling Towers medium thickness, m relative surface roughness cooling efficiency, % fin efficiency correction factor defined in text the mean flow incidence angle defined in text dynamic viscosity of air at mean temperature through the heat exchanger, kg/(ms) dynamic viscosity of water, kg/(ms) air density, kg/m the air density outside the tower at the elevation of the heat exchanger, kg/m the air density inside the tower at the entrance of the heat exchanger, kg/m the air density inside the tower at the exit of the heat exchanger, kg/m the mean air density through the heat exchanger, kg/m the air density at tower exit, kg/m the ambient air density at elevation ➅, kg/m density of water, kg/m contraction ratio defined in text ratio of minimum to free stream flow area = 0.433 a factor defined in text dimensionless temperature changes of water and air dimensionless mean temperature difference Past studies of wetted media in thermal power plants have been limited to wet cooling towers or forced-draft dry cooling towers. This paper presents the first report on whether wetted media can also be used to improve the performance of Natural Draft Dry Cooling Towers (NDDCTs). As opposed to the case for forced-draft towers, the answer is not trivial because of the complex trade-off between the pressure drop and the heat transfer in the governing equations of a Natural Draft Dry Cooling Tower (NDDCT), which is a heat rejection device that creates the air flow through the heat exchanger bundles by means of buoyancy effects due to the difference in air density between the inside and outside of the tower Early studies found that hybrid cooling may be a cost-effective solution. Among hybrid cooling options, the evaporative pre-cooling (e.g., fogging cooling, wetted-media cooling and spray cooling) and deluge cooling have received favourable consideration because they introduce wet cooling without extra heat exchangers and are always easy to install Wetted-media cooling is presently applied in many fields and shows good cooling performance. Some of the many uses of wetted-media cooling are, evaporative cooler and cooling ventilation system Although studies about wetted-media pre-cooling of air-cooled thermal power plants have been conducted by some authors It is widely acknowledged that wetted media are the most important elements in wetted-media cooling systems Munters CELdek is a high efficiency evaporative cooling medium that is engineered to provide maximum cooling, low pressure drop and long life of reliable service The cooling efficiency is a key factor in determining the performance of direct evaporative cooling system. It determines how close the air gets to the state of saturation Essentially, the cooling efficiency is a function of heat transfer coefficient, air velocity, air properties, and wetted-media dimensions The pressure drop introduced by the wetted media is also of critical importance in NDDCT applications. It is critical because the pressure drop will affect the air mass flow rate passing through the tower. For a specific medium with specific thickness, the pressure drop is a strong function of air velocity The cooling efficiency and pressure drop of CELdek7060, CELdek7090 and CELdek5090 can be expressed by two polynomials, the coefficients of which were determined using the manufacturer's data The values of the constant coefficients are given in A hyperbolic, natural-draft, dry-cooling tower pre-cooled with Munters media is shown in The entire tower inlet area is covered with Munters media. Water is distributed over the top of the media and drips down by gravity to wet the media uniformly. Air passes through Munters media to form a cross-flow heat and mass exchange process. The water deposited on the media evaporates by extracting its evaporation heat from the air stream and thus cools the air. The pre-cooled air then flows through the heat exchanger to cool the tube-side fluid coming from the thermal power plant. The tower considered in this study has a height of 120 m, a typical height for NDDCTs used in thermal power plants. The details of the tower and heat exchanger are summarised in The design conditions of the proposed tower without pre-cooling are given in  Thermal analysis The energy equations of the pre-cooled NDDCT as shown in The overall thermal resistance is defined as, The other thermal resistances like the resistances due to the tube wall, fouling, and the thermal contact resistance between the tube and the fin were ignored in Eq. Substitute Eq. For most industrial finned surfaces, the effective heat transfer coefficient may be defined through a heat transfer parameter. The characteristic heat transfer parameter Ny was presented by Kroger The water-side heat transfer coefficient Eq. The relative surface roughness of the studied finned tube, Pressure drop analysis The draft equation balances the buoyancy against the total pressure drop, i.e., The flow resistances include the pressure drop across wetted medium Δ The loss due to the heat exchanger supports is small and is ignored in Eq. The pressure drop can also be expressed by Eq. Substitute Eq. The loss coefficient at tower supports based on the conditions at the heat exchanger, The cooling tower inlet loss coefficient referred to heat exchanger conditions The contraction loss coefficient based on the conditions at the heat exchanger The expansion loss coefficient based on the conditions at the heat exchanger For non-isothermal flow through an array of A-frames, just the same as this study, the heat exchanger loss coefficient is For the hyperbolic tower with a cylindrical outlet, the tower outlet loss coefficient The properties of moist air in energy and draft equations were calculated according to references The values of air mass flow rate, water outlet temperature, air outlet temperature and heat rejection rate, etc. can be found when the energy and draft equations are satisfied. A MATLAB code was developed to find these values by an iterative process. The iteration procedure is summarised as follows. Step1, a preliminary air mass flow rate Step2, calculating a new air mass flow rate Step3, calculation of wetted-media evaporative cooling used the new air mass flow rate Step4, Step1 and Step2 were repeated using the new temperature Step5, it was then to make sure that the cooling efficiency and pressure drop calculated in Step3 and Step4 were consistent. This was finished by a period of iteration of Step4. After that, a closer air mass flow rate Step6, the energy equations were balanced by a period of iteration. If the air mass flow rate Finally, a value of air mass flow rate could be found that would satisfy both the energy and draft equations. The heat rejection rate, water outlet temperature, air outlet temperature, etc. would be found simultaneously.  All results reported in this section were from the numerical simulation described above. The wetted-media performance is coupled with the tower performance but will be reported in two separate sections. The results presented in this section correspond to the predicted performance of Munters media when placed on the NDDCT inlet section. The cooling efficiency and pressure drop across the media are given in    The effects of the three different types of wetted media, namely CELdek7060, CELdek7090 and CELdek5090 on the NDDCT performance were reported in this section. The ambient temperature of 20 °C is the design point of the proposed tower. For the sake of comparison, a benefit efficiency The benefit efficiency The air mass flow rate and the benefit efficiency of the NDDCTs are compared in The changes in air mass flow rate of the towers with (0.10 m-thick media), and without pre-cooling are given in In terms of heat rejection (as is benefit efficiency shown in Both the air mass flow rate and benefit efficiency shown in The air mass flow rate and benefit efficiency of the towers are compared in   The material CELdek5090 displays a similar trend as shown in The results presented above are based on constant ambient humidity of 30%. For real climatic conditions, the humidity may exceed this value, and the benefit efficiencies will be lower than that in This is the first study of wetted media in a NDDCT application. The study investigated pre-cooling with Munters media to enhance the performance of a proposed NDDCT during hot and dry periods. A MATLAB code, which was validated against the case study reported by Kroger, was developed to simulate the operation of cooling towers with and without pre-cooling. Three types of Munters media, each with three thicknesses, were considered. The results show that NDDCT can benefit from pre-cooling with wetted media when the ambient air is hot and dry, which is the case in most EGS geothermal and also concentrated solar thermal power plants proposed in Australia and USA. There is a critical ambient temperature below which the tower performance does not benefit but is hindered by wetted-media pre-cooling. This critical temperature depends on many factors, like the tower specifications, air relative humidity, medium type and thickness. Specifically, the critical temperatures for 0.10 m, 0.15 m and 0.20 m CELdek7060 are 15°, 17° and 20 °C; for 0.10 m, 0.15 m and 0.20 m CELdek7090 are 24°, 28° and 31 °C; for 0.075 m, 0.10 m and 0.15 m CELdek5090 are 30°, 32° and 36 °C, respectively. These critical temperatures are only valid for the proposed 120 m height NDDCT and ambient relative humidity of 30%. As the design condition of the cooling tower is 20 °C, it can be concluded that only the pre-cooling with 0.10 m and 0.15 m CELdek7060 is to be useful in the studied case. From the comparisons of CELdek7060, CELdek7090 and CELdek5090, it could be concluded that CELdek7060 is the most competitive one among the three studied media, followed by CELdek7090 and CELdek5090. However, whether they are viable for practical application requires further study. The favourable performance of CELdek7060 is due to good cooling performance (good heat and mass transfer characteristics), and relatively low pressure drop. These two characteristics are important when considering other types of wetted media for the pre-cooling of NDDCT. Moreover, the simulation revealed that the dependence of heat rejection improvement on wetted-media thickness is weak. Although the medium thickness can cause some differences in heat rejection, the simulated differences were small. Besides, thicker medium does not necessarily bring more benefit. The authors acknowledge the financial support received from