Mineral carbonation of serpentine in the aqueous phase traditionally required high temperatures and pressures or additives to dissolve the mineral. This was accompanied by significant costs and important environmental burdens. This paper aims to demonstrate the feasibility of thermally activated serpentine leaching under ambient temperature and pressure. A simulated cement flue gas effluent with a CO2 content of 18.2% on a volume basis was used. The reaction was performed in a bubble column operated under a homogeneous regime. Agitation was required to improve solution mixing and CO2 diffusion.
                  Results showed that the extent of Mg leaching was limited by the low solubility of silica in the aqueous solution. Once the solution was saturated with silica, CO2 dissolution acted only to cause precipitation of magnesium carbonate. Successive leaching with fresh water partially limited the problem as serpentine leaching declined with time. A total of 32% of the serpentine magnesium content was recovered from the solution after six successive leaching stages. For comparison, 33% of the content of the same material was dissolved when the reaction was performed in a batch reactor operated under 11.5 bar total pressure. In addition to costs and environmental improvements, these results have positive consequences on reducing complexity and retrofit issues for the application of mineral carbonation with serpentine.
                  It was also shown that improving CO2 mass transfer through increasing agitation or superficial gas velocity accelerated serpentine leaching, highlighting the synergistic effect between the two reactions.Mineral carbonation was proposed in the early 90s as a promising solution to tackle CO Aqueous phase carbonation under neutral pH and ambient conditions is limited and Mg leaching is generally considered as the reaction-limiting step ( The natural serpentine crystalline structure limits access to the Mg atoms which hinders dissolution. Mechanical or thermal activation removes the bound hydroxyl atoms from the mineral brucite group [Mg In regards to CO Werner et al. studied dehydroxylated serpentine leaching at both the natural slurry pH (8–9) and acid pH (4–6) for a temperature range of 30–120 °C and Previously, our research team studied thermally activated serpentine dissolution without additives at ambient temperature with diluted CO The material used in this work was the same as in our prior work and originated from residues of the Jeffrey mine situated in southern Quebec. The detailed preparation procedure is given with more details by ( The experimental set up is illustrated in The certified simulated CO In a typical experiment, the required amount of solid was weighed and mixed with 1 L of distilled water. N The outlet gas flowrate was calculated according to (Eq. Where:     The CO In this study, magnesium is more likely to precipitate as nesquehonite ( The experimental error in Mg concentration was estimated using the differentiation method and was found to be around 4–5% of the measured value. Errors in the dissolved CO Typical experimental results are shown in Even early in the reaction period, Mg dissolves at four times the rate of Si (   The Mg concentration initially increases with time and then declines after an hour of reaction time. This reflects dissolution being the dominant process in this first hour, while re-precipitation as magnesium carbonate becomes dominant at later timeframes, causing the Mg solubility to regress towards the equilibrium value. On the other hand, the CO In industry, slurry bubble columns are generally operated at superficial gas velocities >0.4 m/s to avoid the need for mechanical agitation of the slurry phase ( For a given reaction time, increasing the agitation speed beyond 300 RPM affected the amount of CO Beyond 600 RPM any further increase of agitation provides only limited enhancement in Mg dissolution. Nevertheless, it also seems that increasing agitation speeds increase the carbonate precipitation rate, with an earlier decline in both Mg and dissolved CO As indicated in the introduction, the nesquehonite is the form of carbonates that precipitates under the reaction condition. According to (Eq. Higher superficial gas velocities (gas flowrates) lead to faster Mg leaching and CO For a given reaction time, the increase in gas flow increased the rate of CO Increasing the solid concentration decreases the proportion of dissolved Mg ( From the previous results, it appears that beyond 2 h reaction time, the concentration of dissolved Mg does not improve under any conditions, with precipitation becoming dominant. The CO In the present case, we compare these earlier results in a batch reactor (Purple bars in  The total cumulative Mg recovered within the liquid was 32% in the bubble column for both protocols compared to 33% obtained in the batch reactor under 11.5 bar. The large difference in operating pressure did not seem to have an impact on the total amount of recovered Mg for the material used in this study. In our previous study under 11.5 bar, the amount of Mg recovered was 50% (Purple bars in This section attempts to give some insights into the mechanism behind the leaching of thermally activated serpentine under CO When activated serpentine is dissolved in water in the absence of CO  Where:    Note that the CO This study aimed to demonstrate the feasibility of activated serpentine leaching under ambient temperature and atmospheric pressure directly with dilute flue gas. The flue gas contained 18.2% CO Precipitation was found to occur simultaneously with serpentine leaching as the Mg concentration moved towards and equilibrium regardless of the reaction conditions. In addition, increasing the solid concentration reduced the proportion of dissolved Mg which confirms that mass transfer is rate controlling. For the range of parameters studied here, it was found that reaction time must be limited to 2 h. This is because after this period, the solution is saturated with silica, which in turn prevents further serpentine leaching. Beyond that, CO Increasing agitation and superficial gas velocity were found to increase the amount of dissolved CO This study highlights the feasibility of mineral carbonation under atmospheric pressure and ambient temperature. Eliminating the need for flue gas compression prior to usage in leaching reduces the costs and environmental burden. This facilitates retrofit issues for existing plants and improves the overall economics of the process. Future work must focus on leaching under a heterogeneous bubble column regime to avoid the energy consumption related to agitation. Nevertheless, for higher CO This work was financially supported by The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper.