Objectives
                  The purpose of this study was to determine the role of circulating endothelial progenitor cells with osteoblastic phenotype (EPC-OCN) in human aortic valve calcification (AVC).
               
                  Background
                  Recent evidence suggests that rather than passive mineralization, AVC is an active atherosclerotic process with an osteoblastic component resembling coronary calcification. We have recently identified circulating EPCs with osteogenic properties carrying both endothelial progenitor (CD34, KDR) and osteoblastic (osteocalcin [OCN]) cell surface markers.
               
                  Methods
                  Blood samples from controls (n = 22) and patients with mild to moderate calcific aortic stenosis (mi-moAS, n = 17), severe calcific AS (sAS, n = 26), and both sAS and severe coronary artery disease (sCAD) (n = 33) were collected during diagnostic coronary angiography. By using flow cytometry, peripheral blood mononuclear cells were analyzed for CD34, KDR, and OCN. Resected normal and calcified aortic valves were analyzed histologically.
               
                  Results
                  Patients with mi-moAS and patients with sAS/sCAD had significantly less EPCs (CD34+/KDR+/OCN−) than controls. Patients with sAS showed significantly higher numbers of EPC-OCN (CD34+/KDR+/OCN+) than controls. In addition, the percentage of EPC costaining for OCN was higher in all disease groups compared with controls. A subgroup analysis of younger patients with bicuspid sAS showed a similar pattern of significantly lower EPCs but a high percentage of coexpression of OCN. Immunofluorescence showed colocalization of nuclear factor kappa-B and OCN in diseased and normal valves. CD34+/OCN+ cells were abundant in the endothelial and deeper cell layers of calcific aortic valve tissue but not in normal aortic valve tissue.
               
                  Conclusions
                  Circulating EPC-OCN may play a significant role in the pathogenesis and as markers of prognostication of calcific AS.Calcific aortic stenosis (AS) is a common valve disease affecting up to 26% of adults older than 65 years of age ( The current study was designed to test the hypothesis that patients with varying degrees of calcific aortic stenosis (AS) show high numbers of circulating EPC-OCN, and furthermore that these cells are present in the aortic valve tissue. By comparing patients with varying degrees of calcific AS and coronary artery disease (CAD) with controls, we sought to establish differences in distribution patterns of circulating endothelial progenitor cells (EPCs) (defined in this study as CD34+/KDR+/OCN−) and EPC-OCN (defined as CD34+/KDR+/OCN+). In addition, by using histological techniques, we sought to investigate whether EPC-OCN can be detected in resected valve tissue of patients undergoing aortic valve replacement for symptomatic severe calcific aortic stenosis (sAS). The study was approved by the institutional review board of the Mayo Foundation, and all study subjects provided written, informed consent. A total of 59 consecutive patients with clinical and echocardiographic sAS were referred for preoperative coronary angiography. A total of 26 of these 59 patients were found to have sAS but normal coronary arteries; the remaining 33 patients were found to have both sAS and severe coronary artery disease (sCAD). The severity of AS was determined using standard echocardiographic methods (defined as a mean aortic valve gradient of ≥40 mm Hg and an aortic valve area of ≤0.9 cm Peripheral blood mononuclear cells were isolated from fresh blood samples (collected in ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid tubes) using a Ficoll density gradient, and immunofluorescent cell staining was performed using the following fluorescent conjugated antibodies: CD34-PerCP Cy 5.5 (Becton Dickinson, Franklin Lakes, New Jersey), kinase insert domain receptor allophycocyanin (vascular endothelial growth factor receptor 2, R&D Systems, Minneapolis, Minnesota), and the appropriate isotype controls as previously described ( Severely calcified aortic valves were resected at the time of clinically indicated aortic valve replacement for severe AS. Normal aortic valve specimens were acquired during autopsies. To confirm the correlation of CD34 with OCN and nuclear factor kappa-B (NFkB) with OCN, double-staining immunofluorescence was performed in frozen cross sections (nondecalcified tissue). Polyclonal (OCN, 1:100, Santa Cruz Biotechnology) and monoclonal (NFkB, 1:50, Cell Signaling Technology Inc., Danvers, Massachusetts; CD34, 1:500, Invitrogen, Grand Island, New York) primary antibodies were used. The secondary antibodies were used according to the vendor’s instruction. Frozen sections were fixed in ice-cold methanol for 15 min and washed 3 times in phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) for 5 minutes. Antigen retrieval was done by steaming the tissue for 25 min followed by 5 min PBS washing. Endogenous peroxidase activity was blocked by a 50/50 solution of methanol and 3% H Images were acquired by using a computer-aided image-analysis program (AxioCam digital camera, AxioObserver. Z1 and AxioVision software v4.7.2.0, Carl Zeiss MicroImaging, Inc., Thornwood, New York). Under Apo Tome mode, pictures were first taken separately for each individual color channel (red for CD34 or NFkB, green for OCN, and blue for DAPI) at the same area of the tissue for part inspection, and then an additional multichannel merged image was automatically generated through which the correlations between the positive stainings and the stainings with nucleus are presented. We used the Shapiro-Wilk test to determine normal distribution. Data that are not normally distributed are presented as median (interquartile [25th to 75th percentile] range). Normally distributed data are shown as mean ± SD. Continuous variables were tested using 1-way analysis of variance. Dichotomous variables were compared using the Fisher exact test. Analysis of variance was used to test for group differences in EPC results. Skewed data were transformed using a log-transformation. Pairwise comparisons of the 3 diseased groups with the normal group were adjusted using Dunnett’s method. Analysis of covariance was used as a secondary analysis to assess how the associations changed when adjusting for cardiovascular risk factors. A p value <0.05 was considered statistically significant. The Statistical Package for the Social Sciences version 18.0 (SPSS Inc., Chicago, Illinois) and SAS version 9.2 (SAS Institute Inc., Cary, North Carolina) were used to conduct analyses. Patient characteristics are summarized in Patients with sAS and normal coronary arteries showed significantly higher numbers of circulating EPC-OCN than controls ( Patients with mild to moderate calcific aortic stenosis (mi-moAS) and those with both sAS and sCAD showed significantly fewer circulating EPCs (CD34+/KDR+/OCN−) than controls ( Analysis of covariance showed that after adjustment for diabetes, hypertension, and smoking, the statistically significant differences held except for the comparison between normal subjects and subjects with sAS/sCAD for percent OCN of CD34+/KDR+ cells ( To address the effect of age on the number of EPCs and EPC-OCN, we compared 12 patients with severe calcific bicuspid aortic valve stenosis with 12 controls of similar age (53 ± 2 years vs. 59 ± 9 years, p = NS). In this subset of study subjects, there was a significantly higher percentage of OCN costaining of EPCs 32 ± 33%) versus controls (8 ± 12%, p = 0.026). The numbers of circulating EPCs (CD34+/KDR+/OCN−) were significantly lower in the calcific bicuspid AS group compared with controls (median [interquartile range]: 9 [27] vs. 27 [55], p = 0.028). Patients with early sAS due to bicuspid aortic valve disease showed higher numbers of circulating EPC-OCN than controls, without reaching statistical significance (CD34+/KDR+/OCN+; median [interquartile range]: 5 [6] vs. 1 [6], p = 0.101). Immunofluorescence staining showed colocalization of the marker of inflammation NFkB and osteoblastic activity (OCN) in severely calcified valves (endothelial and deeper valve tissue layers) ( Immunofluorescence staining showed an abundance of CD34+/OCN+ cells within the endothelial cell layer and the deeper cell layers of resected calcific aortic valve specimen but not in normal valves ( The present study shows for the first time that patients with varying degrees of calcific aortic valve disease have a high fraction of circulating EPC-OCN (CD34+/KDR+/OCN+) with osteogenic activity. The current study supports a potential role of osteogenic EPCs as biomarkers for prognostication of disease progression and in the mechanism of AVC. However, the absolute numbers of EPCs and EPC-OCN show interesting variations between the disease subgroups. Patients with both sAS and sCAD have significantly reduced numbers of circulating EPCs (CD34+/KDR+/OCN−) compared with controls, but a high percentage of these circulating EPCs are EPC-OCN. Of note, patients with only mi-moAS and normal coronaries have an EPC/EPC-OCN profile similar to that of patients with both sAS/sCAD. In contrast, patients with sAS and normal coronaries show normal EPCs and high EPC-OCN numbers with a high percentage of EPC costaining for OCN. One could hypothesize that patients with sAS but normal coronaries may represent a subgroup of patients whose bone marrow is capable of a surge of EPC release in response to injury, leading to a more favorable EPC/EPC-OCN profile. In contrast, patients with both sAS and sCAD may not be capable of such a surge and, thus, show progression of calcific atherosclerosis in multiple vascular territories because of an unfavorable imbalance between injury and repair (i.e., low EPC numbers with a high percent of EPC-OCN). Thus, patients with mi-moAS are an interesting group in our current analysis, the majority of whom have what seems to be an unfavorable EPC profile (i.e., low EPC numbers but high EPC-OCN percentages). Because predicting the progression of calcific AS remains difficult and medical intervention trials have been disappointing, long-term follow-up data of this mi-moAS group may provide insights into the role of EPC-OCN for prognostication of disease progression and suitability for decision-making on aggressive medical management. Data are limited on the potential role of circulating EPCs and osteogenic precursors in calcific aortic valve disease. Matsumoto et al. ( In contrast to the study by Matsumoto et al. ( Further evidence for the active role of circulating osteogenic cells in valvular calcification comes from studies of CD45+/OCN+ cells in patients with end-stage aortic valve disease and heterotopic ossification. Egan et al. ( The fact that we rarely found CD34+/OCN+ cells in normal valves but an abundance of CD34+/OCN+ cells in the endothelial cell layer and the deeper valvular tissue of severely calcified aortic valves further supports the concept of attraction of osteogenic precursors to sites of valvular injury and their active role in AVC. Evidence of colocalization of inflammation (expression of activated NFkB) and osteoblastic activity (OCN) within deeper layers but not the endothelium of normal (noncalcified) valves in our study may suggest a role of resident osteogenic cells that are activated by an early inflammatory process. One may speculate that resident osteogenic cells are the first responders to early, modest valvular injury/inflammation, and after more significant injury, particularly to the valvular endothelial cell layer, circulating osteogenic precursors are attracted, as suggested by the abundant colocalization of inflammation and osteoblastic activity, including the endothelial cell layer of severely calcified valves. Toutouzas et al. ( Our current data are also supported by previous experimental data in osteoprotegerin-deficient mice and a mouse model of accelerated calcification through calcitriol administration. Pal et al. ( The mechanistic concept of blood-derived procalcific cells is further supported by recent evidence of increased numbers of circulating OCN+/alkaline phosphatase+ myeloid cells in diabetic patients; Fadini et al. ( We analyzed a subgroup of our patients who were younger and had severe calcific bicuspid aortic valves scheduled for aortic valve replacement. The comparison with normal subjects of comparable age revealed a similar distribution of EPCs and EPC-OCN seen between normal subjects and patients with both sAS and sCAD. Thus, age does not seem to be a major determinant for the decrease in circulating EPCs, number of EPC-OCN, and percentage of OCN costaining of circulating EPCs in the current study. This is in line with our previous findings in which the absolute number and percentage of EPC-OCN were age-independent predictors of early and severe coronary atherosclerosis ( Not every patient with bicuspid aortic valve disease shows early, severe AVC. One may speculate that genetic factors determine the relative ratio of EPC-OCN and EPCs in an individual and, thus, the onset and rate of progression of vascular calcification. Prospective clinical studies will have to show whether assessing EPC-OCN relative to EPCs in patients with bicuspid aortic valve disease helps to prognosticate the rate of progression of bicuspid AVC and stenosis. Our subgroup of patients with bicuspid aortic valves also may help to explain the restriction of the severe calcification process to only 1 endothelial territory in some patients. Despite the fact that patients with severe bicuspid calcific aortic valve stenosis show high percentages of OCN costaining and low numbers of circulating EPCs (similar to our sAS/sCAD group), only few show significant CAD. A combination of low total EPCs but high percentage of EPC-OCN may lead to early accelerated progression of tissue calcification in the most injured endothelial territory (e.g., a bicuspid valve exposed to high shear stresses). With aging, this disadvantageous ratio of EPC-OCN/EPC likely leads to multiterritory vascular calcification when more and more endothelial cell layers become significantly injured. In patients with a more favorable ratio of EPC-OCN/EPC, a better functioning repair process may relatively delay the calcification process. In such patients, severe, symptomatic calcification may manifest later in life and only in the endothelial territory that showed aggressive endothelial injury. Clinical data show that 50% of patients with calcific AS have clinically significant CAD (  Alternatively, circulating EPC-OCN could represent markers of ongoing endothelial-mesenchymal transition, in which case they may be useful in the prognostication of progression of aortic and coronary valve calcification. Further experimental studies will have to elucidate whether circulating EPC-OCN actively participate in tissue calcification or are only markers of the disease. Because our study focused on a different mechanism of calcific aortic valve stenosis, we did not assess valvular endothelial cells or circulating EPCs for senescence, migratory function, or apoptosis. In addition, without using an experimental model, the current study on human surgical specimens does not allow exploring the definite mechanistic role of circulating EPC-OCN in the pathogenesis of AVC. We used isotype controls instead of fluorescence-minus-one controls in our 4-color flow-cytometry analyses. The use of fluorescence-minus-one controls could have led to a different gating strategy. Our subgroup analysis of patients with bicuspid aortic valve stenosis is limited to 12 patients, which is mainly due to the low prevalence of the disease in the general population and the fact that not all bicuspid valves calcify to a surgical degree. The current study design does not allow the assessment of prognosis of patients with calcific aortic valve disease and certain levels of EPC-OCN. Prospective long-term follow-up of our patients (especially those with mi-moAS) will demonstrate whether those with higher numbers of EPC-OCN show accelerated progression of calcific aortic valve stenosis. We show for the first time that the percentage of EPC-OCN in a given EPC population is significantly increased in patients with varying degrees of AVC. Moreover, our data indicate that a combination of low total EPCs but high percentage of EPC-OCN is independent of age and may contribute to early and accelerated valvular and vascular calcification. Future prospective studies will show whether the number of EPC-OCN relative to EPCs may be a marker of prognostication for the onset and rate of progression of valvular and coronary calcification and may be useful in decision making about the aggressiveness of risk-factor management of patients. The authors thank Dr. William D. Edwards and Dr. Joseph J. Maleszewski for acquiring the autopsy specimen of normal aortic valve tissue, and Rebecca E. Nelson for patient recruitment. For supplementary figures, please see the online version of this article. 