A novel extractant heptylaminomethyl phosphonic acid 2-ethylhexyl ester (HEHHAP, abbreviated as H2L2) was synthesized for the extraction and separation of trivalent rare earths (REs: La ~ Lu, plus Y) from chloride medium. The results showed that the extraction of heavy REs by HEHHAP was higher than that of light one as in the order: La < Gd < Ho < Y < Er < Tm < Yb < Lu. The extraction reaction was a cation exchange process and the extracted complexes were determined to be REClH2L4. The extraction process was an endothermic reaction and the thermodynamic parameters were calculated. Moreover, the separation factors between heavy REs and yttrium in HEHHAP, i.e. β
                     Er/Y, β
                     Tm/Y, β
                     Yb/Y and β
                     Lu/Y, were determined to be 2.18, 9.36, 14.9 and 24.3, respectively, which was higher than those of HEHEHP and D2EHPA, indicating that HEHHAP was more efficient to separate yttrium from heavy REs. The extraction capacities of Yb (III) and Lu (III) were calculated to be 12.76 g/L and 15.43 g/L, respectively. HCl was founded to be the best stripping agent as compared with H2SO4 and HNO3.Due to their characteristic 4f electronic structure, rare earths (REs) have been extensively applied in high-tech fields such as aviation, fluorescent, ceramic, catalysis, permanent magnet materials and special alloys ( Until now, solvent extraction has become one of the most popular method for the separation of REs because of its large extraction capacity, fast reaction and high separation efficiency. A large number of extractants have been developed, for instance, TBP (tri-n-butylphosphate), D2EHPA (di-(2-ethylhexyl) phosphoric acid), HEHEHP (2-ethylhexyl phosphoric acid mono-2-ethylhexyl ester), Cyanex 923 (trialkylphosphine oxides), Cyanex 272 (di-(2,4,4-trimethylpentyl)phosphinic acid), Cyanex 572 and N1923 (a primary aliphatic amine with amino nitrogen linked to a secondary carbon consisting of branched alkyl groups in C19–C23 range) are the most commonly used for RE separation. As a typical neutral organophosphorus, TBP has been widely studied for the extraction and separation of REs from nitrate medium ( To further promote the development of RE separation, it is necessary to seek some novel contamination free and effective extractants. Aminophosphorous have attracted great interests as herbicides, anticancer agent, antibacterial, and especially extractants ( In this work, a novel extractant heptylaminomethyl phosphonic acid 2-ethylhexyl ester (HEHHAP) was synthesized for the extraction and separation of trivalent REs. The aim is to study the extraction mechanism and examine the feasibility of RE separation using HEHHAP in chloride media. RE oxides with purity being >99.99% was obtained from Changchun Institute of Applied Chemistry, Chinese Academy of Sciences (Changchun, China). The neutral α-aminophosphonate precursor DEHAMP was synthesized and purified as the previous work ( The organic solution was prepared by diluting the concentrated extractant with heptane to a desired concentration. The stock solution of RE chloride was prepared by dissolving their oxides with concentrated hydrochloric acid and diluting with deionized water. The HCl concentration in aqueous solution was analyzed by the acid-base titration with a standard NaOH solution using phenolphthalein as an indicator. Ionic strength ( Nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) spectra were recorded on a Bruker 400 MHz spectrometer with tetramethylsilane as an internal reference in the solvents. Electrospray ionization mass spectrometry (ESI-MS) data were obtained by using a Bruker Daltonics Flex Analysis instrument. FT-IR spectra were recorded with a Vector22/N spectrometer (Bruker, Fllanden, Switzerland). Sample preparation was carried out by dabbing the organic phase on KBr crystal and then removing the solvent by heating under an infrared lamp. pH analysis was performed with a model PHS-3C digital pH meter (Shanghai REX Instrument Factory). Inductively coupled plasma optical emission spectrometer (ICP-OES, Perkin Elmer Optimal 8000) was used to determine the RE concentration in the aqueous solutions. HEHHAP was readily synthesized according to Oily compound HEHHAP was obtained with a yield of 85% and a purity of 97% (acid-base titration method). The liquid-liquid extraction and stripping experiments were carried out by contacting equal volume of aqueous phase and organic phase at 298 K in a temperature-controlled mechanical shaker for 30 min, unless stated otherwise. The solutions of HCl, HNO The effect of HCl concentration on the individual RE(III) extraction was investigated by using 0.05 mol/L HEHHAP in As shown in HEHHAP shows stronger extractability towards REs as compared with the typical acidic extractants HEHEHP and Cyanex 272. As depicted in To examine the separation of REs by HEHHAP, the extraction experiment was carried out using 0.1 mol/L HEHHAP in heptane as organic phase to extract REs from a mixed solution containing 0.03 mol/L RE in total (0.002 mol/L each) at an equilibrium pH of 4.5. For a comparison, the extraction of REs by HEHEHP or D2EHPA was also investigated under the same condition. As shown in The effect of contact time on the extraction of Lu (III) was studied at different time intervals from 10 s to 20 min. The concentrations of aqueous and organic phases were fixed at 0.001 mol/L LuCl Acidic organophosphorous compounds always form a dimer when dissolved in most polar diluents ( The equilibrium constant, By combining Eqs. ( Based on the above derivation, a series of experiments were carried out to deduce the extraction mechanism by varying the concentration of chloride ion, H Similarly, the plots of log To study the effect of temperature on the extraction, the extraction of Yb (III) and Lu (III) with HEHHAP was proceeded in the temperature range from 291 K to 313 K. As shown in The enthalpy change (Δ To further elaborate the structure of extracted complex, the FT-IR spectra of HEHHAP, extracted complexes of Yb and Lu were measured in the range from 600 to 3700 cm The extraction capacity of HEHHAP was measured by contacting 30% ( The stripping of the loaded Yb and Lu were processed using HCl, H HEHHAP (H This work was supported by the