The antimony (Sb) content of the Rockliden complex Zn–Cu massive sulphide ore lowers the quality of the Cu–Pb concentrate. The purpose of this study is to characterise the Sb mineralogy of the deposit. The Sb-bearing minerals include tetrahedrite (Cu,Fe,Ag,Zn)12Sb4S13, bournonite PbCuSbS3, gudmundite FeSbS and other sulphosalts. On a microscopic scale these minerals are complexly intergrown with base-metal sulphides in the ore. Based on these observations mineralogical controls on the distribution of Sb-bearing minerals in a standard flotation test are illustrated. Deposit-scale and rock-related variation in the Sb-content and distribution of Sb-bearing minerals were found. This underlines the importance in understanding the geological background as a basis of a 3D geometallurgical model for Rockliden. Such a model is expected to predict the Sb content of the Cu–Pb concentrate, among other process-relevant factors, and helps to forecast when the Cu–Pb concentrate has to be treated by alternative processes, such as alkaline sulphide leaching, before it is sold to the smelter.Antimony (Sb) has no commercial use as metal itself, but it finds application in form of metallo-organic and inorganic compounds as flame retardants, pigments, heat and radiation stabilizers for plastics and clarification of specialty glasses, as well as Sb-based catalysts and Sb alloys, to increase strength and hardness of Pb ( The world’s largest natural resources of Sb, such as those in China, primarily contain stibnite associated with pyrite, arsenopyrite, jamesonite, and various oxides if the deposits are affected by oxidation ( Mineral processing techniques traditionally applied to the primary, stibnite dominated, Sb ore material are hand-sorting, heavy medium separation, and flotation ( The zinc–copper (Zn–Cu) volcanic-hosted massive sulphide (VHMS) deposits of the Skellefte district (northern Sweden, Studies by The Rockliden Zn–Cu massive sulphide deposit is located in North-Central Sweden, approximately 150 Most of the mineralisation at Rockliden is found at the altered stratigraphic top of rhyolitic–dacitic volcanic rocks ( The work presented here is part of the Rockliden geometallurgical case study. Generally, geometallurgy combines all steps involved in finding and extracting metals from the earth under current economic conditions (e.g. Critical process-relevant parameters at Rockliden include the Sb content of the Cu–Pb concentrate, and the purpose of this work is to gain detailed knowledge of this component of response (cf. Two types of samples were studied: uncrushed drill cores and flotation products from laboratory tests from three composite samples. Locations of drill core intersections are shown in Prior to sample collection for mineralogical studies on uncrushed drill core samples, all Rockliden drill core assays available from the Boliden archive were evaluated to capture the variation in Sb grades in relation to the base-metal content. Cu, Zn, Pb, As, S and Sb assays were converted into mineral grades of pyrite, chalcopyrite, sphalerite, galena, arsenopyrite and bournonite using the Geo module of the HSC Chemistry software ( Laboratory batch flotation tests were run in 2009 by Boliden Mineral AB to determine the metallurgical response of composite samples (each composed of 15–30 Scanning electron microscope (SEM) studies were conducted at the following instruments and institutions: Hitachi SU6600 (FESEM, NTNU Trondheim, Norway), Ultra Plus – Zeiss Gemini (FESEM, Oulu University, Finland), Merlin – Zeiss Gemini (FESEM, Luleå University of Technology, Sweden), and SEM (Research Laboratory, Geological Survey of Finland (GTK, Helsinki, Finland)). Generally, the acceleration voltage was set to 20 The average composition of common Sb-bearing minerals at Rockliden is listed in The Sb content of the tetrahedrite analysed with EPMA/WDS is relatively constant, but the Ag-content varies between 0.5 and 12.5 Additionally, other Sb-bearing minerals and sulphosalts such as berthierite (FeSb The mineralogical samples are subdivided into (1) disseminated to semi-massive sulphides and (2) massive sulphide samples based on their total sulphide content calculated from chemical assays by element to mineral conversion ( Massive sulphides consist mostly of pyrite followed by sphalerite and chalcopyrite. Often sphalerite is the main base metal sulphide mineral, i.e. the Zn content is relative high compared to the Cu content (MASS, Most of the studied disseminated to semi-massive sulphide samples are dominated by Fe–Mg-bearing silicate minerals such as amphiboles and biotite. They are referred to as mafic rocks. Four out of five studied disseminated sulphide samples are of this type ( The distribution of Sb-bearing minerals in the final flotation products of the three Rockliden composite samples is summarised in In the Cu–Pb concentrates, tetrahedrite and bournonite are the major Sb-bearing phases ( In the laboratory flotation tests the P Beside liberated mineral grains, tetrahedrite ( Microscopic studies of mineralogical samples are summarised and compared with the Sb deportment in the flotation products in Based on observations done in a limited number of thin sections on massive sulphide samples, there is an apparent change in the Sb mineralogy of the massive sulphide samples towards greater depth (>300 Further, the highest Ag-values of tetrahedrite were documented in the mineralogical samples of mafic rock, indicating that the variation of Ag in tetrahedrite is partly related to different rock and mineralisation types. Also, it is known from previous studies of the Rockliden deposit that the Ag-content can be as high as 15 The examples given above suggest that the Sb-mineralogy in the Rockliden deposit can be linked to the geology, to rock and mineralisation types. Thus it is clear that a geological model, accounting for the complex geometry of the Rockliden massive sulphide body should form the basis of a detailed 3D mineralogical map of the Sb mineralogy. The Sb mineralogy of flotation products from Rockliden ( Based on studies by Small grain size and complex mineral textures show that the liberation of Sb-bearing minerals in Rockliden is challenging and would require fine grinding. Furthermore their rejection from Cu–Pb concentrate would require special flotation conditions since most of the Sb minerals are Cu- or Pb-bearing and therefore having natural tendency to float in the chemical regime used ( Since the Sb-content controls the quality of the Cu–Pb concentrates, it is important to know the distribution of Sb-bearing minerals and their mode of occurrence in the ore. This study outlines variations in the distribution of Sb-bearing minerals, which appear to be related to rock and mineralisation types found in the Rockliden Zn–Cu massive sulphide deposit. During flotation, both the chemical composition and mineral association of the Sb-bearing minerals, inherited from the primary ore material, control the distribution of these minerals. Examples are illustrated in this study. In order to implement the data on the Sb mineralogy into a geometallurgical model of the Rockliden deposit, the results of this study need to be quantified. The value of qualitative and quantitative mineralogical and petrographic studies has already been pointed out in case studies on process optimisation for several ore deposits (e.g. If the influence of all factors governing the variations in the Sb mineralogy, as pointed out in this study, is understood in detail, quantified and used in a 3D model, it is expected that the Sb characteristics of flotation products can be predicted for different parts, i.e. geometallurgical units, at the Rockliden massive sulphide deposit. Textural information, as outlined by the mode of occurrence of Sb-bearing minerals in this study, plays a significant role in creating the model. The task of transferring texture information from the ore to quantitative mineral association data of corresponding flotation feed is challenging but concepts have been proposed (e.g. New Boliden is acknowledged for financing the analytical work in this study, and for permission to publish this paper. H. Raat and J. Lasskogen (Boliden) are thanked for introducing us to the geology of Rockliden and to the geological interpretation of drill cores. The help and assistance with SEM/EDS and EPMA/WDS by following persons is acknowledged: S. Varpenius, L. Palmu, K. Aasly, K. Eriksen, G. Bark, I. Bhuiyan and J. Mouzon. This study is part of a PhD project financed by CAMM (Centre of Advanced Mining and Metallurgy). ALS Minerals Division (Piteå, Sweden) is thanked for financial support for preparation of mineralogical samples for chemical assays and analytical work. Travelling costs for SEM/EDS studies were partly covered by ProMinNET (Nordic network of Process Mineralogy and Geometallurgy 380 funded by Nordforsk). The authors also acknowledge comments of two anonymous reviewers.