Background
                  Ankle fractures are among the most common lower limb fractures and they can cause significant detrimental effects on quality of life and work.
               
                  Objective
                  The objective of the review was to evaluate if there is any advantage of early weight-bearing after open reduction and internal fixation of the ankle.
               
                  Methods
                  Electronic databases, reference lists of included studies and relevant systematic reviews were searched for randomized and non-randomized controlled trials in adults comparing early and late weight-bearing after open reduction and internal fixation of the ankle. The search was inclusive up to February 2012.
               
                  Results
                  Nine studies comprising 555 subjects were included for review. There were significantly better outcomes for improved early dorsiflexion, time to full weight-bearing, early return to previous work and shorter hospital stay (patient<60 years of age) in the early weight-bearing group.
               
                  Conclusion
                  The evidence base contained many methodological limitations and was generally poor, and so any conclusion drawn from the research must be done so with caution. The literature suggests that early weight-bearing may allow for quicker rehabilitation and earlier return to work. Future studies should focus on randomized controlled trials with narrow range of clinically useful outcome measures and consistent immobilization strategy between experimental groups.Ankle fractures are among the most common lower limb fractures There are varying rehabilitation regimes that have been reported in the literature; these include: the method of immobilization – cast, brace or splint The most popular rehabilitation regimes in clinical practice can generally be characterized as either: (1) early weight-bearing, most often with immobilization in either a rigid cast or a removable brace or splint to permit active ankle exercises, and (2) non-weight-bearing for 6 weeks or more, often in conjunction with immobilization using a rigid cast, in removable braces/splints to permit exercises, or occasionally with no immobilization at all Proponents of early weight-bearing regimes argue that it decreases ankle stiffness, aids healing of articular cartilage, limits muscle and bone atrophy, decreases complications and aids in early return to activities Only a handful of studies have compared the effectiveness of early versus late weight-bearing on operatively fixed ankle fractures; however, the majority of the studies suffer from various methodological limitations – small sample sizes, non-randomization, historical controls – that make drawing definitive conclusion from an individual study problematic. A previous systematic review The literature search was conducted through online electronic database MEDLINE, CINAHL, AMED, EMBASE, PEDro and Google Scholar inclusive of all dates up to February 2012. The key words were: ankle, joint, fracture, internal fixation, open reduction, weightbearing, and weight-bearing ( The studies included were all randomized and non-randomized controlled clinical trials comparing the effects of early weight-bearing and late weight-bearing on operatively fixed ankle fractures. All human trials found in our search were used regardless of subject demographic, specific operative method or length of follow-up. Studies were excluded if they were non-english language, case reports, letters, editorials, or abstracts without corresponding fully referenced papers. Data was extracted from each paper, including: sample size, population demographics, details of control and intervention groups, main outcome measures, follow-up period, surgical technique, and main outcomes. The PEDro scale (Physiotherapy Evidence Database) was used to assess each identified article's methodological quality. The PEDro scale is a valid and reliable means to rate the methodological quality of clinical trials The search strategy revealed 577 studies that met the inclusion criteria ( The search strategy revealed four studies by Ahl et al. A summary of the PEDro scores for each paper can be found in The outcome measures used in each paper were: (1) clinical outcome scoring systems, (2) pain, (3) ankle range of motion, (4) muscle wasting and ankle swelling, (5) time to full weight-bearing, (6) return to work/activity and length of hospital stay, (7) radiological analysis, and (8) complications. Eight of the studies used some form of subjective clinical scoring system to evaluate outcome. Five studies Three studies demonstrated significantly better scores in the early weight-bearing group during early follow-up Two studies demonstrated non-significant trends towards higher scores in the early weight-bearing groups Only two studies evaluated pain as a separate entity Five of the papers evaluated loaded ankle range of motion. Ahl et al. Ahl et al. Three papers by Ahl et al. Residual ankle swelling was measured as part of the clinical scoring system in Finsen et al. Simanski et al.’s Four papers evaluated time to return to work Gul et al. Only one study All of the papers used radiographs to evaluate their ankle repairs. Ahl et al. Ahl et al. Both Simanski et al. van Laarhoven et al. In their RSA analysis three studies by Ahl et al. All nine studies evaluated post-operative complications. Two of the studies reported no incidence of post-operative complications in either group The most common complication report in all studies were superficial wound infections The remaining studies did not report the difference in infection rate between groups, but instead reported overall rates of wound infections. Harager et al. Other complications include re-fracture, loss of fixation, deep vein thrombosis (DVT), pulmonary embolus (PE), wound/skin complications, pseudoarthrosis and post-traumatic arthritis; however, there were no significant differences between groups The aim of this review was to determine if there were any advantages to the timing of weight-bearing after operative fixation of ankle fractures. There was some evidence to suggest that early weight-bearing after ankle fixation may result in faster rehabilitation of patients’ and result in an earlier return to work. One of the key objections to allowing early weight-bearing is the possibility of fracture displacement It is often stated that one of the aims of an early weight-bearing regime is to decrease the risk of complications such as joint stiffness, articular cartilage degeneration, bony atrophy, and serious complications such as venous thromboembolism (VTE) Two papers evaluated radiological signs of arthritis A wide range of complications were reported. Overall complication rates were similar between the various weight-bearing regimes and none of the studies detected any significant differences. The most common complication was superficial wound infections, although not all studies explicitly stated the break down in infection rates between early and late weight-bearing groups. Four studies did separate their infection rates between early and late weight bearing groups and they reported a trend towards more wound infections in the early weight-bearing groups Non weight-bearing status is a risk factor for development of VTE in lower limb injuries An ankle fracture can be a debilitating injury and result in significant stiffness of the ankle joint, prolonged hospital stay, and impairment in a person's activities or ability to work. Three studies A previous systematic review by Smith and Davies in 2008 Another confounding factor is that the method of immobilization was also not consistent between splints One of the reasons for lack of significant findings lies within the design limitations of the studies. None of the studies performed a power analysis and the lack of statistically significant findings may represent a type II error. To compound this lack of power, the reviewed studies used a wide variety of outcome measures, some of which were only used by an individual study. This heterogeneity of the outcome measures prevents pooling of results for a meta-analysis This review is in partial agreement with previous systematic reviews There are a number of limitations to this study that should be considered. Firstly the exclusion of, as yet, unpublished work may introduce selection bias. Secondly the small number of papers in the subject area combined with the majority of outcome measures being used by only a small subset of these publications limits the comparisons that can be made. Thirdly, the heterogeneity of data precluded the use of a meta-analysis which would have leant statistical weight to our conclusions; however, the evidence base needs to be expanded and the methodology improved before this is possible. Future studies should utilize appropriately blinded randomized designs; however, in clinical practice it may not always be possible to blind subjects and/or clinicians, in such circumstances assessors should always be blinded to minimize bias Due to various methodological limitations it is difficult to conclude with any certainty on the advantages of either weight-bearing regime; however, this review does suggest that early weight-bearing after operatively fixed ankle fractures would be appropriate for patients with good bone stock, minimal fracture commination and anatomical reduction at the time of fixation and does not lead to increased incidence of implant failure, malunion or non-union. Furthermore, early weight bearing facilitates quicker rehabilitation and early return to work which is especially important in the younger patient population (under the age of 60–65). These advantages may be complicated by an increased risk of superficial wound infection. Ideally future studies should use power analyses to reduce the chances of Type II error, though the authors recognize that in clinical research it is often difficult to get the number of subjects required by such analysis. Further studies should also focus on a narrower range of clinically relevant outcome measures, use a consistent immobilization strategy for their experimental groups, and narrowly define their timings of weight-bearing in order to establish with greater accuracy if there are any advantage to various weight-bearing strategy after operative fixation of ankle fractures. There were no financial arrangements or support, nor were there any relationships with persons’ or institutions that would inappropriately affect the manuscript.