PbO2–CoOx and PbO2–Co3O4 composite-coated anodes, using titanium and nickel substrates, have been successfully prepared and tested under typical copper electrowinning conditions. The aim of depositing a well-adhered composite coating onto the surface of the titanium and nickel substrate materials was pursued using three different coatings. The performance of the produced anodes was examined in terms of oxygen evolution potential and service life. Both of the anodes with PbO2–CoOx or PbO2–Co3O4 deposited on titanium resulted in reduction of the oxygen evolution potential of 300 to 400mV compared with a conventional PbCaSn anode. The anodes prepared by applying the same coatings onto a nickel substrate showed poor stability in the acidic electrolyte media used in this experiment to represent typical copper electrowinning conditions. Of the different coatings tested, a combination of thermal deposition of a SnO2–Sb2O3 interlayer on the surface of a titanium substrate followed by electrodeposition of the top layer of the composite coating resulted in the best electrochemical activity and service life for the anodes. A Tafel slope of 88mV dec−1 was recorded for the anode with a top coating of PbO2–CoOx and 47mV dec−1 for the anode with a top coating of PbO2–Co3O4, which both compare favourably to the 122mV dec−1 which was observed for a conventional PbCaSn anode. Anodisation tests were carried out for a period of 16h both in the presence and in the absence of the organic additive thiourea in the electrolyte. Corrosion rates were estimated from these tests and the results showed that the titanium-based anode with a SnO2–Sb2O3 interlayer and PbO2–CoOx coating has a lower corrosion rate than a conventional PbCaSn anode, whereas the corrosion rate of the titanium-based anode with same interlayer and PbO2–Co3O4 coating might be much greater but this remains to be confirmed. The results also showed that the addition of thiourea appears to increase the corrosion rate of the composite-coated anodes although it reduces the corrosion rate of a PbCaSn anode. Thiourea showed no obvious effect on the anode potential.In coated anodes containing a PbO The present paper contributes to this field of study by focusing on the preparation and performance characterisation of lead dioxide coatings incorporating cobalt oxides, deposited onto either titanium or nickel substrates. It is well established in electrowinning applications that cobalt, added into the electrolyte, or added as an alloying element or on the surface layer of an anode, reduces the operating potential and corrosion rate of lead-based anodes, while the lower lead dioxide formation contributed to the quality of the produced cathodes ( Preparation of the coated anodes was carried out using a standard three-electrode electrochemical system. The reference electrode was a mercury mercurous sulphate electrode. All potentials are reported in the normal hydrogen electrode (NHE) scale. The ohmic drop between the reference and working electrode was not compensated. In every experiment, a fresh substrate was used, with an exposed surface to the electrolyte of 19.62 Six different composite coatings were prepared and tested in this study: (a) three coatings with PbO Direct anodic deposition of a lead–cobalt composite coating onto the surface of the substrate. Electrodeposition of a metallic Pb interlayer prior to anodic deposition of a composite layer. Thermal deposition of an SnO In each experiment, the substrates were subjected to pre-treatment to clean the surface and ensure uniform coverage by the coatings over the entire surface area. The pre-treatment of substrates consisted of several steps, involving wet polishing the substrate with successively finer (600 and 1200 grit) SiC papers, followed by 10 PbO  The method of anodic electrodeposition of the PbO The surface of the composite-coated anodes was observed using a scanning electron microscope (SEM) model Philip XL20, which was equipped with an energy dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDS) Oxford Link ISIS model 5175. This method was also used to determine the surface composition of the different composite-coated anodes. Short-term (16 Cyclic voltammetry was used to estimate the starting potential for oxygen evolution on the fresh composite-coated anodes in 180 In addition, using cyclic voltammograms the corrosion rates of the composite-coated anodes were estimated over 16 Tafel slopes of the anodic reaction were also measured to examine the electrochemical reaction rate characteristics on the different anodes. The data for the Tafel plots were generated from the same set of result recorded during the cyclic polarisation measurements, which the anodic Tafel slope for each anode estimated from the linear section of the log current density versus potential where the oxygen evolution reaction was observed to be activation controlled, which varied from one anode to another. A recent study ( It is apparent that the surface structure of the Ni–PbO The same coating electrodeposited under the same conditions onto the titanium substrate ( An essential criterion for use of an anode in copper electrowinning is adequate service life. Hence, in order to prevent the growth of TiO As an alternative to a lead interlayer, a SnO The titanium-based composite-coated anode in The next tests carried out involved cyclic voltammetry to estimate the overpotential for the start of the oxygen evolution reaction and compare this with the potential on a conventional PbCaSn anode surface. The Ti–SnO The composite-coated anodes produced by direct deposition of PbO The tendency of titanium to produce a nonconductive TiO Comparing Although the Ni–SnO The Ti–SnO  The amount of cobalt released from the Ti–SnO The Ti–SnO The corrosion rates of the two composite-coated anodes with the most promising stability and operating characteristics, Ti–SnO Comparing the cathodic peaks with and without thiourea in the electrolyte related to the reduction of PbO  The Ti–SnO The Ti–SnO The overpotentials for the oxygen evolution reaction at the operating current density and the Tafel slopes for each of the titanium-based composite-coated anodes and PbCaSn are summarised in The Tafel plot for oxygen evolution reaction on the Ti–SnO The Tafel slope is an intensive parameter which does not depend on the electrode surface area so it can be used to compare the kinetics and mechanism of a reaction on different surfaces. Therefore, the observed lower Tafel slope for the Ti–SnO PbO The Ti–SnO Corrosion tests showed a significantly lower corrosion rate for the Ti–SnO The fresh Ti–SnO The results from these bench scale tests demonstrate that the lead–cobalt composite-coated anodes with a SnO The authors would like to thank Murdoch University, AMIRA project P705B, The Minerals and Energy Research Institute of Western Australia, and the Parker Cooperative Research Centre for Integrated Hydrometallurgy Solutions for providing the funding for this study.