Knowledge of prediction of grind size for liberating minerals to recover minerals is very important for mineral processing applications. The grind size for mineral beneficiation can be established by determining the particle size distributions (PSDs) of minerals in an unbroken ore by image analysis. PSDs determined by fractals in natural cataclasites reveals the degree of cataclastic deformation in the chromites. PSDs have been described by relations between particle mass and size, volume and size, number and size and number and mass. Different mathematical formulas and approaches have been suggested to express relationships against size, and total mass/volume/number is given against increasing size (mass/volume/number undersize). In this paper, grain size distribution was estimated from the distribution of mean Feret diameters (d
                     F) of individual grains by image analysis. It was found by fractal evaluation that the relation is not linear and the cataclastic deformation of the chromite ores studied is dominated by extension microstructure due to fragmentation by microfracturing. The suitability of the lognormal distribution function was studied for linearization of number-based size distribution curves measured on polished sections of unbroken samples of five chromite ore types from Turkey. Data analysis revealed that lognormal evaluation of the distribution of the mean Feret diameters (d
                     F) gives excellent fits for all types of chromite samples which have different degree of cataclasis and wide size ranges.Fundamental knowledge about particle size and distribution is essential for a wide variety of industrial processes. To recover minerals in the mineral processing industry, an ore must be ground to produce liberated grains within the size range defined. Classic mineralogy helps us to determine the properties of minerals qualitatively but quantitative data are lacking. Mineral recoveries from a concentrator can often be improved by utilizing mineralogical studies that affect mineral beneficiation. In order to improve metal recovery of economic minerals in beneficiation, the necessary quantitative mineralogical data can be obtained by developed image analyzer ( The use of an image analyzer in mineral processing involves analyzing unbroken ore pieces to predict how the minerals might behave during grinding and processing, and analyzing ground ores and concentrated products to determine how the minerals respond to processing ( The first step in studying the unbroken ore is to identify minerals and their quantitative appraisal in the ore. The second and the most important step is size analysis for establishing size distribution.  The distributions of fragment sizes, or particle size distribution (PSD) obtained from unbroken rocks, reveals useful information about cataclastic deformation mechanism ( The usual procedure consists in assessing size parameters such as area, length or width for each individual particle analyzed. The resulting particle size frequencies may be expressed as number percentage leading to number-based distributions, or as percentage of a given measurement, i.e., total area, leading to measurement based distributions ( Particle size, like other variables in nature, tends to follow well-defined mathematical laws in its distribution. PSDs have been described by relations between particle mass and size, volume and size, number and size and number and mass. Different mathematical formulas and approaches have been suggested to express relationships against size, and total mass/volume/number is given against increasing size (mass/volume/number undersize) and to make linear the distribution curves especially the size distribution. PSDs of fragmented geological materials have been described previously by at least seven relationships between mass/volume/number and mass/size of fragments ( The lognormal law is more frequently found with particulate systems. Since the particle size is plotted on a logarithmic scale, the presentation of data on a log-probability graph is particularly useful when the range of size large ( In this study, the mean Feret diameter ( The five types of chromite ore samples obtained from the run-of-mines, namely Bantlı which belongs to Karaburhan in Eskisehir, Turkey; Dereboyu, Kef, Lasir and Yunuskuyu which belong to Guleman in Elazig, Turkey are used in the studies. Chemical analysis of chromites by XRF is given in The representative samples of chromite ores were examined by XRD and the patterns are given in Lump samples of chromites were made thin and polished sections and then these sections have been investigated for the texture of chromite and gang minerals. According to the results evaluated with both petrographic/mineralogic examinations and XRD patterns, the mineralogical properties of the chromite types can be summarized as following: The banded ore type consists of dominantly serpentinized olivines as the gang mineral. Chromite grains are mainly seen as cataclastic texture due to tectonic effects. Fractured chromite crystals are filled with serpentines ( The spotted ore type has mainly pyroxene mineral as the gang mineral. Pyroxene is serpentinized in the contact zone of chromite grains and fills the fractures. Chromite grains are fractured and show the cataclastic texture ( The massive type of chromite has mainly unaltered olivine minerals. The alteration products are serpentine and chlorite minerals. The chromite grains within the unaltered olivine keep their original shapes and less fractured than the grains within the altered olivine ( The disseminated type of chromite ore. The alteration products are serpentine as chlorite and serpentinized olivine. Chromite crystals generally are broken due to fragmentation effects to get cataclastic texture ( The Leopar type of chromite ore has dominantly serpentinized olivine minerals as gang mineral which show sieve texture. The chromite grains in the nodular are fractured and show cataclastic texture ( Polished sections were prepared directly by from chromite ores for grain size analyses by image processing. Chromite samples were cut in cube-shape approximately 2 The studies on the polished sections of chromite were carried out by Leco 2001, automatic image analyzer. Images were acquired with an optical microscope. The minerals were easily discriminated by their grey levels depending on their optical reflectivity and they displayed mainly two grey levels. Chromite grains had 98–255 grey levels while the 0–97 grey levels were belongs to the gang minerals. Touching grains were separated from each other by applying erosion and then dilation techniques, so it is allowed to measure the each grain individually. Feret diameter, the distance between two parallel tangents, measurements of chromite grains were achieved on the binary images of chromite samples. The 50× magnification was used in all measurements. Geometric scale was 3.27 The lognormal distribution is selected to fit the measured data since the grain size range of the chromite ore samples is too large. Its probability density function The lognormal distribution is a two-parameter function, geometric mean (ln If the measured data points show an appropriate pattern of linearity in log-probability paper, then they can be considered to follow lognormal distribution. Considering a lognormal distribution by number such that: The number-length mean diameter defined as: A relevant determination of the size distribution requires the analysis of a sufficient amount of particles ( PSDs of cataclastic rocks are commonly fractal, and can be described by the relation between the number of particles with a greater than The measurement of the fractal dimensions ( The chromite samples were grouped into three types of microstructure by The similarity of chromite types used in this study is that individual grains are almost invariably fractured into sharp-edged sub-grains due to the cataclastic deformation. The grain size distributions (PSD) determined by Eq. In order to examine the size-number relationship of chromite ore samples, their arithmetic mean of mean Feret diameters ( Standard normal values for estimation of the required grain size percentage can be found by number-based geometric means (ln The calculated cumulative undersize percentages are given in These results suggest that the lognormal distribution is a very accurate and precise of all chromite ore samples used to determine the grain size distributions. The calculated number-based diameter distributions are parallel to each other; an example is given for Bantlı ore in Image analysis associated with microscopy allows the determination of PSDs of unbroken ores. Approximately 20,000 grains are enough as the number of the particles that should be examined for unbroken chromite ores deformed cataclastically to increase the statistical reliability of the results. Fractal evaluation of number-based distributions of chromite ore samples revealed that the relation is not linear and therefore can not be described as fractal. There is considerable variation in the degree of cataclasis between the chromite ore samples. The variation can be seen even within a single observation area of polished sections. It is found that the lognormal distribution gives a very satisfactory fits to the number-based distributions of mean Feret diameters obtained from all types of chromite samples having different degree of cataclasis. Since the transformation from one mean diameter to another is easy, the other number-based mean diameters and their distribution can be estimated correctly by using the same geometric standard deviation calculated for the number distribution. The results show that for the lognormal distribution provides excellent results and describes the whole range of distribution when applied to the cataclastically deformed chromite samples showing wide range size distributions.