The processing route and the final microstructural and mechanical characteristics of a novel biomaterial composite are described. This new material is composed of 70wt% Si3N4 ceramic phase and 30wt% bioglass, the later performing as a liquid sintering aid system and simultaneously providing bioactivity characteristics to the composite. The conditions for fabrication of an almost fully dense material (∼98% of relative density) were pursued. Optimised parameters were 1350°C–40min–30MPa by hot-pressing technique. The very fast densification rate of the process avoided the crystallisation of the bioglass intergranular phase and therefore its intrinsic properties were maintained. Also, the large amount of glassy phase assured the densification by liquid phase assisted grain rearrangement without Si3N4 phase transformation. The final mechanical properties of the Si3N4–bioglass were as follows: fracture toughness, K
                     IC=4.4MPam1/2; Vickers hardness, H
                     V=10.3GPa; Young's modulus, E=197GPa; bending strength, σ
                     R=383MPa; Weibull modulus, m=8.3. These values provide an attractive set of properties among other bioactive materials, namely by upgrading the main drawback of bioceramics and bioglasses for high-load medical applications, which is the lack of satisfactory fracture toughness.Silicon nitride (Si Bioglasses, like commercial Bioglass Theoretically, Si Si Computer assisted pressure dilatometry allowed for the characterisation of the densification behaviour of the composite material. Pressureless sintering experiments were also performed at the same temperatures, with BN embedded samples under N Part of the disc shaped samples were cut off and crushed for X-ray diffraction (XRD) analysis. Phase composition was determined from the X-ray spectra using the method of Gazzara and Messier Vickers hardness, The development of the present Si The DTA curve of the bioglass is shown in The densification curves taken from the dilatometric analysis of the isothermal portion of a representative experiment at 1350°C ( The amount of liquid (30 In Si The final microstructure of the Si The mechanical properties of the novel Si The flexural bending strength of Si Concerning the Young's modulus of the Si Several attempts have been made to obtain such kind of materials that combine bioactive behaviour with appropriate mechanical properties, particularly fracture toughness, for high load applications. These properties are usually key features for in vivo functioning of the large majority of bioceramic implants. Furthermore, for an effective stress transfer a good bonding between the two constituents of the composite must be achieved. Stainless steels and titanium fibers-Bioglass However, in many cases complex systems are required to bond the two constituents of the composite since no chemical bonding is usually present Highly dense (>98% of relative density) Si The authors would like to acknowledge the financial support of PRAXIS/P/CTM/11144/98 research project and PRAXIS XXI/BPD/16311/98 grant financed by FCT, and Grant No. 11934 financed by University of Aveiro.