Magnesite and dolomite are salt-type minerals that show similar flotation behavior due to the same crystal structure, similar chemical composition, and sparingly soluble nature. It is difficult to achieve effective separation of magnesite from dolomite in a single stage of flotation. The present study was undertaken to investigate effects of dissolution rate, species distribution, solubility, surface conversion phenomenon, and surface electrical properties on flotability of magnesite and dolomite. Dissolution rate was measured by solution pH change as a function of stirring time. Species distribution diagrams were determined based on equilibrium constants for various chemical species. Solubility of mineral was calculated using species distribution diagram. Surface conversion was characterized using Gibbs equation and species distribution constants as a function of solution pH. Electrical properties were investigated using zeta potential measurement. The flotation behavior of magnesite and dolomite was studied using solution chemistry of magnesite and dolomite, dodecyl phosphate species distribution diagram. Both simulation results and experimental data show that the separation of magnesite from dolomite by flotation can be enhanced by controlling the solution chemistry.Magnesite (MgCO Gravity separation and flotation are two major methods used for magnesite ore beneficiation. Gravity separation is employed for coarse size (>1 mm) magnesite separation. Flotation is used for fine magnesite, particularly when high grade of magnesite concentrate is needed Froth flotation was used for magnesite mineral processing as early as in 1930s by Doerner and Dwigh The dissolution characteristic of mineral has significant effects on flotation. It affects solution composition, surface charge and its flotability. The solution equilibria and IEP of calcite were studied by The solution chemistry of magnesite and dolomite minerals has not been thoroughly studied and their interactions are not well understood. The present study was conducted to better understand solution chemistry of individual magnesite and dolomite minerals and their mixtures and establish correlation between solution chemistry and flotation behavior. Dissolution rate was measured by solution pH change as a function of stirring time. Species distribution diagrams were determined based on equilibrium constants for various chemical species. Solubility of mineral was calculated using species distribution diagram. Surface conversion was characterized using Gibbs equation and species distribution constants as a function of solution pH. Electrical properties were investigated using the adsorption model and zeta potential measurement. The magnesite and dolomite samples used in this study were acquired from Haicheng Magesite Mine and Dashiqiao Dolomite Mine, Liaoning Province, China, respectively. Once received, the samples were immediately crushed to −6 mm using a laboratory jaw crusher, split into representative lots of approximately 1.0 kg each, and then stored in a freezer at −20 °C to minimize oxidation. Prior to flotation and solubility tests, the samples were dry pulverized in a laboratory hammermill and screened into different size fractions. The particle size used was −0.104+0.074 mm (−140+200 mesh) for flotation and solubility tests. A porcelain ball mill was employed to produce 25.4 μm (−500 mesh) particles for zeta potential measurements using Zeta Meter DXD-1. The grade of MgO is 47.35% in the magnesite and 21.63% in the dolomite. To study the selective flotation of magnesite and dolomite, the floatation experiments were carried out for individual minerals in a 125 ml Hallimond microflotation cell. The pulp containing 500 mg solids and 125 ml distilled water was conditioned for 3 min. The flotation was then initiated and lasted for 3 min. Magnesium carbonates are characterized by the dissolution of the lattice ions and subsequent complexation, hydrolysis, and adsorption of the dissolved species. The complex interactions between these processes determine the interfacial properties of magnesium carbonates and thereby the efficiency of flotation. Mineral dissolution rate is defined as the quantity of lattice ion dissolved in solution at fixed time. It is often assumed that the mineral dissolution rate is controlled by the chemical reactions on mineral surface. For carbonate minerals, the dissolution rate is expressed by the solution pH as a function of stirring time or lattice ion concentration in the solution as a function of stirring time. The lattice ions of carbonate minerals (M  In open system, solution pH of carbonate mineral is affected not only by lattice composition, but also by CO The species distribution was determined by the dissolution of the lattice ions of mineral and the ionic composition of solution. The species concentrations have significant effects on flotation since they affect the surface charge and reagent adsorption. In MgCO The ionic species distribution of magnesite based on For CaMg(CO The ionic species distribution of dolomite was plotted based on Since magnesium carbonates are sparingly soluble salt type minerals, the chemical potentials of the solid and liquid start to equilibrate through hydration and dissolution of the surface lattice ions immediately after the mineral is immersed in aqueous media. The surface charge is a result of surface formation and/or adsorption of hydrolysis products of lattice ions from water, depending on the pH. Therefore, solubility has a significant effect on surface charge and mineral flotability. For sparingly soluble carbonate minerals (M Due to the effect of CO In open systems of magnesite and dolomite, the concentrations of ions in solution are affected by CO Based on Assume [Mg In closed systems of magnesite and dolomite, CO The solubility product of sparingly soluble carbonate mineral is defined as the product of total concentration of cation and total concentration of anion: The solubility product for magnesite The solubility of magnesite is expressed as follows For dolomite, the solubility can be expressed as follows From  During the processing of magnesium carbonates, magnesite and dolomite dissolve in water followed by pH-dependent hydrolysis and complexation of the dissolved species. Surface conversion may occur as a result of reactions of the dissolved species with the mineral surface, considerably altering interfacial characteristics of minerals. In magnesite suspensions, magnesium cations exist in three forms: Mg Based on In dolomite solution, cations exist in six forms: Mg Based on In the mixed system of magnesite and dolomite, the following conversion equilibrium exists The conversion from magnesite to dolomite is spontaneous in the mixed system since Δ The surface charge of salt-type minerals is caused mainly by mineral dissolution or diffusion of lattice ions to the medium under the influence of water molecules. Water molecules have different affinity to anions and cations on mineral surface, which causes the selective dissolution. Thus the mineral surface has unequal adsorption of anions and cations in the solution, which destroys the charge balance on the mineral surface and leads to the surface charge. The dissolution models for carbonate mineral (MCO In dissolution process, lattice cations (Mg Zeta potential of magnesite and dolomite can be predicted using species distribution diagram and surface charge mechanism. The species distribution diagram of magnesite The species distribution diagram of dolomite Zeta potential affects the adsorption of reagents and thus the flotability of minerals. Zeta potentials of magnesite and dolomite minerals were measured as a function of pH and are given in The results in Dodecyl phosphate is a new collector for magnesite and dolomite separation The species distribution of dodecyl phosphate as a function of pH based on the above equilibria is shown in Based on solution chemistry of magnesite and dolomite, dodecyl phosphate species distribution diagram, and adsorption model, the flotability of magnesite and dolomite can be predicted as follows: At low pH value (pH<2), dodecyl phosphate exists as neutral molecule, which was unfavorable to physisorption and chemisorption, thus unfavorable to flotation. At 4<pH<6, the activity of [H At 6<pH<11, [HPO At pH>11, [PO Mineral flotation response is significantly affected by solution pH and collector dosage From the above discussion, the following conclusions can be drawn: The dissolution rate of dolomite was much faster than that of magnesite in water solution. The dissolution rate of Ca The species distribution was strongly affected by solution pH. The solubility decreased with increasing solution pH. The IEP's of magnesite and dolomite were predicted to be at pH 6.8 and pH 6.0 based on the species distribution diagram, which were very close to the measured value of pH 6.7 and pH 6.2, respectively. The flotability of magnesite and dolomite can be predicted using solution species distribution diagram, collector species distribution diagram and zeta potential. In solutions with pH close to IEP or greater than 11, both minerals had good flotability. In acidic solutions of pH<2 and weakly alkaline solutions, the flotability was poor for both minerals.