This paper evaluates the effect of zinc ions on copper electrodeposition. Although zincis not found at significant concentrations in conventional industrial copper electrolytes, in copper-concentrated sulfate leach liquors produced in the treatment of waste printed circuit boards (WPCB) its concentration may reach high levels. In this context, the effect of zinc on physical-chemical properties of copper sulfate electrolyte, performance indicators of copper electrowinning, and morphology and crystal structure of copper deposits were investigated. Copper electrowinning tests indicated that the current efficiency was negligibly affected by adding zinc (up to 75 g L−1) to synthetic copper sulfate electrolyte (30 g L−1 Cu2+ and 110 g L−1 H2SO4) at two levels of current density (250 A m−2 and 450 A m−2) and fixed temperature (35 °C). The energy consumption slightly increased: up to 4% at 250 A m−2 and up to 3% at 450 A m−2, both effects at 75 g L−1 Zn2+. This behavior was ascribed to decreases in the electrical conductivity of the electrolyte by adding zinc (up to 35% at 75 g L−1) and consequent increases in the ohmic drop and cell voltage. Electrochemical measurements by cyclic voltammetry and linear sweep voltammetry (LSV) indicated no cathode polarization by adding this impurity to the electrolyte, even at the highest level. In turn, the addition of zinc caused significant drops in the limiting current for copper deposition (e.g., the values recorded at 100 min−1 decreased about 60% when 75 g L−1 Zn2+ was added to the electrolyte). This effect was explained by the measured increases of electrolyte viscosity and calculated decreases of copper diffusion coefficient. The addition of 75 g L−1 Zn2+ to the electrolyte increased its viscosity in the order of 76%, and decreased the diffusion coefficient in the order of 45%. Regarding the effect of zinc on product quality, SEM analysis revealed negative effects on the morphology of the deposits (i.e., higher roughness and nodulation), mainly at the highest concentration of zinc and highest current density. XRD analysis showed modifications in the growth pattern of copper crystals under some conditions. For example, the addition of 30–75 g L−1 Zn2+ to the electrolyte led to the formation of (220) textured deposits at 250 A m−2. The findings of this work may be helpful to define proper operating conditions for copper electrowinning in order to produce high quality products, thus maximizing the recycling of copper from the selected secondary source.Copper (Cu) is the third highest consumed metal in the world after iron and aluminum ( Waste electrical and electronic equipments (WEEE) also represent important secondary sources for copper due to the increasing amounts generated worldwide and the large contents of this metal. For instance, waste printed circuit boards (WPCB) of computers, which are electronic devices made by plastics, ceramic materials, fiberglass and metals, contain 30–50 wt% metals, mainly Cu and other high valuable metals, such as Pd, Au, Ag, Ni, and Sn ( Pyrometallurgy is traditionally used to recover copper and precious metals from WPCB ( As iron may critically affect the recovery of copper through electrowinning from sulfate electrolytes, its presence in the sample to be leached must be minimized. The Fe content in the ground, concentrated samples is typically low (< 2 wt%) ( Zinc ion does not represent an electroactive species in the copper electrodeposition process due to the significantly lower standard reduction potential in relation to that for the Cu Only one publication was found in the literature regarding the effect of Zn In view of this review, it is important to recognize that fundamental knowledge on the effect of zinc ions on physical-chemical properties of copper sulfate electrolytes and on copper electrodeposition has yet to be acquired. For instance, the effects of this metal impurity on the current efficiency, energy consumption and product quality, mainly at high levels in the sulfate solution, are unknown. Thus, the purpose of this work was to investigate the effect of zinc concentration on the (i) main properties of copper sulfate electrolyte, (ii) performance indicators of the electrowinning process, and (iii) morphological and crystallographic features of copper deposits. The variables and corresponding levels evaluated here were defined according to hydrometallurgical route under development at UFMG for recovering copper and other valuable metals of connector pins removed from WPCB. Details about the preparation method ( All the electrolytes were prepared with copper sulfate pentahydrate, CuSO Relevant physical-chemical properties of different copper sulfate electrolytes, such as viscosity, conductivity, and diffusivity were determined in this work. Viscosity was measured in duplicate using an Ubbelohde style viscometer. The average viscosity was used to calculate the copper diffusion coefficient, as better discussed later. The electrical conductivity was measured using a Hanna (Edge HI763100) conductivity meter, which was calibrated with a standard solution of potassium chloride, KCl (1413 ± 7 μS cm The electrowinning experiments were carried out in duplicate using cylindrical Pyrex cell with four electrodes: three equidistant 316 L stainless steel cathodes in the form of vertically aligned disks (10 mm diameter) mounted in Epoxy resin (EpoFix, Struers); and one central platinum anode (99.99% pure) in the form of vertical rod (2 mm diameter, 5 cm length). In order to keep nearly constant the free acidity to copper molar ratio during electrowinning, such small deposition areas were used in a large volume of solution (1 L). Cathodes and anode were arranged in Teflon lid at fixed geometry (~20 mm apart). Prior to each experiment, fresh cathode surfaces were prepared by wet-polishing using silicon carbide ( The experiments were carried out by applying a direct current to each cathode-anode couple using a customized power supply. Most of the experiments were carried out at current density of 250 A m Voltage (V) measurements were taken hourly between each cathode and central Pt anode using a Minipa (ET 2615A) multimeter. After each experiment, the copper deposits were manually stripped from the cathodes using a sharp blade, thoroughly rinsed with deionized water and absolute ethyl alcohol (99.5% ACS, Synth) and then dried in a furnace at 100 °C for 30 min. The average mass of the three deposits produced in each experiment was measured by using an analytical balance with a high degree of precision (Mettler AE200). The current efficiency (CE) and specific energy consumption (SEC) of copper electrowinning were determined according to Eqs. Electrochemical measurements by cyclic voltammetry and linear sweep voltammetry were conducted to investigate the effects of zinc ions on copper deposition and copper diffusion coefficient. The measurements by cyclic voltammetry were conducted in duplicate using a cylindrical Pyrex cell (0.5 L) with three electrodes. The working electrode was 316 L stainless steel in the form of a vertically aligned disk (10 mm diameter) mounted in Epoxy resin (EpoFix, Struers); the counter-electrode was platinum (99.99% pure) rod (2 mm diameter); and the reference electrode was Ag/AgCl/KCl (3 mol L Copper diffusion coefficients were determined by linear sweep voltammetry in a three-electrode cell. A rotating platinum disk (5 mm diameter) was employed as the working electrode. Five rotational speeds (100–500 min It is well-known that the limiting current at a rotating disk can be related to the diffusion coefficient by Levich equation. A slightly more rigorous version of this traditional equation is given by The copper deposits were analyzed by scanning electron microscopy (SEM) coupled to energy dispersive spectrometry (EDS) using a Quanta FEG 3D (FEI) microscope, and by X-ray diffraction (XRD) using a PANalytical (Empyrean) diffractometer, with Cu Kα1 radiation (λ = 1.5406 Å). SEM images were obtained at accelerating voltage of 5 kV. The XRD patterns were measured in the 2θ range from 20.01° to 99.99° using a step size of 0.02°. The patterns were identified using an ICDD (International Centre for Diffraction Data) file as reference ( In industrial operations, the electrowinning of metals is typically evaluated by three key performance indicators - production level (current efficiency), energy consumption and product quality ( Specific energy consumption (SEC) appears to increase slightly at high concentrations of zinc ( Zinc concentration increases SEC through the increase in cell voltage, since CE remained essentially constant (see Eq. Zinc concentration impacted cell voltage by decreasing solution conductivity ( As modern production facilities can operate at current densities between 400 and 500 A m In order to evaluate product contamination with zinc sulfate, copper deposits produced at 450 A m  From the electrowinning experiments, specific energy consumption will increase slightly with increasing zinc concentration (up to 4% at 250 A m The electrowinning experiments revealed that high zinc concentrations produced rough copper deposits especially at 450 A m Cyclic voltammograms recorded for different zinc concentrations in the copper sulfate electrolyte and the corresponding negative-going sweeps are displayed in The electrochemical measurements by cyclic voltammetry also demonstrated that in the positive-going sweep, the currents gradually decayed until the zero value was reached at the reversible potential (about 0.30–0.31 V After reaching the reversible potentials, the currents then became anodic, consistent with the oxidation of the copper films previously deposited on the working electrode ( The effect of zinc ion concentration on cupric ion mass transport was investigated using LSV in conjunction with a rotating platinum disc electrode. By ploting the voltammograms as a function of zinc concentration at fixed rotational speed (not shown), the addition of this impurity to the copper sulfate electrolyte caused significant decreases in the limiting currents, in disagreement with findings reported by  The electrochemical results support the assumption that the addition of zinc ions to the copper sulfate electrolyte produced nodular deposits during electrowinning caused by inhibiting the mass transport of cupric ions to the cathode surface. The impact of slower copper ion transport on deposit morphology and structure were investigated by characterizing the deposits. The possibility of co-deposition of zinc with copper was thermodynamically analyzed. Reduction potentials were calculated for copper and zinc using the Nernst equation assuming ideality. The calculated potentials are +0.330 V Thus, copper deposits produced in the absence and in the presence of zinc ions in the sulfate electrolyte were analyzed by SEM-EDS and XRD to confirm that zinc was not depositing and to examine the morphology and crystal texture of the deposits influenced by changes in copper mass transport.  Typical electron micrographs acquired from central areas and edges of deposits produced at 450 A m The formation of nodular copper deposits is obviously undesirable. This type of crystal growth not only favors the formation of short circuits ( It is known that the increase of the applied current density towards the limiting current density causes the formation of rough deposits, which often contain nodules. According to Regardind the effect of Zn Previous works investigated the effect of metal impurities on the morphology of copper deposits. For instance, XRD patterns measured for all the copper deposits produced in this work are provided in Effects on the growth pattern of metal deposits caused by the presence of inorganic or organic impurities in electrolytes are commonly related to the adsorption of the species on the cathode surface. It is well-known that the adsorption of charged or uncharged molecules on the metal surface may prevent the growth of crystals in specific directions possibly by hindering the diffusion of ad-atoms towards growing sites ( The electrochemical measurements conducted in the present work did not indicate any change in the cathodic curves recorded during polarization. Then, there are no evidences to correlate the observed effect on the growth pattern of the copper deposits with zinc adsorption. Previous works evaluated the effect of metal impurities on the growth pattern of copper deposits. In the presence of 250–1000 mg L In summary, the experimental approach used in this work revealed that the addition of zinc ions to the copper sulfate electrolyte may change the growth pattern of copper deposit and, as a consequence, its morphology. Assuming current distribution issues in the electrowinning cell, the combined effects of current density and zinc concentration may compromise (i) process stability ( This paper described the effects of zinc ions on relevant aspects to the electrodeposition of copper, such as the physical-chemical properties of the sulfate electrolyte, the current efficiency and energy consumption of the electrowinning process, and the quality of the final product. Zinc represents the major metal impurity in copper-concentrated sulfate liquor produced in the oxidative leaching of connector pins removed from waste printed circuit boards. Considering that this leach liquor may directly feed electrowinning cells in processing routes under development, and that the exhausted electrolyte may feed the leaching reactor, a systematic evaluation on the impacts of this impurity may be helpful to establish proper operating conditions, mainly in terms of tolerable zinc concentration and current density to be applied. The experimental approach indicated that the presence of zinc ions in the copper sulfate electrolyte up to 75 g L None. The first authors would like to thank the Centro de Microscopia (CM/UFMG), Laboratory of Chemical Analysis (LAQ/DEMET/UFMG), and Laboratory of X-rays for technical support and analyses. The Brazilian agencies CNPQ (