Ck45 Steel was electroless coated with nickel–phosphorus alloy from a bath containing sodium hypophosphite and different complexing agents (sodium citrate, sodium acetate and lactic acid). The effect of different complexing agents on phosphorus content, morphology, structure and hardness of the deposits was studied. The coating compositions deposited were determined by using energy dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDX). Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) was used to study the morphology of coatings. The anti-corrosion properties of Ni–P coatings were investigated in 3.5% NaCl solution by the weight loss and potentiodynamic polarization techniques. It has been found that Ni–P coating obtained using sodium citrate complexing agent with the spherical nodular structure and smooth surface showed higher microhardness and anti-corrosion resistance.Deposition of metals without an external current source has become a commonly used process in modern technology. It allows to produce thin layers of pure metals, alloys or composites with uniform thickness and composition on conductive and nonconductive substrates ( The aim of this work is to investigate the effect of the most appropriate complexing agents such as; sodium citrate, sodium acetate and lactic acid on structure and corrosion behavior of EN plating in 3.5% NaCl by using the weight loss and potentiodynamic polarization techniques. The Ni–P composite depositions were coated on Ck45 steel substrates (20 All reagents (AR grade) were purchased from Merk (Germany) and used without further purification. Nickel sulfate hexahydrate was used as the source of nickel. Sodium hypophosphite was used as the reducing agent, which also serves as the source of phosphorus in the coating. Thiourea was used as a stabilizer to prevent sodium citrate, sodium acetate and lactic acid to control the rate of release of free metal ions for the reduction reaction. The chemical composition of the plating baths and their operating conditions are given in The surface morphologies of deposited Ni–P composite coatings with different complexing agents of electroless bath (sodium citrate, sodium acetate and lactic acid) were investigated using scanning electron microscope (SERON THECNOLIGY AIS-2100) and also chemical composition of coatings analyzed by wavelength dispersive spectroscopy (WDS). The coating hardness test was carried out using Micro Vickers Hardness Tester, Model Strvers Durmin (Denmark), by subjecting the samples to a load of 50 The steel samples were polished with 400, 600, 800, 1000 and 1200 grades of abrasive papers, washed thoroughly with distilled water, degreased with acetone and dried at room temperature (30 The corrosion parameters of various Ni–P composite coatings were studied using potentiodynamic polarization in 3.5% sodium chloride solution. The potentiodynamic polarization experiments were conducted by sweeping the potential at a scan rate of 1 The element compositions of electroless Ni–P with different complexing agents of electroless bath (sodium citrate, sodium acetate and lactic acid) were measured using EDX. The Ni and P contents on the composite coatings are tabulated in  The anti-corrosion performance of the Ni–P with different complexing agents in 3.5% NaCl solution was compared with substrates via the weight loss method (  It can be seen that Electroless Ni–P coating obtained by bath A resulted in a homogenous surface profile and less nodule boundaries, dislocations, kink sites and other surface defects ( The potentiodynamic polarization results also confirm that the Ni–P composite coating (used bath A) elevates the anti-corrosion performance of specimens remarkably consistent with the results of the weight loss test.  The complex sodium citrate in the bath decreased the contents of P atoms in the depositions, and increased the deposit processes of Ni atoms. The Ni–P composite coating obtained using sodium citrate complexing agent with the homogenous surface and less nodular structure showed higher anti-corrosion resistance. The microhardness of coatings increased with decreasing P content. The authors acknowledge the Amir Kabir University of Technology for the use of their instruments facilities.