Owing to the drastically increasing occurrence of bone disorders, it is essential to develop synthetic materials suitable for bone tissue regeneration. In the present study, biocomposite scaffolds of polyvinyl alcohol (PVA) reinforced with different concentrations of functionalized graphene nanoplatelets (GNP: 0, 0.5, 1 and 1.5wt%) were prepared using freeze drying method. The prepared scaffolds were characterized for their physicochemical, mechanical and in-vitro biological properties. To study the effect of GNP reinforcement on the MG-63 osteoblast cells behavior scanning electron microscopy (SEM), 3-(4,5-dimethylthiazol-2-yl)-2,5-diphenyltetrazolium bromide (MTT) assay, alkaline phosphatase (ALP) activity assay and alizarin red stain-based (ARS) assay were performed. The homogenous dispersion of GNP up to 1wt% improved the mechanical and biological properties of the nanocomposite scaffolds. The tensile strength of the scaffolds with 1wt% of GNP was found to be 16.48±0.50MPa which is 20.68 times more than the PVA sample. The low concentration of GNP (1wt%) provided the most favorable microenvironment for osteoblast cell proliferation and differentiation. Further increase in GNP concentration (1.5wt%) lead to agglomeration of GNP which deteriorates the properties of nanocomposite. The study showed that the relatively low concentration of GNP in PVA-GNP scaffolds certainly exhibit a beneficial effect on the mechanical and biological properties of nanocomposite scaffolds, thus proving to be a promising biomaterials for bone tissue engineering applications.The worldwide occurrence of bone disorders and defects has increased drastically in recent years, and it is expected to double by 2020 Carbon based materials like diamond, graphite, carbon fibers, nanotubes, nanowires, and nanoribbons are being used from years for various electronics, optics, and sensor applications Graphene, a 2-D sp Graphene nanoplatelets (GNP) are gaining attention of researchers owing to its structural similarity to idealized graphene. It provides an ameliorative substitute to CNT as GNP contain no metallic impurities and its production is cost effective. Due to its high aspect ratio and sheet like structure, GNP form percolated networks when reinforced in the polymer matrix. Lalwani et al. have reported that the nanoplatelets are better reinforcing materials when compared to nanoribbons and nanotubes owing to their lower aspect ratio and better cross-linking density To the best of our knowledge, no study has yet explored the mechanical and biological properties of lyophilized PVA-GNP scaffolds by varying carboxylated GNP concentration for bone regeneration and repair. Therefore, the aim of this study is to evaluate the effect of the addition of different concentrations of functionalized GNP on surface, physicochemical, mechanical and The hot water soluble PVA (average molecular weight of 70,000–1,00,000, 98–100% hydrolyzed), Bradford reagent, bovine serum albumin (BSA) and 3-(4,5-dimethylthiazol-2-yl)-2,5-diphenyltetrazolium bromide (MTT) assay kit were purchased from HiMedia, India and carboxylic acid (COOH) functionalized GNP (average thickness 6–8 To prepare PVA-GNP nanocomposite scaffolds by freeze drying technique, PVA (10% w/v) was dissolved in distilled water and stirred at 90 The surface morphologies of the developed scaffolds were observed by a field emission scanning electron microscope (FESEM-FEI, NovananoSEM 450, Netherland). Prior to FESEM, the samples were sputtered with gold to avoid imaging artifacts from electrical charging. The phase and crystallinity of the PVA-GNP nanocomposites were studied using X-ray diffraction (XRD, Rigaku Ultima IV Diffractometer, Japan) technique over a scan range of 5°−60°, a scan speed of 5°/min and step size of 0.05° using CuKα radiation. To examine the presence of functional groups in PVA-GNP nanocomposites attenuated total reflectance-Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy (ATR-FTIR, AlphaE, Bruker, USA) was performed within the range of 600–4000 The PVA-GNP scaffolds in triplicates were weighed (W where W The The nanocomposite samples in triplicates were immersed in 10 where OD For protein adsorption studies, samples (triplicates) were immersed in 1 The tensile properties of the nanocomposite scaffolds was carried out using universal testing machine (ElectroPuls E1000, Instron, UK) with a 250 Human osteoblast-like MG-63 cells were incubated in DMEM supplemented with 10% FBS and 100 The Human osteoblast-like MG-63 cells were cultured on the sterilized samples for 7 The ALP activity of MG-63 cells cultured on samples was analyzed using ALP colorimetric assay. The samples seeded with osteoblast cells for 7 Data are expressed as mean A representative cross-sectional FESEM micrographs of PVA-GNP nanocomposite scaffolds are shown in The XRD patterns of GNP and PVA-GNP nanocomposites are shown in The FTIR analysis was carried out to examine the interactions between PVA and GNP in the developed nanocomposites, and their spectra are shown in The wettability of solvent casted PVA-GNP nanocomposites was determined by measuring their water contact angles The swelling ratio and weight loss are important properties that must be evaluated for a scaffold material used in tissue engineering. The swelling behavior determines the infusion of nutrients and cellular products in the scaffold respectively. Swelling property also affects the porosity, degradation and mechanical properties of scaffolds when implanted in the body. The swelling percentages of the PVA-GNP scaffolds are shown in  The hemocompatible nature of a scaffold is an important factor to evaluate its biocompatibility. The When a scaffold is implanted in human body a variety of cytoplasmic, transmembranal and extracellular proteins get adsorbed onto its surface when comes in contact with physiological fluids. These proteins facilitate the cell attachment and encourage tissue repair (cell responses). Protein adsorption is intensely influenced by the surface chemistry, surface charge and hydrophobicity of the scaffold material. Bovine serum albumin (BSA) is a glycoprotein representing 50% of all the plasma proteins. Its molecular structure and functions are similar to those of human serum albumin The mechanical properties of PVA-GNP nanocomposites are characterized by their tensile strength, Young’s modulus, and energy at break. As expected, the addition of GNP into PVA matrix has a significant effect on the mechanical properties of the developed nanocomposites. The results have shown ( The cell attachment and proliferation, controlled by the scaffold properties, further influence the cell differentiation The osteoblast cell attachment and growth mainly depends on the scaffold surface properties like wettability, charge and surface roughness. The SEM micrographs of osteoblast cells (MG-63) attached to different PVA-GNP scaffolds after 7 Alkaline phosphatase (ALP) is a known early osteogenic differentiation marker. Therefore, quantification of ALP activity determines the initialization of matrix mineralization for the osteoblast cells. The ALP activity of the cells cultured on PGN scaffolds was analyzed to evaluate their bone forming ability and the results with respect to the control are shown in The mineralized matrix on the scaffolds samples cultured with osteoblast cells is the sign of the osteoblast differentiation. The calcium deposition due to matrix mineralization was analyzed using Alizarin Red stain (ARS) based assay and the results were normalized to the control ( In the present work, PVA was successfully reinforced with GNP to prepare biocompatible PVA-GNP nanocomposite scaffolds via freeze drying method for efficient bone repair and regeneration. The incorporation of sheet like structured GNP in the PVA matrix improved the surface morphology, bioactivity and protein adsorption of the nanocomposite scaffolds. The homogeneous dispersion of GNP (0.5 and 1