Metabolic syndrome has been known as a risk factor for morbidity following orthopedic procedures, yet its impact on surgical treatment of ankle fractures remains unclear. The aim of this study was to compare the patient outcomes of surgical treatment of supination-external rotation ankle fractures in patients with and without metabolic syndrome. This study was designed as a retrospective matched case-control study. Forty-nine patients with supination-external rotation ankle fracture and metabolic syndrome were age-, sex-, and fracture type-matched with 49 controls without metabolic syndrome. Olerud-Molander Ankle Score (OMAS), Visual Analog Scale (VAS), Kellgren and Lawrence (K&L) scale, and complications were assessed at final follow-up. The mean postoperative follow-up was 19.5 months (range, 13–44). The OMAS measurements in the metabolic syndrome group were lower than those in the control group (p=0.006) and the VAS for pain measurements in the metabolic syndrome group were greater than those in the control group (p<0.001). The K&L scale and complications did not differ significantly between the two groups. Patients with metabolic syndrome are at risk for higher pain scores and lower functional outcomes after surgical treatment for supination-external rotation ankle fracture. These results suggest that metabolic syndrome should be treated together with ankle fractures.Ankle fractures are one of the most common injuries encountered by orthopedic surgeons. They have increased in frequency due to growth in the number of people involved in athletics and the size of the elderly population [ Metabolic syndrome is a constellation of medical conditions arising from abdominal obesity, hypertension, insulin resistance, and dyslipidemia [ Unlike studies on the incidence of fractures, few studies have explored the impact of metabolic syndrome on the surgical outcomes of ankle fractures. Sadighi et al. [ The aim of this study was to compare the clinical and radiographic outcomes of surgical treatment of ankle fractures in patients with and without metabolic syndrome. The authors hypothesized that patients with metabolic syndrome would show worse surgical outcomes for supination-external rotation ankle fractures than would patients without metabolic syndrome. After local ethics committee approval, we conducted a retrospective review of the medical records of patients who had undergone surgical treatment for supination-external rotation ankle fracture between January 2013 and December 2016. All surgeries were performed by a single senior orthopedic surgeon. Patients with less than 1 According to the National Cholesterol Education Program (NCEP) Adult Treatment Panel (ATP) III definition [ As a primary outcome measure, we used the Olerud-Molander Ankle Score (OMAS) [ To evaluate radiographic changes after ankle fracture, the Kellgren and Lawrence (K&L) scale was used [ Postoperative complications were investigated through the review of medical records by two of the authors, and were classified into categories such as implant failure, superficial infection, deep infection, wound dehiscence, and so on. For simplicity of analysis, complications were dichotomized according to their presence or absence. In a pilot study of 20 patients from each group, OMAS was 74.2 (standard deviation [SD], 14.2) in patients with metabolic syndrome and 82.5 (SD, 14.8) in patients without metabolic syndrome. Based on this data, 98 patients, with an allocation ratio of 49:49, were sufficient to provide 80% power with a 2-side level of 0.05, showing a statistically significant difference between the two groups. We performed random sample selecting for metabolic syndrome, as well as case-control matching based on gender, age, and fracture type for non-metabolic syndrome, using SPSS v20.0 (SPSS, Inc., an IBM Company, Chicago, IL, USA). The Kolmogorov-Smirnov test was used to identify the normal distribution of the variables. The demographics, clinical outcomes, and radiographic outcomes of the two groups were compared using independent The age and sex of the metabolic syndrome group were similar to those of the control group. In addition, there were no significant differences in the follow-up period, nor other variables that may have affected the outcomes differently between the two groups. However, the body mass index (BMI) of the patients in the metabolic syndrome group was significantly greater than that of the control group ( Analysis of OMAS showed a significant difference between the groups, in that OMAS measurements in the metabolic syndrome group were lower than those of the control group (p On the K&L scale for evaluating radiological changes after ankle fracture, the progression of posttraumatic arthritis was observed in some patients, but no difference was found between the two groups ( The overall rate of complications was 10.2% in the metabolic syndrome group and 6.1% in the control group, but no statistically significant difference was found between the two groups ( The primary finding of this study is that the surgical treatment for supination-external rotation ankle fracture in patients with metabolic syndrome showed worse clinical outcomes in terms of the OMAS, and VAS for pain than did patients without metabolic syndrome. On the other hand, there were no significant differences in the rate of complications or the K&L scale between the two groups. These findings indicate that when patients with metabolic syndrome sustain ankle fractures, they should be informed that their clinical outcomes may be worse, and the ankle fracture treatment should be managed together with treatment for metabolic syndrome. Metabolic syndrome includes diabetes, which is a well-known risk factor for less favorable outcomes after surgical treatment of ankle fractures [ Beyond the negative impacts of each individual component of metabolic syndrome, metabolic syndrome as a whole can create a vicious circle of sedentary behavior and low physical activity [ In contrast to the clinical outcomes that showed differences between the two groups, the difference in the rates of complications between the two groups was not identified as statistically significant. However, because the rate of complications after ankle fractures is not high, a post hoc power analysis indicated that the power for rate of complications in this study is 0.015, which is not sufficient to verify a difference between the two groups. Unlike the previous nationwide database studies showing a higher rate of complications in the metabolic syndrome group [ This study has two limitations. First, among the types of fractures within the Lauge-Hansen classification system [ The results of this study indicate that patients with metabolic syndrome are at risk for higher pain scores and lower functional outcomes after surgical treatment for supination-external rotation ankle fracture. Therefore, the authors suggest that these patients should manage metabolic syndrome together with ankle fracture treatment in consideration of worsening clinical outcomes associated with metabolic syndrome. Young Hwan Park: Lead investigator and first author. Woon Kim: Data analysis and manuscript review. Ji Hyun Park. Choi: Data analysis and manuscript review. Hak Jun Kim: Corresponding author, primary surgeon. No benefits in any form have been received or will be received from a commercial party related directly or indirectly to the contents of this study. None of the author of this paper has a financial or personal relationship with other people or organization that could inappropriately influence or bias the content of the paper.