Flotation is a process of separating fine valuable mineral particles from their associated gangues. In flotation, hydrophobic minerals of interest are attached to air bubbles, floated under the buoyancy force of bubbles to the top of pulp, and collected as products referred to as concentrate, leaving hydrophilic particles in the pulp as tailings. Flotation has been used in large-scale mineral processing industry since the 1920s. In 1921, Perkins first patented the slightly soluble thiocarbamate as a nonoil chemical collector for sulfide mineral flotation, followed by Keller who invented in 1925 water-soluble xanthates and Whitworth who developed in 1926 dithiophosphate, which revolutionized flotation. During 1930s, the application of soaps and cationic amine collectors industrialized processing of nonmetallic ores. Due to its high efficiency and low cost, flotation is currently used to process annually over billions of tons of ores, in addition to its widely expanding application to wastewater treatment and recycling of various types of valuables from electronic wastes, metallurgical slugs, used batteries, etc. The importance of the froth flotation to the economy of the industrial world has been considered to be enormous. Many early efforts at understanding flotation were directed toward explaining differential flotation in terms of the relative occlusion of gases. In 1916, bubbles were considered to be at the heart of flotation science. The role of interfaces in flotation had been considered by Sulman by 1912. The first direct application of thermodynamics to systems similar to flotation was that of von Reinders, who deduced how fine solid particles would be distributed between oil and water phases based on Maxwell's capillarity equations in 1913. In 1915, Ralston suggested that flotation might result from the electrical attraction between negatively charged air bubbles and positively charged mineral particles. In 1917, Taggart and Beach fairly lucidly applied thermodynamics concepts directly to flotation. At present, thermodynamics has become a fairly widely used tool for the analysis of flotation phenomena. In 1917, Anderson suggested that adsorption might play a dominant role in flotation and used the Gibbs adsorption equation to discuss the frother adsorption at the air–water interface. In 1920, Langmuir found the correlation between adsorption and hydrophobicity. He reported that oleic acid created large contact angles on cleaved calcite and galena but only small angles on clean glass and cleaved mica. In 1928, Taggart described the results of adsorption tests on sulfide minerals that related the structure of the adsorbate to its ability to Since most of natural minerals are originally not sufficiently hydrophobic for effective attachment to air bubbles, a key for separating valuable minerals from gangue minerals is therefore to render the target minerals hydrophobic by selective adsorption of added chemicals known as collectors in mineral processing. Collectors can adsorb on mineral surfaces by electrostatic attraction, electrochemical reaction, chemical binding, hydrogen bonds, etc. To achieve selective adsorption of collectors on target minerals requires designing special structures of collectors to suit particular mineral surfaces. A number of theories have been proposed to explain the selectivity of collector adsorption at mineral surfaces in flotation. In 1930, for example, the solubility product theory of solutions was suggested by Taggart that the smaller the solubility product of the compounds formed by reagent and metallic ions is, the stronger is the adsorption of the reagents on the corresponding minerals, hence the more effective flotation. This theory has provided satisfactory explanation on some flotation phenomena, such as strong flotation of calcium minerals and weaker or negligible collecting power of silicate minerals by oleic acids. Similarly, the product solubility theory has been used to explain selective flotation of metal sulfide minerals from gangue minerals by xanthate. Other theories based on chemical reactions, chelation, and coordination of collectors with metal ions in solutions have also been proposed to explain selective flotation. In these theories, the potency of metal ions to react with collectors in bulk solutions is used to infer their interactions on mineral surfaces. Clearly the influence of the mineral surface structure and the properties of adjacent coordination atoms on their interactions with collectors are not considered in these theories. Therefore, they cannot explain why copper, lead, and iron sulfides can be effectively floated by xanthate, but not their corresponding oxidized minerals. The atoms (ions) in mineral crystal structure and on mineral surfaces are known to interact with each other, which greatly affects their reactivity with collectors. For example, the reactivity of iron in hematite (Fe In 1925, Schrödinger put forward the wave function equation of electrons to describe the behavior of microscopic particles. In 1927, Hitler and London made the first attempt to describe the structure of hydrogen molecules using the Schrödinger equation, which laid the foundation of modern quantum chemistry. In 1991, K. Takahashi calculated the electronic properties of reagent molecules by adopting extended Hükel molecular orbital (EHMO) method to predict their reactivity. D. Z. Wang focused on the structure–activity relationship of the reagent by using semiempirical LCAO-MO method. However, the calculation using atomic orbital-based MO method is very difficult. For a molecule of 100 electrons, for example, resolving the RHF equation using MO methods requires integration of 100 million double-electron equations. It is therefore almost impossible to calculate mineral surfaces by MO approach. Density functional theory (DFT) using electron density distribution as a basic variable is a new revolutionary approach for studying the ground state properties of multi-particle systems, which greatly reduce the intensity of calculations. With the recent development of supercomputing power, a wide range of software for DFT calculation has been developed and available for various applications. As a result, DFT is now being rapidly used to calculate the crystal structure of minerals, lattice impurity, mineral surface and interface properties, and reagent adsorption. The solid physical properties of minerals are of particular importance for sulfide flotation. First, sulfide minerals have semiconducting properties, and the flotation of sulfide mineral is an electrochemical process. Electrochemistry is the basic feature of sulfide mineral flotation. Secondly, electrochemical reactions or electrochemical interactions are common in the sulfide ore processing from grinding to flotation separation, such as galvanic interaction between sulfide minerals and grinding media, the electrochemical interactions between flotation reagents and sulfide mineral surfaces, the galvanic corrosion between different sulfide mineral particles, and the electrochemical reaction between the sulfide mineral surface and the oxygen and water medium, all of which involve the semiconductor band structure and electronic properties of sulfide minerals. Therefore, the semiconducting properties of sulfide minerals are the foundation of electrochemistry of sulfide mineral flotation. Studying the solid physical properties of sulfide minerals (energy band structure, electron state, and electron transfer) could provide theoretical explanation to the electron transfer mechanisms during sulfide mineral flotation. This book systematically summarizes the research results of the authors in recent years and expounds the relationship between the crystal properties and the floatability of sulfide minerals from solid physics, crystal chemistry, surface science, and quantum mechanics. The research works of this book have been funded by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (50864001, 51164001, 51864003, 51304054). The authors are thankful for these supports. We would also like to thank Dr. Li Yuqiong, Dr. Zhao Cuihua, Dr. Lan Lihong, and others for their contributions to this book.