Secondary raw materials like steelworks slag or other vanadium bearing industry wastes like catalysts and oil burner ash can be used for the production of vanadium before their final disposal. Therefore, as in primary processing, alkaline roasting has to be carried out in a rotary kiln or multiple hearth furnace. This process transforms the vanadium, strongly embedded within the spinel mineral structure, into leachable vanadates. Mathematical modeling of this process for the establishment of simulation programs and for model based controller design requires accurate models of the chemical reaction kinetics. In this article a set of equations describing the reaction rate of the vanadium roast process and its derivation is presented. Validation showed good agreement between simulation and measurement data.concentration concentration of oxygen concentration of sodium concentration of insoluble vanadium concentration of soluble vanadium energy of activation factor for adaption to large-scale factor for adaption to large-scale performance quantity coefficient in Arrhenius law parameters for adaption temperature dependent factor mass of bulk in a floor incoming mass-flow of bulk outgoing mass-flow of bulk rotation speed of drive-shaft reaction rate initial reaction rate spec. reaction rate of sodium spec. reaction rate of insoluble vanadium spec. reaction rate of soluble vanadium universal gas constant time temperature For the vanadium production a well known process can be applied to recover vanadium from steelworks slag or other vanadium bearing industrial wastes like catalysts and oil burner ash. The slag is roasted in a multiple hearth furnace or a rotary kiln under alkaline conditions, usually using NaCl or/and Na This article describes the derivation of a new reaction rate law for the vanadium roast process. Beginning with a literature survey, which did not reveal sufficient information for a suitable reaction kinetics rate law, a description of a laboratory scale roasting unit for practical experiments follows. By a series of well directed experiments a data base for the rate law derivation was provided. Finally a short summary of the rate law implementation within the formerly published roasting process model is presented. A literature survey was carried out to gather information about the vanadium roast process, especially concerning its reaction kinetics. The following gives a short summary of the most important facts revealed by the authors literature survey. It is a common assumption that vanadium within the slag is mainly trivalent ( Many authors report better recovery yields for the Na For the practical experiments a laboratory scale roasting unit was developed. A muffle furnace was modified containing a continuously stirred batch reactor, where it was possible to adjust the process conditions according to the requirements (see flowchart in Several different bulk mixtures were used as initial conditions of the bulk concentrations to cover the range of interest. The initial concentrations of vanadium were kept constant at a typical value, but the initial concentrations of sodium were varied around an operating point. For these initial conditions roasting experiments were carried out at three different oxygen concentrations of the reactive gas, all at constant reaction temperatures. The influence of the temperature was investigated by experiments at four different temperatures but constant initial bulk conditions. For chemical analysis the experiment was stopped at the desired time by pouring the complete sample in a cooled tray. The cooled and grinded material was then analyzed by taking a random sample for the standard analyzing routine. Thus, for recording one complete process progression the experiment had to be started from the beginning several times with remaining initial conditions. Since starting each reaction needed some handling time (preparation of the reactor, waiting for constant temperature, etc.) it is obvious that this routine for recording the progress of reaction is highly time consuming but at the same time very precise. In order to derive an appropriate reaction rate law investigations were carried out to find a rate law structure that could be fitted to the measurement data. To accomplish this task information from the literature survey was taken into account. Finally a rate law according to Eq. A dynamic model of the vanadium roast process has been derived by Due to chemical reactions a source-/drain term  It has to be considered that the measurement profile represents the results only of a random sample without the knowledge of a confidence interval. The consistency check, therefore, can be made only qualitatively with a good indication of the quantitative aspect. Nevertheless, it can be stated, that the new reaction rate law seems capable of describing the stationary concentrations of soluble and insoluble vanadium in the furnace. The main interest concerning the roast process is usually focused on the overall rate of recovery. Hence, it is of importance to validate the dynamic behavior of the model for the lowest floor of the furnace. Therefore, an experiment was carried out at the multiple hearth furnace, where the composition of the bulk input was changed resulting in a decrease of the overall rate of recovery.  A physically based dynamic model of a multiple hearth furnace, which can be used for roasting of primary and secondary raw materials, was derived. In order to model the chemical aspect of the roasting process a new reaction rate law based on systematic experiments on laboratory scale was set up and implemented into the dynamic model. Validation showed that a satisfactory approximation of the concentrations of interest can be achieved. Generally, the presented approach for the derivation of a roasting process rate law seems suitable for common roasting processes. It is of great importance to find a proper rate law for the very special application and therefore, practical experiments will usually be necessary. By identifying the major influencing quantities and setting up a rate law structure, the parameters of the rate law can be adjusted and the rate law can be implemented into the dynamic model of the process. A process model can be used advantageously for investigating process variations or parameter sensibilities by process simulation and for optimal design of a control algorithm for automatic process control (e.g. in This project was supported within the scope of the Industrial Competence Center for Mechatronics and Automation (IKMA) by the Austrian Ministry for Economic Affairs (BMWA) and the Provincial Government of Upper-Austria. The authors would like to thank VOEST-ALPINE MECHATRONICS GmbH. and all other cooperating industry partners and supporting institutions.