In this study, we investigate the effectiveness of particle mixing technique to improve the fluidization hydrodynamics of nanoparticles that show strong agglomeration behavior during their dry processing. We choose small proportions of particles belonging to Geldart group A classification as additive particles because of their superior hydrodynamic behavior. This strategy not only suppresses the hysteresis phenomenon, but also helps to substantially reduce the size of agglomerates. Moreover, mixing of external micron-sized Geldart group A particles with resident nanoparticles of fluidized bed causes a variation in the volume-change of mixing in the range of −25% to −60%, indicating a significant contraction of the bed. Conventional models reported in the literature were unable to describe such a high degree of volume contraction. Results obtained in this study clearly establish the efficacy of particle mixing as an effective assisted fluidization technique in eliminating bed non-homogeneities and promoting the deagglomeration of nanoparticles.An important challenge in the large-scale application and processing of nanoparticles is their agglomeration. While the primary size of nanoparticles ranges from 1−100 For large-scale processing of fine and ultrafine particles, fluidized beds are gaining increasing attention because of low pressure drop, high heat and mass transfer rates and better contact between the fluid and solid phases In order to improve the fluidization hydrodynamics and promote de-agglomeration, conventional fluidization is often supplemented with additional input of energy to overcome interparticle forces that cause agglomeration. Such techniques include external or internal vibrations of the fluidized bed In this study, we investigated the effectiveness of the particle mixing technique to improve the fluidization hydrodynamics of silica nanoparticles, which are widely used in the paint and pharmaceutical industries. Its dry particle size analysis yields the Sauter mean diameter as 20 The schematic of the experimental set-up is shown in The nanoparticles used were hydrophilic fumed silica, Aerosil 200, which has a primary size of 12 Our experimental strategy had two parts. In the first part, unassisted fluidization of nanoparticles was carried out using air superficial velocities of up to 171.5 An important aspect of the present work is to investigate the effect of adding external particles on the expansion behavior of the fluidized bed. Owing to the dissimilar sizes of two components, the overall expansion of the bed may not be additive. Therefore, we compute the volume change of mixing for a two-component mixture as follows Note that the term in square brackets in Eq. The percentage volume change of mixing is given as Various models in the literature predict the specific volume of the mixture of two solid particle species. One of the oldest and well-known models proposed by Westman The dependence of the pressure drop on the superficial air velocity for three different compositions of the bed is shown in From the velocity versus pressure-drop profiles, we determined the incipient fluidization conditions for all the cases (see Another noteworthy aspect of For all the three cases of particle mixing, Using Eq. Existing models in the literature were used to describe the contraction behavior of the bed of nanoparticles in the presence of micron-sized group A particles. The comparison is shown in Consequently, we can now understand the occurrence of a prominent peak in the pressure-drop profile around 25 The highest degree of contraction shown in In assessing the efficacy of the particle-mixing technique in promoting de-agglomeration behavior, we used the well-known Ergun equation (Eq. The particle mixing strategy, when carefully implemented, is effective in improving fluidization hydrodynamics. In this case, addition of even small proportions of inert particles conforming to Geldart group A classification almost eliminated the hysteresis phenomenon, indicating a marked improvement in the bed homogeneity. We also noted a significant reduction in the agglomerate size; addition of 8.6  mean hydrodynamic diameter of nano-particle agglomerates (μm) distance between pressure taps (m) solid mass in the bed (kg) Reynolds number at size ratio (smaller to larger) (−/−) superficial velocity of the fluid (m/s) minimum fluidization velocity (m/s) volume of the solids in the bed (m Specific volume of i Specific volume of mixture (−/−) Volume fraction of i  bed porosity (−/−) bed porosity at incipient fluidization (−/−) air density (kg/m true solid density (kg/m air viscosity at room temperature (N·s The authors are grateful to the Deanship of Scientific Research at the