Frequency and scale of the blasting events are increasing to boost limestone production. Mines are approaching close to inhabited areas due to growing population and limited availability of land resources which has challenged the management to go for safe blasts with special reference to opencast mining. The study aims to predict the distance covered by the flyrock induced by blasting using artificial neural network (ANN) and multi-variate regression analysis (MVRA) for better assessment. Blast design and geotechnical parameters, such as linear charge concentration, burden, stemming length, specific charge, unconfined compressive strength (UCS), and rock quality designation (RQD), have been selected as input parameters and flyrock distance used as output parameter. ANN has been trained using 95 datasets of experimental blasts conducted in 4 opencast limestone mines in India. Thirty datasets have been used for testing and validation of trained neural network. Flyrock distances have been predicted by ANN, MVRA, as well as further calculated using motion analysis of flyrock projectiles and compared with the observed data. Back propagation neural network (BPNN) has been proven to be a superior predictive tool when compared with MVRA.Due to the explosive force, rock fragments are propelled and thrust high into the air and beyond the safety limit of blast area, thus termed as “flyrock”. This is mainly due to the flaws presented in the blast design and also due to the mis-interpretation of rock mass behavior. The phenomena of flyrock are always uncontrolled and can never be brought down to zero. But beyond safe permissible limits, flyrock can cause some serious damage to the property and can inflict serious to fatal injury to the personnel, thus making it be one of the main causes of accidents and deaths in opencast mines. Number of accidents as well as number of deaths and injuries due to blasting in Indian mines has been shown in By blasting, we obtain a fixed and/or constant size of rock due to fragmentation, which can help in optimizing the further production economics. During explosion, a part of energy is used in breaking and displacing the rock, while the rest of energy (a major portion) is used up in ground vibrations, air blasts, noises, back breaks, flyrocks, dusts, etc., thus posing a thrust to the nearby life and property ( Inadequate burden, inadequate stemming length, faulty drilling, back breaks, loose rock on top of the bench due to poor previous blast, very high explosive concentration, inappropriate delay timing, and their sequence, and inaccuracy of delays are the prominent blast design parameters responsible for flyrock problems ( Blast performance is basically governed by geological and geotechnical data, such as rock quality designation (RQD), unconfined compressive strength (UCS), and joint setting. Joints have an important role to play in any blasting operation as they determine both the safety and performance. Joints are the natural planes of weakness that offer practically no resistance to split. Joints are the zones of discontinuity and weakness and thus during blasting they get affected first, rather than the stable homogenous regions. Therefore, they control the rock breakage process by determining which area gets affected first. Rock fragmentation and over break are influenced by the joint sets. The blast design can be improved by review and analysis of past data of the blasts conducted in the mines ( Flyrock due to blasting in opencast mines is complex in nature as it is a random phenomenon. In this paper, an attempt has been made to calculate initial velocity and angle of ejection of flyrock projectile, and maximum horizontal throw of flying fragments. Flyrock distances have been predicted with the help of feed forward back propagation neural network (BPNN), because it is the most versatile and robust technique ( Experimental blasts have been conducted in 4 limestone mines in India. Out of datasets of 125 experimental blasts, 95 datasets have been used to train the neural network; remaining datasets are used for testing and validation of neural network. Flyrock distances for 30 experimental blasts have been predicted by artificial neural network (ANN), multi-variate regression analysis (MVRA), calculated using motion analysis of videos of flyrock projectiles and compared with the observed data. Four limestone mines have been selected in this study, i.e. (1) Bamangaon and Mehgaon mines, ACC, Katni, (2) Sheopura-Kesarpura (S-K) mine, shree cement, Beawar, (3) Aditya mine, UltraTech, and (4) Chittorgarh and Kotputli mines, UltraTech, Jaipur. The mining lease of Bamangaon and Mehgaon mines is located at Kymore Village, Vijayraghavgarh Block, Katni District, Madhya Pradesh State of India. It lies between longitude E80°29′ and E80°57′E and latitudes N23°48′ and N24°8′, survey of India toposheet No. 64A/53. The lease area is 51.2022 km The S-K mine is located near Beawar City, Ajmer District, Rajasthan. The mining lease of 856.8 ha lies between longitude E74°22′ and E74°26′ and latitudes N26°1′ and N26°5′, on toposheet No. 45J/8 of survey of India. The planned capacity of the mine is 2.0 million tons of limestone per year. The major portion of area is rocky and there is no vegetation. There occur two parallel ridges of limestone extending along length of area. Between two ridges, there is alluvium/soil. Structurally the area represents a tight isoclinal synclinorium fold where limestone constitutes two limbs of fold, which are separated by a shallow valley. The general strike direction of limestone beds in the area is N30°E. Generally beds are dipping in WNW direction with dip of 45° to as high as 60°. The Aditya limestone mine is located in Tehsil–Chittorgarh and Nimbahera, Chittorgarh District (Raj). The site is located 18 km Southwest of Chittorgarh Town. The mining lease area of the Aditya limestone mines forms a part of survey of India toposheet Nos. 45L/9 and 45L/10 between latitudes 24°43′ and 24°45′ north and longitudes 74°35′ and 74°37′ east. The leasehold area of mine is 760.692 ha with the planned production capacity of 6.6 million tons of limestone annually with a stripping ratio of 1:0.33. Structurally the area represents a syncline fold. In spite of above folds, study of dip and strike readings indicates N–S trend with maximum of 10° deviation on either side. The dip varies between narrow ranges of 0° and 20°. Dip direction changes from east to west due to folding. The Kotputli limestone mine (Grasim Cement) is located at Mohapura Jodhapura near Kotputli Town, Jaipur District, Rajasthan. It is situated at a distance of 165 km south from Delhi and 106 km north from Jaipur. The lease area of the mine is 5.4878 km Limestone mining is being implemented by fully mechanized opencast mining methods in all the mines under the study. The working pit has been excavated by developing working benches of 9–10 m in height. Each bench is connected with a ramp. Necessary haul roads have been developed all around the benches for approaching the working faces. Shovels carry out the excavation and loading operations. Transportation of limestone and waste rock is carried out by dumpers. Before crushing, the limestone from crusher hopper is passed through grizzly screen for screening out intrusive clay. The clay-free limestone is crushed to required size and transported to stock pile located inside plant through belt conveyor. Overburden, mainly clay and soil, is very thin in nature, and it is scrapped by dozer and then lifted with the help of shovel and dumper combination and disposed off to dump yards. The problem of blast-induced flyrock is prominent as these mines are surrounded by the villages, and management of blasting events in these mines has been a challenging task. Blast design data, such as burden, spacing, stemming, average depth of blast holes, blast hole diameter, charge per hole, linear charge concentration, specific charge (i.e. ratio of explosive consumed to tonnage of rock broken per blast, kg/t), maximum throw of flyrock or flyrock distance from the blasting face, are generated before blasting operation. Geotechnical data, such as volumetric joint count ( The experimental blasts were monitored with high-resolution video camera of 24 frames per second. The interval between two consecutive frames is 42 ms. The view of the blasting events was shot from safe distance in view safety of the equipments and personnel. The flying fragment motions were captured in videos of the blasting events. The videos of the blasts have been analyzed to know launching velocity and launching angle of the flyrock projectiles. The AVI files obtained through unloading the images from the camera to the computer for slow motion analysis using ‘ProAnalyst 1.5.6.7’ software of XCITEX, USA ( The pattern of the result is predicted by ANN on the basis of preceding learning. Once the neural network has been established and trained, any similarities in the new pattern will be detected and the result pattern will change accordingly, thus providing the technique interpolation capability. ANN is trained using back propagation algorithm. The feed forward BPNN comprises 3 layers, i.e. input layer, hidden layer and output layer. Layers are made up of neurons which are the basic processing units. These neurons connect the layers using appropriate weight. The output of the neurons in the input layer serves as input for the neurons in the hidden layer and the same applies to the connection between hidden and output layers. The problem defines the number of hidden layers and the neurons in them. In the present case, the BPNN with ‘Levenberg-Marquardt’ algorithm and ‘log-sigmoid’ transfer function has been undertaken. After trial of a number of different combinations, two hidden layer and ten neurons in each hidden layer have been found as the best predictive model for the case under the study. The input and output parameters used in ANN model are shown in The relation among the variables can be calculated using MVRA and the least squares fit method to solve the dataset. Regression matrix solves the simultaneous equations thus created. MVRA has been conducted by the same datasets and the same input parameters used in ANN. The equation for prediction of flyrock by MVRA is as follows: Flyrock distance has been predicted by neural network and multiple regressions. Relationships between flyrock distance predicted by ANN and MVRA have been compared with the observed ones as shown in In order to assess the impact of an independent variable on maximum throw flyrock, sensitivity analysis has been performed in ‘Matlab 7.11.0 (R2010b)’ using ‘simulation tool’. While performing sensitivity analysis of an independent variable, all other independent variables are set at their mean values as specified in The ANN with two hidden layers and log-sigmoid transfer function has been found as the best predictive combination in back propagation algorithm. While solving the blast-induced flyrock predictive problem, six independent variables have been selected, i.e. linear charge concentration, burden, stemming length, specific charge, UCS, and RQD. Among the various flyrock models namely ANN, multiple regression and ‘projectile motion model’, ANN has been proved to be an excellent model due to its highest coefficient of determination and lowest MAE as well as RMSE. Sensitivity analysis has been performed and we found a positive correlation of linear charge concentration and specific charge with the flyrock distance, whereas burden, stemming length, UCS and RQD bear a negative correlation with the flyrock distance. Impact of burden and stemming length are more pronounced at blast hole of The authors wish to confirm that there are no known conflicts of interest associated with this publication and there has been no significant financial support for this work that could have influenced its outcome.