Leach solutions and wastes of the Bayer process are important resources for metals such as aluminum and vanadium. Despite the fact that vanadium is precipitated as cake and removed in the Seydisehir Eti Aluminum Facility (Turkey), it cannot be used due to low metal content and impurities it contains. Within the scope of this study, research and development of environmentally acceptable, technically sound and low-cost chemical leaching and recovery methods were conducted for the recovery of vanadium from the by-product cake of the Bayer process. In the conducted studies, a sample of vanadium cake was used after its detailed characterization. Roasting tests were performed in order to remove the arsenic from the vanadium cake; however, it was found that roasting was not effective for arsenic removal. The performances of different reagents were examined in chemical leaching tests (H2O and H2SO4 leaching, H2SO4 leaching with the addition of NaSO3, and NH4F); in the H2SO4 leaching tests performed with the addition of Na2SO3, the effects of concentrations of reagents and temperature on the efficiency of vanadium recovery (max. 93.09%) were determined with the full factorial experimental design method. The results were evaluated with ANOVA (variance analysis) method, and empirical models were formed. In lab and semi-pilot scale leaching tests, vanadium recoveries were 96.34% and 94.76% respectively. Vanadium was precipitated with NaOH and FeSO4 and almost all vanadium (95.8%) was obtained as Fe3(VO4)2. Cost analysis and economic evaluation have shown the economic feasibility of the leaching and recovery processes proposed.The Bayer process is a keystone method of the aluminum production industry used in producing quality alumina for bauxite refining worldwide. Despite the fact that the process is well understood, the existence of impurities in the solution affects the product quality and causes a significant cost in the industry ( Bauxite ores contain strategically important metals such as vanadium as well as aluminum. In the Bayer process, vanadium in the ore is dissolved with the leaching procedure and the concentration of vanadium in the leach solution increases with time. Vanadium is removed from loaded leach solutions as vanadium cake (16–17% V It is estimated that approximately 10,000–50,000 Solvent extraction ( An optional method is recovery by precipitation of vanadium in the Bayer solution ( Vanadium, > Alkaline solutions containing vanadium may be treated to selectively separate V from Si, Al and P. From a solution containing Si, Al, P and V, a vanadium containing solution was obtained by a two-stage process: addition of H In order to obtain vanadium pentoxide as a by-product from the Bayer process sodium aluminate solution,   In this study, efficient leaching and metal recovery methods/reagent systems were investigated with laboratory and semi-pilot tests regarding recovering vanadium from vanadium cake, which is strategically important in terms of the industry, from the Bayer process waste by-products in the Seydisehir Eti Aluminum Facility. Vanadium cake sample was collected systematically from the points where the evaporation unit of the Seydisehir Aluminium Plant (Cengiz Holding, Konya, Turkey) could be represented in general. Initially, the sample was allowed to settle and then the water on top was removed. This was repeated for 10 Physical and chemical analyses of the vanadium cake sample were performed. Moreover, XRD (Siemens D500) analyses were performed in order to be able to determine the mineralogical compounds. DTA-TG device (SEIKO 6300) was used in order to determine the thermogravimetric changes that occur in the vanadium cake due to the increase in temperature. Vanadium cake sample was exposed to the roasting procedure for 1 In order to perform factorial leaching tests, hot water leaching, H Experimental design techniques constitute a statistical approach and they are techniques that can be used in all research and development activities, increase quality, decrease costs by using the resources efficiently, assure reliability of the results, and support and complete all other quality techniques ( The parameters and working intervals of chemical leaching tests were determined according to Yates experimental design technique. All experimental studies were conducted based on 2 In the analyses of experimental data using the Yates algorithm, the main effects and interactions were also considered and it was assumed that there was a linear relationship between the outcomes of the experiment and parameters that were efficient in the experiments (cases higher than 95% significance), and a model associated with effective outcomes was created. The calculated V recovery yields, which had to be obtained according to this model that was created (Ymodel), were calculated by using Minitab 14 Statistical Software. The consistency between the outcomes of the experiment and estimated data was assessed with the regression coefficient (R Chemical leaching tests were performed in 600 Laboratory and semi-pilot scale reactor leaching tests were performed in glass reactors with the capacities of 2 Lab and semi-pilot scale vanadium cake leaching tests were performed under conditions given in Optional precipitation/recovery of vanadium from the loaded leaching solutions was aimed in these tests. Reagents such as NaOH and FeSO Precipitation tests were performed for recovery of vanadium from leaching solutions that were obtained from semi-pilot scale leaching tests through filtration. Precipitation tests were performed in beakers with a volume of 600 Leaching tests were performed with full factorial experimental design method prior to technical and economic analysis procedures. With the obtained data, it was investigated whether the selected process was economically feasible to be performed in a facility by using SuperPro Designer (demo version) program, which is a simulation software developed by Intelligen Inc. The most appropriate process conditions were selected based on the results obtained from chemical leaching experiments and precipitation tests, and then, a facility operation simulation was created. Technical and economic analysis evaluation was performed with the flow chart created by considering the facility and market conditions. The facility was designed as a batch design facility. Physical and chemical analyses of the vanadium cake sample were performed. The V content of vanadium cake was found to be 9.8% ( DTA-TG device (SEIKO 6300) was used in order to determine the thermogravimetric changes that occur in the vanadium cake due to increase in temperature and the temperature increased up to 700 The vanadium cake sample was exposed to the roasting procedure for 1 After roasting procedures of vanadium cake sample initially containing 1.13% As As a result of two-stage pre-leaching tests performed with vanadium cake in the existence of hot water leaching, H After leaching tests performed with the vanadium cake sample, V recovery percentages were calculated by performing titration with KMnO  Amount of spent KMnO Amount of vanadium in stock solution. As the vanadium recoveries in H The values of vanadium recovery obtained from vanadium cake as a result of two-stage leaching procedures performed with full factorial design are shown in ANOVA was performed in order to determine the effects of the investigated factors on vanadium recovery yield and determine the factor according to these interactions and then to provide the optimization. The ANOVA results created according to vanadium recovery data are included in  The regression model (Eq. 93.09% V recovery was obtained in H 2 Cumulative vanadium recovery was 96.3% in water leaching test at 80 Precipitation, which is one of the recovery methods, was performed as it is more economical compared to the other recovery methods (such as electrowinning, solvent extraction). The outcomes of semi-pilot scale leaching tests were evaluated and the best leaching conditions were specified. According to the best leaching conditions specified, precipitation procedures of the solutions and precipitation of V Precipitation tests were performed with the leach solutions obtained as a result of leaching tests by using 1 The process simulations created with SuperPro Designer Software regarding vanadium recovery were shown in The chemical reaction and mass balance that occurred during the chemical leaching stage for vanadium recovery purposes are shown below. The chemical reaction and mass balance that occurred for vanadium obtained with the method of precipitation from leach solution after chemical leaching tests are shown below as Eqs. Sulfuric acid was used in the flow diagram, which was planned for vanadium recovery, created in the The data for the consumption of reagents and production of V By evaluating the optimum conditions obtained after the chemical leaching tests, a facility simulation was created in order to determine the feasibility of the chemical leaching procedure in a full scale facility, and it was observed that the process was economically feasible. Vanadium cake sample was subjected to roasting prior to leaching experiments in order to remove the contained arsenic. It was observed that roasting (200–600 In two-stage leaching tests which involved water leaching followed by H This study highlights the potential for the development of technically and economically feasible process for treatment of vanadium cake of the Bayer process. This is also important for waste management and exploitation of waste by-product as a secondary resource as well as more efficient and effective utilization of the resources of the country. The authors express their sincere gratitude to the Research Projects Coordination Unit of the