Recently AASC (Alkali Activated Slag Cement) is utilized for construction materials in order to reduce environmental load like abundant CO2 emission. Red mud which is a byproduct from Bauxite ores process has a strong alkali component containing 10.0–15.0% of Na2O, so that it can be used for an alkali activator or retarder for cement hydration. This work presents an evaluation of efflorescence characteristics in cement mortar with AASC and red mud. For the work, OPC (Ordinary Portland Cement) and AASC are used as matrix binder, and varying replacement ratios of red mud (0.0–30%) are prepared. In order to evaluate the efflorescence characteristics in the binders with red mud, analysis of water absorption and porosity are performed. The changing efflorescence areas with weight loss are also measured. The compounds in efflorescence are quantitatively analyzed through various techniques such as EDS, XRD, SEM, TGA, and alkali leaching test. In the work, the accelerated efflorescence mechanism and its characteristics are quantitatively evaluated considering the effects of binder types and red mud replacement ratios.Recently, AAC (Alkali Activated Cement) is recognized as a special cement. It can replace OPC (Ordinary Portland Cement) which causes a significant CO Red mud is an inorganic byproduct with pH over 11, obtained from mineral processing of aluminum hydroxide-Al(OH) Efflorescence is the migration of a soluble Ca This work presents an evaluation of efflorescence characteristics in AASC mortar with red mud, and several tests like porosity measurement, moisture absorption coefficient, and elution analysis are performed considering varying red mud replacement. For analysis of compounds in efflorescence, microscopic analysis like SEM, TGA, and EDS are also performed. The physic-chemical properties of the OPC-noted as C and AASC-noted as NC are compared with those of FA (Fly Ash) and GGBFS (Ground Granulated Blast Furnace Slag) in Approximately two tons of red mud are produced in sludge with 40.0–60.0% moisture content, when one ton of Al The mix proportions for cement mortar are listed in Cubic mortar samples with 50 After 28 Construction materials with porosity like cement mortar can absorb water through capillary suction. A large amount of water is absorbed initially and the absorption becomes steady afterwards. The absorption coefficient was obtained from Eq. The mortar samples are crushed after the accelerated efflorescence test and the powder is mixed with distilled water in a weight ratio of 1:50 and exposed to the same conditions of the accelerated efflorescence test for 48 The test results of physical and chemical properties are listed in The results of XRD analysis for dried red mud shown in As illustrated by the SEM images shown in The results of the compressive strength considering binder type and red mud substitution ratio are shown in The results of porosity measurement with red mud substitution ratios are plotted in The moisture absorption coefficients with varying red mud substitution ratios are shown in As shown in   S compound content is only 0.69% for C while 17.37% is observed in NC sample. C binder contains 2.2% of SO The results of XRD analysis are shown in The efflorescence from NC binder is mainly made up with Na SEM images of the efflorescence compounds are shown in The concentrations of Ca Very small amount of Na The conclusions on effects of red mud and Alkali-Activated Slag Cement on efflorescence in cement mortar are as follows. The results in compressive strength at the age of 28 The increase in the 10–1000 For the efflorescence compounds in C binder with red mud, Na This research was supported by a grant (