Based on the impact mechanism and fluid wedge effect of the high-pressure fluid jet, a new approach to raw salt comminution has been worked out. The fluid jet comminution process has a unique characteristic of providing a fine appearance for the product particle as well as a high washing efficiency. Dissolution of raw salt and loss of product are avoided owing to saturated sodium chloride solution used as high-pressure medium. Compared with mechanical comminution, the product processed by this technique has higher quality and better appearance. The working condition is also improved since the comminution is operated under wet conditions. Also, this approach has the potential to be used to comminute the thermally sensitive, inflammable and explosive materials.Starting in the 1970s and continuing for 30 years, high-pressure liquid jet technology has experienced a rapid development. It is mainly applied in the areas of cleaning, cutting and cracking. The technology will have an outstanding role to play in the 21st century when new materials that are hard to machine by conventional means will be used commonly by industries and when the highest ecological requirements are imposed Recrystallization and mechanical comminution are two most commonly used methods in the salt-refining industry. Recrystallization can produce a high-quality product through dissolution and recrystallization. The impurity of raw salt can be reduced to the lowest level, and the shape of the product can also be well controlled. However, high-energy consumption is one challenging problem for the recrystallization process. Mechanical comminution has many advantages, such as high yield and low cost. Generally, the process consists of three mechanical comminutions and three washing steps in order to obtain desirable particle size and quality. Based on the characteristics of the raw salt comminution, a new approach has been developed that has the function of both comminution and washing. Experimental results show that the purity and particle appearance are improved. Raw salt (Tanggu Salt Plant, Tianjin) was chosen for the experiments. The saturated salt water was used as the liquid jet medium in order to avoid the salt loss during the comminution process. Before the experiment, the raw salt material was sieved to achieve a maximum diameter of salt particles of 6 mm. The composition of the raw salt material is shown in The pulverizer uses a post-mixing method. As show in The high-pressure fluid is supplied by a 3S-2 type reciprocating piston pump made by General Engineering Machinery Company, Tianjin, People's Republic of China. The high-pressure liquid jet medium ejected at high speed from the fluid nozzle is mixed with material particles in the mixing chamber. Then the particles hit the target through the mixing nozzle. The impact effect provides size reduction of processed particles. In our experiments, the working pressure was from 10 MPa to 30 MPa. It is possible to adjust the product particle size by changing the working pressures. The cross section of the nozzle with the outlet diameter of 1.5 mm is shown in The target is made of stainless steel which reduces its corrosion during operation and provides low contamination in the product. Samples comminuted by liquid jet pulverizer and mechanical pulverizer were analyzed, respectively. Filter paper method was used to measure the undissolved substance content. Barium sulfate method was used to quantify the SO The newly developed pulverizer is mainly based on impact effect between the raw salt particles and the target and fluid wedge effect of the high-pressure fluid jet Fluid wedge effect caused by a high-pressure fluid jet with high-density energy can lead to crushing of raw salt particles. As we can see in As the accelerating carrier, a high-speed media will give the raw salt particles a high speed and a powerful impact stress. Using the chemical analytical methods mentioned in Images of product particles are shown in Based on the impact of the particles and the target, the equipment has a function of selective crushing caused by the fluid wedge effect, which can increase the washing efficiency. Both fluid wedge effect and regeneration phenomenon occur during the comminution process, resulting in better product appearance. Compared with the mechanical comminution, the comminution occurs in wet condition so there are little dust pollution, less temperature increase of material and no sparks during the comminution process. Therefore, the approach can be potentially used for thermally sensitive, inflammable and explosive materials. The authors thank the National Iodic Salt Foundation of China for the financial support.