Phosphogypsum (PG), primary byproduct from phosphoric acid production, is accumulated in large stockpiles and occupies vast areas of land. Phosphogypsum is a technologically enhanced naturally occurring radioactive material (TE-NORM) that contains radionuclides from 238U and 232Th decay series which are of most radio-toxicity. The reduction in concentration of radionuclides content from PG was based on leaching of 226Ra, 210Pb, 238U and 40K using tri-butyl phosphate (TBP) and tri-octyl phosphine oxide (TOPO) in kerosene. The factors which affect the leaching process such as contact time, concentration of the solvent and temperature were optimized. Based on the experimental results, about 92.1, 88.9, 83.4, 94.6% of 226Ra, 210Pb, 238U and 40K respectively were successfully removed from the PG. The reduction in the concentration of radionuclides was accompanied by reduction in the concentration of rare earth elements (∑REE) equals to 80.1%. Using the desired organic extractant under optimum conditions for treatment of the PG waste leads to obtain a decontaminated product that can be safely used in many industrial applications.Phosphogypsum (PG) is a hazardous waste associated with the phosphoric acid production using the wet process A method for the extraction of radium into a mixture of 2-thenoyltrifluoroacetone (HTTA) and tributyl phosphate (TBP) or trioctylphosphine oxide (TOPO) in n-hexane or cyclohexane with regard to the pH, TBP and TOPO concentrations was studied. The formation of mixed complexes of Ra(TTA) El-Didamony et al. The present work aims to purify the PG, a by-product from the wet process phosphoric acid, and to minimize the environmental pollution during storage, transportation and usage. The main goal is to decrease its radionuclides such as Samples of PG (of density equals 2.29 The γ-ray spectrometer was used for radiometric determination of radionuclides. The different radionuclides in PG samples were identified and quantified using HPGe detector (2201-Oxford, USA, the detector was shielded by lead shield) with relative efficiency of 30% and resolution (FWHM) of 1.95 An accurate 50 Morphologically, phosphogypsum is yellowish brown color and relatively soft grains Chemically, the PG consists primarily of calcium sulfate dihydrate (CaSO The IR spectra of the PG sample have been measured as potassium bromide (KBr) disc, The principle for leaching process is that the active agents present in a solid matter are extracted and dissolved in a liquid (usually, but not always a solvent), either in nature or through an industrial process. In general, leaching is the process in which inorganic, organic contaminants or radionuclides are released from the solid phase into the water phase under the influence of mineral dissolution After dryness and grinding of PG, the bulk sample was carefully sieved to <63 The removal efficiency ( Tributyl phosphate (TBP) is a major extractant and modifier with many applications in hydrometallurgy. The addition of TBP to TOPO can improve the removal efficiency and the mass transfer of leaching process. The factors affect the synergism of TBP–TOPO such as contact time, concentration of solvent, molar ratio and temperature were optimized as the following: The effect of agitation time on the leaching of PG using TBP–TOPO in kerosene was investigated from 0.5 It is clear that, the removal efficiency of Different concentrations of TBP–TOPO in kerosene ranged from 0.05 The results from leaching of radionuclides and ΣREE from PG using different solutions of TBP–TOPO in kerosene indicate that, the leachability percent increases with concentration from 0.5 Based on the above data, the best removal efficiency concentrates between 0.5 The effect of mole ratio of TBP–TOPO in kerosene for leaching of PG samples was studied. A series of experiments was performed at room temperature for 2 The results indicate that, the effect of TBP–TOPO mole ratio on the The effect of reaction temperature on the leaching process was studied. About 100 The results indicate that a remarkable increase in the removal efficiency of radionuclides and ΣREE occurs at 55 Based on the above results, the optimum conditions required for the leaching of radioactive materials and ΣREE from homogenous PG (<63 01 – Agitation time equals 2 02 – Concentration of TBP–TOPO: 0.7–0.9 03 – Liquid: solid ratio equals (1:1) (volume of solvent per weight of PG). 04 – Reaction temperature of 55 The leaching of radionuclides and ΣREE from the PG, of homogenous particle size (<63 From the results, the removal efficiency for Radium species in the phosphogypsum are in the form of insoluble RaSO After the separation of leaching products by centrifugation, the obtained decontaminated PG contains The results for the removal efficiency of radioactive materials are higher than those obtained by El-Afifi et al. Stripping of the extracted radioactive materials from the organic layer was performed using sodium carbonate. The stripping investigations were carried out to choose the best conditions that can successfully strip these materials from the organic extractants. The effect of shaking time and organic to aqueous phase ratio were studied. Khorfan et al. The effect of shaking time on radioactive materials stripping from TBP–TOPO in kerosene was investigated using sodium carbonate (0.5 The effect of organic: aqueous phase ratio on radionuclides stripping from TBP–TOPO in kerosene has been studied using sodium carbonate (0.5 Upon increasing aqueous: organic ratio, the radionuclides stripping efficiency increased to exhibit a maximum at a ratio equals 2:1 which equal 74.5, 62.1, 67.2 and 55.4% for Radium was formerly used in self-luminous paints for watches, nuclear panels, aircraft switches, clocks, and instrument dials. Radium was once an additive in products like toothpaste, hair creams, and even food items due to its supposed curative powers. Radium (usually in the form of radium chloride) is used in medicine to produce radon gas which in turn is used as a cancer treatment. The isotope of radium is currently under investigation for use in medicine as cancer treatment of bone metastasis. It is well known that the average worldwide activity concentration of U, Th and The flow sheet for the treatment process was illustrated in The 1 53 97–174L (TBP–TOPO) 1000 The total costs for the treatment of PG depending on the type and quality of the used reagents. A successful leaching procedure of phosphogypsum, a by-product from acidulation of the Sebaiya phosphate rock by the wet process phosphoric acid, has been developed in the present work. This was possible through leaching of radionuclides by using TBP–TOPO in kerosene. The corresponding relevant factors were studied and the conclusions can be summarized as follows: The best leachability percent obtained of The obtained decontaminated product contains The extracted radionuclides can be easily recovered from the solvent and introduced in many useful processes. The best conditions for the stripping of radioactive materials using 0.5 The authors wish to thank the Abu-Zaabal Company for fertilizers and Chemicals for providing with the PG sample. The authors also thank the collaboration from Egyptian Nuclear Materials Authority and Atomic Energy Authority.