Elastic screen surfaces are widely used for classification of moist steam coal. In this study, a novel rigid-flexible coupled elastic screen surface was proposed, and its motion characteristics were investigated. Furthermore, the effect of excitation parameters on classification performance was analyzed. The results showed that the acceleration of the flexible elastic screen surface were markedly larger than those of the screen box due to the large deformation. The y-axis acceleration amplitudes of the elastic screen surface were about 150% higher than those of screen box, and showed a more pronounced increase during the feeding process, but decreased during the stable state compared to the no-load condition. With increasing total excitation force and frequency, the accelerations increased, the screening efficiency increased first and then decreased, while total misplaced materials changed in the opposite direction. The maximum screening efficiency of 83.15%, indicating the satisfactory classification performance for moist coal.Coal is an important primary energy source One method which was proposed to overcome the blockage phenomenon is the elastic screening method, which increases the vibration intensity of the screen surface Traditional screen surface was usually rigid or elastic, such as stainless steel plate or polyurethane material, respectively. However, the rigid screen surface was not only easy to cause the secondary crushing of coal, but also had low vibration intensity. Elastic screen surface can solve the above problems, but it was easy to be damaged and then effected the screen performance. On the basis of the above bottlenecks, a novel rigid-flexible coupled elastic screen surface was proposed, which was to take rigid metal material as the skeleton and pour polyurethane material outside. The screen surface combined the advantages of rigid and elastic screen surfaces. The time-frequency characteristics and spatial trajectory of which were investigated using vibration and high speed camera testing systems. Furthermore, the effect of the excitation parameters on motion characteristics of rigid-flexible coupled elastic screen surface as well as on the 3 mm classification performance of moist coal were analyzed. This study will increase the current scientific understanding of rigid-flexible coupled elastic screening mechanism and provide technical guidance for industrial applications of the technology. A schematic diagram of the experimental setup used in this study is shown in A schematic diagram of the rigid-flexible coupled elastic screen surface is shown in The raw coal samples used in this study were obtained from the Wanli coal mine, Ordos city, China. The ash content, volatile content, and low calorific value on a dry basis of the coal samples were 14.99%, 36.10%, and 6182 kcal/kg respectively, putting them into the low-ash, medium-to-high volatile, and medium-to-high calorific value categories. The particle size distribution was shown in In this paper, the upsized coal and the undersized coal was collected by the receiving box, respectively. And then the coal sample was analyzed by the manual standard sleeve screen, which can determine the misplaced materials in the upsized granules and the undersized granules. And the holes of the standard sleeve screen were 25 mm, 13 mm, 6 mm, 3 mm and 1 mm from top to bottom, respectively. The screening efficiency, total misplaced materials were used to evaluate classification performance, hence, they can be calculated using Eqs. In order to study the motion behavior of the rigid-flexible coupled elastic screen surface under harmonic excitation, the high speed camera test and analysis system was used to track the impact of the polyurethane ball on the flexible screen surface during screening process. The overhead, front-on, and upward views captured by the camera are shown in The motion characteristic of the rigid-flexible coupled elastic screen surface was further investigated using the vibration testing and analysis system, as shown in The time-domain characteristic displacement curves for each measuring point on the vibration screen were obtained via integral transformation of the acceleration signal, as shown in As  The material distributions during the screening process and the acceleration of each measuring point on the rigid-flexible coupled screen surface for a feed rate of 7.2 t/h are shown in Comparing among the The total excitation force, The screen performance without bouncing balls showed that the screen efficiency was only 50.07% and the total misplaced material reached 18.82%. The results were difficult to realize the high-efficiency dry deep screening of moist coal. In this case, the acceleration amplitude of The mathematical relationship between the three-dimensional acceleration and the total excitation force at points 1 and 4 was obtained using a simple linear regression model, i.e. The partition size ( The vibration frequency has a significant effect on the acceleration and vibration intensity of the rigid-flexible elastic screen. In this study, the speed of the vibration motor (i.e. the vibration frequency) was adjusted via the frequency converter to explore its influence on the motion characteristics of different regions of the rigid-flexible coupled elastic screen. In this set of experiments, the total excitation force was set to 7.0 kN, and frequency values of 16, 15.36, 14.72, 14.08 and 13.44 Hz were used.  The mathematical relationship between the three-dimensional acceleration and the frequency at points 1 and 4 was obtained using a quadratic regression model, i.e. The partition size ( The The accelerations of the measuring points increased with increasing total excitation force and frequency, and the mathematical relationships between the acceleration and these two variables were found to be linear and quadratic for the total excitation force and frequency, respectively. When both the excitation force and the frequency were increased, the screening efficiency and total misplaced materials showed maximum and minimum values, respectively. The maximum screening efficiency of 83.15% was reached under a total excitation force of 7.0 kN and a frequency of 14.08 Hz, with a corresponding total misplaced materials value of 6.39%. The research work is financially supported by the