Gold is typically associated with platinum group metal (PGM) ores and is ultimately recovered in the precious metals refineries. This chapter summarizes the extraction and refining of gold from PGM-bearing concentrates and secondary materials. Pyrometallurgical and hydrometallurgical methods are both used in the industry, spanning techniques such as matte smelting, converting, pressure leaching, precipitation, ion exchange, and solvent extraction.Updated information and references pertinent to this chapter were provided by Mike D. Adams and are acknowledged. The major portion of platinum and a significant portion of the palladium produced today originates from the Bushveld Igneous complex in South Africa. Beneficiation and recovery of platinum group metals (PGMs) from the major reefs involves a complex set of unit operations that has evolved greatly over the past few decades. Over time, a number of interesting flowsheets have been developed for the concentration, separation, and purification of PGMs. The major reefs mined today are the Merensky, UG2, and Platreef, with ore grades ranging from 3 to 8 World reserves of PGM are estimated to total more than 100 Gold from this source is estimated to be ∼5 Minerals in the Merensky reef associated with the PGMs are Pt–Fe alloys [Pt The orebodies are milled and concentrated by froth flotation. Yields generally range from 60% for oxidized and high-chrome UG2 reef to in excess of 90% for well-mineralized Merensky reef. The PGM content of this flotation concentrate varies between 100 and 1000 Matte is composed of sulfides of Ni, Cu, Fe, and PGM, and at typical hearth operating temperature of 1200 The primary producers have developed two processes for the subsequent treatments of the converter matte. Amplats uses the slow-cooled converter matte process, where matte is cast into thermally insulated molds to facilitate a slow rate of cooling, allowing the Ni–Cu sulfide phases to form distinct crystal habitats. Iron as an impurity is forced into the interstitial spaces between the Ni and Cu sulfide crystallites and concurrently concentrates the contained PGMs. The iron alloy produced this way is virtually free of metalloids such as arsenic, selenium, and tellurium. Crushing and milling liberate the iron–PGM phase and they are separated magnetically from the bulk of the matte. The efficiency of PGM deportment to the iron phase is as high as 97%. The iron alloy is leached to yield a final concentrate for input to the precious-metal refinery (PMR). Impala and Lonmin practice a more traditional matte water-granulation process, as does Stillwater Mining Company (Montana, USA). This leads to a longer circuit to liberate the PGM contained and a poorer selectivity against metalloid elements. Granulated matte is first leached with sulfuric acid in a countercurrent circuit for nickel extraction, followed by copper removal via a series of autoclaves using high temperature and high oxygen pressure. The finely divided leach residues are inputted to the PMR as final concentrates. The major disadvantage of this process concerns the metalloid elements that tend to concentrate with the PGMs, requiring further unit operations. Typical final concentrate feed assay to PMR is given in The three major producers have developed linear extraction circuits using crushing, flotation, smelting, converting, and leaching to effect base metal/PGM separations. The typical process flow-circuits are detailed in The amount of gold that is recycled in the world is substantial and was estimated to be 150 Recycling precious metals is an extremely competitive business. The first priority is driven by the need to reach agreement with the customer on expectations of metal content, so preparation for sampling is an important part of the process. Shipments are accurately weighed and homogenized; this may include burning, shredding, melting, and grinding to obtain a blend that can be accurately sampled. It is not uncommon for a client representative to be present at this step. Once representative samples are obtained, it is not unusual for the sample to be assayed by more than one accredited laboratory to determine the metal content for monetary settlement. Next is the output of metal in high yield and low cost in an environmentally sound and acceptable way. Refining alloys of greater than 30% gold content are well suited to the Miller process provided that the feed is free of PGMs. Alloys of this type are high-grade jewelry scrap, typically karat gold alloys and fillings. The impurities are in the main silver, nickel, and copper. The Miller process is based on the fact that gold does not form stable chlorides above 400 The process involves melting the alloy and sparging chlorine gas into the melt with a quartz pipe. The first impurities to react are iron, zinc, and lead, followed by copper and silver. The base metals and silver chlorides, being less dense, form a slag that can be skimmed off, and the end point is observed when a purple haze forms above the melt. The process is very effective in routinely producing gold purities in excess of 99.95%. This process is economical from the point of view that it is inexpensive to operate and is fast and, with experience, very little gold deports to the slag, resulting in low metal inventory or lockup. Alloys containing gold, silver, PGMs, and other metals are usually first processed using the Miller process to remove base metals and cast into anodes. Gold–PGM alloys are processed using the Wohlwill electrolytic refining process, also known as the gold cell. The Wohlwill cell uses impure gold alloy as anodes and deposits pure gold at the cathode. The electrolyte is made up as HCl and 100 The disadvantages of the gold-cell method are the gold inventory required for the electrolyte, the long processing time to produce the anode slime, and the subsequent time spent to refine the PGMs from the anode slime. A further disadvantage is the buildup of impurities in the electrolyte; this requires purging or complete change-out of electrolyte, with associated higher recovery costs. Au–Cu alloys containing base metals can be processed in oxidized sulfate medium, as shown by the generalized flowsheet in Anode slimes high in copper can be roasted followed by sulfuric acid leaching for copper removal. A further established process is the recovery of gold and PGMs from electronic scrap. These materials are usually derived from shredding and grinding electronic components and boards followed by incineration. The ash is induction melted and deslagged and cast into anodes. These types of alloys are extremely variable in composition; they are largely composed of copper and small amounts of gold, silver, palladium, platinum, and sometimes ruthenium. The balance is composed of the less desirable metals like lead, tin, bismuth, iron, and aluminum. The anodes are processed electrolytically using sulfuric acid as the electrolyte. Copper is recovered at the cathode, and the insoluble gold and PGMs are recovered as anode slime. Low surface-area alloys such as grains are usually processed using Lower-grade sweeps contain just about any combination of metals, metal oxides, and salts. Typically, materials of less than 2–5% PGM are considered too low for hydrometallurgical leaching due to poor dissolution efficiency and high cost. Materials of this type are concentrated and separated from base metals via various smelting routes. Alloys produced are processed to further remove base metals, and final concentrates are dissolved and processed via hydrometallurgical circuits to recover gold and precious metals. Perhaps lead collection is the most well-known smelting process. A feature of this process is the relatively low temperature that is required to perform this pyrometallurgical unit operation. A limited variety of feeds can be processed via this method due to the requirement of a low-melting flux in the range 1100–1300 Lead oxide [litharge, PbO] is used with carbon as reducing agent to form the collector metal in the form of finely divided lead particles. As the particles collide and grow, the influence of gravity causes the particles to drop through the molten slag and efficiently scavenge gold, silver, and PGMs. The efficiency of the collection is promoted by using an excess of lead. Silver is inevitably present and is often added to facilitate the melting and collection process by lowering the eutectic of the alloy formed. Smelting temperatures are in the range 1100–1300 The formation of intermetallic compounds such as AuPb Lead smelting is a versatile process; in the simplest form, it is used for the assaying of gold bullion. The process can be modified to process complex feeds by adjusting the slag chemistry; iron can be removed by adding silica to form an iron–silicate slag phase such as fayalite [Fe A number of process routes have been developed to recover the gold, silver, and PGMs from the lead phase. Cupel furnaces and, more recently, top-blown rotary converters have been used to oxidize the lead into lead oxide (PbO). The volatile lead oxide is recovered for recycling by cooling the fume and filtering the stream though high-efficiency bag-house filters. The alloy, now deficient in lead, is called doré. The alloy is grained and leached with nitric acid to dissolve silver and base metals. The residue is composed of insoluble gold and PGMs as a finely divided sponge. The sponge is processed via conventional hydrometallurgical circuits. Lead alloys can also be treated using the Parkes process to recover the gold, silver, and precious metals ( The availability of large volumes of catalytic converters from automobiles (autocats) has led to the development of smelting technologies based on iron and copper collection ( The smelter is a 2.5-MVA submerged carbon arc with a circular three-electrode (AC) and is operated as a slag-resistance furnace. The power density of this specialized furnace is relatively high at 320 The off-gas stream is passed through a thermal oxidizer to oxidize CO to CO A rather large variety of materials are available for smelting and includes refinery residues generated from internal hydrometallurgical refining circuits; autocatalysts (also termed Autocat manufacture generates a considerable volume of waste materials with small but significant PGM contents. These ceramic substrates are high melting-point aluminosilicates, namely, cordierite [Mg Spent catalysts are refractory materials with a large spread of compositions ranging from alumina, aluminosilicates, zeolites, and silicates to silicon carbides. Metal content ranges from 0.1% to 5% PGMs, and compositions range from single PGMs (Pt on Al The more traditional sweeps are also added to the smelting circuit and include jewelers' sweeps that are typically less than 0.1% gold as well as polishing rouge, which are mixtures of refractory abrasive materials such as iron oxides, corundum [Al The collection mechanism in essence uses the carbothermic reaction between hematite and carbon to form finely dispersed iron particles that act as the collector. Smelting conditions are considered to be oxidizing, where most of the iron is deported to the slag as FeO, but some of the iron oxide is reduced to metal, forming a dense, finely dispersed metallic phase. The finely dispersed iron collector rains through the molten slag, colliding with gold and PGMs, and once a critical particle size is reached gravitational forces cause the particles to settle on the hearth. The main carbothermic reactions are summarized as follows: Iron oxide is not the only source of collector metal. At temperatures of 1600 The distribution coefficients  Hydrometallurgical techniques have the potential of low-capital costs and automation. More recently, extensive use of solvent extraction and resin technologies has been successfully applied for the selective extraction and concentration of PGMs. PGM refineries input concentrates and alloys that are inevitably mixtures of PGMs and base metals with gold and silver as minor constituents of the complex mix. The presence of other metals such as selenium, tellurium, and arsenic often detract from the use of solvent extraction due to the coextraction and formation of interface cruds. Hence, great efforts are taken to remove these deleterious elements early in the process. Atmospheric dissolution and pressure dissolution with hydrochloric acid–chlorine is usually the method of choice. The dissolution process is greatly facilitated by the extremely fine leach residues obtained from high-pressure autoclave leaching of matte and doré leach residues containing PGMs. Bulk alloys can be atomized to increase surface areas, facilitating the dissolution process. Once in solution as the tetrachloroauric complex, a number of commercial processes are used to isolate gold from PGMs and base metals. Reduction of gold to the metal is used for batch processes, and solvent extraction is often used for continuous processes. Resin technology has been used for large-scale gold adsorption, and a number of solvent-impregnated resins have been investigated ( The classic process involving reduction of gold to metal from chloride solution is a simple and effective technique that is well suited to batch operation. A large number of reagents have been used, namely hydrazine, SO Hydrazine as the hydrochloride is an effective reducing agent for gold in the presence of significant concentrations of metalloids such as selenium and tellurium. Hydrazine is slowly added to the boiling solution and the solution potential is taken to 400 The reaction is given by: The main reaction product is nitrogen gas. However, side reactions take place and result in the formation of ammonium ions. This leads to the contamination of the gold by the precipitation of ammonium salts of platinum and palladium. A further problem is the coprecipitation of selenium and tellurium, depending on the solution conditions. A useful method for the reduction of gold chloride to metal makes use of SO The use of SO Perhaps oxalic acid is the most selective reducing agent for the reduction of tetrachloroauric acid from solution. Oxalate is a mild but sufficiently strong reducing agent for the reduction of gold in the presence of large amounts of PGMs in solution. The reaction is given by: The reduction of the tetrachloroauric acid from solution using the Fe(II)/Fe(III) couple is an especially selective process against PGM. The slow addition of a concentrated solution of Fe(II) sulfate to a warm solution precipitates a fine gold powder that is usually better than 99.95% gold sponge. The reaction is given by: Acceptable gold purity is obtained with difficulty on the first pass using reductive methods. Depending on the impurities present, the impure gold is routinely reworked, often a number of times, to achieve purity. The Miller process can be used when PGMs are minor contaminants. Either the oxalate reduction process or the ferrous salts reduction process can be used after redissolution of the gold. Several commercial processes exist for the selective extraction of chloro-complexes of PGMs and gold from aqueous solution ( Amines have been extensively investigated as ion-exchange reagents, both in solvent exchange and in stationary-phase applications. In general, the strength of the interaction of amines with anions is given by the following sequence: The ion-exchange process is summarized in the reaction shown below ( The problem with amine solvents is with the strength of the ion pair formed. Solvents based on quaternary-ammonium salts form very strong ion pairs and, once formed, are essentially irreversible. The extraction of tetrachloroauric anion with octadecyldimethylbenzylammonium chloride results in an extremely strong interaction with a reported distribution coefficient Strong base resins have not found much commercial application in PGM circuits other than as metal scavengers from dilute streams. Readily available commercial quaternary ammonium ion-exchange resins are used to recover small amounts of PGMs and gold from dilute solution. In practice, adsorbed metal is recovered by burning the resin. Ternary, secondary, and primary amines have found commercial application in PGM extraction circuits ( Solvent-extraction circuits for primary producers of PGMs are complex due to the multicomponent metal ions present, as illustrated by the flow of material shown in Secondary producers usually have less complex mixtures that include platinum, palladium, rhodium, and minor amounts of base metals. Separation circuits typically include coextraction of the anions Selective solvent extraction of the tetrachloroauric anion is achieved when less basic groups than amines are used to form the ion pair. Solvents based on oxygenated organic groups such as polyethers, ketones, and alcohols are weakly basic, and these moieties interact weakly with the tetrachloroauric acid. Further, no appreciable interaction of the weak oxygen-base groups with anions with double and triple negative charges takes place, according to the following series, reflecting charge on the anion and the charge-to-size ratio: The mechanism of extraction first involves the formation of a protonated ion pair between the organic and hydrochloric acid, followed by ion exchange of the tetrachloroauric anion for chloride, as shown in the following reactions ( The mechanism of the extraction process has been investigated in detail ( Dibutyl carbitol or, more correctly, diethylene glycol dibutyl ether (also known as butex and butyl diglyme) was the first gold-selective solvent-extraction system to be commercialized, by Vale Inco at the Acton Refinery ( The extraction of tetrachloroaurate anion in acid medium with dibutyl carbitol is extremely fast and can be performed using batch extraction or mixer-settlers. The distribution coefficient for gold extraction into the organic phase is large and is of the order of  The selectivity of dibutyl carbitol against PGMs and most base metals is very good, the exceptions being iron and, to a lesser extent, platinum. Iron, in the form of the tetrahedral tetrachloroferrate anion The thermodynamics of extraction of Impurities are managed with dilute acid back-stripping of the loaded solvent. The process requires multiple contacts, leading to small but significant gold and solvent losses. Stripping is achieved using oxalic acid and heating to 50 The reduction is given by The main drawback of this process is the water solubility of the organic, leading to solvent losses to the acid raffinate, scrub liquors, and stripping stage. A more recent commercial example of gold solvent extraction is MIBK (methyl isobutyl ketone), which is used by Amplats at the SAREF facility ( Extraction kinetics are fast and virtually instantaneous. The distribution coefficient for tetrachloroaurate is reasonably high at Stripping is conducted with reducing agents such as oxalic acid, with gentle heating. Gold particles are recovered by filtration and purity after calcination is usually 99.95%. MIBK is relatively insoluble in water and mild acid, and only 0.3% of the solvent is lost per cycle. Selective solvent extraction of tetrachloroauric acid from complex PGM solutions using 2-ethyl hexanol (2-ethyl-1-hexanol) offers distinct advantages over the solvents described above ( Stripping can be achieved using the oxalic acid reduction method to yield gold sponge that requires calcination to remove adsorbed solvent. Sponge purity is in the 99.99% range. Stripping the solvent of gold is also possible using a dilute carbonate solution to neutralize the proton, causing abstraction of the tetrachloroauric anion into the aqueous phase. This process (see The tetrachloroauric anion is relatively stable toward hydrolysis, provided that the strip solution is reacidified with hydrochloric acid without too much delay. Selective adsorption of tetrachloroaurate anion in acid solution by the resin Amberlite XAD-7 has been investigated ( Stripping is conducted with a weak base to yield a solution of tetrachloroauric that is stabilized with hydrochloric acid. Purity is not readily achieved in practice. However, the technique is useful in the separation and polishing of gold from PGM streams. Further, the process of adsorption, washing, and elution is relatively simple to automate and can be operated in a semibatch manner.  Processes for the direct hydrometallurgical treatment of concentrates for recovery of PGMs, gold, and base metals have been developed but have not yet been applied commercially. This approach would avoid the need for conventional smelting, converting, and base-metal refining prior to refining of PGMs and gold. The Platsol™ process was originally developed in Canada for the treatment of flotation sulfide concentrate for Polymet Mining Company in Minnesota and subsequently tested on other PGM concentrates. This process involved codissolution of base metals (copper and nickel), gold, and PGMs via addition of chloride to the autoclave. Grinding the ore with ceramic rather than iron balls was required to prevent cementation of gold chloride ( The Kell process comprises recovery of base metals by sulfuric acid pressure leaching, and a heat treatment may be applied to convert precious metal–bearing minerals into forms that are soluble in a subsequent chlorination leach, at 95–99% extraction efficiencies for the precious and base metals. The process has been patented ( The igneous techniques developed for the recovery of gold from primary and secondary sources mirror the state of the art in the field of extractive metallurgy. In some respects, extraction techniques have in essence not changed for centuries, an example being fire assay practice. On the other hand, more advanced extractive techniques have only recently been developed, an example being selective solvent extraction. Undoubtedly, economic considerations will continue to drive the ongoing discovery and development of metallurgical techniques and processes to perform cheaper and faster and, hopefully, drive the industry toward more sound environmental practices.