This study aimed to assess the reliability of the Robinson classification for displaced comminuted midshaft fractures. A total of 102 surgeons and 52 radiologists classified 15 displaced comminuted midshaft clavicular fractures on anteroposterior (AP) and 30-degree caudocephalad radiographs twice. For both surgeons and radiologists, inter-observer and intra-observer agreement significantly improved after showing the 30-degree caudocephalad view in addition to the AP view. Radiologists had significantly higher inter- and intra-observer agreement than surgeons after judging both radiographs (κmultirater of 0.81 vs. 0.56; κintra-observer of 0.73 vs. 0.44). We advise to use two-plane radiography and to routinely incorporate the Robinson classification in the radiology reports.Classification systems for fractures serve as a basis for treatment choice and outcome prediction. Classification systems for clavicular fractures have been developed by Allman Fifteen displaced and comminuted midshaft clavicular fractures of adult patients were selected randomly from the electronic hospital registry. These fractures had been classified according to the Robinson clavicle fracture classification ( The 30 radiographs of the 15 displaced and comminuted midshaft clavicular fractures were presented in an online survey developed with LimeSurvey 1.91 The online survey was performed in the Netherlands and Belgium among the clinical members of the Dutch Trauma Society, members of the Dutch Society of Radiology, and members of the muscular and skeletal imaging division of the Royal Belgian Society of Radiology in August 2011. Members of these societies with an active e-mail address were invited to participate in the survey. A reminder e-mail was sent if the respondent had not filled out the survey. The inter-observer agreement on the Robinson classification for the AP radiographs and 30-degree caudocephalad radiographs was calculated using the free-marginal multirater kappa (κ The intra-observer agreement was calculated using Cohen’s kappa (κ Of the 242 invited members of the Dutch Trauma Society, 112 filled out the first survey (response rate, 46.3%), of which 102 surveys were complete. Those 102 surgeons received the second survey after 8 weeks, of which 66 were returned (response rate, 64.7%). Of the second survey, nine were incomplete and therefore excluded, leaving 57 surveys for analysis ( The κ The overall intra-observer agreement was fair to moderate for the combined respondent groups on classification of the AP and 30-degree radiographs, respectively (κ In this study, we found that the inter-observer and intra-observer agreement on the Robinson classification of displaced and comminuted midshaft clavicular fractures was moderate. Additional 30-degree caudocephalad radiographs improved both the inter-observer and intra-observer agreements. Radiologists were found to classify these fractures more reliably than surgeons. Their intra-observer and inter-observer agreement was substantial after viewing the fractures on two-plane radiography. Robinson validated his classification system in a group of five orthopedic surgeons who reviewed 20 series of lateral, midshaft, and medial clavicular fractures In our survey, the fractures were first classified based on an AP radiograph. Subsequently, additional insight into the fracture characteristics was provided on a 30-degree radiograph. We therefore expected that observers would classify the fractures on the 30-degree radiograph more reliably. This assumption was confirmed for the intra-observer and inter-observer agreement of both the surgeons and specialized musculoskeletal radiologists in our study. The decision whether or not to operate midshaft clavicular fractures may depend on the physical abilities and wishes of the patient; nevertheless, it is also based on the amount of shortening, displacement, and comminution as judged on the radiograph. Displacement and comminution of the clavicle are the most important factors for determining the fracture type according to the Robinson classification. In the study of Jones et al. The Robinson classification has been stated to provide the most reliable prognostic information compared to the other classification methods for midshaft clavicular fractures The relatively low response rates (46% for the first survey and 65% for the second survey among the responders to the first survey) pose a limitation to this study. All participating respondents have judged radiographs of clavicular fractures before because of their interest in trauma surgery or musculoskeletal radiology. The results of this study are therefore generalizable for those who treat midshaft clavicular fractures on daily basis. Response rates were sufficient to calculate inter- and intra-observer agreements. In conclusion, midshaft clavicular fractures should be classified according to the Robinson classification on two-plane radiography to optimize treatment decisions. Furthermore, we advise to include the Robinson classification in the radiology reports on midshaft clavicular fractures to improve the fracture classification of displaced comminuted fractures.