Cylindrical cyclone media separators using a suspended calcite separation media simulating industrial scale operations are demonstrated to effectively separate a wide variety of forms and a greater range of particle sizes of plastics by density than presently recycled. Purities of plastic products and recoveries obtained from mixed plastic wastes are comparable to those reported for established separations. Products of ≈100% purity with recoveries of >99% were obtained for high density fractions and >98% purities and recoveries for the low density fractions. Cyclonic centrifugal forces and/or the fine particle size of the separation media appear to minimize hydroscopic and particle shape effects.
                  A mathematical model is proposed for defining plastic waste feed rates and treatable particle size ranges for the LARCODEMS media separator.
                  Waste plastic separations yielded Ecart probable (Ep) values ⩽0.024 for a water only separation media. The Ep for 1.1gcm−3 separation medias was <0.032 with minimal to no variation in values for 1–8mm particle sizes. Variation in the quality of separations is shown to be minimal with <72μm, <45μm and <2μm media particle sizes. Media density offset created varied according to particle size.The high volume of post consumer and manufacturing plastic wastes constitutes a major and continually increasing problem for landfill management. The disposal of these materials represents a significant loss of a potentially valuable, reusable material estimated by Except for manual sorting, virtually all recycling of plastic wastes is based on physical operations that utilize density separations as a production, or as a pre-concentration phase so as to create a suitable feed stock for subsequent physical separation methods such as that of Argonne ( The separating medias used consist of water or solutions of water with solvents (typically alcohol) or Ca(NO The effectiveness and range of particle sizes treatable for such separations are determined by parameters such as minimum particle size, shape and surface texture; hydroscopic character of the plastic; media viscosity and flow rate; and operating costs. Industrial density separation of plastic wastes appears to tend towards treatment of coarser particles typically 6.4–9.5 The greater the proximity in density of plastics to be separated, the slower the rate of separation obtained. Furthermore, the thinner or smaller the particles treated, the greater their ratio of surface area to mass and the greater their potential susceptibility to hydroscopic effects as well as resistance to displacement in the separation media, thus inhibiting the settling of dense particles present. Studies using lignosulfonates as a surfactants by Cyclone type media density separation processes established in the coal processing industry may constitute a means of optimizing such separations. This technology may be applicable since the hydroscopic character and particle sizes and shapes of coal ore are relatively similar to plastic particles from shredder wastes. The larger range of treatable particle sizes and high capacity of this technology is due to the centrifugal forces within the separation media accelerating the rate of separation of particles in the media and applying sufficient force to overcome hydroscopic effects that prevent them from settling. This type process of could significantly enhance the amounts of plastics recovered while reducing operational costs typically ∼0.0241 Although to date no cyclone media density separation process appears to be used for plastics recycling, published results of investigations of this technology have been reported by: The present work was conducted with to demonstrate the potential application of cyclone media separation technology. An effective demonstration of cyclone media density separation requires that the optimum operating conditions be defined. There are a considerable number of parameters required to define these operating conditions including: media flow rate, pressure and viscosity; type of media used; size and design of product exit ports (vortex finder and apex in the case of the cylindroconical type); separation cylinder inclination; throughput of plastics to be processed; and characteristics (size and hydroscopic properties) of the plastic particles that can be treated collectively. Of these, the volume or throughput and maximum particle size treatable is a primarily a function of the diameter of the cylindrical section of the cyclone used. Of the other operating parameters those of the feed material to be processed and the type of media used may be the most critical. As such, investigated are some of the compounds established in the mineral processing industry as affecting particle surface hydroscopic characteristics and which would not permanently alter a plastics physical property. Furthermore, initial tests were conducted to identify an optimum particle size of a suspension of none contaminating, calcium carbonate particles as potential separating media. The suspended media particle subjected to the cyclones centrifugal force creates a partial settling of these particles during the separation process resulting in an offset in media densities within the separation cylinder as demonstrated by the differences in media densities exiting with the separated fractions. The greater the suspended particle size the greater the density offset created and the greater the potential misclassification of particles with densities approximating the initial media density value. Of the various types of media separation cyclones, the cylindrical type was selected for this study due to it not requiring the particles to be treated passing through the pumping circuit and it producing a lower media density offset due to the lower fluid pressures used. Of this type of separator, the LARCODEMS was selected as the manufacturers specifications and reported industrial operations ( Originally designed for treating coal, but also shown to be suitable for treating iron ore, the LARCODEMS is presently manufactured in six versions with recommended processing capacities and maximum particle sizes varying in proportion with the devices diameter. All have an excessive capacity for laboratory scale tests, with the smallest (300 The device consists of a cylindrical separating chamber ( Operational variations of this device at a given vessel size include separating media density, media pressure feed, media feed nozzle size, type of product exit ports and size of exit ports. Industrial operation of this device usually limits the maximum treatable particle size to 40% of the diameter of the product exit ports. The laboratory model is composed of polymethyl methacrylate and is equipped with a cylindrical separating chamber or vessel with an internal diameter of 14 Extrapolating this equation to the laboratory model diameter indicates a theoretical maximum particle size of 4.025 The most realistic fit (Eq. Extrapolating this equation to the laboratory model diameter indicates a theoretical maximum plastics capacity of 83 Selection of the appropriate material to create a separating media is a critical factor affecting the cost and effectiveness of industrial media separations. The density difference between underflow and overflow media produced with suspended particles in a given cyclone increases with media flow velocity as well as particle size and density of the solid particles used. Operators of industrial operations minimize the density differences of the media flows to reduce misclassification of materials with densities approximating that of the media density. In addition to a water only media, three types of calcium carbonate separation media were used for these tests. Crushed limestone and PCC were selected as materials for creating the media due to their low abrasiveness, being non-toxic and of low cost. A separating media with a low abrasiveness was required since the laboratory models separation cylinder is composed of PMMA and would be easily abraded by conventional magnetite or ferrosilicon based separating medias. The crushed limestone has a density of 2.663 The use of calcium carbonate as a potential separation media material was considered an important aspect in its selection for simulating an industrial density separation. The common use of crushed limestone and PCC as fillers in plastics makes its use more advantageous than other potential low cost, relatively none abrasive compounds such as barium or strontium sulphate since any residual particles not removed by product washing would constitute an insignificant contamination of plastics produced. It is emphasized that separations with medias based on materials with a density of crushed limestone at densities higher than 1.5 A suite of different types of coloured plastics of known compositions (PU, PP, PE, HDPE, PS, ABS, PMMA, PVC and PBT) was prepared from urban, industrial and scrap yard refuse. Virgin material was also selected when a suitable scrap sample could not be obtained. The samples were washed, dried, their densities determined, and then fragmented using a variable speed impact crusher to produce fragments with a range of particle sizes from 1.0 to 10 Test samples of 0.35–1.1 Variations in operational design of the LARCODEMS were not evaluated. Unlike the industrial versions, the feed and exit ports of the laboratory version cannot be modified. Tests were conducted with a constant media flow rate of 72 The samples to be processed were fed either dry or moist and the separated fractions collected on screens below the exit ports. The product fractions of tests with low and high density separating media were washed to remove any media material adhering to the fragments. Both product fractions were dried, sieved into the corresponding particle size fractions. Each sized product fraction was manually sorted by colour and weighed (±0.0001 Due to the variety of possible media densities and the labour intensive nature of manually sorting the product fractions produced, tests were limited to separation medias with densities of 1.0 and 1.1 Initial tests were conducted with water as the separation media. The fragments of test material consisted of: 3.6% PP; 5.2% LDPE; 24.8% HDPE; 16.6% PS; 8.2% ABS; 34.7% PMMA and 3.9% PBT. A wide range of particle sizes from 1 to 8 Although the LARCODEMS was designed to process coal where the large proportion of the product is of low density, this design is reported to have been tested successfully with 60% reporting with the dense fraction ( It was anticipated that the recovery of PS with densities (1.051 and 1.057) approximating that of the separating media and its plate like form as indicated by the high aspect ratio (up to 9.1) and to a lesser extent finer particles of PMMA could be due to hydroscopic effects preventing the settling of these particles into the dense product flow path. Considerable research has been conducted into the use of depressants and surface modifying agents to modify the hydroscopic character of plastics for the concentration of specific plastics by skin flotation Unlike the industrial processes such as those described by To determine if the recovery of dense particles in the light fraction corresponded to hydroscopic effects or to separation inefficiencies, four sets of samples were prepared with yet a higher dense fraction (85%). The materials consisted of PP (15.1%), PS (19.0%), PMMA (16.0%), ABS (25.8%), PBT (7.4%) and PVC (16.6%). Reprocessed the low density fraction, a common practice in mineral processing to improve product grades, was also conducted. To determine if there are indications that the hydroscopic character of plastics could be reduced without inducing semi-permanent or permanent surface modifications associated with surfactants such as lignosulfonates used by Results for all four sets of samples after a single processing ( It was also observed that purities obtained decline significantly in the finer particle sizes of the low density fraction. The Ep of 0.024 is identical to that of the overall results of the previous test. The slightly overall lower quality separations obtained compared to the previous test is interpreted to be a result of the higher proportion (85%) of fragments corresponding to the dense fraction. A single reprocessing of the low density fractions resulted in all having product purities >99.3% with contaminants tending to occur in the finer fractions. A second reprocessing of the low density products all had purities >99.7% with the samples previously soaked in water and sodium hydroxide had 100% purities. The increase in purities by reprocessing the separation products indicates that the hydroscopic character of the plastic particles did not affect the quality of the separations obtained but that the high percentage of dense material to be separated did. Recoveries of low density materials would not be adversely affected by an industrial operation using a reprocessing since the dense fractions from the reprocessing stages could be re-circulated to the primary processing stage to create a closed circuit with no loss in recovery. Tests were conducted with a separation media density of 1.10 The results ( The calculated Ep for the separation cylinders ranged from 0.050 for the 12 The densities of the media created by the centrifugal forces in the 42 Despite the analytical margins of measurement error, analysis to identify the probable limitations in separations due to increased density offsets created with increased <72 Analysis of the media density offset ( To assess the extent to which the media density offset could be minimized by reducing the media grain size used, the dense product media grain size distribution ( Tests were conducted using a separation media with a density of 1.1 The qualities of separations obtained with this media were of poorer quality than those of previous tests due to the extremely fine particle size increasing the media viscosity. The separations ( Separation tests were conducted with a media containing <45 The results ( To simulate a reprocessing or cleaner circuit operating in closed circuit to improve product grades, the low density products of all four samples were reprocessed under the same operating conditions. A single reprocessing pass results for all four sample sets yielded low and high density product purities >99% and most 100%. In contrast to the results obtained with the <72 The feed separating media density offset was 0.019 Product purities and recoveries obtained from all the separation tests are similar or better than those reported in the literature. Compared to the presently used static type separators, and based on the operational characteristics of industrial media cyclone separators, a significant increase in the range of particles processed and volumes of material treated can be effectively accomplished with cyclone type media separators. These results also demonstrated that low cost materials such as crushed limestone or magnetite can be used in separation medias as a substitute for saline medias, thus avoiding the potential environmental hazards of such solutions. Unlike the results reported by The improvement in product purities obtained by reprocessing density separated plastics suggests that the accelerated settling forces in cyclone type media separators is sufficient to negate any hydroscopic effects of the plastics within the particle size ranges tested. Alternatively, this could also be attributed to the exposure of the plastic fragments to ultrafine particles (23.4% <10 Despite the lack of adequate intermediate density plastics to better define the limitations of this technology, the Ep values obtained <0.034 for the <2 It is emphasized that a number of the operational parameters of cylinder cyclone separators for the separation of plastics has not been investigated here. Testing of other industrial scale operational parameters such as: variation in feed rate; media flow rates; the use of ultrafine particles to suppress hydroscopic effects; product exit port configurations; the extent to which the separation vessel can be extended, augmenting the interface zone between the medias carrying low and high density products; and possibly the use of different wetting reagents in the separation media are amongst these. All separation processes have a certain degree of imperfection that results in misclassification of particles. Reprocessing to pre-concentrate or clean fractions is a common procedure in the mineral processing sector. Similar processing of plastic wastes is recommended in order that recoveries are maximized and/or greater product purities achieved that could have values comparable with that of virgin plastics. The use of upgrading and rewashing or scavenging cycles in the mineral sector is economically viable due to the scale of operation. Similarly reprocessing of plastic wastes to produce high quality products may not be a practical unless an adequate scale of operation is attained. The results obtained are considered a good indication of the potential application of cylindrical cyclones such as the LARCODEMS for separation of plastics by density. The lack of a mathematical model defining fluid paths and particle movement in these devises for different particle shapes and densities requires the use of trial and error methods to determine the optimum operating conditions and the limitations of the process. A preliminary mathematical model defining plastics processing feed rates and treatable particle size ranges for the LARCODEMS is proposed based on the manufacturers’ specifications for treating coal. Test results show that this model is imprecise as coarser material than that defined by the proposed model can be effectively processed. Plastics from 1.25 to 6.3 Variation in the Ep values for 1.1 Multi-density separations with cyclone type media separators such as the LARCODEMS, will be the most effective method when based on separations with progressive reductions or increments in density, depending upon whether a cylindroconical or cylindrical type is used. In the case of the LARCODEMS, the optimum treatment of mixed plastics wastes requiring separations a several densities would be a sequential reduction in density to optimize purity and recovery based on the direct recovery of the dense fraction as a final product with rewashing of the low density fraction. Such separations with reprocessing of materials in closed circuit should achieve purities of 100% with ≫95% recovery.