Interaction between Paenibacillus polymyxa and iron ore minerals such as hematite, corundum, calcite, quartz and kaolinite brought about significant surface chemical changes on all the minerals. Quartz and kaolinite were rendered more hydrophobic, while the other three minerals became more hydrophilic after bacterial interaction. Predominance of bacterial polysaccharides on interacted hematite, corundum and calcite and of proteins on quartz and kaolinite was responsible for the surface chemical changes. The bacterial strains could be preadapted to different mineral substrates. Corundum-adapted strains were seen to secrete mineral-specific proteins which could be used to separate alumina from iron ores. The utility of bioprocessing in the beneficiation of iron ores for removal of silica and alumina is demonstrated. Although the use of different microorganisms in ore leaching is well established, biological methods of mineral beneficiation are not even sufficiently understood. The utility of It is essential to understand the mechanisms and resulting consequences of microbe–mineral interactions before the utility of the microorganism in the processing of minerals could be established. Since mineral beneficiation processes such as flotation and flocculation depend on the surface chemical properties of the minerals, any changes in the surface chemistry brought about by biotreatment is of significance. In this paper, the role of bioreagents secreted by A pure strain of In some tests, the bacterial strain was adapted to corundum by repeated subculturing upto 6 months in the Bromfield medium in the presence of 5% (w/v) mineral. These adapted strains were used in some beneficiation tests and their performance compared with unadapted strains. A special medium containing 1% peptone, 1% starch, 0.005% neutral red dye and 2% agar was used for enrichment of bacterial cultures and purification of the strain. Isolated pure colonies were picked up and repropagated in the same medium, the process being repeated until pure strains were obtained and checked. Mineral adhered organisms were desorbed by agitation and centrifugation and counted by direct plating on solid medium. The bacterial growth pattern was studied by the dilution plate technique through enumeration of colony forming units. The viable cell counts were cross-checked microscopically. The cell counts by both these methods were found to be within ±10%. A batch culture after growth in the Bromfield medium was centrifuged at 31,000× Hand-picked pure mineral samples of hematite, corundum, calcite, kaolinite and quartz used in this study were obtained from Alminrock Indscer Fabriks, Bangalore, India. The samples were subjected to dry grinding in a porcelain mill. The ground sample was then dry screened and the <38 μm size fraction was used in adsorption, dissolution, flocculation and electrokinetic studies. A (75–110 μm) size fraction of the minerals was used in flotation tests. In some tests, two types of iron ore samples having the chemical composition shown in Electrophoretic measurements were made using Zeta-meter 3.0. Mineral samples before and after interaction with bacterial metabolite, bioproteins and exopolysaccharides were dispersed in 10 Adsorption of bacterial proteins and exopolysaccharides onto different minerals was estimated at different pH values and concentrations. A 10 One gram of the mineral sample was used for the flotation of the minerals to study the influence of bacterial pretreatment. The mineral sample was taken in 200 ml of deionised double distilled water and the pH was adjusted to the desired value (7–9). The conditioning period was 5 min and the flotation was carried out for 5 min under a nitrogen flow rate of 40 ml/min using a Hallimond tube. Flotation tests using actual iron ore samples were carried out using a Leaf and Knoll cell To study the settling rates of the different minerals, 5 g of each sample were dispersed in 100 ml of deionised double distilled water in a graduated cylinder. The weight settled as a function of time and pH was monitored in the presence and absence of the bacteria or metabolite. For selective flocculation studies, artificial binary and ternary mixtures of the minerals in equal proportions were placed in a 100-ml graduated cylinder and diluted with make-up water to near the 100 ml mark so that the subsequent addition of bioreagents would give a total pulp volume of 100 ml. At this point, the pH of the pulp was adjusted either with sodium hydroxide or nitric acid which was followed by the addition of reagents in three equal portions, mixing being performed between each addition by gently inverting the cylinder three times between each addition. After the final addition, the cylinder was inverted five times and set down. The settling of the mineral particles in the mixture began immediately. After 1 min, the mud line had reached the bottom. A total of 90 ml of the supernatant was decanted out. Another 90 ml of water, whose pH had been preadjusted to the same value, was added to the remaining solids. The cylinder was inverted five times, set down, and the settling and decantation procedure repeated. The desliming process was performed six times. The sink and float fractions were analyzed each time. Control experiments in the absence of bioreagents were also carried out under similar conditions for comparison purposes. Infrared absorption spectra were recorded on a Bruker Equinox-55 model Fourier Transform Infrared spectrophotometer using different minerals before and after interaction. The instrument was provided with a KBr beam splitter separator and DTGS as detector. The acquisition was through the transmission mode. After interaction with bioreagents, the mineral samples were thoroughly washed using deionized double distilled water and vacuum dried. The KBr pellet technique was used to record the spectra. The difference spectrum was obtained by subtracting the spectrum of unreacted minerals from that of interacted ones using a program available in the instrument. Microbe–mineral interactions result in significant surface chemical changes on mineral surfaces The influence of adsorption of bacterial cells on the electrokinetic behavior of the above five minerals has already been reported The bacterium possesses negatively charged groups (phosphate, carboxylate, etc.) on the outermost surface. The cell walls of Gram-positive bacteria are made up of many layers of murein and teichoic acids. The p FTIR spectra of the various mineral samples before and after interaction with bacterial metabolite, bacterial proteins and exopolysaccharides were also taken. Before bacterial interaction, quartz surfaces indicated the presence of silanol groups and vibrational spectra due to SiO bonds. Surface hydroxyl groups, hydrogen bonded OH as well as metal to oxygen stretching vibrations were observed on fresh untreated hematite, corundum, calcite and kaolinite samples. However, difference spectra obtained through subtraction of biotreated mineral from unreacted mineral yielded evidence of new surface species. Bands due to amide I (1650 cm The changes in surface chemical behaviour of the minerals after interaction with bacterial metabolites could then attributed to the above surface species. Positive deviations in measured zeta potentials for quartz and kaolinite Microflotation results on the various mineral samples before and after interaction with, metabolite as well as with the separated bacterial proteins and polysaccharides are illustrated in Also, proteins are predominantly adsorbed onto quartz and kaolinite, while hematite, calcite and corundum exhibited more affinity towards polysaccharide To establish further the positive role of proteins in enhancing the flotability of certain minerals such as quartz and kaolinite, additional flotation tests were performed in the presence of different concentrations of a standard representative protein, namely, bovine seum albumin and the results indicated that significant enhancements in the flotability of quartz and kaolinite could be readily obtained (90–100%). Interaction with proteins, on the other hand, did not significantly promote the flotability of calcite, corundum hematite. Adsorption densities of bacterial protein and polysaccharide onto different minerals as a function of time in the pH range 7–9 are illustrated in As evident from the above results, interaction with bacterial metabolite and bioproteins promoted the flotation and dispersion of quartz and kaolinite, while such biotreatment resulted in the depression of hematite and corundum. Starch, a natural hydrophilic carbohydrate polymer, is extensively used in mineral processing operations for depression of iron oxides It has also been reported The major mechanisms involved in such interactions are electrostatic, hydrogen-bonding and chemical. Results from adsorption and electrokinetic studies reveal the existence of electrostatic and chemical interaction. Significant shifts in the IEP of hematite, corundum, calcite and quartz after interaction with bacterial metabolites is indicative of chemisorption. FTIR spectroscopic data gave further evidence of chemical interaction as well as possibilities of hydrogen-bonding of metabolic products on different minerals. Sorption and interaction of bacteria with clays have been well reported Settling rates of various minerals corresponding to 1 min of interaction (<38 μm) at different pH values in the presence of bacterial metabolite, bioproteins and exopolysaccharides are illustrated in Results of selective flocculation tests carried out with mineral mixtures substantiate the above conclusion. Typical results of selective flocculation on 1:1 mineral mixtures are presented in Generation of bacterial proteins and exopolysaccharides was also found to be influenced by the nature of the mineral species present during bacterial growth as illustrated in It has been found not possible to separate alumina from hematite efficiently using the Bromfield-grown cells or their metabolites since bacterial interaction brings about similar surface-chemical changes on both of them. Tests with hematite–corundum mixtures have shown that both the minerals settled down faster in an aqueous medium after bacterial interaction without any selectivity The differences in bacterial protein and polysaccharide adsorption, nature of interaction products and the resulting alterations in the surface chemical behaviour of the minerals could be taken advantage of in the beneficiation of ores containing the various mineral constituents. The minerals studied in this work constitute a typical iron ore system. Removal of silica and alumina from iron ores is a major problem facing the iron and steel industries, the world over. Systematic studies carried out with hematite–corundum–quartz and hematite–kaolinite–quartz mixtures after interaction with adapted strains of The following major conclusions can be drawn from the present work. Interaction of metabolic products of