A new precipitation process is reported for the removal and recovery of gallium (III) from aqueous solutions using sodium di-(n-octyl) phosphinate. The complexes formed have low solubility in water and the ligand is easily regenerated, as previously reported for the precipitation of lead and zinc. The effects of different ligand-to-gallium mole ratios, pH and temperature are studied. Essentially complete removal of gallium was obtained at 22 °C using a ligand-to-gallium mole ratio of 3 and pH between 2 and 7.5. The effects of competing ions, such as SO4
                     2−, Cl−, Na+ and Ca2+, are documented. While there is a clear selectivity of gallium over Ca2+, the presence of Na+ cation and anions such as SO4
                     2− and Cl−, instead of NO3
                     −, decreases the efficiency of the process. Gallium is recovered from the insoluble complexes using diethyl ether or chloroform in contact with an aqueous solution at different values of pH. While gallium is solubilized in the aqueous phase, the ligand is extracted into the organic phase. The ligand is recovered by evaporating the organic solvent.Gallium is used primarily in the electronics industry under the form of gallium arsenide. The physical and electrical properties make gallium arsenide a unique semiconductor that has found applications in numerous integrated circuits. Its ability to emit light makes it also suitable for optoelectronic devices, which include light-emitting diodes (LEDs) ( Using the affinity of organophosphorus extractants for metals, The speciation of gallium is well documented ( In the present work, the removal of gallium from aqueous solutions by complexation with sodium di-( Based on the procedure described by An aqueous stock solution of the sodium di-( The experiments were carried out at 22±1 °C with analytical grade inorganic chemicals. An initial solution was prepared at a fixed pH° with a fixed amount of either gallium nitrate (Fisher Scientific, Montreal, QC), gallium sulfate (Aldrich Chemical, Montreal, QC) or gallium chloride (Aldrich Chemical, Montreal, QC). The pH measurements were performed with an accuTupH reference/pH electrode (Fisher Scientific, Montreal, QC) filled with saturated potassium chloride solution. An OAKTON pH/mV Benchtop Meter (Fisher Scientific, Montreal, QC) with a resolution of 0.1 mV and accuracy of ±0.2 mV was used to monitor pH measurements. The pH was adjusted using HNO To regenerate the ligand, the solid complexes were separated from the aqueous phase. The regeneration was performed at different pH using HNO The concentrations of the species are expressed in molarity (M) and/or mg/L. The data are also presented in terms of percent removal of metal, percent removal of ligand from the aqueous solution and the final pH versus each of the independent variables. The percent removal of gallium, The effect of pH on the removal of gallium from an aqueous solution without ligand and on the removal of the ligand from an aqueous solution without gallium was first investigated. The effect of the concentration of sodium on the removal of the ligand was confirmed by adding a 1.09 M solution of NaNO The removal of gallium by complexation with the ligand is shown in The effect of pH on the removal of gallium was investigated at a ligand-to-gallium mole ratio of 3 and an initial concentration of gallium of 0.36 mM (25 mg/L). The pH° of the initial solution containing the gallium was adjusted with HNO  While chloride and sulfate form complexes with gallium, as shown in reactions  The anions Cl The selectivity of the ligand for calcium and gallium was studied as a function of pH. The initial solution contained 1.13 mM (45 mg/L) of calcium nitrate and 0.36 mM (25 mg/L) of gallium nitrate representing a calcium-to-gallium mole ratio of 3.15. The pH was adjusted using HNO Two phases, one organic and the other aqueous, were used to dissolve the complex and separate the gallium from the ligand. The gallium was concentrated in the aqueous phase and the ligand was extracted into the organic phase. The initial insoluble GaL In the first case, 20 mL of a new aqueous solution at a fixed pH and 10 mL of a solvent (diethyl ether or chloroform) were added to the complex. After mixing, two phases were formed. While both solvents solubilized the ligand, the advantage of the chloroform over the diethyl ether is its low solubility in water. When lower amounts of diethyl ether were added to dissolve the complex implicating a higher concentration of ligand in the diethyl ether phase, the solubility of the solvent inhibited the complete extraction of the ligand. Some ligand remained solubilized with the solvent in the aqueous solution. Another disadvantage of the diethyl ether is that a lower pH is necessary to recover the gallium from the gallium–ligand complex. On the other hand, due to the need to evaporate the solvent to regenerate the ligand, the higher boiling point of chloroform is a disadvantage. In conclusion, for a fast recovery or to concentrate the gallium removed from an acidic solution, chloroform can be used up to a pH of 1.5. The acidic solution from the cleaned waste stream can be used to redissolve the gallium. In the second procedure, the gallium was recovered and the ligand regenerated at the same time in its sodium form. The complex was dissolved in 5 mL of 3 M NaOH and 5 mL of diethyl ether. In this strong basic condition, the hydroxyl ions compete with the ligand for the gallium and the sodium ions compete with the gallium for the ligand. More than 98% of the gallium was concentrated in the aqueous solution while all the ligand was extracted into the diethyl ether phase. The ligand was then regenerated by evaporating the ether phase. No gallium was detected in the regenerated ligand. It should be noted that in this second case, the gallium was concentrated 4 times in the aqueous solution. Higher gallium concentration can be achieved in this step by using a larger volume of gallium solution during the removal process and a lower amount of NaOH during the regeneration. Thus, the recovery of the gallium using concentrated NaOH solution presents an advantage over the recovery in acidic solution as the ligand is regenerated in its sodium form and the amount of gallium recovered is higher An application of this method for the selective removal of gallium, from waste water from the electronic industry containing Fe and As, has been reported elsewhere ( Gallium was removed from an aqueous solution using sodium di-( sodium di-( total volume containing, after mixing, all the reagents gallium, calcium or ligand L overall final concentration of overall initial concentration of number of moles of number of moles of final pH pH of the initial solution before addition of the ligand percent removal of gallium percent removal of calcium percent removal of the ligand mole ratio of sodium di-( mole ratio of ligand to calcium in the initial solution mole ratio of ligand to gallium in the initial solution