Dislocation of the elbow with transposition of the proximal radius and ulna, also known as convergent elbow dislocation, is rare. Only 8 cases had been reported in the literature. A 27-year-old female tri-athlete fell from her pushbike and dislocated her elbow ( The patient was referred to us 2 weeks post-injury. The elbow had a restricted range of movement, from 80 to 100째 of flexion. It was locked in 20째 of supination. X-rays revealed transposition of the proximal radius and ulna ( A 15-year-old male was lifted by both legs and dropped backward while wrestling with friends and injured his nondominant left elbow. He presented to the emergency department with a posterior elbow dislocation and a comminuted radial head fracture ( A 12-year-old boy presented after falling from a trampoline while wrestling with his brother. A closed reduction in the emergency department was unsuccessful. The next day an open reduction was performed, and the radial head was found to be located on the medial aspect of the elbow joint while the radial shaft and neck had returned laterally. The radial head was retrieved from the medial side of the elbow and was noted to have no soft tissue attachment. It was reduced and pinned to the radius using two K wires. The annular ligament was repaired. Five weeks later, the K wires were removed and mobilization was commenced. At his most recent follow-up, 6 months after the injury, there was no pain, yet he still noted reduced rotation of his forearm. There was a full range of flexion and extension of the elbow, supination 30째, and pronation 50째. CT scans confirmed delayed union of the radial head but no signs of avascular necrosis. There have only been 8 cases of convergent dislocation of the elbow reported. The etiology of the convergent elbow dislocation is debatable. Harvey and Tchelebi believed that it occurs iatrogenically after closed reduction of the posteriorly dislocated elbow. On x-ray films, transposition of the proximal radius and ulna can be easily overlooked. Very often the lateral projection gives the appearance of a well-reduced elbow joint. On the AP projection, the radial head articulates with the trochlea and the ulna with the capitellum, and this may be missed. Independent of the projection, the radius should always articulate with the capitellum. This was not appreciated at the time of presentation in 4 of the 8 previously reported cases. Clinical examination after closed reduction is vital to alert the clinician to this abnormality. With the loss of supination after reduction, reinspection of the radiographs should be performed to exclude convergent dislocation of the elbow. In the previous reported eight cases, convergent dislocation was diagnosed on the initial films in 4 cases: 2 were discovered at the time of closed reduction Successful closed reduction without surgery was only reported in 2 of the 8 cases. Fracture of the radial neck was present in 3 of the 8 reported cases Scullion noted a delay in radiographic union of the radial neck fracture. Radiographic union of the radial neck fracture was not seen for at least 7 months in another case. Late diagnosis and treatment of a convergent fracture dislocation are associated with a significant reduction in range of movement, particularly supination. We have also noted the development of late wrist pain in all of our cases. This has not been reported previously and may be due to interosseous membrane injury. Additional follow-up of these patients is required to determine the significance of this finding. In conclusion, this is the first reported adult case of convergent dislocation of the elbow. Despite having a delayed surgical intervention, the outcome was excellent and similar to those in the adolescent group. Although difficult, delayed surgical intervention is possible. Transposition of the proximal radius and ulna should not be overlooked following elbow dislocation.