The proposed work intended to improve sludge reduction efficiency of dark Fenton (DF) treatment. Dark Fenton reduces 61% of sludge in 90 min under the optimized Fe (II) and H2O2 dosage of 0.008 g/g suspended solids (SS) and 0.032 g/g SS respectively at pH 3. Combination of dark Fenton with disperser (DFD) reduces time required for the treatment from 90 to 30 min with the disperser specific energy input of 835.536 kJ/kg total solids (TS). At 30 min reaction time, mixed liquor suspended solids and total chemical oxygen demand reduction were found to be 65% and 60%, respectively for DFD. The efficiency of DFD treatment revealed best fit with R2 value of 0.989 during pseudo first order kinetic analysis. The synergistic effect of DFD resulted in 29% higher MLSS reduction and 31% higher TCOD reduction than dark Fenton (DF) in 30 min treatment as the obtained MLSS and TCOD reduction at 30 min treatment time was observed to be 65% and 60% in DFD and 36% and 29% in DF, respectively. Although, DFD demands higher energy input (233.69 kWh), it had potency to reduce higher solids concentration in a short duration and this results in a net profit of 12.852 USD/ton of sludge.Rapid growth of population, industrialization and urbanization demands high water in future which increases the sludge generation rate ( Mechanical treatment also plays a major role during sludge treatment which aids in disintegration of particulate matters into aqueous phase ( To improve the efficiency of Fenton process, Fenton was combined with various other treatment such as mechanical method ( The waste activated sludge was sampled from aavin dairy industry, Madurai, India. Before experiment, the sludge was kept under refrigeration at 4 °C. The sludge characterization results were estimated as follows: pH = 6.9, Total solids (TS) = 10400 ± 300 mg/L, Dissolved solids = 3400 ± 100 mg/L, Mixed Liquors Suspended solids (SS) = 7000 ± 200 mg/L, Total chemical oxygen demand (TCOD) = 12000 ± 250 mg/L, Soluble chemical oxygen demand (SCOD) = 200 ± 10 mg/L. Dark Fenton treatment was carried in 500 mL sludge sample. This method was initiated by altering the sludge pH to 3 using concentrated sulphuric acid (H The combined dark Fenton and disperser treatment was carried out in 2 L sludge sample. After adjusting the pH of sample to 3, the optimized dosage (Fenton-0.008 g/g of SS and H Parameters used for energy and cost analysis calculation were shown in Both total chemical oxygen demand (TCOD) and Mixed liquor suspended solids (MLSS) were analyzed based on the procedures given in Standard methods ( The extent of TCOD and MLSS reduction were calculated as follows: All the analysis was performed in triplicates and the results were articulated as average of three values.  It has been hypothesized that the sludge disintegration by Fenton reagent is explained through following mechanisms ( Disintegration of extracellular polymeric substances (EPS) through oxidative reductive polymerization- The added Fenton induces the cleavage of linkages in the polymeric backbone of exobiopolymers; Oxidation through OH radicals causes alterations in interparticle association among sludge flocs and their particles. This further leads to decrement in electrostatic repulsion between the biomass present in the sludge flocs diminishing the cohesiveness of floc strength. In addition, the acidic pH during Fenton reaction would degrades the components of sludge flocs, EPS decreasing the stability of flocs. As a result, the sludge flocs get disintegrated. Disintegration of sludge biomass: Disintegration of sludge biomass was exhibited in two ways: Solubilization of organic compounds and mineralization of solid particles. Solubilization enhances the biodegradation by cleaving the cell walls of sludge biomass and release of intracellular organics. Mineralization enhances the conversion of the major proportion of sludge into CO  At 0.008 g/g SS, the TCOD removal efficiency was increasing gradually without any wavering effect upto 90 min and achieved a maximum efficiency of 59% respectively. This may be due to mineralization of the organic matter rapidly by generated hydroxyl radical. This indicates the second mechanism of Fenton reaction inducing the conversion of the major proportion of sludge into CO Further increase in dosage ranges from 0.01 g/g SS to 0.1 g/g SS recorded high generation of hydroxyl radicals upto certain duration which oxidizes the particulate matters that accounts 30–40% TCOD removal efficiency. Beyond that duration, TCOD removal efficiency was not efficient due to the scavenging effect of excess Fenton dosage. This excess Fenton would consume generated HO· radical which limits the catalytic action of Fe and inhibiting TCOD removal efficiency ( Hence, the ferrous ion dosage of 0.008 g/g SS yield better TCOD removal efficiency of about 59% in the 90 min considered to be an optimum dosage and reaction time for dark Fenton reaction. The effect of ferrous ion dosage on MLSS reduction during dark Fenton sludge treatment process efficiency was shown in   On combining disperser with dark Fenton process, the hydrogen peroxide and ferrous ions undergoes reaction generating active hydroxyl radicals that enhances the degradation of organic matter and Fe OH radical is the main product of the Fenton treatment. The generated radicals have adequate oxidizing potential to disintegrate, reduce and oxidize the organics present in the sludge and induce the decomposition of sludge flocs. This in turn releases the organics into the aqueous medium. Disperser through its cavitation effect enhances the diffusion and utilization of Fenton reagent confirming an increased contact between the generated radicals and organics present in the sludge. Moreover, in addition to the stimulation of hydroxyl radical generation during dark Fenton process, the disperser itself involved in hydroxyl radical generation through hydrodynamic cavitations ( The variation of MLSS concentration with respect to different rpm was shown in At 8000 rpm, it was observed there was a gradual decrease in MLSS concentration. The maximum MLSS reduction achieved at 8000 rpm is about 2470 mg/L. This may be due to considerable formation of hydrodynamic cavitation at 8000 rpm favoring the dark Fenton process stimulating the hydroxyl radical generation. So that generated hydroxyl radicals utilized for degrading the organic matters and there is no surplus H During, combined dark Fenton with disperser treatment of sludge, the variation of TCOD concentration with respect to different rpm was shown in Thus,  A mass balance analysis was done to compare and evaluate the MLSS and TCOD removed during DFD with that of DF treatments. For this evaluation, 30 min treatment time was used as an index to calculate the mass balance. The concentration of TCOD and MLSS in DF and DFD at the start of the treatment was found to be 12000 mg/L and 7000 mg/L, respectively. During DF and DFD treatments, the percentage of MLSS was calculated to be 65 and 36%, respectively. Therefore, the concentration of reduced MLSS in DFD and DF was calculated to be 4550 mg/L and 2520 mg/L, respectively. By comparing DFD with that of DF, a considerable amount of solids has been reduced by this combined DFD process when compared to DF. In addition, the remaining MLSS to be disposed was calculated to be 2450 mg/L and 4480 mg/L, respectively. As a result, DF demands higher solids disposal cost when compared to DFD. Similarly, in case of TCOD reduction, the percentage of reduced COD during DF and DFD was found to be 60 and 29%, respectively. Therefore, the concentration of reduced TCOD in DFD and DF was calculated to be 7200 mg/L and 3480 mg/L, respectively. By comparing DFD with that of DF, a considerable amount of TCOD has been reduced by this combined DFD process when compared to DF. In addition, the remaining TCOD after DF and DFD treatments were calculated to be 4800 mg/L and 8520 mg/L, respectively. From the above, it can be concluded that DFD treatment was efficient and economical in terms of solids reduction and TCOD removal. The sludge reduction efficiency of the dark Fenton and combined dark Fenton with disperser treatment were explored through kinetic analysis. To simulate MLSS reduction efficiency of these two processes, pseudo second order model has been employed. Similar pseudo second order model has been employed by The energy analysis, cost assessment and solid balance were carried out to evaluate the field applicability of the study. In Economic analysis is an essential term to be focused on. During economic analysis, the energy cost, consumable cost, reduced cost for sludge disposal and solid disposal cost was taken into consideration. During cost analysis, positive net profit was obtained during dark Fenton with disperser treatment of sludge. But dark Fenton treatment, achieve negative net profit of about −96.69 USD due to high disposal cost and less treatment efficiency compared to combined dark Fenton with disperser treatment. Addition of NaOH and H The present study investigated the synergetic effect of combined dark Fenton with disperser treatment i.e., chemo-mechanical treatment in sludge reduction. At the optimum duration of 30 min, the combined treatment could reduce 29% of MLSS in excess than dark Fenton treatment. Even though, there is a lack of beneficial energy output during the combined dark Fenton with disperser treatment, combined treatment reduces sludge quantity to 350 kg on treating one ton of sludge within half an hour with positive net profit. This treatment process saves time consumption of more than 1 h compared to dark Fenton process. Additional, research is required regarding various alternative methods for sludge management will be considered in future. We thank DST, India for providing financial assistance to this work ( The following is the supplementary data to this article: Supplementary data to this article can be found online at