The structural characteristics of LaNiO3/Si(001) films grown by pulsed laser deposition have been studied mainly using a synchrotron X-ray scattering measurement. The films were grown with the (00
                     l) preferred orientation without any alignment in the in-plane direction. The initially unstrained film became strained gradually as it grew further, but its crystalline quality improved significantly. A fully (00
                     l) textured Pb(Zr0.4Ti0.6)O3 film was successfully grown on such a (00
                     l) textured LaNiO3/Si(001) substrate as low as 350°C. The nature of structure and microstructure of the Pb(Zr0.4Ti0.6)O3 film appeared to be similar to that of the underlaying LaNiO3 film.Electrodes are required to integrate ferroelectric thin films into devices, and they may often determine the whole device functions considerably. Much attention has been therefore paid to obtain more reliable ones. Instead of metal thin films such as Pt usually used as an electrode layer, oxides with metallic conduction currently bring attention because of their favorable structural and chemical compatibility with most ferroelectric thin films. Among them, LaNiO Several workers have attempted to prepare LNO thin films using various deposition techniques including sputtering and pulsed laser deposition (PLD) In this study we prepared by PLD a set of LNO films on Si(0 All the films in this work were prepared by PLD. A pulsed KrF excimer laser (248 We used a substrate temperature of 350°C and an oxygen pressure of 50 A synchrotron X-ray scattering experiment was carried out at Beamline 5C2 at Pohang Light Source (PLS) at Pohang Accelerator Laboratory. A double bounce Si(1 First, conventional powder diffractions (  The mosaic distribution of the films were estimated by the rocking curves for the LNO(0   We investigated the structural characteristics of LNO thin films grown on Si(0 S.S. Kim acknowledges the financial support provided by the Research Center for Automobile’s Parts and Materials (RCAPAM) at Sunchon National University.