Introduction
                  We conducted a prospective, single-center, continuous study of patients operated for fractures urelated to osteoporosis at the thoracolumbar junction level using percutaneous techniques. The aim of this study was to investigate the clinical and radiological outcomes of percutaneous techniques for these indications.
               
                  Patients and methods
                  This study included patients who underwent standalone balloon kyphoplasty surgery or combined with percutaneous posterior osteosynthesis in cases of associated distraction. The fractures were classified according to the Magerl classification. The patients were evaluated clinically (visual analog scale [VAS], the Oswestry Disability Index, and autonomy) and radiologically (vertebral kyphosis and height variations of the vertebral body) for 12 months.
               
                  Results
                  Sixty-five patients were included. The mean age at the time of the surgery was 45.4 years (range, 19–72 years). The main indications were A.1 fractures of L1. We noted 22% cement leakages, none having a clinical impact. In the overall series, the VAS at the lesional level improved from 5.5 (range, 3–8) preoperatively to 0.6 (range, 1–3) at 12 months. In all, 95% of the workers resumed their occupation. Traumatic kyphosis improved from 13.3° (range, 5–23°) before the surgery to 8.3° (range, 1–20°).
               
                  Discussion
                  The complication rate was low. The radiological results are comparable to those reported in the literature for other series with percutaneous surgery. Only the loss of the correction observed in the group undergoing standalone kyphoplasty with calcium phosphate cement led us to propose another type of treatment for these indications. This study must be continued over the long term to detect the appearance of discopathy related to cement leakage and to answer questions as to how cement evolves.
               
                  Level of evidence
                  III, prospective study with low statistical power.Fractures of the thoracolumbar spine are frequent The general principle of the treatment of these fractures is to provide long-term correction of the vertebral deficiency resulting from injury so as to avoid kyphosis that will have negative clinical repercussions This report presents the results of a prospective, single-center, continuous study of 65 patients who presented a non-osteoporotic fracture with no neurological deficit of the thoracolumbar spine, treated with standalone kyphoplasty or in association with percutaneous posterior osteosynthesis following the indications detailed below. The objective was to evaluate this series of patients clinically and radiologically so as to validate these percutaneous techniques in the designated indications and to propose possible improvements. This prospective study involved a single-center, continuous, homogenous series comprising 65 patients. The patient inclusion period extended from January 2008 to November 2009. This study included patients who had undergone a balloon kyphoplasty (Medtronic Sofamor Danek, Memphis, TN, USA) alone or in association with Sextant™ (Medtronic) percutaneous posterior osteosynthesis for the reasons retained: single fracture of the thoracolumbar spine (T11 to L2) with no disk or ligament instability. Patients were excluded if they presented fractures that appeared to be osteoporotic, with neurological complications during management, or presenting objective radiological rupture of the PLC such as dislocation of the joint facets or an increase in the interspinous space. In our opinion, this latter type of fracture remains an indication for open surgery with posterolateral arthrodesis so as not to expose the patient to the risk of material disassembly. Also eliminated from the study were Magerl All the patients in the series underwent kyphoplasty alone (49 cases) or associated with Sextant™ minimally invasive osteosynthesis (16 cases). Kyphoplasty was used for fractures with bone involvement limited to the vertebral body caused by pure compression (Magerl type A). A solution was chosen such that for this type of fracture, long-lasting reconstruction of the vertebral body anatomy using kyphoplasty alone would be sufficient to reduce disk impaction We based our indications of complementary percutaneous osteosynthesis on Vaccaro and the Spine Trauma Study Group's work, who consider that PLC lesions have a central place in the therapeutic decision tree in fractures of the thoracolumbar spine In 69% of the cases, acrylic cement (bone cement V; Biomet Biologics, Warsaw, IN, USA) was used and in 31% of the cases calcium phosphate cement (KyphOs; Medtronic). The cement was chosen according to the patient's age, with the upper limit of the calcium phosphate cement set arbitrarily at 40 years of age. The dose injected varied depending on each patient's anatomy and the level and type of lesion. The surgeries were performed in the same center by two senior operators and according to the same procedure: installation in the ventral decubitus position on bolsters, under general anesthesia, and with radioscopic guidance using two image intensifiers simultaneously, thus reducing the duration of surgery and limiting the risk of infection related to intraoperative handling. The trocar positioning technique was intentionally plunging and convergent for the kyphoplasty to obtain a single large cement cavity ( The postoperative protocol included authorization of ambulation for the first time 24 Clinical and radiological patient evaluation took place preoperatively, immediately postoperatively, and then at 6 weeks, 3 months, 6 months, and 1 year. All patients were assessed for pain using the VAS and the Oswestry score The radiological analysis was performed using Spineview All the data were analyzed using SPSS 13 software. The Student The different items were compared so as to demonstrate a statistically significant relation within homogenous groups in terms of pathology and treatment. During the inclusion period, 96 percutaneous interventions were performed in the department. Nine patients were lost to follow-up (six managed in another center and three not seen again in consultation). A total of 65 patients responded favorably to the inclusion criteria cited above. The characteristics of the population are summarized in The mean quantity of acrylic cement injected was 7.6 cc (range, 5–12 cc) versus 5.7 cc (range, 2–9 cc) for calcium phosphate cement; this difference can be explained by the much more rapid hardening properties of the latter. The fracture mechanisms varied: 27 falls from a height, 20 traffic accidents, eight falls from a horse, six falls from a low height (four in a context of alcohol consumption and two caused by epilepsy), and four other etiologies. The fractures involved the L1 vertebra in 31 cases (48%), T12 in 16 cases (25%), L2 in 12 cases (18%), and T11 in six cases (9%). All the fractures treated with standalone kyphoplasty were Magerl type A fractures ( There were 14 cases (22%) of cement leakage: 43% upper disk leaks, 29% lower disk leaks, 21% anterior or lateral leaks, and 7% canal leaks. None of these leaks showed clinical manifestations, notably neurological. All of the screws showed a good pedicular trajectory on the follow-up CT scans on D1. Four postoperative complications occurred, all resolved with no sequelae after adapted treatment: one case of pulmonary embolus with thrombosis of a sural vein 48 a deep spondylodiscitis-type infection 2 months postoperative in a patient with relative immunodepression (obesity, type II diabetes, and long-term corticoid therapy for rheumatoid arthritis); left L2 cruralgia with probable pedicular breakage by the trocar during the kyphoplasty procedure; a postoperative hematoma in a patient who underwent osteosynthesis with the Sextant™ requiring revision for drainage at 72 For the overall series, the VAS lesional score significantly improved ( The patients first stood upright on D2 (range, D1–6) and were discharged on D3 (range, D2–7) for the standalone kyphoplasty procedure and D4 (range, D2–7) for those associated with osteosynthesis. Of the entire series, 83% of the patients presented at the first consultation by their own means of transportation, 14% in a patient transport service ambulance, and 3% by ambulance. At 1 year, all the patients came to the visit with their own vehicle. Fifteen percent of the working patients resumed their occupation either in the same position or in an adapted position at the first visit versus 95% at 1 year. Finally, at 1 year, 65% of the patients in the series estimated their overall satisfaction as “excellent,” 22% “good,” and 13% “fair.” VK significantly improved ( In the kyphoplasty alone subgroup, the loss of correction over time was significantly greater ( The VK study in the cases of kyphoplasty alone according to the fracture type found a significantly greater absolute gain in correction at 1 year ( The analysis of the linear values of the lesioned vertebrae allowed us to objectify a 7% gain in height of the anterior column and a 13% gain in the Beck Index at the last follow-up. However, a 3% loss in height of the posterior column was observed ( Management of fractures of the thoracolumbar spine remains controversial. For a long time, the operator had only the choice between orthopaedic treatment or classical surgery. A literature search did not turn up any consensual guidelines on this subject Percutaneous vertebral cementoplasty techniques (vertebroplasty and kyphoplasty) have been the subject of many publications over the past few years in the field of osteoporotic fracture management, for which they become a first-line treatment The objective of percutaneous posterior osteosynthesis was to reduce muscular injury, blood loss, and the hospital stay. Initially developed for degenerative surgery The present study confirms the reliability of these surgical percutaneous techniques in the designated indications, since only four complications occurred, all resolved after adapted treatment. None of these complications was directly caused by the cement, even if the high rate of leakage to adjacent discs should encourage the search for the onset of discopathy, which was not evaluated in this study. Other than treating only non-osteoporotic fractures of the thoracolumbar spine, the particularity of this study was the treatment of type A3 fractures with kyphoplasty alone, limiting the use of complementary percutaneous osteosynthesis to B1 fractures with no radiological evidence of PLC rupture so as not to load the PLC for the duration of healing. The functional and subjective results were good, since at 1 year 95% of the active patients were able to resume their occupation either in their former position or in an adapted position. Of the patients who were not working (the unemployed, retired, or students), 92% were able to resume their daily activities at 1 year at the same level and 8% at a lower level. None took pain killers higher than step 2 on a daily basis for spinal pain at the lesional segment. It should be noted that there was no significant difference in terms of clinical scores between the kyphoplasty alone subgroup and the kyphoplasty The absolute VK gain was 5° The osteosynthesis material was removed in seven patients (44%). In all cases, this material was removed through small incisions centered on the screws, as described by De Peretti's team The preliminary results of this study allowed several improvements to these techniques to emerge: since the in vivo resistance to compression of the two types of cement were similar use of percutaneous pedicular osteosynthesis ancillary instrumentation with monoaxial screws and the possibility of bending stems such as the CD Horizon Longitude™ (Medtronic) or Viper™ (Depuy Orthopedics, Warsaw, IN, USA) stems would make it possible to carry out reduction maneuvers by distraction between the screw-holding forceps before performing the kyphoplasty. In theory, obtaining an additional gain in correction would be possible with ligamentotaxis, even though the recent study by Blondel et al. use of fluoroscopic guidance for the kyphoplasty transpedicular cancellous bone grafting has not always proved to be effective, even as a complement to osteosynthesis systematic access to MRI when in doubt concerning posterior ligamentous complex injury could rationalize the indications for complementary posterior osteosynthesis This prospective study of 65 patients has confirmed the value of these minimally invasive surgical techniques in our indications, notably the contribution of percutaneous pedicular osteosynthesis in cases of a distraction mechanism in absence of radiological evidence of PLC rupture. In accordance with those reported in the literature, the radiological and clinical results obtained as well as the low rate of complications and the patients’ early return to autonomy has led us to increasingly disregard open surgery techniques, preferring these minimally invasive techniques for our indications. However, the follow-up of this prospective remains short and must be continued over time so as to detect any appearance of late complications such as discopathy and to respond to the remaining questions on the long-term behavior of cement. The authors declare that they have no conflicts of interest concerning this article.