Drying of wet particulate solids is carried out in a novel way in a wall heated fluidized bed dryer. The experimental data shows that drying occurs effectively. The temperature variation with respect to time reveals that there is evaporative cooling occurring in the solids. Initially, there is lowering of temperature, then an increase is noticed and finally it reaches steady state. This phenomenon of wall heated drying is modelled first by percolation model by taking radial average of temperature of air, temperature of solids and moisture content of solids but accounting for axial variation along the height of the cylindrical fluidized bed. The drying rate is considered to depend on the local temperature of the solids in the fluidized bed. This procedure produced three coupled partial differential equations: one for temperature of air, second for temperature of solids and third for moisture content of solids. The axial convective heat transport equation and drying rate equation are solved using an explicit Euler numerical method. Well-mixed (CSTR) model and CSTRs-in-series model are also presented to account for recirculations in the bubbling regime of fluidization. The simulation results of CSTRs-in-series model show a good agreement with experimental data for temperature and moisture variation. Especially, the evaporative cooling phenomenon is captured successfully through simulation.Fluidized bed dryers (FBD) are widely used in chemical, pharmaceutical, food and mineral process industries for drying of moist solids. A classification is done to delineate the fluidization regimes and flow patterns in fluidized beds Temple and Boxtel Wang and Chen It can be inferred from above literature that it is a very difficult task to simulate the drying behavior in fluidized bed dryer with respect to temporal and spatial variation of moisture content of solids, solid temperature and air temperature. In the present study, the influence of wall heat source on fluidized bed drying is modeled and simulated by incorporating the variation of temperature of air, solids and moisture content in solids with respect to time and position along the height of the fluidized bed. Compared to the above discussed models for hot air FBDs and internally heated FBDs, the present model is novel. The novelty is that, a distributed parameter model is developed for spatial and temporal variation for moisture content of solids, temperature of air and temperature of solids in a wall heated FBD. Since there is availability of high speed computation now-a-days, such coupled ordinary differential equations (ODEs) and partial differential equations (PDEs) could be solved by simple finite difference method in space in combination with Eulerian approach for time unlike the approximations proposed in earlier models The advantage of this wall heated fluidized bed dryer (FBD) is that the solids temperature does not increase to a high temperature like in hot air fluidized bed dryer since the inlet air is at room temperature. In the case wall heated FBD, the heat supplied to the wall could be controlled at a desired level. The dried product in hot air fluidized bed dryer is at drying medium temperature and it requires to be cooled to room temperature. Also to heat the air medium high energy consumption is required due to low thermal conductivity of air. Heat is also lost in the transportation of hot air. These drawbacks of hot air FBD may be overcome using wall heated FBD. The evaporative cooling effect is found to keep the solids at a temperature closer to the room temperature or inlet air temperature and at the same time causing a good drying effect. Hence, this type of wall heated FBD is useful for drying of particulate solids which are heat sensitive like the materials produced in pharmaceutical, food and other related industries. A schematic diagram of experimental setup is shown in the Initially, the heater was switched on to allow it to reach a steady state without any solids in the dryer. Then a measured quantity of wet sand with initial moisture content of 0.1  Moisture variation in the solids at the top of the fluidized bed is measured with respect to time and has been presented in the From From Fluidized bed drying is a multiphase phenomenon. The system consists of solid particles, air, water in solids and water vapor in air. Modeling such a system is a difficult task as found in literature for hot gas drying method. During fluidization, air is supplied from the bottom of the column of solid particles. When the inlet air velocity is beyond minimum fluidization velocity, the solid particles get fluidized. The height of the solids bed increases to certain level such that the applied pressure drop balances the weight of the particles. Though the bed height might be different for different flow rates, the height is assumed not to change with time for given superficial gas velocities of air. Only the void fraction, As shown in In The main source of heat is from the wall of the fluidized bed and the assumption has been made that the temperature distribution along the wall is uniform. In the present model, it is assumed that air gets heated by wall heating. The heated air in turn heats the solids. The evaporation of water from solids takes place at drying rate that depends on the instantaneous temperature and moisture content of the solids. When a control volume such as Here Q Where Now, an assumption of radial averaging of the governing Eq. Let the radial averaged temperature in air phase be defined as The following simplification is obtained for the radial heat conduction term of Eq. Where, For the solids, the radial averaged heat balance equation is written as Where, Where By substitution of Eqs. Now, the local evaporation rate Where, Where By substituting Eqs. Where The governing equation of temperature of solids is simplified by substituting Eqs. Where The governing equation for temperature of air is simplified by substituting Eqs. Where For predicting the kinetics of drying in wall heated fluidized bed, Eqs. The governing equations for moisture content of solids, temperature of solids and temperature of air are as shown in Eqs. Explicit and implicit methods are approaches used in numerical analysis for obtaining numerical solutions of time and space dependent ordinary and partial differential equations as is required in computer simulations of physical processes. Explicit methods calculate the state of a system at a later time from the state of the system at the current time, while implicit methods find a solution by solving an equation involving both the current state of the system and the later one. It is clear that implicit methods require an extra computation (solving the above equation), and they can be much harder to implement. In the present numerical simulation, explicit method is used. The coupled differential Eqs. Solving Eqs. Eq. The simulation of Eqs. In Similarly, the air temperature, solids temperature and moisture content along the bed height at various times are plotted in In In From Well-mixed model means that the air temperature, solid temperature and moisture content of the solids are uniform throughout the FBD. By this model one can predict the variation of overall or average air temperature, solids temperature and moisture content with time. It is also known as Well-mixed Lumped parameter model (CSTR model) The governing equations for well-mixed model in a wall heated FBD have been presented below for rate of change of temperature of sand, temperature of air and moisture content of sand as in Eqs. Let m For sand particles, Rate of change in enthalpy of solids dX/dt is negative therefore a positive sign is used in Eq. Rearranging the above equation gives, For air. Rate of change in enthalpy of air Rearranging the above equation gives, For moisture content of solids. Rate of moisture loss from solids Rearranging the above equation gives, Let the parameters in each of the above equations be represented as The values of these parameters are calculated as a These coupled differential Eqs. The air temperature suddenly jumps to a higher value than that of inlet. This could be due to high wall heat flux and that the first order time constant term in Eq.  By this well-mixed model the drying kinetics in a wall heated FBD are predicted in a Lumped parameter mode. But experimentally it was observed that there is a variation of temperature of solids, temperature of air and moisture content of solids along the height of the bed also. Hence a distributed parameter model could be developed. It can be done in two ways: Continuous stirred tank reactors (CSTRs) in series or Percolation model. The percolation model is already presented in To predict the appropriate drying kinetics, the above depicted model has been assumed (  Thus well-mixed model is able to predict the solids, air temperature and moisture content of solids for overall wall heated FBD and CSTRs in series model is able to predict the solids, air temperature and moisture content of solids variation at different locations of the wall heated FBD. The two different models namely percolation model and CSTRs in series model results have been compared in  The wall heated fluidized bed dryer has been modelled using radial averaged heat convection equation in percolation model. Further CSTR and CSTRs-in-series models are also developed. The temperature distribution in the fluidized bed at various bed heights shows good agreement with model results. The moisture distribution in fluidized bed shows that at the top of the bed the drying rate was slightly high as compared with bottom of the fluidized bed. The phenomenon of evaporative cooling is observed and found to be substantial. This phenomena is similar to the hot air injected fluidized bed dryer  Constant, (1/s) Constant, (°C) Constant, (1/s) Constant, (°C/s) Constant, (1/s) Specific surface area (m Constant (kg/m Constant (1/°C. s) Constant (1/s) Constant (1/s) Constant (°C/s) Constant (1/s) Specific heat capacity (kJ/kg. °C) Diameter of the particle (m) Heat transfer coefficient (W/m Height (m) Current (amp) Slope of drying rate curve (kg/m Thermal conductivity (W/m. °C) Drying rate (kg/m Heat transferred per unit volume (W/m Heat transfer from wall (W/m Radius (m) time (s) Temperature (°C) Temperature below which drying rate is negligible (°C) Radial averaged temperature (°C) Voltage (volts) Superficial velocity (m/s) Moisture content (kg water/kg dry solid) Equilibrium moisture content (kg water/kg dry solid) Radial averaged moisture content (kg water/kg dry solid) Height (m) Density of air (kg/m Void fraction Latent heat of vaporization of water (kJ/kg) Time step (s) Mass flow rate (kg/s) Radial direction Vertical direction Air Air in bed Solids Solids in bed Fluidized bed Particle Column  Supplementary data to this article can be found online at