Vibration mills work with free moving grinding media as it is with stirred media mills. Investigations on stirred media mills showed that for constant energy input there is an optimum concerning fineness in dependence on specific energy exchange per stressing event. It is the aim of this paper to compare the knowledge about stirred media mills with vibration mill results.
                  In comparison to stirred media mills it is possible to determine the absolute number of stressing events of the mill filling. So, the specific energy exchange of the total mill filling for one stressing event can be calculated from measured energy input. It is a means to decide whether energy input is not sufficient for comminution or whether energy input is too high, as results with stirred ball mills tell us.
                  The results indicate that vibration mills work outside the energetic optimum.Some years ago vibration mill batch tests were done to compare “small” (10 mm) and “large” (30 mm) circles of vibration. This difference was sufficient to realise different grinding media movement. In the first case the mill filling once per revolution expands and collapses (movement I) We have found that similar to stirred ball mill results the mass related specific energy  Up to filling rates of about 27% there is no influence on the fineness. An explanation may be that up to this concentration only one particle is stressed between two balls. Increasing particle filling rates lead to coarser product. For explanation we can use the picture of the grinding media forming a big and compact rod running round in the mill cylinder. High particle filling rates mean high particle layers on the mill wall. With the centrifugal force of the rods being constant the energy absorption of the particle bed decreases leading to a coarser product. High energy input may lead, as is well known, to a stop of the increase in fineness because of agglomeration during comminution. Without grinding aids fineness no more increases. In this case, for quartz sand the limit was found around 10 μm. The term Md/M in equation 1 characterises the energy exchange of the mill filling per one stressing event. This quantity is a means to decide whether at given mill operating conditions energy is not sufficient for comminution or whether it is too high, i.e. energy utilisation is not optimal. If we assume the particles being equally distributed in between the grinding media the term equals to the mean energy exchange of every grinding body. But it is necessary to underline that energy exchange in vibration mills is very much dependent on the place within the mill body.  If we transform the energy values from 1 to 20 J/kg into impact velocities we find a range from 1.4 to 6 m/s. Because the experiments were not designed to compare results with constant specific energy there are only a few points available ( As the results with stirred media mills tell us, a possibility to reduce the specific energy per stress event is given by smaller grinding media size. The influence of grinding beads was only tested by few experiments in continuous mode. There were used 10 and 6 mm steel beads instead of 20 mm rods. Results showing fineness are given in However, a difference could be found in mean residence time and throughput. With rods and a throughput of about 300 kg/h mean residence time is about 0.5–0.75 min dependent on the number of rods With the same fineness of about 12 μm rods allowed a throughput of 384 kg/h compared to 294 kg/h with 10 mm beads. Stress intensity as energy exchange of the mill filling per every single stress event of the filling is given by torque divided by particle mass. An equivalence to the stress intensity as defined by Kwade, i.e. the mass of grinding media multiplied by the square of their circumferential velocity, is not given with vibration mills. An influence of grinding media size and form could not be extracted because of a very low number of experiments. The results indicating that vibration mills work—under the conditions given with the experiments—outside the energetic optimum may be of interest for centrifugal mills running with