Objective
                  To compare the efficacy of a new dentifrice containing 1.5% arginine, an insoluble calcium compound, and 1450ppm fluoride to a matched, positive control dentifrice containing 1450ppm fluoride in arresting and reversing early coronal caries lesions in children using Quantitative Light-induced Fluorescence (QLF).
               
                  Study design
                  331 children from Chiang Mai, Thailand, aged 7–14 years, with one or more visible early enamel caries lesions on the upper anterior teeth, completed the study. The new dentifrice contained 1.5% arginine, an insoluble calcium compound, and 1450ppm fluoride, as sodium monofluorophosphate; the matched positive control contained 1450ppm fluoride only. Subjects brushed twice daily at home and additionally once on school days under teacher's supervision. Digital images of the upper six anterior teeth were captured at the baseline, 3- and 6-month examinations using a custom apparatus for reproducible acquisition of Quantitative Light-induced Fluorescence data.
               
                  Results
                  At the 3-month examination, the ΔQ (representing lesion volume) for the test group decreased from a mean of 28.62 at baseline to 20.53mm2% and for the positive control group to 23.38mm2%. The difference between groups was not statistically significant (p
                     =0.055). At the 6-month examination, the ΔQ decreased for the test group to 15.85mm2% and for the positive control group to 20.35mm2%. The difference between groups was statistically significant (p
                     <0.001).
               
                  Conclusion
                  A new dentifrice containing 1.5% arginine, an insoluble calcium compound, and 1450ppm fluoride, as sodium monofluorophosphate, provided statistically significant superior efficacy in arresting and reversing active coronal caries lesions in children than brushing with a matched positive control dentifrice containing fluoride alone.During the last two decades, the management of dental caries has improved significantly as our understanding of both the methods available to identify lesions and the therapeutic approaches to arrest or reverse them have become more clearly understood. The most successful therapeutic interventions are based on the arrest or re-mineralization of initial enamel or root caries lesions that are not cavitated. Recently, an alternative approach to the management of dental caries has been identified and validated. The basis of the approach, which combines arginine and an insoluble calcium compound, is to complement and enhance the effects of fluoride by specifically targeting dental plaque, modulating its metabolism to reduce the production and effects of bacterial acid and, thereby, to reduce its pathogenicity. The anti-caries benefits of this approach have been demonstrated in two studies which compared the ability of a new dentifrice containing 1.5% arginine, an insoluble calcium compound, and 1450 The anti-caries benefits of this approach on the arrest and reversal of buccal enamel carious lesions have also been investigated in three 6-month studies using Quantitative Light-induced Fluorescence (QLF) methods to measure changes in mineralization of enamel lesions. One of these studies is reported in this paper. In the other two studies, the new dentifrice containing 1.5% arginine, an insoluble calcium compound, and 1450 The Quantitative Light-induced Fluorescence (QLF) method is based upon the principle that when a tooth is stimulated with blue light it fluoresces green. When dental caries is present, the emitted green light is scattered within the lesion and, hence, this area of the tooth surface appears to be dark against a green background. By comparing the loss of fluorescence, due to scattering in the lesion, to the background level of fluorescence, both the area and degree of de-mineralization (Δ Finally, a 2-year conventional caries clinical study has proven that two dentifrices containing 1.5% arginine and 1450 The aim of the current study was to confirm the hypothesis that the new dentifrice containing 1.5% arginine, an insoluble calcium compound and 1450 This study was a randomized, double-blind controlled clinical trial of 6 months duration in which a new dentifrice containing 1.5% arginine, an insoluble calcium compound, and 1450 The subjects who consented to take part in the study were 7–14 years old school children with one or more visible early enamel buccal caries lesions (white spot caries) on the upper anterior permanent teeth. They were recruited from eight schools in Chiang Mai, Thailand that were selected on the basis that they were able to take part in a daily supervised tooth brushing program. The fluoride level in the drinking water of the communities included in the study was <0.03 For consenting subjects, a screening examination was conducted to see if they were suitable to be included in the study. Participants in the study had to be 7–14 years old, available for the duration of the study, and have visual evidence of early enamel buccal caries in one or more of the upper anterior permanent teeth. Students meeting the inclusion criteria were centrally, randomly allocated to study group by the study administrator using a randomly generated series of numbers. They were instructed to use their dentifrice twice daily at home. On school days, they also brushed their teeth in school after lunch under the supervision of school teachers. On approximately half the brushing days, tooth brushing was monitored by study personnel and compliance logged. During the 6 months of the study, the children brushed on approximately 105 days in school. At each brushing, subjects were instructed to cover the head of the toothbrush with paste. Colgate Extraclean Professional 35 toothbrushes (Colgate-Palmolive, New York, NY, USA) were provided for use at home and in school. All dentifrices were supplied in identical white laminated tubes and the products were identical in terms of taste and consistency. Toothbrushes and dentifrice were distributed to each subject on the day of the baseline examination and again at the 3-month examination. Intermediate supplies of dentifrice were supplied by the school teacher when required. At the screening examination and all subsequent examinations (baseline, 3 and 6 months), an examination of the soft and hard tissues of the mouth was conducted. Subjects then had digital images taken of the upper six anterior teeth using a custom apparatus. Prior to imaging, plaque was removed from the upper anterior teeth, first by the student brushing and second by a dentist manually, to ensure that lesions could be clearly identified and measured. The equipment was designed to enable the capture of Quantitative Light-induced Fluorescence images in a reproducible manner. The geometry stabilizing equipment is illustrated in Images were acquired using QLF Patient software (Version 3.03 Inspektor Research Systems BV, Amsterdam, The Netherlands). At the 3- and 6-month visits, the integral video repositioning software was employed with a grab level of 0.95 to accurately reposition students relative to the baseline image. Images were analyzed to calculate lesion area and loss of fluorescence (Δ The QLF software was used to calculate the area (mm The primary outcome for this study was the mean subject Δ Consent forms were sent out to a total of 445 children and 437 of them consented to take part in the study. The other eight children had left the school between the consent form being sent out and the study commencing. Of the consenting students, 341 children satisfied the inclusion criteria and were recruited into the study. Between the baseline and 3-month examination, six students were lost from the study as they had moved to other schools. Between the 3- and 6-month examinations, a further four children were lost from the study for the same reason. A total of 331 students completed the study of which 166 used the test dentifrice containing 1.5% arginine, and 165 used the positive control dentifrice with fluoride alone ( It can be seen in At the 3-month examination ( At the 6-month examination, further improvements in lesions were observed for all QLF metrics for both groups. For the arginine-containing dentifrice group, the baseline adjusted Δ This study has, once again, demonstrated that the new dentifrice containing 1.5% arginine, an insoluble calcium compound, and 1450 In two studies, using the same methods, very similar results were observed, with reductions in lesion area of approximately 50% in the group using the dentifrice containing 1.5% arginine, and insoluble calcium compound and 1450 Based upon an in vivo plaque metabolism study, Traditional clinical studies are routinely conducted on large numbers of subjects (4000) and last 2–3 years in order that cavities develop sufficiently to be detected using conventional visual or visual/tactile criteria. The ethics of conducting such studies when the most likely resulting intervention will be restoration, is now being questioned. It is known that therapeutic treatment of initial carious lesions is both possible and practical, and by employing sophisticated detection and measurement methods, outcomes can be monitored so that participants receive optimum, minimally invasive treatment. In particular, the QLF method has proven to be a powerful tool in the caries clinical hierarchy providing unique insights regarding efficacy and mechanism of action of anti-caries products on early coronal caries lesions that complement and augment those generated in traditional 2-year caries studies of cavitation. This study confirms that the use of Quantitative Light-induced Fluorescence (QLF) in studies of early coronal caries significantly improves the ability to discriminate between anti-caries products, enabling the studies to be conducted effectively in shorter time periods with fewer participants. In addition, the ability of products to re-mineralize initial carious lesions is measured accurately and at the stage prior to cavitation, when such products are likely to be most beneficial. It is concluded from this, and other studies, that a new dentifrice containing 1.5% arginine, an insoluble calcium compound and 1450 Drs Zhang, Cummins and Ellwood are employees of the Colgate-Palmolive Company. Drs Srisilapanan, Korwanich, Yin, and Chuensuwonkul have no conflict of interest. Mr Mateo provided independent statistical review of the data for the Colgate-Palmolive Company on a consultancy basis. This study was sponsored by the