Meat emulsions with a reduction of 0, 25, 50, 75, and 100% of phosphate levels were produced. Soon after filling, the pieces were sonicated in an ultrasonic bath (normal mode, 60% amplitude, 25 KHz frequency, 230 W acoustic power, and 33 W L−1 volumetric power) for 0, 9, and 18 min. The technological, oxidative, and sensory quality was evaluated. The reduction of the phosphate content in the non-sonicated samples led to a decrease in the cooking yield and emulsion stability and impaired the texture profile, and the oxidative and sensory quality of the samples. Although the 9-min ultrasound treatment was not effective to compensate for defects caused by the phosphate reduction, the application for 18 min improved the technological quality and did not increase the lipid oxidation. In addition, it allowed reducing most of the sensory defects caused by the reduction of 50% of the phosphate level. Therefore, the US can be useful to produce low-phosphate meat emulsions.The demand for healthier foods has increased significantly in recent years and the food industry has developed new products to meet this demand. Emulsified meat products, such as bologna and sausages, are widely consumed all over the world and are of great economic importance to the meat industry. These products contain high fat, high sodium, and chemical additives; thus, they have been targets for food reformulation from the perspective of improving the nutritional quality and consumers' health. Phosphates are additives widely used in the manufacture of emulsified meat products. These compounds act synergistically with NaCl in the extraction and solubilization of myofibrillar proteins, which are responsible for the water retention capacity, emulsification and fat retention in the meat emulsion and the stability of the gel formed during cooking ( Although the recommended daily intake of phosphate is 700 to 800 mg, phosphate intake exceeds 1200 mg per day in developed countries ( Ultrasound (US) is an innovative technology that has gained a lot of importance in the food industry due to its ability to inactivate microorganisms and enzymes at low temperatures, without altering flavor, color, and nutritional quality of foods ( Several studies have reported that the US treatment altered the structure and improved the functional properties of dietary proteins, such as whey proteins ( The entire experiment was repeated 3 times in 3 different days ( Immediately after filling, the pieces were sonicated for 0, 9, and 18 min ( The meat emulsion was cooked in water using three cooking stages, as follows: 30 min at 60 °C; 30 min at 70 °C and 80 °C until reaching the internal temperature of 72 °C, which was monitored with a thermocouple inserted in the center of one sample (discarded after cooking) ( Approximately 20 g of raw meat emulsion was packed in polyethylene bags. The bags were sealed, and the samples were cooked in water at 70 °C for 60 min. The cooking yield was calculated from the initial and final cooked weights, in quintuplicate, as shown in Eq. The emulsion stability was evaluated in quintuplicate according to the methodology described by TPA was performed in a texture analyzer equipped with a 25 kg load cell (TA-TX2, Stable Micro Systems Ltd., Surrey, England). Five samples per treatment were subjected to TPA. Four cylinders (2 cm thick and 2 cm in diameter) of each cooked meat emulsion (20 cylinders per treatment) were sampled with a cylindrical knife and compressed axially in two consecutive cycles of 50% compression. A probe of 40 mm diameter was used with a constant velocity of 1 mm/s. The texture parameters hardness (N), cohesiveness, springiness (mm), and chewiness (N) were determined. Ten grams of sample was mixed with distilled water (1:10), and the pH measurements were performed using a DM 23 electrode (Digimed, Brazil). Aw was determined using the Aqualab 4TE apparatus (Decagon, Pullman, USA). Both determinations were performed in triplicate using 3 cooked samples for each treatment. The TBARS values of the treatments Control The sensory profile of the treatments Control The sensory acceptance tests and Check all that apply (CATA) were used to trace a sensory profile of Bologna sausages with reduced phosphate levels. Samples were presented to consumers in a monadic form ( The acceptance test was applied using a structured hedonic scale of nine points, with extremes varying from disliked very much (1) to liked very much (9). The attributes color, aroma, flavor, texture, and overall acceptance were evaluated. For the CATA test, consumers were asked to mark all the sensory terms that characterized the sample. These terms were generated by a group of 10 Bologna sausage consumers and included the descriptors related to color (ideal), aroma (mild, acid, pleasant, unpleasant, rancid), taste (pleasant, unpleasant, acid, salty, and rancid) and texture (soft, juicy, and dry). A randomized complete block design was used. Data were analyzed by analysis of variance (ANOVA) using a general linear model procedure, except for the CATA results. The treatments were considered as a fixed effect and the repetitions as a random effect. The Tukey's test at the 5% level of significance was used to compare the mean between treatments. Pearson correlation test was performed and correlation coefficients were calculated between pH, cooking yield and emulsion stability of meat emulsions. CATA data were recorded in a binary format (0: attribute not ticked; 1: attribute ticked). The Cochran's Q test was applied to compare the products independently for each attribute, once a high proportion means that the attribute was frequently ticked by consumers for the considered product. A correspondence analysis was performed using the chi-square distance calculated from a frequency table made with the treatments in rows and the CATA terms in columns ( The addition of phosphate during the manufacturing process of meat products increases the muscle pH and ionic strength, which provides a greater extraction and solubilization of myofibrillar proteins ( The emulsion stability was determined as the percentage of water release ( The improvement in the technological quality of meat emulsions sonicated for 18 min suggests that the US caused a modification in the structure of the myofibrillar proteins, leading to a greater interaction between the polar and apolar groups of water and fat, respectively. In addition, the sonication caused by the US may have improved the diffusion of both salt and phosphate in the meat emulsion, thus contributing to a greater solubilization of the myofibrillar proteins ( The texture is an important quality attribute of emulsified meat products. The positive effects of the phosphate addition on the texture attributes have been reported by several authors ( The application of the US significantly affected the texture of cooked meat emulsions ( The reduction of cohesiveness and springiness is a serious problem that can affect the quality of emulsified meat products, once they are directly related to the sliceability. Alkaline phosphates added to meat increase the pH of meat, thus increasing the electrostatic repulsion between protein molecules ( The Aw of meat emulsions ranged from 0.97 to 0.98 ( In summary, the 9-min ultrasound treatment was not effective to compensate the defects caused by phosphate reduction. However, the application of 18 min of US improved the technological quality of meat emulsions, and therefore, it was chosen for the second experiment, in which, the lipid oxidation and sensory quality were evaluated. TBARS levels from 0.3 to 1.0 mg/kg can be considered as a threshold in meat products linked to consumer perception of unpleasant aroma and taste ( The application of US can lead to the formation of free radicals, thus increasing the speed of lipid oxidation reactions. However, the formation of the free radicals is influenced by various factors, e.g., pressure, temperature, ultrasound settings and type of liquid ( The correspondence analysis (CA) used to evaluate the descriptors generated by the CATA questionnaire is presented in The treatments without phosphate reduction (Control The results of the consumer study are presented in Therefore, the results of the CATA test and the consumer study suggest that the 25% phosphate reduction can be used without impairing the sensory quality of this type of meat product. On the other hand, the 50% phosphate reduction should be performed with caution as it may impair important sensory attributes, which can be prevented by the application of 18 min of US. For the first time, the effect of ultrasound on the technological, oxidative, and sensory quality of meat emulsions with reduced phosphate content was evaluated. The results showed that the application of 18 min of US in meat emulsion was effective to compensate for defects in cooking yield and emulsion stability caused by the phosphate reduction. In addition, the 18-min US application made the products more cohesive and did not increase the lipid oxidation. This condition was also effective for reducing most of the sensory defects caused by the 50% phosphate reduction. Therefore, the US can be considered a promising technology for producing healthier, acceptable, and economically viable meat products. This study was financed in part by the