There is currently no standard approach to laboratory flotation testing and interpretation. The deficiency stems, in part, from the difficulties in quantifying the recovery of mineral particles by hydraulic entrainment (Re
                     ) and the recovery of collected mineral particles across the froth zone (Rf
                     ) of a laboratory flotation cell. For lack of alternatives, most practitioners ignore entrainment (Re
                      = 0) and assume that froth recovery is 100% (Rf
                      = 1). Consequently, differences in test scraping frequency or froth characteristics can lead to large differences in the inferred collection kinetics.
                  This paper proposes resolving the problem by incorporating a phenomenological solution for Re
                      and Rf
                     . By considering the test water balance, incorporating hindered settling theory, and making some simple assumptions regarding the pulp, interface, and froth phases, it can be shown that the entrainment recovery of any mineral can be calculated solely from the particle size and specific gravity. A similar approach can be used to estimate the froth recovery as a function of time.
                  The method is applied to a data set of flotation tests conducted with different scraping rates, and it is demonstrated that it yields similar flotation rate constants regardless of the scraping rate.There is no accepted standard for calculating the residence time requirements for a bank of industrial flotation cells from laboratory flotation kinetics tests. In the western hemisphere base metal industry (which accounts for much of the authors’ experience), most engineering companies still rely on empirical methods such as the time multiplier method. Loosely stated, this means that the plant recovery will equal that of the laboratory test when the plant retention time is equal to that of the laboratory, multiplied by some factor, usually between 2 and 3. In this method, the value chosen for the time factor is based on experience. Therefore, the tests must be conducted in identical fashion—scraping frequencies, frother dosages, froth stability, and the equipment type (cell type, impeller speed, air flow rate) must all be standardized so as to avoid scale-up bias. Indeed, it is probably this standardization that explains why the 70-yr old Denver flotation cell is still the most popular laboratory cell for froth flotation test work, despite the availability of much more sophisticated (and instrumented) alternatives. The limitations of this kind of standardization are significant because it means that the flotation cell geometry, frother type and dosage, impeller type, diameter and rotational speed, scraping frequency, and other test parameters must be faithfully duplicated between laboratories and technicians. If they are not, then it creates a potential for scale-up bias ( For these reasons, many practitioners have turned to phenomenological models for flotation circuit simulation. The most widely adopted phenomenological model is the “compartmental” model, which discretizes the flotation system in two compartments and applies sub models for the relevant mass transfer vectors that occur in each one. The three main ones are: Mineral recovery in the collection zone, Mineral recovery in the froth zone, Mineral recovery by entrainment, which applies to uncollected hydrophilic and hydrophobic particles in the collection zone.  The following equations describe the system ( For continuous flotation, the collection recovery follows the continuous stirred tank reactor (CSTR) model ( It has been recognized for some time that recovery by entrainment is proportional to the size of the particle and the water recovery of the flotation cell ( While Eqs. Another common problem relates to entrainment. Because the relationship between the laboratory These two caveats create a “catch-22” when performing and interpreting flotation kinetics tests. On the one hand, the practitioner can perform a test with fast scraping rates—say, every 1 to 3 s the froth is completely removed from the surface of the cell—and minimize the error associated with the assumption that It is likely for this reason that many current test standards (to use the term loosely), involve scraping rates of between 10 and 15 s ( While this compromise around scraping frequency has provided a reliable scale-up method that has been used for many years to simulate industrial flotation circuits, it requires that the scraping frequency, froth characteristics, and other test parameters to be rigidly fixed, so as not to introduce error due to the underlying assumptions (for examples and discussion, see The only practical solution to the conundrum is to measure or infer Below, an alternative, phenomenological, approach is presented for estimating the values of The first step is to further develop the compartmental model by adding the vectors describing the mass transfer of water ( For a given mineral, the total recovery, R, is the sum of flotation and entrainment recovery; i.e. the sum of Eqs. The collection recovery of water, The froth recovery of water, The froth recovery of water can be defined as the fraction of water flux into the froth zone that is recovered to the concentrate; i.e.: Recognizing that at the beginning of the test (t = 0) there is no water drainage from the froth because a froth bed has not yet been formed, we can estimate The extrapolation of For the shallow, quiescent froth and short froth residence times of batch flotation tests, we can assume that particle reattachment in the froth zone is negligible, and hence: From a water balance around the froth zone of a laboratory test with continuous froth scraping, it is apparent that the net water flux through the interface and froth zone does not change with height; i.e. Eq. The net rise velocity of water ( Because the interface is the point of lowest rise velocity, a particle that is captured by hydraulic entrainment at the interface The concept of the interface threshold dictates that, for continuously scraped laboratory tests, the degree of hydraulic entrainment can be calculated directly by applying hindered settling theory to particles at the interface. For modeling hindered settling of distributed size and distributed density particulates, we have chosen the method proposed by Lee’s method, when applied to a flotation test, yields an idealized entrainment curve (Eq. In practice, the curve of  From the water balance, calculate the rise velocity of water for each period in the flotation test, starting with concentrate period 1 (Conc. 1). Calculate the terminal settling velocity for each mineral and in each size class using the equations above If no size-by-size mineralogical information is available, it is necessary to assume a mineral distribution to size classes for each mineral phase. If the settling velocity of the mineral in a given size class is greater than the rise velocity for that concentrate interval, the mineral is not recovered by entrainment; otherwise, it is. Sum the mass of each mineral entrained to derive the degree of entrainment for that concentrate period. Note that entrainment is applied after collection, so collection must be calculated first. The overall As noted above, froth recovery and entrainment are closely tied to scraping frequency. In an earlier work ( The test data set from this prior work was used to validate the entrainment and froth recovery models described above. Because all of the tests were performed under identical conditions, From This paper presents a method for using phenomenological models of froth recovery and entrainment for modeling batch flotation kinetics tests. If the scraping frequency is fast enough at the beginning of the test, any scraping rate—even variable scraping rates—can be used for the remainder of the test without significantly impacting the resulting collection rate constants. This has benefits because it means the concentrate and tails will be more representative of those of industrial plants, and therefore better suited for subsequent testing (i.e. settling rate tests, rheological characterization, and acid generation tests). The method also serves to reduce the fitting error by eliminating several key parameters from the test interpretation algorithm, including The method also has some limitations. For example, we have assumed spherical particles for the entrainment model, which may cause error for some minerals (this is hinted at by the high Perhaps the most interesting aspect of the method is that both entrainment and froth recovery are based on interface phenomena, a fact that may support the adoption of a “three compartment” structure for the modeling and simulation of mineral flotation systems. We’d like to thank Freeport-McMoRan for supporting this work.