Amelogenin, the predominant extracellular matrix protein secreted by ameloblasts, has been shown to be essential for proper tooth enamel formation. In this study, amelogenin adsorption to hydroxyapatite (HAP) surfaces, a prototype for enamel mineral, has been studied using a quartz crystal microbalance (QCM) to interrogate effects of protein phosphorylation and solution pH. Dynamic flow-based experiments were conducted at pH 7.4 and 8.0 using native phosphorylated porcine amelogenin (P173) and recombinant non-phosphorylated porcine amelogenin (rP172). Loading capacities (μmol/m2) on HAP surfaces were calculated under all conditions and adsorption affinities (Kad) were calculated when Langmuir isotherm conditions appeared to be met. At pH 8.0, binding characteristics were remarkably similar for the two proteins. However, at pH 7.4 a higher affinity and lower surface loading for the phosphorylated P173 was found compared to any other set of conditions. This suggests that phosphorylated P173 adopts a more extended conformation than non-phosphorylated full-length amelogenin, occupying a larger footprint on the HAP surface. This surface-induced structural difference may help explain why P173 is a more effective inhibitor of spontaneous HAP formation in vitro than rP172. Differences in the viscoelastic properties of P173 and rP172 in the adsorbed state were also observed, consistent with noted differences in HAP binding. These collective findings provide new insight into the important role of amelogenin phosphorylation in the mechanism by which amelogenin regulates enamel crystal formation.Phosphorylated extracellular proteins, including osteopontin, bone sialoprotein, and dentin matrix protein 1, have been demonstrated to play important roles in mineralization and the regulation of hard tissue formation, in part, due to the presence of multiple phosphorylation sites per protein Amelogenin protein structure and function have been recent topics of research interest. It is well accepted that amelogenin and its cleavage products make up over 90% of the extracellular enamel matrix, that amelogenin self-assembles into supramolecular structures in solution in a pH-dependent fashion, and that protein–protein and protein-mineral interactions play a crucial role in mineral regulation Solution NMR and FT-IR studies have provided additional insight, showing that the monomeric protein is intrinsically disordered but that it adopts different structures when interacting with molecular moieties QCM is a technique that has been widely used as a biosensor to study protein-surface interactions in real-time Hydroxyapatite nanopowder (<200 A quartz crystal microbalance (QCM) sensor was used in order to analyze protein adsorption to HAP surfaces in real time with high sensitivity. The QCM (Stanford Research Systems, QCM 200) was operated in an equivalent circuit mode An HAP surface was prepared on the QCM gold electrode using a suspension of 5 HAP was characterized using optical microscopy, SEM, and FT-IR. Electron microscopy was completed using a Zeiss EVO LS10 microscope operated at 2.0 Prepared frozen protein stock solutions (5 The QCM axial flow cell was filled with 20 The Langmuir isotherm was used to determine affinity constants (K Complete coverage of the gold QCM electrode with HAP is crucial to gaining specificity for protein adsorption. Hydroxyapatite nano-powder characterization from the manufacturer confirmed the structure by FT-IR spectroscopy, complexometric titration, atomic emission spectroscopy, and TEM analysis Proteins rP172 and P173 ( In contrast, initial binding rate and total mass adsorption increase significantly for both proteins at pH 7.4 compared to that found at pH 8.0. Kinetic rates in the first 2 The data represented in For comparison, additional amelogenin binding experiments were conducted under static, no-flow conditions over a period of 120 The importance of amelogenin solution structure Prior to adsorption experiments, it was imperative to ensure a stable calcium phosphate layer with complete coverage of the QCM electrode and the characteristics of crystalline HAP. Optical and electron microscopy in The first observation made when comparing adsorption of the two amelogenin proteins is that at pH 8.0 they behave with remarkable similarity with regard to loading capacity, footprint, and apparent mechanism of adsorption to HAP. At this pH, the protein is known to form nanometer-sized aggregates in solution Significant differences arise in QCM binding data when the pH is lowered to pH 7.4. At this pH, both proteins show higher loading capacity (N It is also apparent that at pH 7.4, significant differences arise between protein phosphorylation states that were not seen at pH 8.0. At pH 7.4, P173 binds to HAP with a higher affinity (K The assessment of adsorption kinetics, made possible with dynamic QCM measurements, provides additional support of surface rearrangement and structural switching (Supporting information, S2). Initial rates (0.025 Static QCM experiments (Supporting information, S5) were conducted to make comparison with kinetic adsorption results. Importantly, static experiments demonstrate that both amelogenin proteins reach stable adsorption states and do not continue to aggregate or bind non-specifically over a 2 A significant advantage of the QCM, relative to traditional approaches to elucidate the mechanism of protein binding to surfaces, is in its ability to interrogate viscoelastic properties in addition to mass loading. When rigid materials adhere to the QCM gold electrode, the acoustic wave generated by the resonant quartz propagates with minimal energy loss through the solid material then penetrates into the contact media as an evanescent wave. Biomolecules are not considered rigid, but have viscoelastic properties that interact with the evanescent acoustic wave. Rigorously solving mathematical models to calculate energy loss to a biomolecule is not trivial, but differences in viscoelastic properties are measured as loading resistance, ΔR, and can be used We conclude from these data that at pH 8.0 both rP172 and P173 have similar interactions in solution and at the HAP surface. At pH 7.4 the phosphorylated P173 adopts a more extended conformation upon adsorption resulting in a higher affinity and larger footprint. The ability of P173 to bind with higher affinity, cover an HAP surface with fewer protein molecules, and more rapidly equilibrate with mineral surfaces, as observed in the present study, suggests that native amelogenin phosphorylation may markedly affect its capacity to regulate enamel mineral formation by better stabilizing mineral phases This study was supported in part by The authors acknowledge Drs. James Simmer and Yasuo Yamakoshi for supplying native and recombinant amelogenins for this study. AEG would like to thank Dr. Felicitas Bidlack and Mark Dougherty for their helpful discussions regarding experimental design. Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at AFM of HAP spin-coated onto a QCM crystal; Kinetic rates for the first two minutes of binding in dynamic experiments; Langmuir isotherm plots for dynamic QCM experiments; Complete binding curves at additional concentrations for QCM dynamic experiments; Static binding plots and Langmuir isotherm plots for static QCM experiments. The following is Supplementary data to this article: