Self-aligned titania nanotubes have been fabricated by electrochemical anodic oxidation of titanium foil in organic electrolyte containing fluoride ions. Varying the water content in electrolyte used during anodization results in a fluorine concentration gradient along the titania nanotubes. A consequence of this is the dependence of the extent and morphology of the nanograss layer on the water content in the electrolyte. A mechanism has been proposed for the formation of the nanograss layer over titania nanotubes and its different morphologies viz. ring type or vertical splitting.Titanium dioxide nanotubes (TiO In this work, we demonstrate that variation in water content in organic based electrolyte causes difference in nature of splitting of nanotube (NT) from vertical splitting which was responsible for nanograss (NG) formation to ring type splitting of the nanotubes. Based on thorough characterization of the TiO Titanium foils (0.6 Viscosity of electrolyte was measured using Brookfield R/S Plus rheometer. Morphological aspects of the titania NT/NG layers were characterized using JEOL JSM 7600F Field Emission Scanning Electron Microscope (FE-SEM) and JEOL JEM 2100F Field Emission Transmission Electron Microscope (FE-TEM).  To analyze the effect of anodization parameters on the nanograss formation, different anodization parameters such as electrolyte composition (ethylene glycol, NH The overall process of nanotube formation by oxide formation, selective etching and dissolution is given by The water content in the electrolyte used is much more than what is consumed during anodization as per the above reactions. The extent of excess water is expected to affect viscosity of the electrolyte and mobility of different ionic species (mainly fluorides) which will in turn influence the rates of anodic oxidation, dissolution of TiO In order to study the effect of water content on the formation of nanograss, samples were anodized for 4 It has been reported that, the conductivity of electrolyte increases with increase in water content The enhanced rate of dissolution of nanotubes resulted in the absence of nanograss in films anodized in high water content (>15%) electrolyte ( It was observed that for anodization carried out in electrolyte containing 20 The as-anodized tubes have residual electrolyte consisting of ethylene glycol and fluoride inside them. To study the presence of fluorine along the length of the nanotube, the TiO In the TiO Proposed mechanism for splitting of titania nanotubes – along or perpendicular to the tube axis is depicted in The F It must be pointed out that for a fixed viscosity, despite significant change in ionic strength of electrolyte ( The influence of water content in the electrolyte on nanograss formation during anodization has been studied. Two types of splitting in TiO The authors would like to acknowledge DST India, NCPRE, SERIIUS, SAIF, I.I.T Bombay, for the financial assistance and analytical facilities. The authors would also like to acknowledge Sajan Pillai for graphical work, Santosh Shaw and Lekha P. for technical discussions. Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at The following are the supplementary data to this article: