Femoral shaft fractures are among the most severe injuries of the skeleton. They are associated with high morbidity and mortality. The most appropriate treatment depending on the type of fracture and location level should be chosen.
                  A finite element model of the femur has been developed, analyzing various types of fractures in the subtrochanteric and diaphyseal supracondylar area, with several gap sizes, being stabilized with a single combination of screws for the intramedullary nail. The mechanical strength of the nail against bending and compression efforts was studied comparing two materials for the nail: stainless steel and titanium alloy.
                  Beside the finite elements (FE) simulations, a clinical follow-up was carried out, considering a sample of 55 patients, 24 males, and 31 females, with mean age of 52.5 years. Localizations of fractures were 22 in the right femur and 33 in the left one, respectively.
                  A good agreement between clinical results and the simulated fractures in terms of gap size was found. Non-comminuted fractures have a mean consolidation time of 4.1 months, which coincides with the appropriate mobility at fracture site obtained in the FE simulations, whereas comminuted fractures have a higher mean consolidation period estimated in 7.1 months, corresponding to the excessive mobility at fracture site obtained by means of FE simulations.
                  The obtained results between both nail materials (stainless steel and titanium alloy) show a higher mobility when using titanium nails, which produce a higher rate of strains at the fracture site, amplitude of micromotions and bigger global movements compared to stainless-steel nails. Steel nails provide stiffer osteosyntheses than the titanium nails.
                  In conclusion, anterograde locked nail is particularly useful in the treatment of a wide range of supracondylar fractures with proximal extension into the femoral diaphysis.intramedullary nailing finite element three dimensional computed tomography computer-aided design post-operative Femoral shaft fractures are among the most severe injuries of the skeleton, characterized by high morbidity and mortality In 1940s, Gerhard Küntscher Their indication has been extended to almost all femoral proximal and distal fractures: running from the lesser trochanter to the supracondylar area zones 2 (subtrochanteric) and 5 (supracondylar) Although several improvements in IM nails have been made, some complications remain as fatigue failure, non-union and screw loosening. Reducing the stiffness of nail material can contribute to diminish stress-shielding and thus accelerate the fracture-healing process The indications for anterograde intramedullary nailing are essentially extra-articular fractures, inclusive in the rare cases of bi- or trifocal fractures of the distal femur, where nailing is often the only option Despite the multiple designs, techniques, and materials, the static locking intramedullary nail remains the reference treatment of femur fractures located between zones 2 and 5 of Wiss In vivo animal experiments on biomechanical behavior of intramedullary femoral nails are not transferable to humans due to anatomical differences and load conditions. Similarly, in vitro experiments on cadaveric bone or plastic bone models Few studies have been published on experimental or computational models based on FE method applied to intramedullary nailing investigation of femoral shaft fractures. Wang In the herein study, we evaluated the stability of an IM Stryker femoral nail S2 (Stryker, Mahwah, NJ, USA). A FE model of the femur was developed, analyzing various types of fractures in the subtrochanteric and diaphyseal supracondylar area, being stabilized with a combination of screws. The mechanical strength of the nail against bending and compression efforts was assessed in order to determine its maximum resistant capacity. Both a 316 LVM stainless-steel and Ti-6Al-4V alloy implants were studied. A comparative analysis of the different types of osteosynthesis at different fractures was undertaken, in order to verify the optimal solution in each case of those analyzed. A three-dimensional (3D) finite-element model of the femur from a 55-year-old male donor was developed. The outer geometry of the femur was obtained by means of a 3D scanner Roland3D Roland The studied femoral nail Stryker S2™ (Stryker, Mahwah, NJ, USA) was 380 Nail surgery was reproduced in I-Deas in a virtual way, inserting the nail into the femur with the corresponding screws. Afterward, the assembly of the computer-aided design (CAD) model was performed under surgeon supervision. Bone, nail, and screws were meshed with linear tetrahedra. They were assumed for the bone linear elastic isotropic properties ( A sensitivity analysis was performed to determine the minimal size mesh required for an accurate simulation. For this purpose, a mesh refinement was performed in order to achieve a convergence toward a minimum of the potential energy, both for the whole model and for each of its components, with a tolerance of 1% between consecutive meshes. All the considered fractures were modelled as transverse by means of an irregular surface developed to represent a closer geometry to the actual fracture. The effect of gap size remains unclear in the literature. So, the majority of the reviewed in vivo studies are referred to a gap size ranging from 0.6 to 6 Thus, using this irregular fracture pattern, three different fracture gaps have been studied: 0.5 The study was focused on the immediately post-operative stage. Thus, the interaction at the fracture site does not take into account any biological healing process. Contact interaction was assumed between the outer surface of the nail and the inner cortex of the medullary canal of the femur ( This study considered fully constrained conditions at the condyles and a load case associated with an accidental support of the leg at early post-operative (PO) stage ( Beside the FE simulations, a clinical follow-up was carried out, considering a sample of 55 patients, 24 males and 31 females, with mean age of 52.5 years, all of them treated with femoral nail Stryker S2™. Localizations of fractures were 32 in the right femur and 33 in the left femur. The distribution corresponding to fracture localization and fracture grade are included in The FE simulations allowed obtaining the mobility results for the different cases analyzed. In order to study relative micromotion at fracture site, pairs of homolog points at the fracture site were identified, as nodes that were opposed as shown in When analysing results, Perren’s method   Nevertheless, when evaluating the global stability reported in For steel nail, With respect to the clinical follow-up, non-comminuted fractures found to have a mean consolidation time of 4.1 months, whereas comminuted fractures (grade 4, Winquist and Hansen) had a higher mean consolidation period of 7.1 months. On the other hand, intermediate comminution grades lead to longer mean consolidation periods than non-comminuted fractures (4.9 months for grade 1 and 6.2 months for grade 2, respectively). Grade 3 was not finally considered because only one case was assessed. So, the healing time increases in as much as the comminution grade is higher. Difficulties in vivo experimentation and the unreliability of in vitro models has supported the development of simulation models by FE that allow studying different biological systems in both physiological and pathological conditions. They provide a quick and easy testing in different conditions difficult to achieve experimentally. However, they are still a very limited number of published papers, which study the behavior of intramedullary nails in the femur. The models developed in the present work allow the simulation of fracture in different locations, with different gap and different alternatives of nailing (material and different locking system), and determine whether the relative displacement at the fracture site fall within acceptable limits, in order to achieve fracture healing. The stability of the fracture is essential for the consolidation. Fracture healing depends on general and local factors which may be modified by extrinsic conditions, such as biomechanics of fracture fixation Although distal fracture (zone 5 of Wiss) is considered to be the most problematic area in terms of fracture stability, anterograde intramedullary nailing is a suitable option to provide stability at the fracture site Anterograde interlocked intramedullary nails have been used successfully in the treatment of extra-articular distal femoral fractures with 7 There is a good agreement between clinical results and the simulated fractures in terms of gap size. Thus, non-comminuted fractures have a mean consolidation time of 4.1 months, which coincides with the appropriate mobility at fracture site obtained in the FE simulations, whereas comminuted fractures (grade 4, Winquist and Hansen) have a higher mean consolidation period estimated in 7.1 months, corresponding to the excessive mobility at fracture site obtained by means of FE simulations. On the order hand, the obtained values between both nail materials (stainless steel and titanium alloy) show a higher mobility when using a titanium nails, which produce a higher rate of strains at the fracture site, amplitude of micromotions and bigger global movements compared to stainless-steel nails. This tendency is related with the stiffness of both materials: steel nails provide stiffer osteosynthesis than the titanium nails. The obtained results agree with previous experiences using anterograde intramedullary nails. So, anterograde interlocked intramedullary nails have been used successfully in a wide range of fracture types: in the treatment of extra-articular distal femoral fractures with 7 However, contraindications to anterograde nailing are a preexisting proximal prosthesis or hardware, femoral deformity, obliteration of the intramedullary canal, and insufficient distal bone stock There is a good agreement between clinical results and the simulated fractures in terms of gap size. Non-comminuted fractures have the minimum mean consolidation time, which coincides with the appropriate mobility at fracture site obtained in the FE simulations, whereas comminuted fractures have the higher mean consolidation period, corresponding to the excessive mobility at fracture site obtained by means of FE simulations. Considering the obtained results, it can be asserted that the anterograde locked nail is particularly useful in the treatment of a wide range of supracondylar fractures with proximal extension into the femoral diaphysis. AH, JA, and LG conceived the design of study. LG, SG, EI, and SP conceived and developed the finite element models and carried out all the simulations. AH and JA realized the medical supervision of models. All authors participated in the drawing up of the manuscript, and read and approved the final manuscript. This research has been partially financed by None declared.