As part of a hydrocyclone control system, different measured values have been tested, which can serve as a command variable for volume split regulation. Indicators for the operating state are the sediment mass stored in the conical part of the hydrocyclone, the formation of the air core and the shape of the underflow discharge. Principally, all tested variants including mechanical and optical detection of the discharge shape, hydrocyclone weighing and acoustic emission sensing are suitable for this purpose. Contact-free methods using laser signals for pattern analysis of rope/spray discharge or Fourier analysis in case of a laser vibrometer are given preference.Uniform feed conditions regarding solids concentration and particle size distribution are a precondition for a good separation efficiency of hydrocyclones. Varying feed conditions lead to considerable fluctuations of the cut size and the separation sharpness. A hydrocyclone control system developed by This contribution presents different variants of hydrocyclone monitoring as part of a hydrocyclone control system. In order to serve as a command variable of hydrocyclone control, a measured value of the hydrocyclone state has to perform the following conditions: sensitivity; non-invasive sensing; on-line sensing with a sampling time <1 s; robust sensors, insensitive to blinding and mechanical stress; cost effective instrumentation. As can be seen from sediment mass stored in the hydrocyclone, formation of the air core, shape of the underflow discharge. In In The Measuring the discharge shape of the underflow using mechanical detection ( electrical capacitance tomography ( Measuring the internal operating state of the hydrocyclone by weighing the hydrocyclone ( tomography using X-ray ( electrical impedance ( acoustic emission sensing ( The following monitoring methods were included in this report: Detecting the shape of the underflow using the dielectric properties of the underflow with a capacitance probe as direct contact sensor, optical pattern identification with a CCD-camera. Measuring the internal process state of the hydrocyclone using a gravimetric determination of the hydrocyclone weight using a weighing cell, and the measurement of the hydrocyclone oscillations by an acoustic sensor. The special capacitance probe (  As can be seen from  Laser–optical monitoring implies the advantage of an indirect, non-invasive method. The equipment can be installed at a certain distance from a splashing hydrocyclone discharge. The necessary hardware (laser, CCD-camera, PC) consists of mass production articles. Therefore, this modern method is attractive for future applications. Here, the mass of the solids content in the hydrocyclone is detected by applying a weighing procedure. The mass of the solids accumulated in the cyclone depends on the solids content and particle size distribution in the feed.  These images were computed by The hydrocyclone is mounted to the distributor by using an arm, where also a weighing cell is installed. All other connections of the cyclone on the feed side and the overflow side are carried out in flexible version. Measuring the hydrocyclone weight enables a direct and fast determination of the operating state. Though, the signals are superimposed by disturbing forces coming from the flexible connections of the hydrocyclone. These forces depend on the operating conditions (pressure drop) and assemblage, necessitating a special software for the compensation. Therefore, this method is less recommendable for demanding practical conditions. Hydrocyclones in operation are vibrating units. Vibration generating mechanisms are instationary movements of the turbulent multiphase flow in the hydrocyclone. Here, the eccentrical and instable movement of the air core and of the discharged rope in dense flow separation plays an important role. Further, turbulent movements and particle impacts to the hydrocyclone wall cause higher frequency oscillations. These stimulations act on the natural oscillation of the hydrocyclone, influencing the oscillation mode. The measurement system (  As can be seen from A robust installation can be realized by casting a microsensor into a polyurethane apex. Oscillation measurement may be performed more efficiently by using a laser vibrometer that is installed at a certain distance from the hydrocyclone. For hydrocyclone control, a measuring quantity is required which indicates the transition of rope discharge to spray discharge. Principally, the tested quantities for discharge shape, hydrocyclone weight and acoustic emission are all suitable for this purpose. Under the rough practical conditions of a splashing and mechanically stressed hydrocyclone battery, the safe installation of a remote sensing system plays an important part. Furthermore, simple measurement principles, continuously producing large data quantities in a short sampling time, should be given preference. Then, this procedure should be combined with a demanding, PC-supported signal treatment. From this point of view, contact-free laser–optical devices that are installed at a certain distance from the hydrocyclone seem to be advantageous. The signals of a laser–optical scanning of the underflow discharge are undergone a pattern recognition. In case of a laser vibrometer, the signals are transmitted to a fast Fourier transformation. Finally, it has to be mentioned that the hardware costs for these measuring systems are relatively low.