We have studied the functional behavior of the field-cooled (FC) magnetic relaxation observed in melt-textured YBa2Cu3O7-δ (Y123) samples with 30 wt% of Y2Ba1Cu1O5 (Y211) phase, in order to investigate anomalous paramagnetic moments observed during the experiments. FC magnetic relaxation experiments were performed under controlled conditions, such as cooling rate and temperature. Magnetic fields up to 5T were applied parallel to the ab plane and along the c-axis. Our results are associated with the paramagnetic Meissner effect (PME), characterized by positive moments during FC experiments, and related to the magnetic flux compression into the samples. After different attempts our experimental data could be adequately fitted by an exponential decay function with different relaxation times. We discuss our results suggesting the existence of different and preferential flux dynamics governing the anomalous FC paramagnetic relaxation in different time intervals. This work is one of the first attempts to interpret this controversial effect in a simple analysis of the pinning mechanisms and flux dynamics acting during the time evolution of the magnetic moment. However, the results may be useful to develop models to explain this interesting and still misunderstood feature of the paramagnetic Meissner effect.The Meissner effect is one of the most important features of the superconducting state, characterized by a diamagnetic response showed by a superconducting material due to exclusion of the magnetic flux from its interior, when the temperature is below the critical temperature (T However, in several situations the superconducting material exhibits a paramagnetic response during a FC process, contrasting with the usual diamagnetic behavior, and the effect is called Paramagnetic Meissner Effect, or simply PME. In the PME the magnetic flux is not expelled, but penetrates into the material creating a paramagnetic state. In some cases the positive magnetic moments can increase with the applied magnetic field in such way that the PME is reinforced with the increase of the magnetic field. Originally the PME was observed in polycrystalline samples of high temperature superconductors A curious and interesting feature is the anomalous time dependence of the FC magnetic moment observed in some superconducting samples In this study we report on FC magnetic moment relaxation experiments in two melt-textured YBa The two melt-textured YBa The melt-textured pieces were cut with a diamond saw in small parallelepipeds with 3.0 The magnetic measurements were performed with a MPMS-XL SQUID magnetometer and a vibrating sample magnetometer (VSM), both from Quantum Design, in magnetic fields up to 5T applied along the c-axis and parallel to the ab plane. The experimental results were always corrected for temperature gradient and demagnetization effects. Initially the magnetic moments were measured as a function of the temperature according to the zero-field cooling (ZFC) and field-cooled (FC) prescriptions. The ZFC results (not shown here) always showed the usual diamagnetic response, due to shielding effects. The FC measurements were performed with two different procedures namely, field-cooled cooling (FCC) and field-cooled warming (FCW) prescriptions. In the FCC prescription the magnetic moment was measured while cooling the sample to temperatures below the critical temperature (T The FC magnetic moment relaxation experiments were performed at fixed temperature and magnetic field. In this case, similar to FCC prescription, the sample is cooling down to a temperature below T The PME in our samples was clearly identified by FC measurements, as shown in In our view the PME results in our samples may be explained in terms of the compression of the magnetic flux, as originally proposed by Koshelev and Larkin We performed specific FC magnetic relaxation experiments, according to the experimental procedures described in the The The results shown in the In order to understand the functional behavior of the magnetic relaxation shown in the The combination of two exponential functions allowed us to define the time intervals of the dominance of each one in the In our view, the results presented in the In the early stages of the magnetic relaxation the vortices penetrate in the grain junctions (weak links), configuring a Josephson dynamics scenario. Melt-textured samples are known to have oriented long platelets microstructure, as can be seen in the On the other hand, the black solid curves fitting the long time intervals in the We performed an experimental study about the anomalous FC magnetic relaxation in two melt-textured YBa Finalizing, our results constitute a simple and interpretative analysis, sometimes speculative, of the FC magnetic relaxation in samples that exhibit the PME. Due to the lacking of works exploring the functional behavior of the magnetic relaxation connected to PME, our results may supply important elements to more detailed models on this interesting effect. This work was financed by the Brazilian MCTI/CNPq Universal 14/2012 (contract number 477506/2012-7). We acknowledge the support of the HLD-HZDR, member of the European Magnetic Field Laboratory (EMFL).