The functional resins with amino ligands are synthesized by the modification of lightly crosslinked poly(vinylbenzyl chloride–divinylbenzene) matrix with the following amines: 1-methylpiperazine, ethylenediamine, dipropylamine, 1-methylimidazole, 2-mercapto-1-methylimidazole, 1,2-dimethylimidazole and 1-(3-aminopropyl) imidazole. Two methods of the modification reactions were employed, the first one is the traditional heating of the polymer with either neat amine or amine solution in an appropriate solvent, the second method is heating of the reaction mixture in a microwave reactor. The resultant resins show different degrees of modification depending on the applied method and contain 1.61–3.68mmol of ligand/g. The 1-methylimidazole resin displays the highest affinity towards gold from ammonium buffer (100g/dm3 NH3
                     ·H2O, 50g/dm3 (NH4)2SO4). For this resin, the sorption is as high as 15.5mg/g and log K
                     d (distribution coefficient) value is 2.94. All resins are highly selective and they do not sorb copper amino complexes.
                  These polymeric materials were characterized using nitrogen, sulfur and chlorine elemental analysis and FTIR spectroscopy.In recent years, the use of cyanide as a lixiviant for gold has been criticized because of the environmental reasons and, at the same time, non-cyanide lixiviants, such as: thiourea, thiosulphate, hydrochloric acid and ammonia have been increasingly studied Ion-exchangers and chelating resins are widely used in hydrometallurgy, especially for the recovery of precious metals from leach solutions. Chelating polymers are characterized by the presence of reactive functional groups containing O, N, S and P donor atoms that are capable of forming complexes with metal-ions. The adsorbent properties depend on the physical and chemical properties of the resin (type and structure of the functional groups introduced into the polymer matrix, cross-linking degree, swelling) and sorption conditions (pH of the solution, contact time, quantity of the resin, concentration of the metal-ions, type and presence of blast ions). Particularly, the ion exchange resins, containing selective functional groups, are very useful for the separation of noble metal-ions from various solutions So far, only small amount of work was done and reported on the application of polymeric resins for the removal of cationic complexes of gold. There is in the literature a paper, presenting synthesis of resins with carboxyphosphonate ligands (containing hard O donor atoms) and their use in sorption of gold from ammonium buffer In this present study, we decided to obtain resins with ligands containing less hard N- and soft S-atoms and to investigate their sorptive properties towards The chemicals were Sigma-Aldrich products. The solution of gold in ammonium buffer was prepared by dissolving metallic gold in an aqua regia. The solution of [AuCl The initial gold concentration was 431.40 Stability constant of VBC/DVB copolymer were prepared from vinylbenzyl chloride (VBC/DVB) and divinylbenzene (DVB) using suspension polymerization. They were either gel type or, when obtained in the presence of toluene, had an expanded gel structure. Polymers contained 0.5 and 2 The polymeric resins were prepared by conventional and microwave modifications. In order to prepare Resin 1, 3 and 6 ( The guanylthiourea resin (Resin 2) was prepared by the following procedure: first, VBC/DVB (0.5% of DVB) copolymer has been modified with ethylenediamine in order to introduce amino groups into its structure. The resin with ethylenediamine ligands is swollen in butanol for 24 In the microwave method (Resins 4,5,7 and 8), the VBC/DVB (2% of DVB) copolymer was placed on a petri dish and swollen with amine (five times molar excess with respect to the chlorine content in the polymer) for 1 Water regain was measured using centrifugation method in which about 1 Nitrogen content was determined using the Kieldahl method after mineralization of the sample of resin (about 200 The chlorine content was measured by burning about 20 The sulfur content was measured by burning about 20 The sorption capacity of the resins towards The distribution coefficient ( FTIR spectra of resins in KBr pellets were recorded on a Perkin–Elmer System 2000 spectrophotometer. The polymeric resins (Resins 1, 3–8) were prepared by the chemical modification of the VBC/DVB (2%) polymer. This material with expanded gel structure, containing 2 conventional method (modification at reflux or at room temperature); and microwave method. In the case of conventional method energy transport by means of the heat conduction and convection is not even in the reaction mixture. It is due to the difficulties with mixing of mixture containing polymers, which very often are mechanically unstable and produce high amount of “fines”. Compared to the conventional method, microwave process has the following advantages: selective heating; no direct contact between the heating source and the heated material; savings of energy and time; and reduced equipment size, waste and processing costs. Moreover, the internal heating associated with microwave energy can lead to products that cannot be achieved using conventional method. These advantages contribute to use of microwave methods in the synthesis of resins. The polymeric materials obtained by both conventional and microwave methods were characterized by elemental analysis ( The best result was obtained in the case of 2-mercapto-1-methylimidazole resin (Resin 6) synthesized at room temperature. Elemental analysis gave 7.35 The resin containing also 2-mercapto-1-methylimidazole groups (Resin 5) has been prepared using microwave modification. The yield calculated from the nitrogen content is much less and equals only 47%. In both cases, the concentration of 2-mercapto-1-methylimidazole, used during the modification reaction, was comparable: 11% for Resin 5 and 10% for Resin 6. The reactions of VBC/DVB (2%) with imidazole derivatives (Resins 4, 5, 7, 8) were carried out for 7–10 The resins with 1-methylpiperazine (Resin 1) and dipropylamine (Resin 3) ligands were obtained by refluxing the amine and VBC/DVB copolymer for 6 The polymeric resin with guanylthiourea groups (Resin 2) was prepared in a two-step reaction. The resin containing ethylenediamine (Cl content 0.00 The structures of all polymeric resins were confirmed using FTIR method. In the spectra of all resins, the peaks at 1446, 1488 and 1606 The spectrum of guanylthiourea resin is characterized by The proposed structures of the resins are presented in Amino groups contribute to the hydrophilicity of resins due to possibility of formation of hydrogen bonds with water. The resin with 1,2-dimethylimidazole ligands is the most hydrophilic, having water regain equal to 4.76 The sorption properties of these resins towards gold and copper were studied under the conditions presented in Experimental part. The results are shown in According to the Hard and Soft Acids and Bases (HSAB) theory of Pearson, noble metals (Au, Ag, Pt) are considered “soft acids” and tend to form stable complexes with ligands containing “soft” donor atoms (“soft bases”) such as sulfur and, to a lesser extend, nitrogen which is a donor with the character between soft (like S) and hard (like O). The prepared resins with amino ligands display affinity towards The best sorption capacity towards gold shows Resin 4, modified with 1-methylimidazole in a microwave reactor. The sorption degree of gold is 17.5%. The guanylthiourea resin displays the high affinity towards noble metal due to the presence of donor N- and especially S-atoms in its functional groups, although the ligand concentration is smaller than in other resins. The sorption degree of gold is 46%. One can find the difference in the affinity towards gold between Resins 5 and 6, both with 2-mercapto-1-methylimidazole ligands. Although ligand concentration in Resin 6 (3.68 The presented resins are selective towards ammine complexes of gold in relation to  Modification of VBC/DVB copolymers with 1-methylpiperazine, ethylenediamine, dipropylamine, 1-methylimidazole, 2-mercapto-1-methylimidazole, 1,2-dimethylimidazole and 1-(3-aminopropyl) imidazole is an effective method of polymeric resins preparation. Both methods of modification, that is conventional heating in neat amine or amine solution as well as microwave heating are applicable although in some cases the resultant resins have different structure as evidenced by FTIR and sorption properties. Resins are useful for sorption of The presence of large excess of ammonium cations,