The flotation process of minerals is influenced by the shape of the particle. In this paper, the glass beads and fragments are selected as different shape materials. The effect of particle shape on bubble-particle attachment behavior is investigated by the bubble-particle attachment angle tests and flotation tests. The bubble-particle attachment angle (BPA) is introduced to quantify the mass of particles. The results show that the irregular glass fragments have a lager BPA than that of glass beads. The addition of collector improves floatability of glass particles and then weakens the influence of particle shape on the BPA. The flotation results show the cumulative flotation recovery corresponds to the BPA and the addition of collector also weakens the role of the shape in the cumulative recovery. Glass fragments with shape edges can accelerate the thinning and rupture of the water film between bubble and particle and hence enlarge the BPA and flotation recovery.Flotation is a widely used method to separate the valuable minerals from other gangue particles in the flotation pulp [ The bubble-particle attachment interaction of different particle shape is not well understood, and the flotation recovery experiments were usually used to verify it [ This paper used the BPA to reveal the influence of particle shape on the bubble-particle attachment which has not yet reported before. In this study, the spherical glass beads and the irregular glass beads fragments which are produced by the crushing of spherical of glass beads, are used for samples to investigate the effect of particle shape on the bubble-particle attachment angle and its flotation behavior. The samples used in this paper were 0.1 mm and 0.5 mm glass beads (Biospec Products, Bartlesville, Okla.). The 0.5 mm glass beads were crushed by the FW100 high speed universal grinder (TAISITE Instrument, Tianjin, China) for 30s, and then wet-screened to obtain the −0.106 + 0.096 mm size fraction glass fragments. In order to avoid the influence of the impurities and fine fragments generated during grinding adsorbing on the surface of the glass beads and fragments, 0.1 mm glass beads and − 0.106 + 0.096 mm glass fragments were firstly cleaned using concentrated hydrochloric acid for 1 h and rinsed with de-ionized water until the pH became neutral.  An experimental apparatus for observing the measurement of bubble-particle attachment angle is shown in the The 2 g samples were put in the 80 mL of de-ionized water at pH of 10 in the tank with or without the addition of collector and the usage of collector was 10 Flotation tests are carried out in a 100 mL XFG flotation cell (Nanchang Jian Feng Mining Equipment Co.Ltd., Nanchang, China) using 2 g samples. The impeller rotation speed is 1800 rpm and the airflow rate is 60 mL/min. The dodecyl amine hydrochloride (DAH) and secondary octanol are selected as the collector and frother respectively. The pulp at pH of 10 is first agitated for 1 min. After the agitation process, the collector (10   However, the difference in the increasing trend of BPA can be found by compared to Comparing to the glass beads, during the attachment of bubble and particle, the glass fragments are angular and have more angular shape which can easily rapture the water film between the particle and bubble [ When the glass particles are presented in DAH solutions, the ions are adsorbed on the surface of the particle surface, and the hydrophilic glass particles are converted to the hydrophobic ones [ Images of the particles attaching to the bubble in the presence of 10 As shown in the In the presence of DAH, the cumulative recovery of three kinds of glass particles all increases with the flotation time. For the usage of 10 As shown in the In this paper, glass beads, fragments and the mixture are prepared, and the bubble-particle attachment angle tests and flotation tests are used to investigate the effect of particle shape on bubble-particle attachment behavior. The following conclusions are obtained: The BPA increases with the increase of the agitation time with or without DAH collector, and irregular glass fragments have a lager BPA than that of glass beads. However, the addition of collector improves floatability of glass particles and then weakens the influence of particle shape on the BPA. The flotation cumulative recovery of glass fragments is higher than that of glass beads with or without collector, which corresponds to the BPA. In addition, the addition of collector also weakens the role of the shape in the flotation recovery. Irregular glass fragments are more competitive than the spherical glass beads during the flotation of mixture. The competitiveness of the glass fragments is weakened under the higher usage of the collector reagent in the flotation process. This research was supported by the