Adsorbent (T3K618) has been prepared from Tunçbilek lignite by chemical activation with KOH. Pore properties of the activated carbon such as BET surface area, pore volume, pore size distribution, and pore diameter were characterized by t-plot based on N2 adsorption isotherm. The N2 adsorption isotherm of malachite green on T3K618 is type I. The BET surface area of the adsorbent which was primarily contributed by micropores was determined 1000m2/g. T3K618 was used to adsorb malachite green (MG) from an aqueous solution in a batch reactor. The effects of initial dye concentration, agitation time, initial pH and adsorption temperature have been studied. It was also found that the adsorption isotherm followed both Freundlich and Dubinin–Radushkevich models. However, the Freundlich gave a better fit to all adsorption isotherms than the Dubinin–Radushkevich. The kinetics of adsorption of MG has been tested using pseudo-first-order, pseudo-second-order and intraparticle diffusion models. Results show that the adsorption of MG from aqueous solution onto micropores T3K618 proceeds according to the pseudo-second-order model. The intraparticle diffusion of MG molecules within the carbon particles was identified to be the rate-limiting step. The adsorption of the MG was endothermic (ΔH°=6.55–62.37kJ/mol) and was accompanied by an increase in entropy (ΔS°=74–223J/molK) and a decrease in mean value of Gibbs energy (ΔG°=−6.48 to −10.32kJ/mol) in the temperature range of 20–50°C.Dyes removal of wastewater is the main problem encountered in textile industry. Although they are not particularly toxic, the dyes affect aquatic diversity by blocking the passage of light through the water. Since the effluents have complex nature, it is difficult to treat such stream by a single process and conventional physicochemical and biological treatment methods are not sufficient for adequate treatment. Liquid-phase adsorption processes have been shown to be highly efficient for removal of colors, odor, organic and inorganic pollutants from the industrial wastewater. This has created an interest concerning the use of activated carbon on this area. But its usage is limited due to its high cost and this has lead many researchers for cheaper sources to prepare activated carbon. Ru-Ling et al. The aim of the present work is to study the adsorption capacity of activated carbon (T The dye, malachite green, CI Brought in containers from Tunçbilek–Kütahya (Turkey) lignite was dried under laboratory conditions for 3 The spectrophotometric determination of dye was done on a Shimadzu UV–vis spectrophotometer (Model UV-2100S). The pH of solutions was measured by using microprocessor based pH meter (Hanna Instruments pH 211). The pore structures of active carbon were investigated by using the standard Micromeritics DFT plus software. Nitrogen adsorption was recorded at 77 Dye solutions were prepared in distilled water at desired concentrations. Adsorption experiments were carried out by agitating 0.1   Effect of temperature and dye concentration on removal of dye by activated carbon (T The magnitude of electrostatic charges imparted by ionized dye molecules is primarily controlled by the pH of medium. The amount of dye adsorbed or rate of adsorption tends to vary with pH of aqueous medium. The experimental result of the adsorption of MG on T And with the rise in pH the dye becomes more and more de-protonated. The low adsorption of dye also exhibits possibility of development of positive charge at activated carbon particles, which inhibits the adsorption of dye. However, the formation of electric double layer changes its polarity in the basic medium. Consequently, the dye removal increases. This result consists with literature Adsorption experiments were carried out for different contact time at different temperature with a fixed adsorbent dosage of 0.1 The adsorption equilibrium data were fitted for Langmiur, Freundlich and Dubinin–Radushkevich (D–R) isotherms. The isotherm results indicate that the adsorption of MG onto T The Freundlich adsorption isotherm can be expressed  The D–R equation can be expressed   It is important to mention that in the present studies, Freundlich model fits slightly better than the D–R model. This result has been recorded for other similar results in the literature Several kinetics models are used to examine the controlling mechanism of adsorption process such as chemical reaction, diffusion control and mass transfer. Applying those models given in literature The pseudo-first-order equation is expressed The pseudo-second-order kinetic model of Ho and McKay The rate parameter for intraparticle diffusion is determined using the following equation First, the values of log( Second, the plots of ( Third, the intra particle diffusion rate, obtained from the plots Kinetic parameters for three kinetic model and correlation coefficient were summarized in  Effect of concentration and temperature on the MG adsorption is shown in Standard enthalpy (Δ It is seen in The results of this work can be summarized as follows: The N T Maximum removal of dye was observed at pH ∼5. Adsorption experiments were carried out for different contact time at different temperature with a fixed adsorbent dosage of 0.1 The adsorption isotherm followed Freundlich and Dubinin–Radushkevich models. The Freundlich gave a better fit to all adsorption isotherms (at 20, 30, 40, 50 The kinetics of adsorption of MG on T The adsorption of the dye, malachite green, was found to be endothermic indicating that the adsorption would be enhanced at temperature above the ambient temperature. The author wishes to thank the (DPT K120330) Planning Organization Center for support.