The particle size distributions (PSDs) of two portion sizes (2g and 4g) of five foods (cake, cereal bar, muesli bar, cooked pasta and peanuts) after human mastication were determined. The PSD of the expectorated bolus and residual ‘debris’ rinsed from the mouth were each determined by wet sieving. There were significant differences in the PSD between food types, between portion sizes in the debris fraction and between the bolus and debris fractions. The latter suggests the existence of a two compartment system where particles are comminuted in at least one compartment within the oral cavity.In mastication studies, a bolus is generally considered the main bulk of food which is masticated at a given point in time within a chewing sequence or the mass of food which is initially swallowed. The debris is the residual material left in the mouth after the bolus has been swallowed. After further clearance, some of the debris may also be swallowed, however, we are still normally left with some material trapped in various locations within the oral cavity. We could consider that the ingested food dissociates and becomes located in two ‘compartments’, i.e., within the main bolus or dispersed elsewhere within the mouth. The assessment of masticatory function by means of comparison of particle size distributions The general assumption that mastication takes place in a single ‘chewing’ compartment may have resulted from early studies of fracture dynamics which used foods or food analogues that were prone to simple fracture, and generated particles that did not adhere to each other. The extent to which particles are retained in subsidiary compartments is likely to be influenced by their physical properties, e.g., their size. It is known that larger particles generated during the mastication of some foods may lodge in interproximal spaces, If the physical characteristics of particles generated from a given food do not lead to subsidiary compartmentation, i.e., the mouth operates as a single compartment, then the particle size distribution of the material within the mouth will be uniform regardless of the site from which it is sampled. Conversely, if subsidiary compartmentation has occurred then the particle size distribution will vary between the compartments, i.e., with site of sampling, given that the pattern of particle size distribution changes rapidly during early chewing. The purpose of this work was to determine the extent to which subsidiary compartments are formed when various types of food are chewed by comparing differences in particle size distributions between the expectorated bolus and remaining debris. The effect of food portion size on compartmentation was also examined. Five foods were chosen with a differing range of sugar, moisture and fat contents, pH and homogeneity, namely cake (Ernest Adams, Madeira), cereal bar (Griffins, Fruitli Apricot), muesli bar (Uncle Tobys, Forest Fruits Chewy Bar), cooked pasta (San Remo, Large Instant Lasagne), and peanuts (unsalted, roasted). The properties of each of the five foods were characterised by texture profile analysis (TPA) The food samples were standardised by weight (either 2 Ten male subjects (mean age: 21.5 Subjects were given the instruction not to touch the food with their hands, but to tip the samples directly from the container into their mouth. The subjects were allowed to swallow the first sample of each food after it had been chewed to form a bolus. Subsequent samples were chewed and the bolus expectorated onto a sieve (0.120 The bolus and debris samples were each washed with 100 A Kolmogorov–Smirnov test (with Lillifors significance correction) for normality was conducted on the data set: percentage of particles on each sieve fraction, debris/bolus ratio and mass of debris solids. The debris/bolus ratio and mass of debris solids were log transformed to achieve normality. Stratified ANOVAs were undertaken to examine the effect of portion size, food type and subjects on the log (debris/bolus ratio) and log (mass of debris solids) data. These statistical analyses were performed using GenStat version 12 (VSNi Ltd., UK). The distribution of particle sizes in each compartment (bolus and debris) is likely to depart from normality as a significant proportion of material may be selectively retained in a subsidiary compartment, or move between compartments in the mouth. Therefore, the percentage particle size distribution from each sieve fraction was log transformed to achieve a normal distribution. We discarded the results from one sieve to maintain available degrees of freedom; data from the largest sieve (4.0 Particle size distributions were characterised using principal components analysis (PCA), and scores of the samples on the significant principal components were analysed using a stratified ANOVA. Initially, the bolus and the debris data were each analysed for food type and portion size effects, with subject and subject The composition and texture profile analysis characteristics varied across the five foods ( The total dry mass of solids recovered on the sieves expressed as a percentage of the dry matter ingested was incomplete for all food types, varying from 14 to 61% ( A stratified ANOVA on the (log of) debris/bolus ratio indicated a significant difference between food types ( The average particle size distributions (PSDs) for each food type are shown in Overall the particle size distributions of the food boluses were all significantly different between the food types ( Overall, the debris fraction particle size distributions were significantly different for each food type ( Significant differences were identified between the bolus and debris fractions for all food types ( There was no significant effect of food portion size on bolus particle sizes ( Variations between subjects, between subjects’ PSDs for different foods, and between bolus and debris were larger than the corresponding replicate to replicate variation within subjects (variance ratios range from 6.8 to 0.9), but these variations were smaller than the difference between food types, or between bolus and debris. (All The quantity of total solids recovered by the wet sieving technique was significantly lower than that ingested and was of similar levels to those reported by other researchers. The significant variation in bolus PSDs produced from different food types supports previous findings Pasta is more cohesive, very adhesive, has a higher TPA chewiness score and a sparse soluble matrix so that the generation of finer particles requires greater comminution. The low cohesiveness and chewiness scores of peanuts suggest they are brittle and readily comminuted. The cereal and muesli bars had very similar TPA scores except for the muesli bar having greater adhesiveness. The less homogenous muesli bar matrix contains relatively large intact ingredients (grains, raisins, etc.) bound together and set with a sugar syrup. This suggests an initial phase during mastication where dissolution of the sugar releases the larger particulate material followed by breakage of these particles. The differences in particle size distribution between bolus and debris support the hypothesis that the resultant particle size distribution of a food depends on the dynamics of the mouth as a multi-compartment rather than a single compartment system. Comminution occurs in at least one compartment (i.e., on the molars), but not necessarily to food present in the other compartments (e.g., interproximal spaces) although moisture adsorption and dissolution of soluble materials are likely to occur in all compartments. The general trend across all foods with debris containing greater proportions of mid-range particles than the bolus suggests that whilst particles are retained in this compartment they are withheld from the occluding surfaces. Particles over 4.0 We hypothesise that one of the mechanisms for particles to move into the debris compartments are particles sticking to the teeth. In this case the tooth area for this to occur is finite and therefore it is possible that the mass of particles that can be lost into the debris compartment is also finite. The variation between the particle size distribution of the bolus and debris that occurs between food types indicates that either the amount of particulate material retained, or the duration of its retention in non-chewed compartments, may be influenced by the physical properties of the food. It is noteworthy that some degree of compartmentalisation between debris and bolus was observed in all foods in this investigation, despite their differing initial physical and chemical properties. Examination of the variations in the ratio of debris to bolus solids with food properties gives some insight into the mechanisms that operate to retain particles in the non-chewed compartments. In the high sugar content foods such as muesli bar debris particles had a greater chance of being retained in non-chewed compartments whilst debris from lower sugar content foods such as pasta was not so readily retained. However, debris from other low sugar content food, e.g., peanuts, was also retained in non chewed compartments to a greater extent than pasta. This may have been due to compaction i.e., elastic elements being packed into non chewed compartments such as the fissures in the molar surfaces. It is likely that the debris compartment in the masticatory system itself consists of multiple components. Some particles are likely to stick to teeth or mucosal surfaces, other particles will become impacted into molar fissures, others will re-join the bolus in the oral cavity, and yet others will simply lodge in non mixing zones of the oral cavity. The degree to which debris particles adhere will depend on the relative force balance between adhesive (between food and surface) and cohesive (interstitial to food) forces and other forces active during mastication, for example compression, suction, and shear together with the tribological properties of the bolus. It is also possible that liquid surface tension affects the internal and external properties of the bolus. Of the particles that adhere to the teeth, it is possible that these preferentially originated from larger particles. It is not known what happens to the debris if a subsequent bite of food occurs, as in eating a meal. The debris proportion could reach a level of saturation where no more debris is added to a particular compartment, or the debris portion could circulate continuously and join the bolus portion while other material moves to the non-chewed compartments. At the end of a meal, a clearance stage When portion size increased, the mass of solids in the bolus also increased. The particle size distributions were slightly influenced by portion size; the PSD shifted to a higher proportion of larger particles with an increase in portion size, however, this was only significant in the debris fraction. This indicates that particle fracture, matrix dissolution and liberation of fine particles occurs in larger boluses with equal efficiency to smaller boluses; this would need to be assessed for portion sizes >4 Our work demonstrates that the debris is a significant proportion of the total mass of solids recovered and, having a different PSD to the bolus, should not be excluded from particle size analysis. Analysis of the bolus and debris separately may give further insight on the cohesiveness of the bolus at swallowing, particularly for foods which are sticky or form a bolus where you have discrete particles suspended in a mostly saliva phase, e.g., raw carrots. The significant differences found between the PSDs of the expectorated boluses and debris for all foods investigated suggests that mastication occurs within a multi-compartmented system where particles are comminuted in at least one compartment. Overall, increasing mouth fill resulted in an increase in larger particles, although this was only significant for the debris fraction. The authors thank the participants in this study, J. Keiser (University of Otago) for the dental examinations, D. Hedderley (Plant and Food Research Ltd.) for the review of statistics and E. Kim, L. Motoi and A. Wilson (Plant and Food Research Ltd.) for instrumental and chemical analyses of the food.   