Abstract – Acute and chronic injuries of the Lisfranc joint
               
            
               Lisfranc joint injury consists of dislocation or fracture dislocation through the tarsometatarsal joints. Historically, this injury are uncommon accounting for only 0,2% of all fractures but with improved diagnostic evaluation they were found to be a more common injury. Lisfranc complex problems represent à broad spectrum of injuries. Up to 20% of these injuries are misdiagnosed or overlooked completely particularly in subtle injuries or if there are distracting concomitant injuries. There should be a high index of suspicion and prompt diagnosis is important to allow patients to return to their activity with the best outcome possible.
            
               The anatomy is thought to play an important role in the injury patterns. The second metatarsal is firmly keyed into a tight articulation with the five adjacent bones and this mortise effect is the primary stabilizer of this area. The Lisfranc ligament serves to secure the second metatarsal in the keystone of the midfoot and is the largest and the strongest of the interosseous ligaments.
            
               Early accurate diagnosis, prompt anatomical reduction and stable internal fixation is the recommended treatment of Lisfranc joint injuries. Anatomic reduction of the Lisfranc joint is one the most important factors in determining outcome.
            
               Non operative treatment is reserved for stage1 sprains. In minimally displaced injuries reduction may be performed percutaneously, however, if a perfect reduction cannot be obtained, rigid internal fixation is recommended with screw medially and Kirschner wires laterally that allows stable healing and prevent the need for salvage arthrodesis. Primary arthrodesis should be reserved as a salvage procedure for comminuted injuries or in patients with purely ligamentous Lisfranc injuries.
            
               Traumatic ligament injury and fractures can result in deformity, instability, pain and degenerative joint disease of the Lisfranc joint. Post-traumatic arthritis is related to articular damage and inadequate reduction and can be treated conservatively with a soft orthosis and a stiff-soled shoe that accommodate the deformity.
            
               When an arthrodesis of the tarso-metatarsal joints is performed for persistant pain and disability of the involved joint, it should involved realignment of the deformity of the midfoot that contributes to the over-all good results.