A self-lubricating, wear-resistant metal matrix composite (MMC) coating of significant thickness (approximately 1.2mm) was produced by melting, using the plasma transferred arc technique, the surface of duplex stainless steel 2205 which was covered with a powder mixture of Al2O3, TiS2 and Fe. During solidification, Al2O3 forms and as the adjacent dissolved Al content in the melt decreases, the local Al and Ti contents reach a point when Al2TiO5 becomes thermodynamically stable and forms on the existing Al2O3 particles. As the melt cools further, the solubility of sulfur in molten steel decreases and the previously formed complex oxides spontaneously act as nucleation sites for sulfides (Ti4C2S2 and TiS), whereas Al2TiO5 is reduced to Al2O3. As the solidification proceeds, δFe begins to form by a eutectic reaction. During this stage, sulfides also form, which are also TiS and Ti4C2S2. After completion of the solidification, a partial solid-to-solid transformation δFe
                     →γFe (ferrite to austenite) takes place. The balance between austenite and ferrite in the matrix was slightly disturbed (36vol.% austenite and 64vol.% ferrite) but within the acceptable limits.
                  The friction coefficient and the wear rate of the coating against an Al2O3 pin were lower compared to the corresponding values of the coating prepared without the addition of TiS2. The Al2O3 reinforcement particles are surrounded by sulfides and thus they have better wettability by the molten stainless steel. As a result, they are less detachable compared to the Al2O3 particles of the coating fabricated without the addition of TiS2. In addition, since there is a metallurgical bond between the Al2O3 and the surrounding sulfide, it may be presumed that even when Al2O3 particles eventually detach, they are always surrounded by sulfides which not only prevent the oxides' action as a third body abrasive but also act as lubricants.Stainless steels are used in a variety of applications due to their good corrosion resistance and mechanical strength. However, when the application involves moving and contact surfaces, wear resistance of the materials is also indispensable. In order to fulfill this requirement, which is not adequate in stainless steels, research has been made towards the production of stainless steel coatings reinforced with carbide particles, using laser or electric arc melting In an attempt to overcome this drawback, a metal matrix composite coating was produced on the surface of duplex stainless steel 2205 by the plasma transferred arc (PTA) technique using titanium carbide powder Since it is not feasible to introduce a larger volume of Al Duplex stainless steel UNS S31803 (SAF 2205) was used as the substrate material. The chemical composition of the steel was determined by mass spectroscopy and it is presented in A powder mixture of Al After the treatment, the specimens exhibited a surface roughness equal to R The tribological properties of the coating were investigated using a pin-on-disk apparatus, according to ASTM G99-95A, “Test Method for Wear Testing with a Pin-on-Disk Apparatus”. The tests were operated under non-lubricated conditions, in air with a relative humidity of 15–20 %, at 293–295 During the scanning process by the PTA, the powder together with a part of the duplex stainless steel's surface melts. This blended melt subsequently solidifies upon cooling and thus a metal matrix composite is produced, herein referred to as “coating”. A cross section of the coating is shown in In the PTA process, the arc is formed between the tungsten electrode (−) and the workpiece (+), i.e. the workpiece is part of the electric circuit and it should be electrically conductive. The electrical conductivity of Al The microstructure of the coating is shown in During the PTA scanning of the surface of the specimen, a melt is created, which is 1.27 As the solidification proceeds, δ The XRD pattern of the coating ( Ti The volume fraction of austenite and ferrite in the matrix of the composite coating was determined using the XRD pattern of The friction coefficient of the coating against an Al The hardness of the coating is 345 During the sliding of the pin on the coating, the austenitic–ferritic matrix is eventually worn by abrasion and plastic deformation with characteristic grooves is observed in the SEM micrographs of the tracks ( The present coating has better tribological performance compared to the coating prepared without the addition of TiS In the present paper, a metal matrix composite coating was produced on the surface of duplex stainless steel 2205, using a powder mixture of Al During solidification, Al The friction coefficient and the wear rate of the coating against an Al The