Background
                  Safety and feasibility of a regenerative strategy based on the use of culture-expanded mesenchymal stromal cells (MSCs) have been investigated in phase 2 trials for the treatment of nonunion and osteonecrosis of the femoral head (ONFH). As part of the clinical study, we aimed to evaluate if bone turnover markers (BTMs) could be useful for predicting the regenerative ability of the cell therapy product.
               
                  Materials and Methods
                  The bone defects of 39 patients (nonunion: n = 26; ONFH: n = 13) were treated with bone marrow–derived MSCs, expanded using a clinical-grade protocol and combined with biphasic calcium phosphate before implantation. Bone formation markers, bone-resorption markers and osteoclast regulatory proteins were measured before treatment (baseline) and after 12 and 24 weeks from surgery. At the same time-points, clinical and radiological controls were performed to evaluate the bone-healing progression.
               
                  Results
                  We found that C-Propeptide of Type I Procollagen (CICP) and C-terminal telopeptide of type-I collagen (CTX) varied significantly, not only over time, but also according to clinical results. In patients with a good outcome, CICP increased and CTX decreased, and this trend was observed in both nonunion and ONFH. Moreover, collagen biomarkers were able to discriminate healed patients from non-responsive patients with a good diagnostic accuracy.
               
                  Discussion
                  CICP and CTX could be valuable biomarkers for monitoring and predicting the regenerative ability of cell products used to stimulate the repair of refractory bone diseases. To be translated in a clinical setting, these results are under validation in a currently ongoing phase 3 clinical trial.The discovery of a subpopulation of bone marrow (BM) cells able to differentiate into the various mesenchymal lineages dates back almost to five decades ago The therapeutic success of a regenerative MSC-based approach depends on multiple factors, including the homing ability of MSCs, the multi-lineage differentiation properties, the responsiveness to biological cues coming from the damaged tissue and the capability to secrete soluble factors that promote the recruitment and function of endogenous cells, thus creating an optimal regenerative milieu Patients affected by a delayed union or nonunion of the long bones or ONFH were recruited in two prospective, controlled, multicentric, phase 2a, interventional clinical trials identified as OrthoCT1 and OrthoCT2, respectively. General inclusion criteria were as follows: age 18 to 65 years, both sexes and the mental capacity to understand the plan and provide the informed consent. Specific inclusion criteria were as follows: for OrthoCT1, the delayed union or nonunion of a traumatic long bone fracture that occurred from 3 months at least, diaphyseal or metaphyseal-diaphyseal, closed or open according to Gustilo I/II; for OrthoCT2, avascular necrosis of the femoral head with less than 6 months of evolution, classified as 0, 1 or 2 according to Ficat and Arlet or as stages 0, I, IIA, IIB or IIC by Steinberg Blood sample collection for the BTM assay was scheduled at the baseline, i.e., pre-operatively, and at 12 and 24 weeks post-operatively. All samples were managed according to standard operative procedures to avoid the potential sources of analytical and biological variability The BTM circulating levels were measured using a sandwich enzyme immunoassay technique, with each sample tested in duplicate. All calculations and analyses were carried out using MedCalc Statistical Software version 18.2.1 (MedCalc Software bvba) and XLSTAT (XLSTAT 2019, Addinsoft). Quantitative data were expressed as the arithmetic mean plus or minus the standard error of the mean (SEM), median and range of values. The D'Agostino-Pearson method was used to test the normality assumption of continuous variables, and a log transformation was applied when the data distribution was non-normal. All follow-up parameters were analyzed under the intention-to-treat principle and using the ‘last value carried forward’ approach to address missing data The Receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curves were plotted to identify threshold values of BTM changes that showed the best sensitivity (true positive rate) and the best specificity (true negative rate) in recognizing the target condition, i.e., the good outcome, which was independently defined through clinical and radiological criteria. A bootstrap resampling method has been used to minimize the limitations due to the small sample size    In the next step, we took into account only the subjects who had a good clinical result after MSC implantation and searched for BTMs that had the same trend over time, regardless of the underlying disease ( The above results suggested that both CICP increase and CTX decrease correlated with a higher probability of a satisfactory clinical result after implantation of culture-expanded BM-MSCs. The ROC analysis was applied to determine the threshold values of BTM variations and their ability to identify who exhibited the condition of interest, i.e., the subjects with a good outcome ( The threshold value of the CTX variation was -0.002, thus corresponding to the baseline. Therefore, to have a positive test the CTX serum level had to be lower than that measured before treatment (positive test ≤-0.002; negative test >-0.002). The positive test was found in about 77% of patients with a good outcome (sensitivity), while the specificity showed that CTX increased in 100% of failures. The probability of having a good outcome was 100% when the CTX variation was less than the baseline, whereas the probability of a poor outcome (negative PV) was 36% if CTX increased. Also for CTX, the positive LR tended to infinity, meaning that a positive test is expected in patients who experienced good clinical results. Instead, the probability of having a CTX increase combined with a good outcome was 0.2 (negative LR). Bone-healing disorders and, more broadly, all functional disturbances that destroy the integrity of bone tissue represent a considerable challenge for orthopedic surgeons. Conventional procedures do not always produce satisfactory results so that specific treatments to stimulate the bone regeneration are required BAP is an early marker of MSC osteogenic differentiation and is essential for the bone matrix mineralization. Serum concentration seems to be directly related to the number and differentiation stage of osteoblasts, but an increase is also expected as a corrective reaction against excessive bone resorption We compared the BTM changes with the clinical results in all patients enrolled in OrthoCT1 and OrthoCT2 who have experienced the same regenerative treatment even though affected by different orthopedic diseases. As mentioned, the experimental plan was conceived to establish if one or more of the selected BTMs were worthy of further validation studies. The mean level of BTMs measured before treatment was within the normal range and close to that found in post-menopausal women As expected, BTM modifications after regenerative treatment varied according to the outcome and underlying disease that, in turn, emerged as a critical variable in subjects who experienced a satisfactory clinical result. The bone formation markers, i.e., CICP and N-Mid OC, increased and CTX decreased significantly when patients had a good outcome, whereas the same BTMs showed an opposite trend when the outcome was negative. However, previous results concerning nonunions revealed also a significant increase in BAP We assumed that the best candidates for monitoring the healing induced by cell product engraftment had to be scarcely influenced by the variable “disease”. Therefore, we focused on the BTMs whose changes correlated with good outcome and showed a similar trend in both diseases, and CICP and CTX met the above criteria. In ONFH, a remarkable post-implantation decrease of BAP and a significant increase in N-Mid OC were recorded, whereas in nonunions the same markers moved toward an opposite direction, as previously shown As a final step, the diagnostic accuracy of CICP and CTX was calculated and, according to the ROC curve, both seemed to be able to discriminate patients who had a good outcome from those who did not. Regarding CICP, our findings indicate that an increase is expected after regenerative treatment, and, if the collagen synthesis is 10% lower than the baseline, the probability of a poor outcome is very high. On the contrary, the CTX lowering compared with baseline was associated with a very high chance of a good outcome. A biological explanation of why collagen biomarkers seem to be suitable for tracking bone healing triggered by high-dose MSC implantation may be provided. After 24 weeks, it is expected that the phase of proliferation and differentiation of bone-forming cells is decreasing, whereas the anabolic process characterized by the synthesis of new collagen is fully active. Even the decline in collagen degradation may be explained because there is a slowdown of the bone turnover as the healing is progressively gained and patients gradually resume their physical activity after surgery. However, it should be remarked that the calculated threshold values indicate what is the expected trend of the two collagen markers, but they cannot be used as absolute reference values because the deviation from the baseline is lower than their least significant change (CICP 29%; CTX 15%) The literature about the relationship between BTM changes and bone repair mainly deal with the fracture-healing process, but no consensus has been reached about their accuracy in predicting the outcome. The BTM variation over the time course of a fracture repair mainly depends on the lesion type and on the healing time The current report shows that collagen biomarkers, CICP and CTX, could be used for monitoring and predicting the regenerative ability of cell products used to stimulate the repair of refractory bone diseases. Ultimately, the idea of combining two different diseases turned out to be the strength of the study because post-implantation BTM changes related to the cell product activity irrespective of the etiopathogenesis of the bone defect were identified. Although the reliability of results on diagnostic accuracy was supported by statistical methods adequate for analyzing a small sample size, the diagnostic performance of the selected markers cannot be inferred from our results with absolute confidence. Indeed, studies on a limited number of cases can provide only valuable information to test hypotheses or to observe a tendency This research was funded by the European Commision (EC), Seventh Framework Program (FP7), through the REBORNE Project, grant agreement number 241879, and partially by the Italian Ministry of Health, Ricerca Corrente (2018-2020). 