Various methods are being used for surface modification of orthopedic and dental implants such as deposition of biocompatible coatings on implant surfaces. In this study, hydroxyapatite/hydroxyapatite-Mg double-layer coatings applied on 316 LVM stainless steel are investigated. The applied coatings consist of a dense layer of plasma-sprayed hydroxyapatite and a top layer of cold-sprayed hydroxyapatite-magnesium composite coating (Mg = 10 and 30 wt%). The coated samples were characterized by X-ray diffraction (XRD), scanning electron microscopy (SEM), and Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy (FTIR) tests. The biological behaviors of the coated samples were evaluated by immersing the samples in a simulated body fluid (SBF) followed by inductively coupled plasma (ICP) spectroscopy, MTT and electrochemical tests. Microstructural studies of the coated samples after corrosion tests showed that the magnesium component of the top layer degraded in SBF solution and formed porosities, which are potential sites for bone tissue growth. Results of ICP spectroscopy analysis indicated that the applied double-layer coating systems prevent the release of toxic elements in the substrate such as nickel. Results of MTT and SBF immersion tests showed that the double-layer coating system improves the biocompatibility and bioactivity of 316 LVM stainless steel.Despite the desirable properties of metallic biomaterials compared with non-metallic ones, the usage of bio-metals is limited due to surface corrosion and wear [ Various methods have been studied by many researchers to improve the surface properties of metal implants. One of the best ways to overcome the above-related difficulties is to improve the corrosion and wear resistance of the implant through surface modification. Among surface modification methods, the use of corrosion-resistant coatings has attracted the attention of many researchers [ During the last decades, bioactive ceramics have been widely used as medical materials because of their desirable properties, including biocompatibility, chemical stability, and corrosion and wear resistance [ Presence of porosity in the surface of implants is one of the most important parameters affect osseointegration. These pores are useful sites for penetration of osteoblastic cells and formation of connective tissue between implants and bone. The use of biodegradable materials in the surface of implants can help to create Growth of Mg-HA thin film on magnesium substrate by pulsed laser deposition technique has previously been studied by Mensah-Darkwa et al. [ In the present study, HA/HA-Mg double-layer coatings applied on 316 LVM orthopedic implant have been studied. A relatively dense HA intermediate layer was applied by plasma spraying method in these double-layer systems in order to increase the corrosion resistance of the substrate. HA-Mg top layer was also applied by cold spraying technique. The biodegradable Mg phase at the top layer can improve the osseointegration process by forming porosities in the body fluid. The effect of different amounts of Mg in top layer on the electrochemical and biomedical properties of coated samples was investigated and the results were compared with the uncoated substrate. Magnesium powder (Merck, 99.9%, <100 μm) and nano-hydroxyapatite powder (Merck, 99.9%, <60 nm) were used as the raw materials. Transmission electron microscopy (TEM) micrograph of nano-hydroxyapatite powder is shown in Before performing the coating process, the sample surface was grit blasted and rinsed thoroughly with acetone. HA intermediate coatings were applied by plasma spraying method using Metco apparatus with a maximum current of 500 A. A mixture of argon and hydrogen gases with an Ar: H Scanning electron microscopy (SEM, Cambridge Stereo Scan - 360UK) was carried out to study the morphology of the coated samples. Phase analysis of the coated samples was characterized by X-ray diffraction (XRD, Philips, Cu Kα). The chemical bonding of the coated samples was determined by Fourier transform infrared (FTIR) Spectroscopy (Spectrum RXI PerkinElmer). In order to evaluate the corrosion resistance of the coating systems, open circuit potential (E The coated and uncoated samples were first immersed in 60 ml SBF for 6 h at 37 °C. After that, the released ions in SBF were measured by inductively coupled plasma-optical emission spectrometry (ICP-OES) (VISTA-PRO Varian model). In order to determine the bioactivity of the coated substrates, the growth of HA on the surface of the coated samples which were immersed in SBF for 14 days was evaluated. The pH of the electrolyte was continuously measured and fixed at 7.45 ± 0.01 by adding HCl. The surfaces of the coated samples were evaluated by SEM. In order to study the viability of the osteoblastic cells on the coated samples, the MTT assay was used. To evaluate and compare cell viability, each sample was incubated in 70% ethanol solution overnight and then it was exposed to UV irradiation for 3 h and washed with phosphate buffered saline (PBS). MTT powder was dissolved in phosphate-buffered saline with a concentration of 5 mg/ml. The prepared solution was kept at 4 °C in a dark container. G-292 osteoblastic cells were used in this study. Each sample was placed in a 24-well cell-culture plate separately, and then cells were cultured with a cell number of 4.8×10 XRD patterns of the surfaces of the coated samples with 10 wt% and 30 wt% magnesium before and after sintering are plotted in   Surface and cross-sectional SEM images of the HA-30 wt% Mg coated sample are shown in The uniform distribution of Mg phase can be observed in the EDS map images of this sample in  Cyclic polarization plots of the uncoated substrate, HA-10 wt%Mg and HA-30 wt% Mg coated samples are shown in   Results of ion release from the substrate and the coatings to SBF are presented in   In the present study, HA/HA-Mg double-layer coatings have been successfully applied on 316 LVM stainless steel. The applied coatings consist of a dense plasma-sprayed HA intermediate layer and a cold-sprayed HA-Mg composite coating (Mg = 10 and 30 wt%). The microstructure, electrochemical, and biomedical properties of the coated and uncoated samples were investigated. The following conclusions are obtained from the present research: The higher corrosion resistance of the coated samples than that of the uncoated substrate is due to the existence of a relatively dense HA intermediate layer. Dissolution of Mg phase in the top layer (in SBF) of the coated samples, results in porosities. These porosities are potentially suitable regions for bone growth. HA/HA-Mg double-layer coatings decrease the release of toxic elements in the substrate. For example, here nickel was reduced from 14.7 ppm to less than 0.09 ppm. HA/HA-Mg double-layer coatings lead to an increase in the viability of the osteoblastic cells in 316 LVM stainless steel from 72% to 97%. The authors declare that they have no known competing for financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper.