The physical properties of slate in buildings are affected by its bedding angle and confining pressure. A total of 74 slate specimens with seven bedding angles and five levels of confining pressure were tested in uniaxial and triaxial compression tests. The effects of bedding angle and confining pressure on the mechanical behaviour of the brittle slate were quantified. The test results showed that, with the increase of confining pressure, the compressive strength of rock increased significantly. The variation in compressive strength of slate under confining pressure could be described by the parabolic Mohr-Coulomb strength criterion. The strength of slate is the lowest when the bedding angle is 45°–60°, and greatest when it is below 15°. When unconfined, the fracture angle of slate is 65°–90°. With increased confining pressure, the fracture angle of slate tends to 45° from above. As the bedding angle increases from 0° to 90°, the fracture angle of slate presents a U-shaped curve. When the bedding angle is 75°–90°, the deformation modulus of slate is greatest, and is minimised when the bedding angle is 45°–60°. Even if the confining pressure is low, the deformation modulus of slate is significantly increased compared to that in unconfined conditions. It proves that shotcrete treatment of the rock surrounding a tunnel will greatly improve the supporting effect thereon.Slate has traditionally been used as a building material for slate houses or fences because it is easily broken into thin plates and is easily obtained in mountainous areas. Among modern building materials, slate is often incorporated as an important component in cement mortars As a pronounced lithological feature, the presence of well-developed slaty structures, cleavage, lamination or bedding planes in slate makes its physical, mechanical, and hydraulic properties highly anisotropic or transversely isotropic Considering the stress conditions of materials in engineering applications, triaxial loading is usually applied to analyse the mechanical behaviour thereof. High confining pressure influences the mechanical properties and fracture evolution mechanism of slate Although these scholars have studied mechanical properties of the slate, the number of experiments conducted in most current studies is insufficient and it is difficult to verify the applicability of the theory. In addition, the existing experimental research into the failure mode of anisotropic materials lacks consideration of the angle of failure. In fact, due to the complex structure of slate, it is necessary to conduct many experiments to reveal the influences of anisotropy and confining pressure on the mechanical parameters and failure modes thereof. Here, a total of 74 slate specimens with seven bedding angles and five levels of confining pressure were tested in uniaxial and triaxial compression conditions. The effects of bedding angle and confining pressure on compressive strength, deformation modulus, fracture angle, internal friction angle and cohesive strength of slate were quantified. In the second section, the preparation of the experiment and the test system are explained. In the third section, the results of uniaxial and triaxial compression tests under different confining pressures and bedding angles are illustrated. The effects of confining pressure and bedding angle on fracture angle, compressive strength and deformation modulus were analysed in the fourth section. The applicability of the Mohr-Coulomb strength criterion, parabolic Mohr-Coulomb strength criterion, and Hoek-Brown strength criterion could be compared. In the fifth section, the effect of bedding angle on the equivalent internal friction angle and the equivalent cohesive strength of slate is discussed. By conducting a comparative study of laboratory experiments and theories, the results are helpful for readers to understand the mechanical behaviour of slate materials, which is valuable for engineering applications, such as the selection of tunnel supporting. To research the various mechanical characteristics of hard rock under different bedding and confining pressure conditions, slate, a hard metamorphic rock, was selected as the test object in this experiment. The sampling site is shown in To study the strength, modulus and failure characteristics of slate under different confining pressures and bedding conditions, the slate should be loaded under different confining pressures and bedding angles. Therefore, the confining pressure is set to 0, 10, 20, 40, and 60 MPa for testing. Under each confining pressure, the bedding angles A larger volume of rock sample from the rock sample acquisition site was selected to prepare the cylindrical specimens. First, a flat surface C paralleled to the bedding angle was cut on the lower surface of the rock sample using a saw stone machine and a stone grinder. During cutting, a geological compass was repeatedly used to measure the angle of the bedding plane of the rock sample to ensure that the angle between the finally obtained flat surface C and the bedding plane of the rock sample does not exceed 1°. Then, the rock sample was placed on the working platform of the drilling machine with surface C downwards. The diameter of the drill bit used for drilling the core is 37 mm. The angle between the face C of the specimen and the work platform was slightly adjusted to the required bedding angle The testing machine is an MTS815.03 (MTS Company, USA) equipped with an automatic three-axis pressurisation and measurement system with electro-hydraulic servo control. It is mainly composed of a loading part, a test part, a control part, a program control part, and so on. Full digital control is realised. The whole stiffness of the test system framework is 11.0 × 10 The diameter and height of each rock sample were measured respectively before the test, and recorded in accordance with the numbering schedule. At the beginning of each test, the rock sample was installed in the three-axis chamber and the axial and transverse displacement sensors were adjusted respectively, and then loaded. During loading, the axial deformation loading rate is 0.01 mm/s, and control confining pressure remains unchanged after loading to the pre-set confining pressure. Data acquisition could be completed automatically during the test, and the frequency of data acquisition is 2 times/second. The collected data were used to plot the stress–strain curve and automatically calculate the elastic modulus and Poisson’s ratio. When the rock sample was destroyed and its residual strength mobilised, the rock sample was taken out. The damaged rock sample was photographed and the damage characteristics were evaluated. The ambient temperature was maintained at 25 °C throughout the test. The failure modes of the specimens tested in uniaxial and triaxial compression are shown in In the development of rock mechanics, many scholars have proposed and improved various strength criteria. The linear Mohr-Coulomb strength criterion According to the Mohr-Coulomb strength criterion, there is a linear relationship between rock strength and confining pressure in the triaxial compression test: Based on the Mohr-Coulomb strength theory, the scholars proposed a parabolic Mohr strength criterion. The criterion states that there is a quadratic relationship between the shear stress The Hoek-Brown strength criterion suggests a nonlinear relationship between the ultimate principal stresses of rocks. The relationship between rock strength and confining pressure is: According to the three aforementioned strength criteria, the test data of the slate strength obtained under different confining pressures were fitted (  When assessing the safety of construction projects, the structural planes (such as faults, joints, and bedding plane) in building materials are non-negligible. In particular, the compressive strength of the rock mass is affected by the angle of the weak surface: slate is an anisotropic rock with several bedding planes. Therefore, the influence of the bedding angle on compressive strength of slate is worth further study. Under different confining pressures and bedding angles, the strength of rock could be calculated by Mohr circle ( Eq. By comparing The Mohr circle can be used to characterise the stress condition of a point in the material according to the Mohr-Coulomb strength criterion. In the Cartesian coordinate system The failure angle was predicted by combining strength curve and stress circle. When the strength curve is tangent to the stress circle, failure occurs at the tangent point ( According to the parabolic Mohr-Coulomb strength criterion, when the confining pressure is tensile, the central angle of the Mohr circle from the point of contact with the strength curve to the x-axis tends to 180°, that is, the fracture angle tends to 90°. With the increase of confining pressure, the central angle of the Mohr circle from the point of contact with the strength curve to the x-axis tends to 90°, therefore, the fracture tends to 45° as the confining pressure increases. The relationship of fracture angle with confining pressure is shown in Moreover, the fracture angle of slate varies over a large range when the confining pressure is 0 MPa. It indicates that the anisotropy of slate in the unconfined state is significant. With the increase of confining pressure, the range of fracture angle decreases, indicating that the degree of anisotropy decreases. In particular when the confining pressure is 60 MPa, the fracture angle of slate ranges from 47° to 62°. Due to the presence of the bedding plane, the mechanical behaviour of the slate exhibits significant anisotropy. The results of the fracture angle of the 63 sets of slate specimens with differing bedding angles are shown in The deformation modulus is an important parameter used to study the deformation characteristics of a rock mass. The contribution of the rock to the deformation The total strain in the rock mass Finally, the total strain in the rock mass The anisotropy of the deformation modulus of a rock mass is the focus of much current research: the pre-peak deformation modulus obtained by Yang et al. Similarly, the deformation modulus of slate exhibits significant anisotropy ( A confining pressure will reduce the gaps in a slate. As can be seen from As can be seen from According to the ISRM suggested method for calculating cohesion and internal friction angle, the cohesion and internal friction angle at each bedding angles were obtained. The parameters obtained are the equivalent internal friction angle and cohesion at each bedding angle. As shown in The equivalent internal friction angle varies with the bedding angle within a small range of variation. With increasing bedding angle, the minimum equivalent internal friction angle is 26° and its maximum is 34°. The fitting curve shows that the equivalent internal friction angle increases slowly with increasing bedding angle. When the bedding angle is 0°, the equivalent internal friction angle is minimised. The equivalent internal friction angle is maximised when the bedding angle is 90°. In conclusion, it can be seen that the range within which the equivalent internal friction angle changes with changes in bedding angle is relatively small. This shows that the equivalent angle of internal friction is less affected by bedding conditions, while the equivalent cohesion is more affected by the bedding angle. It can be seen from the relationship between peak strength and bedding angle that the peak strength changes with changing bedding angle is more consistent with the trend seen in changes of cohesive force with bedding angle. In other words, the compressive strength of slate is more readily affected by cohesion. Therefore, for slate containing bedding planes, the bedding angle should be as horizontal as possible when using such materials, so that they can mobilise a higher strength. In addition, the strength can be improved by means of grouting, and so on. A series of experiments were conducted to investigate the effects of bedding angle and confining pressure on fracture angle, compressive strength, deformation modulus, cohesion, and internal friction angle of slate. The conclusions from this study may be summarised as follows: With the increase of confining pressure, the compressive strength of rock increases significantly. The variation of the compressive strength of slate with confining pressure can be described by the parabolic Mohr-Coulomb strength criterion. When the bedding angle is 45°–60°, the strength of slate is the lowest. When the bedding angle is less than 15°, the compressive strength of slate is maximised. When the bedding angle is 90°, the strength is between the strengths of the slate with bedding angles of 0°–15° and 45°–60°. In the unconfined state, the fracture angle of slate is 65°–90°. With the increase of confining pressure, the fracture angle of slate tends to 45° from above. When the bedding angle is less than 15°, the fracture angle is close to 60°. When the bedding angle is 45°–60°, the fracture angle is similar to the bedding angle. When the bedding angle is 90°, the fracture angle is close to 90°. Even if the confining pressure is small, the deformation modulus of slate will be significantly increased compared with that in the unconfined state. The deformation in the slate rock mass is contributed by both the rock and the bedding planes. Compared with other bedding angles, when the bedding angle is 45°–60°, the deformation of rock contributes the least to the total deformation of the rock mass, and the deformation of its bedding planes contributes the most to the total deformation. When the bedding angle is 90°, the contribution of bedding planes to the total deformation of the rock mass is negligible, therefore, when the bedding angle is 75°–90°, the deformation modulus of slate is greatest, and is minimised at bedding angles between 45°–60°. The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. Thanks are due to Prof. X.T. Feng for guidance and to Prof. Q. Jiang and D.P. Xu for assistance with the experiments. This work was supported by the