Groundwater flow in fractured porous media can be realistically described using a dual-porosity approach. A popular numerical approach for simulation of groundwater flow in dual-porosity media is the use of spatial discretization procedures based upon the finite element techniques. The computational effort for this technique strongly depends on both the number of unknowns and the number of time steps required to obtain an accurate and stable solution. In this paper we develop a modal decomposition technique based on the Lanczos algorithm to solve the equations of transient groundwater flow in fractured dual-porosity media. The Lanczos algorithm uses orthogonal matrix transformations to reduce the finite element equations to a much smaller tridiagonal system of first-order differential equations. By using this method, problems with large node number can be reduced into equivalent systems of much smaller size. Consequently, large savings in computer time can be realized, especially for the problems requiring many time steps. The efficiency is further achieved by using a recursion method to compute the fluid exchange between matrix blocks and fractures. In addition, this paper shows how time-dependent boundary conditions or multiple sources or sinks can be realized for the Lanczos method. In order to verify the proposed numerical technique and show its efficiency, two examples are presented: one is for a homogeneous aquifer and the results are compared to the analytical solutions and the other shows a multiple well system of different time histories in a synthetic dual-porosity aquifer.A number of mathematical models describing groundwater flow in fractured porous media have been developed over the past three decades. The distinction between these models arises from differences in the conceptual model upon which they are based and the methods used to solve the governing equations. One of the most popular and appealing conceptual models is that of a dual-porosity media. The dual-porosity approach was first introduced by Barenblatt et al. In this paper, we extend the Lanczos modal reduction method to solve the equations of transient groundwater flow in dual-porosity media. This method uses an orthogonal matrix transformation to reduce a set of finite element equations to a much smaller tridiagonal system of first-order differential equations. The new system can be solved by a standard tridiagonal algorithm with little computational effort. Similar approaches have been used by Nour-Omid The main focus in this paper is to demonstrate the high efficiency of the algorithm in solving the groundwater flow equation for the dual-porosity media. Two examples are presented. The first example is for a homogeneous aquifer and the results are compared to the analytical solutions. The second example shows a multiple well system of different time histories in a synthetic dual-porosity aquifer with heterogeneities and anisotropic properties. At this point we wish to impress upon the reader that the Lanczos modal reduction method described in this work should not be confused with iterative solvers such as conjugate gradient methods. The difference between these will be made obvious later in this paper. The partial differential equations describing groundwater flow in dual-porosity fractured media are obtained by considering a representative elementary volume (REV) consisting of a sufficiently large number of matrix blocks and fractures. The dimensions of each of these blocks are assumed to be small relative to the scale of the problem. The geometry of the matrix blocks is taken here to consist of either parallel slabs or spherical “blocks”, as shown in The partial differential equation of flow in fracture continuum takes the form The term The fluid interaction at the interface of the matrix block and fracture can be obtained by solving a one-dimensional governing equation with appropriate initial condition and boundary conditions at the rock matrix–fracture interface. The numerical solutions of the dual-porosity flow governing equations are obtained by applying the standard Galerkin finite element method for spatial discretization. Consider now the following flow equation obtained by substituting If we adopt a finite different approach to solve From Numerical solutions of the governing equations for groundwater flow can be complicated due to strong contrasts in the material properties that are likely to exist between the fractures and the porous matrix. In addition, a detailed multi-dimensional numerical grid can easy involve many tens to hundreds of thousands of unknowns. Therefore, an efficient and robust numerical technique is necessary to solve the governing equations. Dunbar et al.  The Lanczos method does not require an actual inversion of the stiffness matrix In this paper we use a Cholesky decomposition and a series of back-solves to carry out the Lanczos reduction. This is, of course, a direct as opposed to iterative scheme. In addition, we typically use time-marching by the Crank–Nicolson method and direct solvers for the solution of During the Lanczos decomposition, each Lanczos vector generated is subject to loss of Another important issue for the Lanczos method is the stopping criterion or terminating the recursion when a sufficient number of Lanczos vectors has been computed. In this work we use an approach described by Dunbar and Woodbury Following the Lanczos reduction method, a reduced system of equations is created by letting The reduced system equations can be solved by any time integration technique. Note the solution at each time level does not need to be transformed back to the original unknowns. Only the original solutions  Initial conditions must also be treated properly. They can be eliminated from the solution by writing The right-hand vector For multiple time-history boundary conditions, Dunbar and Woodbury In this paper we develop a new scheme for the multiple-group time-history boundary condition problems based on the principle of superposition. Similar ideas have been proposed by Li Due to homogeneous initial conditions for The modified reduction method generates Lanczos vectors by using their corresponding starting vectors In this approach,   The coefficients The matrices The matrix The Lanczos decomposition is performed. The Lanczos vectors The small The leakage terms are evaluated and a back solve is performed at each time step. If there are more than one boundary condition time history patterns, repeat step 4 to 6 for the next group boundary conditions. A matrix-vector multiplication computes the solution to the original problem for all the desired time or a dot product of two If there are more than one group time-dependent boundary conditions, add the solutions of different groups together. Updating the leakage terms of the reduced equation system is needed at each time step, and they are related to the solution history. By using the following equation, it is possible to avoid the storage of all the hydraulic head time history data. At time To investigate the robustness and efficiency of the proposed approach the Lanczos technique is applied to two examples. The first example examines the numerical solution algorithm by simulating a problem involving transient flow to a pumped well fully penetrating a fractured, confined aquifer. Both parallel and blocky fracture unsteady fracture–matrix interaction models are applied to the example. The numerical solutions are compared to the available analytical solutions. The second problem investigates accuracy and efficiency of the Lanczos method for a synthetic aquifer system with multiple wells of different time history. The computed hydraulic head field is compared to the results computed from the direct solution method for example two. The first example is a homogeneous, isotropic and infinite aquifer system with a well at the center. The problem is identical to Theis problem, except the aquifer consists of a dual-porosity media. The dual-porosity aquifer is considered to be single horizontal fracture which is analogous to the aquifer–aquitard system. The problem is geometrically symmetric, so only one quarter of the flow field is simulated with 1/4 of the original pumping rate. The dimension of the model is set large enough so that the influence of boundary cannot be reached in a short time and can be considered of infinite extent. Values of various parameters employed in the simulation are given in To obtain the numerical solution for the example, the fracture domain was discretized into 980 triangular elements and 550 nodes. The grid has a size about 0.1 m near the well and 300 m at the outside boundary. The same hydraulic parameters are applied to blocky fracture model with exception that the prismatic matrix blocks are now replaced by spherical blocks of 5-m radius (see In order to investigate the efficency and robustness of the Lanczos method for multiple well system with different time history, a relatively large confined dual-porosity aquifer problem has been solved. To obtain the numerical solution for the problem, the flow domain was discretized into  The number of Lanczos vectors determines the accuracy of the method. The maximum error always occurs in the first several time steps or the moment of pumping rate changed at a particular well. In order to show the influence of domain discretization on the number of Lanczos vectors, we use a different discretization scheme. The example domain was discretized into The Lanczos reduction method has been successfully developed for the solution of problems involving groundwater flow in heterogeneous and anisotropic dual-porosity media. The main advantages of the method are twofold: (1) the equation system is solved in a reduced space, which is much smaller than the original system and (2) the fluid leakage terms are calculated by a recursion scheme in the reduced space. The solution time for the Crank–Nicolson scheme with a direct solution method is proportional to By examining Comparisons with exact analytical solutions have indicated that the Lanczos method is capable of yielding a highly accurate solution even when a relatively less Lanczos vectors are employed. The example simulation for the case of multiple wells with different pumping time history indicates that the reduction method is very robust. Both examples have shown that only a small number of Lanczos vectors were required to accurately match the drawdown computed by direct solution method. For the homogeneous problems, experiments have shown the ratio of Multiple well systems with different pumping time histories or time-dependent boundary conditions have been implemented in the reduction method using a superposition principle. The results of the second example have verified that the implementation method is correct and efficient. We note that the reduction method could be applied to any realistic single and dual-porosity groundwater flow model. The Lanczos algorithm performs the reduction process based on the matrix The authors would like to acknowledge Dr. Henian Li for providing technical assistance. This research was funded by a grant from the Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council of Canada for Dr. Allan Woodbury. The reader is referred to The two equations in  Corresponding to