Depletion of high grade lump ore and increased blast furnace productivity with the use of prepared burden has resulted in increased use of iron ore sinter and pellets. There is considerable interest in including fine iron ore concentrate and micropellets into sinter mixes. These materials need to be accommodated in the sinter mix without adversely affecting the permeability of the sinter bed. Addition of fine concentrate and micropellets to a sinter mix will significantly affect the particle size distribution of the granules in the sinter feed. This paper describes the prediction of granule size distribution using the model developed by Litster. The effect of concentrate and micropellet addition on the model accuracy was evaluated by comparing the experimental and predicted Sauter mean diameters of the granules and evaluating the mean absolute percentage error (MAPE). It was confirmed that Litster's model can be applied to the tested sinter mixtures to predict the mean granule size, with a MAPE of less than 10%. The results of the model also provide a scope for comparing mean granule sizes, particle growth and the ratio of finer to nuclei particles as the amounts of concentrate and micropellets increase. The granule size decreased with addition of concentrate while the particle growth and ratio of finer to nuclei particles increased. For sinter mixtures that contain micropellets, the granule size, particle growth and ratio of finer to nuclei particles decreased with an increase in the mass fraction of micropellets.Granulation is the first stage in the agglomeration of iron ore for sinter production. Fine iron ores, fluxes, coke breeze and other fine materials (collected dusts, mill scale) are mixed together to form large and bigger agglomerates The understanding of the granulation process has recently gained considerable attention in order to predict the properties of granules. In this regard, population balances were used to investigate averaged properties of the whole population rather than the behaviour of each individual particle Previous studies reported that the properties of the sinter feed determine the mechanism of granulation as well as the granule size distribution High grade lump ore resources are becoming depleted and the mining of lower grade deposits results in the production of a greater amount of fine concentrate. This fine material is added to sinter feed as received or as micropellets Although available models for the granulation of iron ore for sinter production are limited, the model of Litster is widely used in laboratory-scale batch granulation. It describes a population balance based on the adherence of fines onto large particles This paper presents the validation of Litster's model for iron sinter feeds containing concentrate and micropellets. The mass fractions of concentrate and micropellets were varied from 10% to 40% (with 10% increments). Model predictions were compared to the experimental size distribution and Sauter mean diameter of granules. Particle growth was also investigated to identify the influence of concentrate and micropellet addition on the granulation process. Population balance equations are crucial in the granulation process because they provide a framework for size distribution calculation Litster et al. For any sinter mixture, Litster et al. (1986) described the partition coefficient as a lognormal distribution function: From a mathematical point of view, the population balance equations can determine how changes to input conditions affect the size distribution of the product. In this work, the full description of Litster's model was not given but could be found elsewhere Granulation merely occurs by layering of fines onto the surface of larger nuclei particles and the extent of coalescence is minimal. For each size fraction i, the fraction of particles that act as nuclei can be represented by a partition coefficient. The effects of the particle shape, density, and chemical composition are assumed to be secondary. The adhering fine to nuclei ratio (R) is independent of the size of the nuclei particle. The absorption of moisture by particles is independent of particle size and size distribution. Litster et al. Waters et al. The thickness of the adhering layer is related to the mean size and mass ratio of adhering fines to nuclei particles: The ratio R The parameter ϕ For a single system, ϕ Assuming that the top size is comparable to the geometric mean size for each size fraction, Eq. While the full derivation of the model is given by Waters et al. The raw materials used in this study consisted of iron ores, concentrate, micropellets, return fines, coke breeze and limestone, dolomite. Each sinter mixture weighed 30 Concentrate was produced through the beneficiation of lower-grade iron ore resources using crushing, milling and dense media separation to upgrade the ore. The particle size of the concentrate was less than 0.1 Micropellets were produced by rolling moist concentrate together with 0.5% bentonite and 0.5% polyvinyl acetate as binders, on an inclined disc. After sufficient rolling, the micropellets were discharged and subjected to natural drying in order to minimize the costs related to heat hardening. The micropellets were spherical with a mean size of approximately 2.31 The addition of concentrate and micropellets influenced the granule size distribution of the sinter mixtures. Their fractions in the sinter feeds varied from 10 to 40% ( The main objective of granulation is to improve the permeability of the sinter bed and hence the productivity of the sinter plant. Iron ore together with other fine materials were mixed in a laboratory tumbling drum of diameter 0.5 Partitioning tests were performed in order to experimentally determine the contribution of different primary particle fractions to the different granule size fractions. The method used in this study was not first freezing of wet granules before screening, because granules adhered to each other and formed hard blocks which were difficult to screen. The green granules were therefore slightly dried in a laboratory oven at 70 Stereomicroscopy and X-ray microtomography techniques were used to analyse the structures of the granule size fractions. Stereomicroscopy is a technique that provides relevant information on the morphology of particles X-ray microtomography is a non-destructive technique that is used for micro-structural characterization of opaque solids For each sample, the mean granule diameter was calculated from the size distribution of the sinter mix by the relation: The partitioning of particles for each particular size into the various granule size fractions was determined for samples that were first dried and manually screened. Particle partition distributions for the base case at 5.5% moisture content are shown in From the particle partition distributions, the partition coefficient of each particle size fraction was determined by using Eq. Images obtained through stereomicroscopy of the tested granulated mixtures are shown in The structures of the granules were also analysed by X-ray microtomography. According to their structures, granules could be classified in four groups, as shown in The addition of concentrate and micropellets to the sinter mixtures decreased the Sauter mean diameter of the granules ( The incorporation of micropellets in the sinter mixture progressively increased the amount of granules in the − Litster's model is applicable when the mechanism of granulation is preferentially based on the layering of fine material onto large particles. This means that the model is associated with granule structure of Group I. Stereomicroscopy and X-ray microtomography images show that primary particles are irregular and form granules of structure defined by Group I (a core surrounded by a layer of fine particles). The addition of concentrate started producing microgranules with pellet-like structure (Group II). However, sinter mixtures with addition of micropellets produced granules based principally on adhering fines around coarse particles and micropellets (Group I). Two additional structures were clearly observed when micropellets were added to the sinter mixture ( The applicability of the Litster model was evaluated by comparing the measured and predicted granule size distribution or granule size for the tested sinter mixtures. To completely define the model, two parameters were used. The lumped parameter K From The predicted and measured granule size distributions are plotted in The validation of Litster's model was also achieved by calculation of the mean absolute percentage error (MAPE) between experimental Sauter mean diameter of granules and the predicted mean diameter. The mean absolute percentage error is defined as the percentage of the average of the absolute errors and determines how close predictions are to the experimental values. In general, a MAPE less than 10% indicates a very good agreement between experimental and predicted data. The MAPE can be computed from: The values of mean average percentage error (MAPE) for sinter mixtures at optimum moisture content are shown in According to the model of Litster In granulation for iron ore sinter production where a layer of fines is formed around large particles, the particle growth becomes a vital parameter to assess the effectiveness of the process The particle growth in different sinter mixtures is plotted in In sinter mixtures that contain micropellets, the particle growth decreases when the fraction of micropellets increases from 0% to 40%. The replacement of iron ore fines by micropellets decreased the ratio of adhering fines to coarse particles. The layering process was limited and produced smaller size fractions of granules than in sinter mixtures with no addition of micropellets (base case). In addition, the amounts of coarse particles (+ Comparison of the Litster model and experimental results demonstrates the applicability of the Litster model in the prediction of the granule size for sinter mixtures containing concentrate and micropellets. The main findings were: Concentrate and micropellet addition decreased the mean size of the granules. The mass fraction of coarse particles decreased to the detriment of both the finer and intermediate size fractions. The addition of concentrate and micropellets resulted in secondary agglomeration mechanisms such as coalescence, adhesion of micropellets and two-stage layering process, to occur. Good agreement was obtained between Litster's model and experiment results on the tested sinter mixtures. The mean absolute percentage error was less than 10% throughout. The adherence of fines onto coarse particles is still the major granulation mechanism for the tested sinter mixtures. The particle growth showed a slight increase as the amount of concentrate increased. Concentrate was used to both form an adhering layer around coarse particles and to coalescence fine particles. Particle growth decreased with the addition of micropellets. The authors gratefully acknowledge the technical and financial support from