Paediatric fractures of the tibial spine are relatively rare and controversy remains around how these injuries are best managed (Gans et al., 2014; Hargrove et al., 2004). Consequently most non-specialised paediatric units have limited experience of managing these injuries. This study aims to review the management and outcomes of isolated paediatric tibial spine fractures in a tertiary paediatric orthopaedic centre between 2008 and 2016.
                  Data were collected on patient demographics, mechanism of injury, imaging, Meyers and McKeever grade of injury (Meyers and McKeever), management and outcomes, including Cincinnati and Lysholm-Tegner knee scores at a mean of 36 months post-operatively.
                  40 patients were included, 21 were male and the mean age was 11.8 years. 3 cases were Meyers and McKeever type I, 13 were type II and 24 were type III. 30 underwent operative management comprising of open reduction and single screw fixation, with or without a washer. 9 patients underwent subsequent metalwork removal at a mean of 10 months post-operatively. 10 underwent non-operative management, consisting of cast immobilisation and bracing.
                  33 patients (83%) were available for follow up. No statistically significant differences were seen in either outcome score between those treated operatively or non-operatively, or between different grades of injury, or if metalwork were removed or not.
                  Our study shows good functional outcomes following paediatric tibial spine fracture. We advocate the use of CT to assess fracture displacement to help guide management. We have shown type I and reducible type II injuries can successfully be managed conservatively and non-reducible type II and type III injuries can be successfully treated with open reduction and single screw fixation. In our experience post-operative knee stiffness can persist for up to 6 months but generally improves. Metalwork removal was only indicated if the patient had on going stiffness after this time or if they had on going pain.Fractures of the tibial spine exhibit a bimodal age distribution, occurring in both the paediatric and adolescent populations The mechanism of injury is a combination of hyperextension and internal rotation at the knee, causing the anterior cruciate ligament (ACL) to become taut Paediatric tibial spine fractures typically occur in isolation, but the equivalent adult injury commonly occurs in association with injury to other structures notably the menisci and collateral ligaments Initial diagnosis of these fractures is predominantly based on plain radiography. Computer Tomography (CT) allows for detailed fracture and displacement analysis, whilst magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) allows assessment for concurrent meniscal and ligamentous injuries The early work of Meyers and McKeever led to the classification of these fractures into three groups Controversy remains within the literature regarding management Knee scoring systems have been established to assess the outcome of patients suffering ACL injuries but there has been little work done to determine the outcome following the management of tibial spine fractures in the paediatric population. The aim of this study is to review the management and outcomes of paediatric patients with isolated tibial spine fractures presenting to Alder Hey Children’s Hospital, Liverpool, UK, a tertiary paediatric orthopaedic centre. All patients sustaining an isolated tibial spine fracture between January 2008 and January 2016 at a single tertiary paediatric orthopaedic centre were included in this study. Data was collected on patient demographics, mechanism of injury, imaging, grade of injury, management, and outcomes. Lysholm-Tegner and Cincinnati ACL specific knee scores were collected prospectively at a mean of 36 months post-operatively. Each fracture was classified according to the Meyers and McKeever classification based on all available imaging and intra-operative findings where applicable. Data was analysed in Microsoft Excel (2011) and SPSS Version 21. As recommended by Tegner, non-parametric statistics were used for analyzing Tegner scores A total of 40 patients were included in this study, of which 21 were male. 35 were sporting related injuries and the mean age of all patients was 11.8 years. 30 underwent operative management and 10 were treated non-operatively. Preoperative CT scans were undertaken in 32 cases however no MRI scans were performed preoperatively. In our cohort, 3 cases were Meyers and McKeever type I injuries, 13 were type II injuries and 24 cases were type III injuries. All patients undergoing surgical fixation had this performed via an open medial para-patellar approach. Fractures were reduced under direct vision and fixed with a single screw, with or without a washer. All were immobilised post-operatively and underwent protected or non-weight bearing for 4–6 weeks. 9 patients underwent metalwork removal, at a mean of 10 months post-operatively. This included 4 patients with persistent knee stiffness and a reduced range of movement, 1 patient with on going knee pain and 4 patients who had metalwork removal planned at the time of fixation. Non-operative management consisted of immobilisation in full extension, but not hyperextension, for 4 weeks followed by hinged knee bracing for 6–10 weeks. Fracture reduction and healing were confirmed on plain radiographs and CT was used if there was any concern regarding displacement or delayed healing. Within the operative group, 7 were type II cases that did not reduce with full extension under image intensification and 23 were type III injuries. The non-operative group consisted of 3 type I injuries, 6 reducible type II injuries and 1 type III injury that was initially thought to be a reducible type II. 33 patients (83%) were available for follow up (24 operative, 9 non-operative). One patient with a type II injury was initially managed non-operatively but later developed fracture displacement and was managed operatively. This patient was analysed in the operatively managed group. One patient with a type II injury managed non-operatively developed asymptomatic ACL laxity. One patient thought to have a reducible type II injury and with acceptable radiographs throughout was managed non-operatively for 6 weeks. However a subsequent CT revealed that the patient actually had a type 3 injury but continued non-operative treatment, as the patient declined operative intervention. This patient developed asymptomatic ACL laxity but had Lysholm-Tegner and Cincinnati score comparable to the rest of the cohort (90 and 94 respectively). Only one patient in our cohort declined screw removal and has on-going knee stiffness at 18 months post-operatively despite ongoing physiotherapy. In most of our cases tibial spine fractures were sustained as a result of sporting injuries. This has been consistently reported in the literature and has been associated with activities ranging from cycling to skiing, which are representative of pivoting movements that would render the ACL taut. Conservative management, consisting of knee immobilization, is generally accepted as the treatment for Type I injuries Wilfinger et al. performed a retrospective clinical analysis on 38 paediatric reducible tibial spine fractures, which had all been treated in cast immobilization, regardless of the type of injury. Gans et al. published a systematic review that documented the Lysholm score of 580 cases of tibial spine fracture that were extractable from 26 published articles. Very little is documented about the incidence of symptomatic ACL laxity within the literature, however the incidence of asymptomatic ACL laxity is well known, albeit quite variable. This particular case further highlights the importance of three dimensional (3D) imaging, especially in type II fractures. Previous authors have advocated its use in delineating the degree of displacement and involvement of the tibial plateau and some suggest that MRI should be used over CT to reduce radiation risk. Soft tissue interposition is a recognized phenomenon that can complicate closed reduction. In one study of 80 patients that required surgical intervention, it was demonstrated that 36 of the cases were not reducible due to interposition of the medial meniscus within the fracture site. Currently no consensus has been reached with regard to the best surgical option. In summary, we believe isolated paediatric tibial spine fractures can be successfully managed non-operatively in an extension cast and this should be the normal management of the type I injury. Displaced tibial spine fractures can also be initially managed in this way. Should a displaced fracture not reduce in extension cast then soft-tissue interposition should be suspected. 3D imaging, such as a CT scan, should be used to assess the fracture displacement and anatomy to help guide management. An open arthrotomy should be used to reduce and fix the fracture. This protocol has the potential to reduce the need for unnecessary imaging and surgery in children. In conclusion, our study shows good functional outcomes can be achieved in paediatric patients suffering tibial spine fractures. Even the most severely displaced Type III injuries have outcomes comparable to minimally displaced Type I injuries provided they are managed appropriately. We advocate the use of pre-operative CT to assess for fracture displacement to help to guide management. We have shown that type I and reducible type II fractures can be successfully treated with closed reduction and immobilisation, and that non-reducible type II and type III fractures can be successfully treated with open reduction and internal fixation with a single screw. In our experience post-operative knee stiffness can persist for up to 6 months but generally improves with physiotherapy. Metalwork removal was only indicated if patients had on going knee stiffness after this time, if they had on going pain or if this was planned at the time of fixation.