The year 2007 marks the 50th anniversary of the founding of Dynamic Systems Inc., the developer and manufacturer of Gleeble physical simulation systems. From the initial welding simulators in the 1950s to today's complex rolling simulators and multi-axis nano-material development tools, the evolution of equipment for physical simulation research has evolved along several paths. In each case, a need to develop or improve processes and materials has pushed the technology to new levels. This paper takes a brief look at the historical developments of physical simulation tools over the last 50 years and reviews a number of significant milestones in the evolving science of physical simulation. After a historical review, the current technologies and accomplishments are discussed. This includes a look at the most recent developing methods such as the use of laser ultrasonics to gather real-time microstructure information during the simulation. This paper also reviews recent work in simulating thin slab continuous casting. Finally a look at what may be expected in the future for physical simulation is presented.Physical simulation as used in the metals industry was described in the literature since the middle of the 20th century. The earliest work was done on experimental machines built by researchers for their own use. Commercially produced physical simulators first appeared in the late 1950s. Some of these early developments took place in Russia at the Paton Welding Institute, in China at the Central Iron and Steel Institute, in England at The Welding Institute, and in the United States at Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute (RPI). An early physical simulator used to reproduce heat-affected zones (HAZ) in weldments is shown in Welding problems were significant in the metals industry in the middle of the 20th century. In particular, the complex metallurgy involved in the arc welding process was not well understood at the time. A method was needed to reproduce at least the weld HAZ under measurable control and to be able to reproduce individual portions of the HAZ. This was the initial goal of the first physical simulators. Due to the very high heating rates and steep thermal gradients of the HAZ, the early physical simulation equipment was primarily devoted to high speed thermal systems with modest mechanical systems. The first physical simulation system commercially manufactured in the U.S.A. was the Model 501 Gleeble produced by Duffers Associates, Inc. a predecessor to Dynamic Systems Inc. and was delivered in 1958. It was designed for HAZ simulation. This system had a rapid heating system capable of 8000 Two decades after the initial Gleeble work on weld HAZ simulation, Suzuki and co-workers at Nippon Steel Corp. in Japan developed a procedure to simulate the continuous casting and solidification process using a Gleeble The success of Suzuki's work was dependent upon his development of a slotted quartz crucible, a method of supporting the thermocouple in the melt, and techniques in programming, which yielded a high rate of success in obtaining a suitable melt zone. This technique allowed successful physical simulation of continuous casting processes under well controlled and instrumented conditions. Over the past two decades many researchers have used this methodology on Gleeble systems to evaluate and solve casting problems. Some of the published reports on their work may be found in Refs. Recently new technology has been developed specifically to simulate continuous casting followed by semi-solid or direct hot rolling Recent developments in laser ultrasonics offer a new way to monitor metallic microstructures in real time, With LUMet, while the specimen is under test, researchers can gather information on recrystallization, grain growth, grain size, phase transformations, elastic constants, and texture. LUMet offers several advantages over conventional technology and has the ability to monitor the entire test cycle from start to finish. This technology has the potential to be more accurate then current dilatometry methods and provide substantial time savings over conventional metallography techniques while providing similar information. It has also shown an ability to make some previously impossible measurements such as austenite grain size in some alloys ( LUMet makes its unique measurements by using two lasers to generate and detect ultrasound pulses in a sample. To generate the ultrasound pulse in the sample, a high-power, short-pulse laser produces light pulses of about 10 The ultrasound pulse is reflected off the far side of the sample and is then detected with a laser interferometer when it reaches the surface of the sample. The laser interferometer is based on a second long pulse Nd:YAG Laser and a confocal Fabry-Perot Interferometer operation in the reflection mode. The laser interferometer measures the tiny amounts of surface displacement caused by the pulse with sub-nanometer resolution. This second laser generates 1 The loss of amplitude and the time between the various ultrasonic echoes gives the ultrasonic attenuation and velocity. The velocity depends on the material under test; it is different for iron or aluminum. The velocity is also a measure of the elastic modulus, which varies with temperature and phase transformation. So researchers can quantify phase transformations with precise laser-ultrasonic velocity measurements. With LUMet, researchers can also measure the texture of the sample. If they know that some crystallographic orientation is normal to the sample surface, then they know that the velocity will be largely determined by that orientation. They also know that changes in the crystallographic orientation will alter that velocity. As a result, they can compute the average orientation distribution from velocity measurements. Grain size is another parameter that can be measured. If you have a continuous medium and an object embedded in it, the object will scatter the ultrasound. The larger the object is compared to ultrasonic wavelengths, the more scattering will result. Because each grain is like a scattering object, the larger the grain size, the more loss of amplitude will be observed. As a result, the measurement of attenuation is also a measurement of grain size. Through LUMet, researchers can measure the grain size and growth at temperature of the austenite phase in steels. Previously, only time-consuming and sometimes complex metallographic analysis of quenched samples was used to evaluate former austenitic grains, and steelmakers have long wished for such a real-time technique, since the austenitic grain size at high temperature is very important for the properties of the steel at room temperature. And since LUMet can measure elastic moduli, phases, texture, and grain size, it can be used to characterize Researchers at Ohio State University have recently developed a modified Gleeble hot torsion test which has the ability to rapidly heat, strain and cool the sample material in a manner similar to parameters seen in the friction stir welding process. Preliminary work Physical simulation has developed into an extremely useful and valuable tool used to study many metallurgical processes, develop new materials, and obtain characteristics of materials in real world situations. The benefits include lower product and process development costs, rapid trouble shooting of existing procedures and materials problems, improved materials and materials applications, development of new procedures, and reduced energy cost. Recent advances using continuous casting, direct charging and direct rolling have provided tools for studying and improving today's newest steel making process. Laser ultrasonics represents one of the newest techniques applied to Gleeble systems and gives researchers the ability to examine dynamic metallurgical phenomena