A representative sample of LD slag provided from French steel industry was treated by different physical separation techniques especially used in mineral processing. The results of characterisation study show that the LD slag may contain up to 35% of iron compounds. The X-ray diffraction reveals the presence of the following crystallized mineral phases: CaO, MgO, Al2O3, SiO2, MnO, and P2O5. Larnite (Ca2SiO4), di-calcium aluminoferrite (brownmillerite: Ca2Fe2−xAlxO5 with x=0.6) and a solid solution (Fe, Mn, Mg)O structurally close to the wüstite (FeO) and some residual lime (CaO).
                  The results of grinding tests show that the manner of grinding is very important. Soft Grinding (SG) or sequential grinding is most suitable to reduce the particle size of LD slag avoiding the overproduction of fine particles, which hinder the effectiveness of magnetic separation techniques. The combination of Low and High Intensity Magnetic Separation (LIMS and HIMS) of ground LD slag at 63μm in wet process may recover ferromagnetic particles (iron oxides) at LIMS and paramagnetic particles at HIMS, while the non-magnetic fraction contains mostly calcium silicates.
                  From this investigation, two flow-sheets of treatment of LD slag are suggested to recover high grade iron material for recycling in metallurgical processes. Calcium and silicon oxide rich product will be directed to the cement industry.The blast furnace produces pig iron with high content of carbon. To reduce the carbon content, the product is converted into steel by injection of oxygen in the basic oxygen steelmaking furnace, also known as Linz–Donawitz (LD) converter. During this process, the slag is formed by the addition of fluxes such as limestone and dolomite and it is considered as a by-product of steelmaking. Note that the undesirable elements such as carbon, silicon and phosphorus are either oxidized to gases or chemically bound in the slag. The production of one ton of steel during pig iron conversion generates roughly 100 The French steelmaking industries generate more than 1.5 The chemical composition of various LD slags is well reported in literature (see Studies reported in the literature are mostly devoted to the use of slags generated from pig-iron and steel making units for various applications such as ceramic glass, silica gel, ceramic tiles, construction materials (blast-furnace slag and as soil conditioners), and fertilizers (steel slag). Several studies are also directed to the high temperature treatment of slags for the valuable element recovery. However, relatively few studies deal with physical separation to recover iron compounds with a low content of phosphorus bearing material. The aim of this paper is the recovery of high grade iron product from LD slags by low and high intensity magnetic separation techniques. A representative sample of Linz–Donawitz steel slag (2 The sample of LD slag contains a well-crystallized and heterogeneous matrix composed of primary phases. According to the literature, the most common minerals found in LD slag are metallic iron, di-calcium-silicate (2CaO.SiO The SEM picture of crushed slag ( The steel slag is considered as a water-hardenable material, because it contains some reactive minerals such as: 2CaO.SiO The carbonation mechanism was studied on the slag crushed to <  A Netzsch STA 409 instrument equip Various mineral processing techniques were used to treat a representative sample, obtained through the sampling method, which is an essential step to evaluate the residual materials. Indeed, regardless of the accuracy of methods of analysis if the sample is not representative, the assessment will be inconclusive. Therefore, it is essential to ensure that the number and the quality of the samples are representative of the residual to improve the material. The sampling methods include several steps shown in the flow sheet given in Two modes of grinding have been made on LD slag: classic ball grinding (CBG) and Soft Grinding (SG) for 60 The separation of metallic iron and minerals from LD slag by using the magnetic separation technique is well reported in the literature. The cross-belt magnetic separator, drum magnetic separator and magnetic pulley separator are usually-used. The work results reported by ( The representative LD slag < Wet magnetic separation tests were performed on LD slag ground to 63 The sample of LD slag was treated according to the flow-sheet shown in  The grinding of steel slag and magnetic separation are necessary for a better separation of a high grade iron compounds which can be directly recycled in converter steel mill. Even, milling at about 50  The results of both LIMS and HIMS are given in From this investigation, two different flow-sheets shown in Free lime content in steel slag may form the carbonates which can disturb the physical separation of the particles, and to avoid this phenomenon, the second variant shown in Characterisation of the investigated sample of LD slag taken from French steelmaking industry shows the presence of the common compounds reported in the literature. The main phases detected are di-calcium silicate (larnite, Ca The results of grinding tests show that the manner of grinding is very important. Soft Grinding is most suitable to reduce the particle size of LD slag avoiding the overproduction of fine particles which hinder the effectiveness of magnetic separation. Two variants of magnetic separation were performed on LD slag. The first one deals with treatment of ground LD slag at different particle size fractions of 1 The second one deals with combination of LIMS and HIMS of ground LD slag at 63 From this investigation, two flow-sheets of treatment of LD slag are suggested to recover high grade iron for recycling in metallurgical processes. The calcium and silicon rich product can be used as raw material for the cement industry. The authors would like to acknowledge the National Research Agency (ANR, France) for financial support and giving us the possibility to work on this project. The authors would also like to express their appreciation for helpful discussions within the working group CEREG, Orleans University, LERM and ArcelorMittal for providing material.