The kinetics for the competitive adsorption of gold and copper onto activated carbon from synthetic alkaline glycine solutions was studied. The adsorption rate for both gold and copper at the initial stage was modelled using the Fleming k,n adsorption kinetic model. The coefficient of variation (R2) of the model were close to unity for both gold and copper adsorption data. The effects of pH, free glycine, ionic strength, initial gold and copper concentrations and carbon concentration were assessed on the adsorption kinetics of these two metals. The results showed that >98% of gold was adsorbed onto activated carbon in 6 h or less under all studied conditions. According to the adsorption tests results, carbon concentration is the only parameter that significantly affected the initial gold adsorption rate. For all other studied parameters, the initial adsorption rate is quite robust, with a few variations in process conditions only affecting it slightly. Activated carbon was found to be very selective for gold glycinate complexes over copper glycinates, with over 99.0% gold adsorbed in 24 h and <15% copper adsorbed in the same duration under optimum conditions from a solution containing 2 ppm gold and 40 ppm copper.The two main technologies used for the concentration and purification of alkaline cyanide leach liquors are the carbon-in-pulp (CIP) and carbon-in-leach (CIL) processes. These processes have been described in detail by several authors ( The reaction rate of an adsorption process is one of the most critical evaluation element used during process operation design of an adsorption circuit. This parameter can be enumerated from kinetic experiments analysis. Activated carbon is known to have a complex structure including a surface with heterogeneous properties and pores with a wide variety of size ranges. The rate of reaction is dependent on both the chemical properties of the carbon surface and the pore distribution of the carbon structure. The surface of the carbon is made up of different functional groups formed from heteroatoms such as nitrogen, oxygen, hydrogen and sulphur ( The overall rate of gold adsorption onto activated carbon is believed to be controlled by three major mechanisms: 1) film diffusion: mass transport of gold (I) complex from the bulk of the solution through the hydrodynamic boundary layer encircling the carbon particle. This is a very rapid process; 2) pore diffusion: mass transport of the dissolved gold complex from the solution filling the pores onto the active sites of the carbon; and 3) surface diffusion; migration of the already adsorbed gold complex along the internal walls from the macropores into the micropores ( Adsorption by carbon is the proposed method for gold recovery from glycine leach liquors. In the presence of a soluble oxidant like hydrogen peroxide, at moderate to slightly elevated temperatures (23–60 °C), gold can be leached by glycine at neutral to alkaline pHs to form a gold glycinate complex. Using caustic as a pH modifier, the stoichiometry of gold dissolution in alkaline glycine solution is as shown in Eq. In addition to containing gold glycinate complexes, leach liquors of pure glycine system are envisaged to contain high concentrations of glycine copper complexes as Cu Fresh activated carbon, PICAGOLD® G210AS produced by Jacobi Carbons derived from coconut shell was used in the study. Prior to use, the carbon was mechanically sized to −2.36 + 2.00 mm and stored in a sealed container at ambient temperature. The carbon was used as it is with no further treatment. The surface area of the granular carbon as determined by the N Gold glycinate solutions were prepared by leaching a 24ct (99.99%) gold sheet (10 cm × 2.5 cm × 0.03 cm) supplied by A&E Metals in an alkaline glycine solution. The leaching solution was prepared by adding 15 mL hydrogen peroxide (30% w/v, Rowe Scientific) and 15 g/L glycine (> 99%, Sigma-Aldrich) to 500 mL of millipore water. The solution was then buffered to pH 11 using NaOH (Thermofisher Scientific). In a beaker, the solution containing the gold sheet was then heated to 60 °C and stirred at 400 rpm using teflon coated magnetic stirrer bars. The temperature was maintained at 60 °C throughout the leach process. The beaker was covered to prevent evaporation. Copper was added to the gold glycinate solution as CuSO Loading tests were performed with the sized fresh carbon to provide a carbon concentration of 2 g/L (0.4 g carbon in 200 ml of solution). The solution contained an initial gold and copper concentration of 2 mg l The adsorption results for both copper and gold were modelled using the In the following sections, the adsorption kinetics of gold and copper were conducted in an alkaline glycine solution containing 2 ppm Au and 40 ppm Cu at pH 11. The effects of glycine concentration, pH, initial gold and copper concentration, carbon concentrations and ionic strength are evaluated below. Adsorption kinetic tests for the competitive loading of Au and Cu from a alkaline glycine solutions at glycine concentrations of 1, 5, 10 and 15 g/L were performed. The results are presented in Adsorption kinetic curves of gold and copper are shown in  Different copper concentrations of 0, 20, 40, 80 and 800 ppm with 2 ppm Au were used for adsorption tests. According to the results, presented in The rate of loading and overall metals recovery was measured at various carbon concentrations between 2 and 12 g/L (See The inial rate of metals extraction and overall recovery were determined from solutions of varying ionic strength by by addition of the Ca  The data of Au and Cu adsorption recoveries for 24 h adsorption time were modelled by the Fleming k,n adsorption kinetic model. The model was applicable for all cases except the high carbon concentration of 12 g/L. It was shown that the overall gold recovery was insensitive to variation of solution pH, free glycine concentration, carbon concentration, intial Au and Cu concentrations as well as ionic strength of the solution. Over 99% gold was recovered in 24 h for all studied parameters. Copper recoveries increased with increasing carbon concentration with 14.8%, 29.1%, 50.7% and 72.7% copper recovered at carbon concentrations of 2, 4, 8 and 12 g/L respectively. This observation would seem to indicate that in a gold‑copper glycinate system, low carbon concentrations with residence times up to 6 h should be used to ensure that gold adsorption is maximised while copper co-adsorption is minimised. Other studied parameters did not have a marked effect on the percentage copper recovery. The effect of studied parameters on the initial rate of adsorption k, are summarised below: Increasing pH decreases the initial adsorption rate of gold glycinate complexes. The highest adsorption rate for copper (25.4 h The highest initial gold adsorption rate of 3491.1 h The initial rate constant for gold is independent of the ionic strength of the solution. However for copper, an increase in the ionic strength of the solution almost doubled the initial adsorption rate. The copper rate constants were 25.2 h The increasing initial gold concentration in solution decreased the initial gold adsorption rate. The rate value at a gold concentration of 16 ppm was 1324 h Increasing the carbon concentration increases the initial gold adsorption rate but decreases the initial adsorption rate for copper. Low copper concentrations of 20 and 40 ppm increases the gold adsorption rate. When copper is present in concentrations above 80 ppm, the initial gold adsorption rate is lower than that of a free copper system. Based on the results, the suggested operating parameters for gold adsorption from an alkaline glycine media containing 2 ppm Au and 40 ppm copper are 5 g/L glycine concentration, pH of around 10, with 2 to 4 g/L carbon. The financial support by