Shoulder instability after total shoulder arthroplasty may be classified as posterior, anterior, superior, or inferior. Basic causes include malposition of the components, incorrect version of the glenoid or humeral cuts, soft tissue contractures or laxity, and cuff deficiency. These may be present as isolated or as combined deficiencies. As always, avoidance is best, but instability is the commonest complication of shoulder arthroplasty and must be dealt with correctly. Recognition of the anatomic cause is crucial. Proper evaluation with radiographs, computed tomography, and magnetic resonance imaging is crucial to the treatment algorithm. Normally the glenoid is nearly perpendicular to the scapular spine, whereas the humeral head is retroverted about 30° with respect to the transepicondylar axis. After defining the anatomic problem, proper component positioning, elimination of contractures, plication of capsular laxity, and establishing cuff integrity ensure the best opportunity for a stable shoulder. Copyright 2002, Elsevier Science (USA). All rights reserved.Instability is one of the most common complications after total shoulder arthroplasty (TSA); reported prevalence ranges from 0% to 29%, with an average incidence of 2.8% Anterior instability most often is caused by failure of the subscapularis tendon or anterior capsule, anterior glenoid insufficiency, or anterior version of the humeral or glenoid components Anterior glenoid insufficiency often is seen in patients with arthritis of recurrent dislocations Similar to anterior instability, posterior instability often results from poor soft tissue balancing or component malposition. The posterior capsule and posterior rotator cuff tendons of the infraspinatus and teres minor provide the major restraints to posterior subluxation It is important to be aware of the significant posterior glenoid wear that often occurs in patients with osteoarthritis; this is addressed by asymmetric reaming to create a surface that is perpendicular to the scapular spine. The surgeon must be careful not to ream excessively. If excessive reaming occurs or if posterior wear is too severe, bone grafting is considered, or a hemiarthroplasty is used with a decrease in the humeral retroversion. Posterior instability may occur with fixed posterior dislocations or with osteoarthritis in which there is preoperative posterior subluxation; in these patients, the capsule is lax and may require a capsular plication from the anterior approach or, if necessary, through a posterior incision. It is important that the capsule not be detached from the labrum during exposure. Compensatory relative humeral anteversion is useful in maintaining a stable construct. Inferior instability usually results from inferior placement of the humeral prosthesis, particularly in patients with fractures. Less commonly, conditions that weaken the deltoid musculature, such as an axillary neuropathy, can lead to inferior instability. It has been our experience that seating the prosthesis too low often occurs during the treatment of 4-part proximal humerus fractures. In these cases, bone loss or absence of bony landmarks related to tuberosity comminution may result in the improper placement of the humeral component and, consequently, a shortened humerus. Imaging studies, particularly of the contralateral shoulder, can help to determine the correct height for seating the prosthesis. New modified humeral trials with a movable pin placed through a hole in the shaft for seating allow for testing of the soft tissue balance. Ideally the head translates inferiorly with traction to a point in the upper one third of the glenoid. Superior-anterior instability is the most common direction of instability after TSA, and it usually is caused by rotator cuff insufficiency If a patient has a torn rotator cuff, it is repaired during TSA. If the tear is irreparable, a hemiarthroplasty is preferred because of the high incidence of glenoid loosening in this setting. Nevertheless, establishment of anterior and posterior stability is essential Component positioning is related directly to soft tissue balancing. Excessive anteversion or retroversion of either the glenoid or the humeral components results in undue stresses exerted on the soft tissue structures. The key to positioning is to perform a trial reduction before cementing the components and to confirm that with the forearm at neutral rotation, the head should face the center of the glenoid. It is important to assess the stability of the shoulder and the tension in the soft tissues and to make minor adjustments in component orientation as needed. Generally, we prefer about 5 to 10 mm of translation in the anterior and posterior direction. Inferior distraction of the humerus should keep the superior aspect of the head in the upper one third of the glenoid. Imaging studies help to diagnose pathology and formulate an operative plan. Anteroposterior, axillary, and scapular Y radiographs can assess position of the prosthesis before revision surgery. Axillary radiographs also are essential in evaluating glenoid wear, but computed tomography more accurately delineates bone loss and defines version. We have found magnetic resonance imaging to be helpful in assessing the status of the rotator cuff despite the presence of some artifact in revision cases (Fig. 4). Despite the fact that instability is one of the most common complications after TSA, it usually can be avoided. Careful evaluation of the prosthetic components and of the surrounding bone and soft tissue structures at the time of surgery can reduce the incidence of such complications drastically. When instability does occur, accurate evaluation and treatment are crucial. Untreated instability after TSA can result in early wear and loosening of the components.