Lateral osteotomy is a very important step in a cosmetic rhinoplasty; it allows the surgeon to narrow the nose, to close the open roof created after hump removal, and to achieve symmetry of an asymmetrical nasal bony framework.
                  In most patients a single lateral osteotomy reaches the expected result, with excellent cosmetic outcome, good stability, and rapid healing. We find that double lateral osteotomy is useful in managing severe asymmetry of nasal walls in patients with too prominent and thick maxillary processes that join asymmetrically together with nasal bones. It is also valuable in correcting very large and wide noses.
                  We review our experience of about 1660 rhinoplasties with more than one year follow-up. Two hundred and ten cases (12.65%) had been treated with monolateral, or bilateral double osteotomy. We evaluate postoperative aesthetic and functional results.Lateral osteotomy is usually executed at the end of a rhinoplasty, to close the open nasal roof resulting after hump removal, to narrow a wide nose and to correct an asymmetric lateral nasal wall. A single lateral osteotomy can be employed in most rhinoplasties, but there are some cases in which it does not succeed in achieving the desired result because one of the maxillary processes is wider or more prominent than the other, or the nose is too wide, or the maxillary processes join together strongly, asymmetrically with the nasal bones in the two sides of the nose; so the two nasal walls are very different one from the other. In this case, and in many post-traumatic rhinoplasties, a single lateral osteotomy could not achieve symmetry of shape of maxillary processes; so a second osteotomy, conducted in a more lateral position than the standard one, can lower and reshape the more prominent maxillary process, giving in our experience, excellent aesthetic and functional results. We made a review of our experience on 1660 rhinoplasties, with more than one year follow-up. Two hundred and ten cases (12.65%) had been treated with monolateral, or bilateral double osteotomy, 127 were male (60.4%), and 83 were female (39.6%), aging from 17 to 52 years. We performed both the osteotomies through endonasal approach, we made the first one begin at the pyriform crista, just above the level of the inferior turbinate, and following a high-low-high direction (curved line), we guided the osteotome till the level of the intercanthal line. The second osteotomy was conducted parallel to the first one, at a lower level. The distance between the two osteotomies was chosen according to the degree of restriction of the nose needed, to the asymmetry of the nasal bony framework, and to the protrusion of the maxillary process. Periosteal elevation remains a matter of surgeons personal preference; we do not elevate periosteum because the overlaying soft tissues constitute a useful support for bony fragments, increasing stability, decreasing the incidence of air flow obstruction and of aesthetic irregularities. For the higher osteotomy, we employed 2 or 3 mm guarded osteotomes, according to the thickness of bones, often choosing 2 mm osteotome for women, and 3 mm osteotome for men. The choice of the right osteotome is critical in order to minimise the soft tissues trauma. After the operation the nose is packed for one day, and the patient wears a nasal splint for one week. The correct execution of the lateral osteotomy is important for both functional and aesthetic outcome, critical points are the surgical trauma to soft and bony tissues, Possible complications of lateral osteotomy are excessive narrowing of the nose, asymmetry of nasal walls, prolonged oedema, haemorrhage and ecchymosis, aesthetic deformities (such as step like deformity) and functional obstruction. The level of osteotomy line is important in preventing external evidence of the infracture: it must be conducted at the base of the nose. In this area, there is a groove formed by the frontal process and the anterior surface of the maxilla; we believe this is the right level to conduct an infracture. Executing the osteotomy at this level may also limit the incidence of fracture comminution. We found monolateral double osteotomy very good in managing strong asymmetry of the nasal walls, in patient with too prominent and thick maxillary processes that join asymmetrically together with nasal bones ( When correcting very large noses, the surgeon usually needs to close a wide open nasal roof with medial movement of the bony fragments. In these cases, the second lateral osteotomy makes it easier to move medially the lateral fragments, because it creates two levels of movement, decreasing tension and achieving more stable closure of the open roof. It also avoids any external evidence of infracture lines, such as step like deformity. In these very large noses we usually execute double osteotomy bilaterally. We found double lateral osteotomy also useful in managing the un-corrected asymmetry of the previously treated nose, during secondary rhinoplasty. In female patients, we mostly employed double lateral osteotomy to correct a very deviated nose ( Parkes et al. described a technique in which the second osteotomy was performed along the path of less resistance anteriorly and superiorly to the thick part of the maxillary process, inside the nasal wall. We never observed collapse of bony fragments toward the nasal cavity, probably because we do not elevate periosteum, and no external evidence of the infracture could be appreciated, even when correcting very wide noses. No mucosal damage could be detected during the follow-up, by speculum examination. In only two patients, we found postoperative complications: one patient presented hypoaesthesia of the right nasal ala, which was only partially recovered at one year. The second patient presented malposition of the bony fragments from the side of double osteotomy, causing irregularity of the nasal dorsum. Correction was achieved by PTFE graft. In all other cases aesthetic results were very good and long lasting, and the outline of the maxillary processes was regular, without any step. Both aesthetic and functional outcomes were judged excellent by the patients, with a high degree of satisfaction.