“Keeping the Lights On” is a revised paperback version of the original 2007 edition of the book. Two years on from the original release the arguments and discussion within are still as relevant, if not more so, than when the original version was published. When reading this text the sheer scale of the task, urgency and the need for innovation in both technology and policy for sustainable electricity generation and fuel use to avoid damaging climate change are eloquently put and rationally argued. “Keeping the Lights On” covers a wide range of topics over its eleven chapters. Divided into two parts, the first of part describes the challenge and the need for making energy sustainable. This section provides the fundamental background required to understand the discussions and concepts built and developed in later chapters. Critically this section defines critical distinctions of how we should really discuss energy, and how in general whilst we use this terms such as ‘energy consumption’ and ‘energy conservation’ freely in our daily lives when we are really talking about ‘energy carriers’ such as fuels and electricity. Usefully the book also contains a style guide for discussing energy that will be of use to general readers as well as professionals in this field, and something I have hopefully followed in this review and will continue to use. The second section of the book explores ways in which it will be possible to make electricity sustainable. This discusses all the key themes from generation to network solutions, business models and the roles of regulation and subsidy. I particularly enjoyed the section discussing the impact of the electricity meter on the supplier and user, and the way this has led us to think of electricity as a commodity. The final chapters of the book re-iterate the importance and need to develop a sustainable electricity generating system. The final chapter especially offers a forward thinking vision of how we might reach this state through rethinking how we generate, use and conceptualise “energy”. At a time where Europe is legislating ambitious targets for 80% reductions in CO