Over the last few years, new methods for plastic separation in mining have been developed. Froth flotation is one of these techniques, which is based on hydrophobicity differences between particles. Unlike minerals, most of the plastics are naturally hydrophobic, thus requiring the addition of chemicals that promote the selective wettability of one of its components, for a flotation separation.
                  The floatability of six granulated post-consumer plastic - Polystyrene (PS), Polymethyl methacrylate (PMMA), Polyethylene Terephthalate (PET-S, PET-D) and Polyvinyl Chloride (PVC-M, PVC-D) - in the presence of tannic acid (wetting agent), and the performance of the flotation separation of five bi-component plastic mixtures - PS/PMMA, PS/PET-S, PS/PET-D, PS/PVC-M and PS/PVC-D - were evaluated. Moreover, the effect of the contact angle, density, size and shape of the particles was also analysed.
                  Results showed that all plastics were naturally hydrophobic, with PS exhibiting the highest floatability. The contact angle and the flotation recovery of six plastics decreased with increasing tannic acid concentration, occurring depression of plastics at very low concentrations. Floatability differed also with the size and shape of plastic particles. For regular-shaped plastics (PS, PMMA and PVC-D) floatability decreased with the increase of particle size, while for lamellar-shaped particles (PET-D) floatability was slightly greater for coarser particles. Thus, plastic particles with small size, lamellar shape and low density present a greater floatability.
                  The quality of separation varied with the mixture type, depending not only on the plastics hydrophobicity, but also on the size, density and shape of the particles, i.e. the particle weight. Flotation separation of plastics can be enhanced by differences in hydrophobicity. In addition, flotation separation improves if the most hydrophobic plastic, that floats, has a lamellar shape and lower density and if the most hydrophilic plastic, that sinks, has a regular shape and higher density.
                  The results obtained show that froth flotation is a potential method for plastics separation, in particular for plastics with particle size greater than 2.0mm.Plastic is a synthetic material and a product of excellence, with wide application and use. Plastic materials possess many advantages and are increasingly being used in several products, especially in packaging, to replace other materials, such as metal, glass, ceramic, wood and paper. Besides their lower weight, higher durability and cheaper cost, compared to many other material types, plastics could be synthesized with a wide range of properties. As a result of their increasing use, the total global production of plastics has grown from around 1.5 million tonnes in 1950 to 311 million tonnes in 2014, being the European production of 59 million tonnes, which corresponds to 20% of the global plastic production ( The increase in plastic production and consumption has been largely responsible for the increase in municipal solid wastes (MSW). Plastic waste has become one of the major categories in MSW. In Portugal, plastics account for approximately 11% of MSW by weight, and more than 30% by volume, due to their low density. Plastic waste is an important matter in terms of environmental sustainability and solid waste management, due to their current levels of usage and disposal. There are several ways to manage plastic waste disposal, namely landfill, incineration for energy production, reuse and recycling. The disposal of plastics in a landfill requires wider areas and longer residence times to achieve its degradation. Energy production by plastic waste burn can also generate emissions of gases such as nitrous oxide, sulphur oxides, dusts, dioxins and other toxins, especially plastics containing PVC ( Plastic recycling requires a previous separation between plastics and other constituents and also between different polymer types, in order to achieve a good recycled plastic quality, since most plastic types are not compatible with each other due to the immiscibility at the molecular level which can cause serious processing problems ( In recent years, separation technologies based on the difference in physical or chemical properties have been applied to separate mixed plastic waste. These technologies include the automatic sorting based on surface properties; X-ray detection (X-ray transmission and X-ray fluorescence) ( Also, several separation methods widely used in the mining industry (e.g. gravity methods, electrostatic separation and froth flotation) have been applied in the separation of plastic mixtures, each one with their advantages and limitations. Gravity separation methods are effective in separating materials with different specific gravity, but polymers of similar specific gravity cannot be separated using these methods. Gravity separation methods include float-sink tanks, jig, shaking table, cylindrical cyclone media separator and liquid-fluidized bed technique ( Electrostatic separation techniques are based on differences in electric conductivity, friction charge and dielectric properties of components in a mixture, but cannot be used when there are small differences in electrostatic charge ( Several combination techniques are also used for the separation of mixed plastic, like air tabling and triboelectric techniques ( Froth flotation is the most important and versatile separation method used in mining industry. Froth flotation also is a promising alternative for plastic separation, enable flotation receive increasing attention all over the world ( Plastics are hydrophobic by nature therefore, in the separation of plastic mixtures by froth flotation, the surface of one or more species should become hydrophilic, while the others are kept hydrophobic. One of the methods of selective wetting is chemical conditioning with wetting agents. In plastic flotation, the selective adsorption of depressant molecules influences the affinity of air bubbles for different types of plastics. Many reagents have been tested as wetting agents aiming the selective flotation of plastic mixtures. Tannic acid, saponin, methyl cellulose, sodium lignin sulfonate and calcium lignin sulfonate have been used by several authors ( In this work tannic acid was used to study the flotation behaviour of six plastics and to study the flotation separation of post-consumer plastic mixtures. The separation efficiency relatively to the tannic acid dosage was also evaluated by flotation recovery and contact angle measurement. Additionally, the effect of size, shape and density of the particles were analysed. This work used six types of granulated plastics from three recycling companies: Polystyrene (PS, black), Polymethyl methacrylate (PMMA, white), Polyethylene Terephthalate (PET-D, transparent) and Polyvinyl Chloride (PVC-D, gray) from Daniel Morais; Polyethylene Terephthalate (PET-S, blue) from Logociclo-Selenis and Polyvinyl Chloride (PVC-M, light green) from Micronipol. The plastics differed on colour and shape, which facilitated separation through manual sorting at the end of each flotation test. The density of these plastics, measured by an Ultra Pycnometer (AccuPyc 1330), ranged from 1.047 The particles used had sizes between 1 and 5.6 The shape of the particles was described by a shape factor (F), defined as the ratio between the thickness (D Average dimensions (D In the flotation experiments, tannic acid was used as wetting agent and methyl isobutyl carbinol (MIBC) as frothing reagent. In flotation, the key step in the collection of particles by air bubbles is the interaction between them. The bubble-particle interaction involves a number of micro processes, which can be divided into collision, attachment and detachment. Hydrodynamic interactions are dominant in the collision efficiency while interfacial forces play a major role in the attachment efficiency. The stability of the bubble-particle aggregate is a function of both hydrodynamics and interfacial forces. Under constant physical conditions, the collision efficiency can be regarded as constant, so that changes in particles collection process may be attributed to interfacial properties, nominally represented by the contact angle that is the angle formed by a water droplet in contact with a solid surface. Contact angle indicates the degree of wetting when a solid and a liquid interact. If the contact angle is very small, then the air bubbles do not attach to the particle surface, while a very large contact angle results in very strong bubble attachment to the particle. Flotation recovery increases with increasing contact angle ( Contact angles were measured by a direct method in the Data Physics Instruments OCA20 equipment, using the sessile drop method. A drop of distilled water was placed on the surface of each plastic sample through a micro-syringe. The image of the water drop was captured by a camera and the angle calculated after setting the drop contour of an ellipse. This process was repeated seven times for each plastic and the average value was considered to be the contact angle of the plastic. Flotation tests were carried out in a Denver cell with a capacity of 3 First, flotation tests were carried out with one-component plastic samples at different tannic acid concentrations. According to the floatability of plastics it is possible to separate the six plastics into two groups: the first group constituted only by the PS, that has a high floatability, and the second group that includes the other five plastics, that have similar floatability. Then, flotation separation of binary plastic mixtures was performed using five bi-component mixtures: PS/PMMA, PS/PET-S, PS/PET-D, PS/PVC-M and PS/PVC-D, contributing each plastic with 50% of the weight at different concentrations of tannic acid, with the intention of obtaining a selective separation of PS. The control of the separation was carried out using the recovery and grade of each type of plastic in the floated and in the non-floated products, after manual sorting and weighing of the two types of plastics. This was possible due to the different colours and shapes of the plastics particles. The tests were carried out three times under similar operating conditions. The effectiveness of the plastic separation was quantified by the efficiency of separation, defined by The variation of contact angles of six plastics against tannic acid concentrations is shown in The two plastic types of PVC (PVC-M, PVC-D) and of PET (PET-S, PET-D) have different contact angles. Plastics are not pure polymers and they consist of polymers and additives. Since different components are often added to the plastic during industrial production and that can influence the properties of the plastics, such as contact angle ( The contact angles measured were in line with those referred in literature. The effect of tannic acid on the contact angles, which have dropped more than 40% for concentrations of 10 Unlike minerals, plastics are hydrophobic by nature, being necessary to add a wetting agent that promotes their wettability and subsequent flotation. The flotation recovery decreased with the increasing of tannic acid concentration ( PS plastic had a lower decrease of floatability due to the addition of tannic acid in comparison with the other five plastics. It can be assumed that a large amount of tannic acid is required to make PS a more hydrophilic plastic when compared with the other five. Concentrations of tannic acid below 1.5 The floatability of the six plastics presents the following order: PVC-M The two plastic types of PVC (PVC-M, PVC-D) and of PET (PET-S, PET-D) have different floatability, which can be due to the presence of additives in these plastics. The curves representing the dependence of contact angle of PS and the other five plastics on the tannic acid concentrations had similar shapes (  According to the floatability of plastics, it is possible to separate the six plastics into two groups. The first group is constituted only by PS, that has the highest floatability, and the second group includes the remaining five plastics, that have similar values of floatability. The particle size has an important role in the flotation process. The influence of the particle size on the floatability of the six plastics is shown in Considering the tannic acid concentrations below 3 For all plastics, with exception of PET-D, the flotation recovery decreased with increasing particles size. The coarse fractions presented lower floatability, with stronger influence of the particle size on PMMA and PVC-D plastics. The coarse fractions only floated in the absence or with very low concentrations of tannic acid. Moreover, The model for plastic flotation is different from that of ore flotation. Due to plastic low density, the maximum particle size capable of floating is larger for plastics compared with ores. In ore flotation, the particles size is smaller than the air bubbles size and a simple bubble is capable of carrying several ore particles. In plastic flotation, plastic particles are larger than air bubbles, so several air bubbles are needed to transport one plastic particle. A particle will float when the density of the bubble-particle aggregate is below the density of the flotation medium (water). The lower the value of the density of bubble-particle aggregate the higher the floatability of the particle. Factors determining the density of the bubble-particle aggregate are the size distribution of bubbles, the fraction of the particle surface covered by bubbles, the density and size of the particle, as well as its specific surface area. The theoretical density of the bubble-particle aggregate was defined by Therefore, the floatability of the plastics particles is controlled not only by the surface chemical-related factor, but also by the size, shape and density of the particles. Plastics flotation is a combination of froth flotation and gravity separation ( Wetting of particle surfaces by tannic acid will cause a decrease in bubble coverage percentage on the particle surface, and hence an increase in bubble-particle aggregate density, suggesting that particle floatability decreases with tannic acid additions. In the presence of high tannic acid concentration, none, or few bubbles, were attached to the particles. In particular, the coarse particle-bubble aggregates do not have sufficient levitation to rise in the pulp, since these aggregates have a density greater than the density of water. The different effect of the particles size in the flotation of the six plastics, particularly in PET-D, can be explained by differences in shape. Two particles with the same grain size and hydrophobicity but with different shapes or densities can have different floatabilities, because the lamellar shaped particle (or the less dense particle) weighs less and, consequently, the particle-bubble aggregates weigh less and have lower density. Also, among particles with equal hydrophobicity, lamellar particles float better than round ones, because they require the attachment of a less number of bubbles to form particle-bubble aggregates with a density lower than the density of water. Furthermore, particles with low density have greater floatability than dense ones because they require the attachment of a less number of bubbles to float.  For the two finer fractions, the attachment of only one or two bubbles is enough to form particle-bubble aggregates with a density lower than the density of water, i.e., floatable aggregates ( In order to obtain high recoveries, the lamellar particles need lower hydrophobicity than the regular ones, indicating that the floatability increases with the irregularity of the particles. However, in spite of presenting lamellar shapes, PET-S and PVC-M have similar behaviour to the regular shaped denser plastics (PMMA and PVC-D) and in order to float, the particles of PET-S and PVC-M need a number of air bubbles similar to the PMMA and PVC-D particles ( The less evident effect of tannic acid concentrations on PS floatability can be a consequence of the formation of floatable particle-bubble aggregates attached to only a few air bubbles because PS is the plastic with lower density. For the finer fraction, the density of the particle-bubble aggregates of the six plastics has the following order: PS For the coarser particles, the density of the particle-bubble aggregates of the six plastics has the following order: PS The order of floatability is different for those two size fractions. For finer particles, the floatability order is similar to the contact angle order, and for the coarser fraction, the floatability order is similar to the density order. Since the fine particles weigh less (being easier to get particle-bubble aggregates with density lower than the density of water) the floatability order of the fine particles represents more reliably the hydrophobicity grade of the six plastics. For particles with similar hydrophobicity, density and size, the lamellar ones have greater floatability. For the coarser fraction, the plastics with lamellar particles (PET-D and PET-S) have greater floatability, as a consequence of the lower weight of lamellar particles and, therefore, require the attachment of less air bubbles to float. PS plastic responded more slowly to the presence of tannic acid (wetting), thus showing greater floatability than the other five plastics ( In order to determine which tannic acid concentration led to the best separation of the five mixtures (PS/PMMA, PS/PET-S, PS/PET-D, PS/PVC-M and PS/PVC-D), flotation tests were developed with four tannic acid concentrations: 1.5, 2, 3 and 4 We can affirm that flotation separation of PS from PMMA, PET or PVC was efficient. The purity and recovery of the separated PS were above 78% and 88%, respectively, being the purity and recovery of the other plastic (PMMA, PET or PVC) above 87% and 75%, respectively. The best results were obtained in the PS/PVC-M mixture separation, having the highest separation efficiency (near 90%) and a floated with a grade of 94% in PS and a non-floated with a grade of 96% in PVC-M. On the other side, PS/PMMA had the lowest separation efficiency, of about 64%, with a PS grade in the floated of 78% and a PMMA grade in the non-floated of 87%. These results were consistent with the floatability of plastics observed in the mono-component tests ( The influence of the particle size was also analysed. To accomplish it, the floated and non-floated products were sieved in five size fractions: +1–1.4 PS plastic was less recovered in the floated when we tested the bi-component mixtures of PS/PMMA, PS/PET-S and PS/PVC-D, because in these three mixtures the tannic acid concentration was 3 PS/PMMA, PS/PVC-M and PS/PVC-D had similar results in terms of particle size and separation efficiency ( PS/PMMA mixture had the worst result for the fine particles. However, for the coarser particles this mixture achieved one of the bests. For the finer fractions, the separation was inefficient, because there was a great amount of PMMA recovered in the floated resulting in a PS floated with low quality. For the fraction 1–1.4 The influence of the particles size in the separation quality of the PS/PET-S mixture is not evident, because the five size fractions presented similar efficiency separations ( In the PS/PET-D, the quality of separation worsened slightly with the increase of the particles size ( Among the five plastic mixtures analysed, the PS/PVC-M mixture was the one that led to best results ( Additionally, in the PS/PVC-D mixture, there was a great influence of the particles size in the quality of the separation. Although the flotation recovery of the two plastics decreased with the increase of the particles size, the decrease on PVC-D was more evident ( For hydrophilic plastics with more regular shape (PPMA, PVC-D), the best separation was achieved for the coarser particles. For particles of fine size, since they weigh less, the attachment of only one bubble is enough to form a particle-bubble aggregate with a density lower than the density of water, and they are more influenced by the system’s turbulence and, so, the separation efficiency can be damaged. For the finer fraction, the separation efficiency of the five plastic mixtures has the following order: PS/PMMA For the coarser fraction, the separation efficiency of the five plastics mixture has the following order: PS/PET-D The six types of plastics - PS, PMMA, PET-S, PET-D, PVC-M and PVC-D - are naturally hydrophobic, because, in the absence of a wetting agent, the floated recovery was 100%. However, their depression was obtained with very low tannic acid concentrations. Floatability and contact angles of the six plastics decreased with the increase in the concentration of tannic acid. The PS was the plastic with larger floatability, while the other plastics showed similar floatabilities. With the exception of PET-D, the flotation recovery decreased with the increase of the particle size. The influence of particle size on the floatability was more accentuated in the plastics with more regular shapes (PMMA and PVC-D). For the finer particles, the floatability was mainly influenced by the hydrophobicity, but for the coarse particles, the floatability was also strongly influenced by the weight of the particles. Plastics with larger contact angles, lower densities, smaller sizes and lamellar shapes, have achieved higher floatabilities. For bi-component mixtures of plastics that join a high hydrophobicity plastic, like PS, and a low hydrophobicity plastic, like PMMA, PET-S, PET-D, PVC-M, or PVC-D, the quality of the flotation separation was always above 64%. The quality of the separation varied with the mixture type and depended not only on the hydrophobicity, but also on the size, density and shape of the particles, i.e. depended on the particle weight. For hydrophilic plastics that had more spherical shaped particles (PMMA), the separation efficiencies improved almost 50% with the increase in the particles size, whereas in hydrophilic plastics with lamellar particles (PET-D, PET-S), the influence of the size was minimal. In bi-component mixtures of PS with hydrophilic plastics that have more regular shapes (PMMA, PVC-M and PVC-D), a pure floated in PS was obtained for the coarser fraction. For fine particles, the separation was mainly influenced by hydrophobicity and density, and to a lesser extent, by shape of the particles. PET-D is the most hydrophilic plastic and presents the most lamellar particles that led to the best separation for the finer fraction, but also to the worst separation for the coarser fraction. Selective separation of plastics can be obtained by their different hydrophobicity grade, when the least hydrophobic plastic has higher density and a rounder shape, and when particles had sizes greater than 2.0 This work was supported by the