The recovery with sulfuric acid leaching of Ti content of red mud, a waste of Turkey Etibank Seydişehir Aluminium Plants, has been studied by statistically designed experiments. The effects of relevant factors, such as temperature, leaching time, acid normality, solid-to-liquid ratio, stirring rate, on leaching yield of TiO2 have been investigated. Experiments have been planned by factorial design and orthogonal central composite design methods. A model has been obtained by means of variance analysis at the 92.5% confidence level.Red mud emerges as a waste product during the alkaline leaching of bauxite in the Bayer Process, and causes serious environmental problems due to its high alkalinity and large amount. Serious disposal problems have led researchers to develop new methods for the use of the red mud as: absorbent to remove H Meanwhile, red mud may also be considered as a secondary raw material for the recovery of valuable substances In this study, statistically designed experiments were performed to investigate the recovery of Ti content of red mud with sulfuric acid leaching. First and second order models, which relate the TiO The principal steps of statistically designed experiments are: determination of response variables, factors and factor levels; choice of the experimental design; and statistical analysis of the data. The final aim of the work is to obtain a statistically sound regression model. Today, the most widely used experimental design to estimate main effects, as well as interaction effects, is the 2 In the planning and analysis of experimental designs, coded values are usually used instead of absolute values of the variables. The relationship between coded value ( Red mud was obtained from Etibank Seydişehir Aluminium Plants Turkey, and has the following average composition (% by wt.): Fe A −75 μm (−200 mesh ASTM) particle sized, washed, and air-dried red mud sample was used in the experiments. The leaching of the red mud was carried out under atmospheric pressure in a jacketed glass reactor fitted with a reflux condenser, a thermometer, and a stirrer. The stirrer made of Teflon had four blades. A constant temperature circulator was used to maintain the desired temperature in the reactor. A typical run was carried out as follows: specified amounts of preheated sulfuric acid of known concentration and red mud were loaded into the glass reactor. The stirring speed was held constant by means of a digital controlled stirrer. At the end of the experiment, the content of the reactor was immediately filtered through Whatman No. 44, and transferred into a volumetric flask filled up to 500 mL. TiO In the light of pre-experiments, five factors, namely, reaction temperature, sulfuric acid normality, stirring speed, solid-to-liquid ratio and reaction time were chosen as independent variables, and their high and low levels were decided as shown in First, a first order model with interaction terms was chosen to fit the experimental data: To test the significance of the effects, an analysis of variance has been conducted at 95% and 99% confidence intervals. The results are shown in This model with 20 factors, fits the experimental results very well, multiple correlation coefficient, The model obtained by regression analysis and tested with When second order model, Residual analysis is a valuable tool to detect the existence of systematic errors. The normalized residual is defined as For a well-established model, systematic errors are absent, and normalized residuals result from experimental errors which exhibit a normal distribution according to a widely accepted statistical convention. The tests' graphics are shown in In this study, statistically designed experiments were performed to investigate the recovery of Ti content of red mud with sulfuric acid leaching. First and second order models, which relate the TiO The correlation coefficient of the second order model established at 90% confidence level with effective factors has a high value of 0.9937, nearly the same as for a full second order model. Thus, the conclusion is that the model estimates experimental data very well, the model is efficient and has no systematic errors. It is believed that the results obtained may provide a background for pilot and industrial scale applications.