In this study, the role of mechanochemical pre-treatment with the addition of S in atmospheric agitation leaching of a lateritic nickel ore was investigated. In the mechanically activated sample with S (20 wt%), the amount of Ni-Co-bearing amorphous FeMg hydrosilicate phases decreased and a new FeMgS phase was formed. In addition, the formation of NiSO4 was determined by X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy analysis. The effect of leaching temperature, leaching time, H2SO4 concentration, and the amount of S added during the mechanochemical pre-treatment on the extractability of Ni, Fe, and Co were investigated. When the mechanically activated sample with 20% added S was leached for 2 h under conditions of a solid/liquid ratio of 1/2.5 (w/w), temperature of 85 °C, and H2SO4 concentration of 300 g/L, 92.0% Ni, 79.1% Fe, and 84.8% Co extractions were achieved. Moreover, 17.5% lower Ni extraction was obtained using the mechanically activated sample without S. In terms of leaching behavior, the relationship between Ni and Fe dissolution weakened after mechanochemical activation. Furthermore, the leaching of the newly formed compounds was mostly controlled by the chemical reaction model.In recent years, declining reserves of nickel sulfide deposits have resulted in considerable interest in lateritic nickel reserves that typically contain approximately 1–1.5% Ni and have complex mineralogical structures ( The new concept of “eccentric type” vibratory mills developed by Mechanical activation leads to point defects, intense dislocation flows, and the creation of fresh surfaces, resulting in crucial changes in the physicochemical properties and crystal structure of materials. Furthermore, phase transformations and chemical reactions such as oxidation–reduction and decomposition can be observed. These features reveal the difference between mechanical activation and conventional fine grinding because fine grinding is just a size reduction process that takes place between the coarse grinding and the mechanical activation processes (Juhász and Opoczky, 1990; Boldyrev et al., 1996; With regard to the lateritic structure, various studies have been conducted on similar mineralogical compositions, especially on ores containing oxides/oxyhydroxides and silicates. Further, the use of mechanochemical reactions to decompose the complex mineralogical structure of ores has been investigated. Mechanochemical processes based on displacement reactions have also been introduced for the synthesis of new compounds and/or the decomposition of existing structures. Highly reactive functional groups, especially the OH group, play a role in these reactions, while the hardness and plasticity of the materials are the major determinants. Additionally, in most cases, after the mechanochemical reactions, the newly formed products are in a completely non-crystalline state ( In this study, a laterite ore sample was mechanically activated with elemental S in an eccentric vibratory mill. Using this method, the mechanochemical reactions occurred between the laterite ore and S. After milling, the newly formed material was examined in detail using mineralogical and XPS (X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy) analyses. Then, the effect of structural changes on the atmospheric leaching of the laterite sample was investigated using H The lateritic nickel ore sample used in this study was collected from Çaldağ (Manisa, Turkey). The chemical analysis of the ore was performed using a PerkinElmer-OPTIMA8300 inductively coupled plasma spectrometer (ICP) and a Thermo Fisher-QUANT'X EDXRF X-Ray fluorescence spectrometer (XRF). The mineralogical examinations were carried out using a FEI Mineral Liberation Analyzer (MLA 650F) in the particle and search mode to determine the modal mineralogy. From the perspective of mineralogy, Ni-Co-bearing structures are amorphous and include clays within the limonite group (Fe hydroxides), Fe Furthermore, image analysis by back-scattered electron (BSE) microscopy signal intensity and energy dispersive spectrometry (EDS) using Bruker 5010 SDD detectors were performed. While the quantitative evaluation of the laterite sample is presented in The mechanical activation tests were conducted in an industrial eccentric vibratory ball mill (ESM 656–0.5 ks, Siebtechnik, Germany). The 2 mm particle size lateritic sample was milled using a 5 L steel satellite milling chamber, 30 mm diameter steel balls with a total mass of 17 kg, a 960 rpm rotational motor speed, and inhomogeneous vibrational amplitudes equal to 20 mm. In the tests, 400 g sample was milled for 1 h with elemental S additions of 0, 5, 10, and 20 wt%. The particle size distribution after milling, determined using a Malvern Particle Sizer 2000, is given in The structural and chemical changes in the sample were observed from the modal mineralogy, classified images, BSE images, and XPS analyses. The results were compared with the raw ore sample and the mechanically activated samples (with and without S addition). The mechanochemically activated samples with various amounts of S addition were examined using atmospheric agitation leaching tests. During these tests, the experimental procedure given in During the milling part of the study, the S additions were 0, 5, 10, and 20 wt%. The samples prepared in this manner were leached to investigate the effect of the activation conditions in terms of the metal extractability. To determine the optimum S addition and leaching temperature, temperatures of 55, 65, 75, and 85 °C were tested. Additionally, the leaching tests were conducted under constant conditions such as a solid/liquid (SL) ratio of 1/2.5 (w/w), H By applying the optimized parameters, a second group of leaching tests were performed in which the effect of the H In addition, the dissolution mechanism was investigated using the sample activated with the addition of 20% S. To reveal the leaching kinetics, leaching temperatures of 55, 65, 75, and 85 °C were tested for leaching times of 1, 2, 3, and 4 h at an H The atmospheric agitation leaching tests were performed in 0.5 L cylindrical glass reaction vessels with a thermostat for temperature control, and a stirring speed of 500 rpm. The leaching solutions were prepared using analytical grade H The pregnant leach solutions (PLS) were analyzed using the ICP method. The H The comparison between the non-activated samples and the samples mechanically activated for 1 h (without S) in terms of the modal mineralogy is illustrated in According to our previous results, the Fe Furthermore, the phase transformation phenomenon also had an influence on the oxyhydroxide minerals. Although the detection of changes to the amorphous phases was difficult, it was believed that goethite additionally lost some of its structural crystalline water during mechanical activation. In terms of the sample with S (20 wt% addition), as a result of the 1 h mechanical activation, the amount of Ni- and Co-bearing clayey and amorphous Fe As the formation of the FeMgS phase was detected through modal mineralogy analysis, it was also possible to confirm the presence of the phase from the classified and BSE images. The addition of elemental S during the mechanical activation process of the laterite sample caused a mechanochemical reaction in which the S became bound to the Mg and Fe The detailed spectral lines for the S 2p, Fe 2p, and Ni 2p are shown in The XPS spectra of Fe 2p in In As a significant result, the NiSO The leaching tests were performed on the activated samples with and without S. Thus, it was possible to investigate the effect of the mechanochemical activation and S addition by comparing the metal extraction results. In order to investigate the effect of the S addition during the mechanical activation on the Ni, Fe, and Co extractions as a significant parameter in the leaching kinetics, temperatures of 55, 65, 75, and 85 °C were tested with four activated samples (with additions of 0, 5, 10, and 20% S). The leaching conditions were performed with a S/L ratio equal to 1/2.5 ( Just like the temperature effect, S addition led to increases in the extraction percentages of Ni, Fe, and Co. As more S was added, more metal was extracted. When the sample with 20% added S was leached at 85 °C, 88.9% Ni, 76.7% Fe, and 88.1% Co extractions were achieved. Due to the accelerative impact of the increased temperature and S addition on the metal extractions, it was decided to conduct further leaching tests at 85 °C with 20% S addition during milling. Next, while selecting the leaching temperature and the amount of S addition, the effect of H Additionally, the leaching results obtained for the sample mechanically activated for 1 h with the addition of 20 wt% S were compared with the sample without added S. As can be seen from Also, the H In laterites, Ni is mostly associated with goethite. As the protons of H To reveal the dissolution behavior of Ni for the mechanically activated sample and the changes after the addition of S, the activation was investigated. According to the mineralogical analysis of the sample, it was known that the Ni was mostly associated with the Fe-bearing minerals. Therefore, comparing the Ni and Fe extractions obtained in the study was a reasonable approach. For this purpose, the leaching results of the sample mechanically activated for 1 h without S were plotted. As can be seen from When the leaching results of the mechanically activated sample with added S were graphically plotted, it became clear that the chemical changes in the composition of the sample and the new form of the Ni had an enormous influence on the dissolution behavior of the Ni. Various kinetic models have been developed for the mechanisms of acid leaching. The shrinking core model is commonly suggested for laterites, in which the solid particle protects its bulk size as the unreacted core of the particle shrinks gradually as the leaching progresses resulting in the formation of a peripheral porous layer ( In order to find the appropriate model for the leaching of the lateritic Ni sample, the Ni extractions were fitted to the shrinking core models. Eqs. With reference to the rate constants, the activation energy (Ea) for the reaction can be calculated using the Arrhenius equation. In Eq. To investigate the relevance of the models for leaching kinetics, specific leaching tests were performed on the sample that was mechanically activated for 1 h with 20% added S. The d According to the calculations, the highest correlation coefficients were found to be nearly 0.99 with the control of chemical reaction and diffusion through the ash layer ( An increase in temperature usually accelerates the leaching process. The existence of foreign atoms has a substantial impact on heterogeneous reactions. These impurities can cause stresses in the crystal structure that leading to an initiation of the reaction. Likewise, the existence of impurities might result in a change of the rate and/or mechanism of the reaction. As well as the effect of impurities and crystal structure defects, macro defects characterized by the morphology and properties of the leached surface have a crucial effect on the kinetics of the process. The energy is accumulated on the porous surfaces contributing to the leaching reaction, while the edges and tips on the irregular surfaces become the nucleation points. In contrast, smooth surfaces are strongly resistant to the reagents. The diffusion rates through porous materials are notably higher than through non-porous materials ( The reactions controlled by the ash layer usually have low apparent activation energy (Ea), mostly around 4–12 kJ mol The ln K versus temperature plot was investigated for the rate constants of the Ni extractions at various temperatures ( Based on the results achieved in this study, the impressive effect of mechanochemical pre-treatment of a lateritic nickel ore on the extractability of Ni and Co can be observed. To reveal the mechanism, at first, the difference between the mechanical activation and the mechanochemical activation should be clarified.  Distinctly, the present study investigated the application of mechanochemical activation of 1 h with S, instead of mechanical activation for 2 h. Through mechanochemical reactions, the clayey phases in the ore sample containing Fe and Mg were transformed into FeMgS by binding Mg and releasing Ni and Co. In addition, the formation of NiSO The results obtained in this study reveal the chemical and structural changes in a laterite sample and their effect on the leaching mechanism through mechanical activation with S. The composition of the laterite sample was found to contain Ni- and Co-bearing phases predominantly from the limonite group, Fe After 1 h of mechanical activation, the Fe In the mechanically activated sample with the addition of S (20 wt%), new phases of FeMgS and NiSO 92.0% Ni, 79.1% Fe, and 84.8% Co extractions were achieved with the mechanochemically activated sample with S under the following leaching conditions: 2 h, 1/2.5 S/L, 85 °C, and 300 g/L H The correlation between the dissolutions of Ni and Fe became weaker to some degree after mechanochemical activation. It was found that the leaching mechanism of the newly formed compounds (containing Ni) was mostly controlled by the chemical reaction model. Further, the apparent activation energy (Ea) for the Ni leaching was determined to be 33 kJ mol The authors gratefully acknowledge the support of Prof. Dr. Eberhard Gock, who will always be missed and remembered with respect.