Saline water is widely used in coal preparation plants and problems are seen in these plants that a large amount of coal froth accumulates on top of thickeners in settling, the first step of dewatering process. However, the influence of saline water on settling in dewatering of coal froth products was rarely investigated. In this study, settling of coal slurry and coal froth in three different types of saline water was investigated. It turned out that saline water accelerated the settling velocity of particles that detached from froth, while increasing the amount of froth floating on top of water. The two effects both presented in settling of coal slurry and coal froth, however, the accelerated settling velocity of detached particles by salinity was more pronounced in settling of coal slurry, and the increased amount of froth by salinity was more pronounced in settling of coal froth. The mechanisms underpinning the two effects were investigated through Scanning Electron Microscopy (SEM) and oscillatory rheology. For particles detached from froth, saline water enhanced the particle attraction in coagula, so the coagula size increased and therefore the settling speed of particles also increased with water salinity. For coal froth, the balance of forces on particles determined the state of particles. Capillary attraction and buoyancy force counteracted gravity force to hold particles in froth. The capillary attraction increased with water salinity, so did the amount of froth floating on top of water.In coal preparation, flotation is widely employed to clean coals through the selective adhesion of hydrophobic coal particles to air bubbles [ Due to the shortage of fresh water and rigorous policy on the amount of saline water that can be discharged into river systems, coal preparation plants have introduced water re-use to reduce the amount of waste water discharged. As a consequence, the salt concentration in re-used water increases with the cycle number being increased in coal preparation plants. A number of studies have noted that saline water has a negative effect on dewatering of coal flotation concentrates [ Settling is the result of synergy of forces on particles. Normally, for particles in coal slurry, there are two forces acting on particles during their settling: gravity and buoyancy. Gravity pulls particles down while buoyancy pushes them upwards. When the gravity overcomes the buoyancy in water, particles start to settle. For those particles in coal froth, with the constraint of bubbles, the forces are no more than gravity and buoyancy and capillary attraction plays a crucial role. Capillary attraction occurs between micrometre-sized particles adsorbed at an aqueous interface and is caused by a distortion of the liquid interface due to dipolar electric fields of the particles [ In the previous study, we found that the dewatering efficiency of coal froth was lower than that of coal slurry [ A coal sample was obtained from Bulli Mine, New South Wales, Australia. It was crushed by a cone crusher. The combustible matter content in the raw coal was 89.5%. MIBC (Methyl Isobutyl Carbinol) and diesel (industry grade) were used as frother and collector in coal flotation, respectively. The crushed sample was ground in a laboratory stainless steel rod mill and then sieved to obtain minus 38 μm size fraction. To minimise the effect of ash, the sample was purified through flotation in the absence of collector and frother. 300 g coal sample was dispersed in tap water in a 3.0 L flotation cell at an agitation speed of 1000 rpm and froth was generated at an air flow rate of 3.0 L/min and collected every 10 s. Then the froth product was filtered and dried in the oven at 70 °C to obtain purified coal particles. The combustible matter content in the purified coal was 96.0%. The size distribution of the purified sample was measured by laser diffraction (Mastersizer 2000, Malvern Instrument Ltd., UK) as shown in The water used is artificial saline water. The types of saline water and the composition are listed in The coal slurry was prepared by mixing 29.0 g coal particles with the same amount of water that was contained in flotation froth products, 2 mL MIBC (1.0% v/v) and 0.01 mL diesel. The coal slurry was transferred to a 500 mL measuring cylinder with the same solid concentration as that in coal froth products. The measuring cylinders were then placed on a flat bench at room temperature. In settling of coal slurry, a clear sediment-water interface formed. As particles settled, this interface moved down. A small amount of froth was generated and floated on top of water in settling of coal slurry and a water-froth interface also formed. It has been well documented that saline water has a frothing ability [ Froth products used in settling were obtained from batch flotation. Flotation was performed in a 1.5 L batch flotation cell with 30.0 g purified coal, 2.0 mL MIBC (1.0% v/v), 0.01 mL diesel and 1.5 L saline water at an agitation speed of 1000 rpm. Coal froth was prepared with an air flow rate of 3.0 L/min and collected every 10 s till no froth was generated. The recovery of coal particles was over 96%. Coal froth from the flotation was transferred to a 500 mL measuring cylinder. The measuring cylinder was then placed on a flat bench at room temperature. A large amount of froth floated on top of water and the water-sediment interface moved down slowly with time. In settling of coal slurry and coal froth, the change of water-sediment interface with time was recorded and the cylinder was pictured after 4 h when the interface was in equilibrium and the water phase was clear. SEM was performed on SU3500 SEM (Hitachi Ltd., Japan) to observe the structural difference between froth products obtained from different saline water. The sample holder was 12.6 mm in diameter to which a carbon tab was attached. The froth samples used for SEM Analysis were the same as those in settling, which were froth overflow products from flotation without any disturbance. The three types of coal froth were put on three holders and the three kinds of coal slurry were also put on three other holders, allowed to spread and then any excess removed. After being dried naturally, these samples were coated with iridium (about 30 nm in thickness). The SEM images were taken at 20 kV accelerating voltage, 30 spot size and 17 mm working distance. Oscillatory rheology measurements were conducted using a TA Discovery HR-1 Rheometer (TA Instruments Ltd., USA). The geometry used was a vane in cup with a vane diameter of 28.0 mm and length of 42.0 mm. The inner diameter of the cup was 60.3 mm and its height was 100.0 mm. All the rheology measurements were obtained at 25 °C. The conditions for coal slurry and coal froth were the same. Coal slurry used for rheology tests was prepared by adding coal particles to saline water to obtain the slurry with 27 wt% solids, which was the same as the mass fraction of particles in coal froth. 0.005 mL diesel and 0.5 mL MIBC (1.0% v/v) were also added to the coal slurry and stirred till all particles were well dispersed. Then the coal slurry was transferred to the rheometer cup for rheology measurements. Coal froth used for rheology measurements was generated in the cup on the rheometer to avoid any modification during a transfer process. 10.0 g coal particles were added to 100 mL saline water. After coal particles were well stirred in water, 0.005 mL diesel and 0.5 mL MIBC (1.0% v/v) were added and stirred by the vane for 30 s at a speed of 100 rad/s. Then the froth was generated at an air flow rate of 1.0 L/min. Air flow and stirrer were stopped when the coal froth was 4 cm in height. The vane was moved into the froth to perform the rheology measurement. The gap between the vane and the bottom of cup was set as 100 mm. The rheometer was operated in a strain controlled oscillatory model which was performed by applying a small sinusoidal strain and measuring the resulting stress. The viscoelastic response of the material can be characterised by the storage modulus G' and the loss modulus G". G' is a measure of the deformation energy stored in the sample during a cycle of the shear process. The energy is restored when the deformation is removed, so G' represents the reversible deformation behaviour of the sample. G" is a measure of the deformation energy dissipated during a cycle of the shear process and represents the irreversible deformation behaviour of the sample [ Amplitude sweeps and frequency sweeps were both performed on coal slurry and coal froth. In amplitude sweeps, the angular frequency was 1 Hz and the shear strain amplitude ranged from 0.01% to 1%. In frequency sweeps, the shear strain was 0.02% and angular frequency ranged from 0.1 to 10 rad/s. G' and G" were calculated from the measured torque by the rheometer software TRIOS v4.3.0. To maintain quality control, each rheology measurement was repeated three times to make sure its repeatability and the error of G' was less than 10%. The settling of coal slurry and froth was reflected by the change of water-froth interface and water-sediment interface. With settling time, the water-froth interface moved upwards as a result of the detachment of particles from froth, while the water-sediment interface moved downwards as a result of settling of the detached particles till an equilibrium was reached. The change of water-sediment interface with time in settling of coal slurry and coal froth with time in three types of saline water is shown in For coal froth, the change of water-sediment interface was recorded after 10 min of settling because the water-sediment interface was turbid until 10 min. The turbidity in the first 10 min of settling was related to the particles that were detaching from froth. In coal froth, due to the presence of bubbles, particles tended to attached on air-water bubbles instead of settling down.  In settling of coal froth ( The settling tests indicate that water salinity had an important role in determining the settling process for both coal slurry and coal froth. With the increase of water salinity, the amount of froth floating on top of water increased in settling of both coal slurry and coal froth and was more significant in settling of coal froth. Once coal particles detached from froth, the settling speed of these particles increased with an increase of water salinity, and due to the great amount of particles that settled, this phenomenon was more obvious in settling of coal slurry. In the previous study, it was determined that the settling behaviour of coal slurry and coal froth in fresh water was governed by particle interactions [  Coal particles suspended in water possess negative surface charge, so positive ions in solution are attracted and adsorb on their surfaces. In this way, ions in saline water affect the electrical double layer of coal particles [ Apart from SEM analysis, the effect of saline water on the interactions between particles in slurry was also investigated by oscillatory rheology.  The rheology measurements indicate that the coal slurry was dominated by the viscous portion at low frequency and with the increase of frequency, it became elastic portion dominated. It exhibited the behaviour of a viscoelastic liquid. With the increase of frequency, the relaxation time for coal slurry was lessened and the relative motion between particles was reduced, so more deformation energy could be stored. Since G' and G" changed obviously with frequency, the particle interactions in coal slurry resulted from physical forces. Rheology presents the bulk particle behaviour. In oscillatory rheology, G'-curve may be taken to describe the structural strength of samples [ Settling kinetics is directly related with the size of particles. According to Strokes law, large particles settle much faster than smaller ones and overall settling rates are dramatically affected by coagulation [ For the froth floating on top of water in settling of coal slurry, the amount was insignificant compared to that in settling of coal froth which was investigated in the following section.  The results of oscillatory rheology of coal froth are shown in  For all three kinds of coal froth, G' was nearly constant with frequency, increasing only a very little, while G" decreased. G' was greater than G" and both were almost independent of frequency, which indicates the presence of a network structure in coal froth and that the system tended to show an elastic response to shear. It has been reported that G' > G" and both G' and G" being independent of frequency can be established as criteria to show the physical stability of viscoelastic materials [ With the increase of frequency resulting in a faster motion, the network in coal froth showed a slight increase of inflexibility and rigidity. More deformation energy was stored and the energy lost in fraction between particles or between particle and air-water interface was less. However, the difference between short-time behaviour (at high frequency) and long-time behaviour (at low frequency) of coal froth was subtle. The results illustrate that the coal froth was a structured solid with strong particle interactions and the network in the coal froth was powerful to resist the glide between coal particles, so the energy lost in the shear process was low and instead the energy stored in the process was high. The magnitude of G' increasing with the increase of water salinity illustrates the increase of rigidity and structural strength of coal froth, which means that the forces between particles and bubbles in coal froth increased with the increase of water salinity. Based on the results above, saline water increased the aggregation of coal particles in froth and enhanced the interaction between particle and bubble. Capillary attraction acted to stick coal particles and bubbles together and represented the interactions between particles and bubbles in coal froth, so it increased with salinity, too. For the particles in coal froth, there was a balance among the forces on them to keep them stay in froth [  In this study, the settling of particles in coal slurry and coal froth in saline water was compared. Saline water accelerated the settling velocity of particles that detached from froth, while increasing the amount of froth floating on top of water. The accelerated settling velocity in saline water was more obvious in settling of coal slurry and the increased amount of froth floating on top of water in saline water was more obviously presented in settling of coal froth. For settling of coal particles that detached from froth, based on the results of SEM and oscillatory rheology, saline water enhanced the particle interaction in coagula, which determined the coagula size, so coagula size increased with salinity. As a result, the settling speed of particles increased with water salinity. For the froth floating on top of water, the balance of forces on particles determined the state of particles. As the results of SEM and oscillatory rheology shown, the capillary attraction increased with water salinity, which counteracted gravity force to hold particles in froth. As a result, the amount of froth floating on top of water increased with water salinity. The authors greatly appreciate financial support from