A novel dual-etch process technology has been developed for the tapering of deep silicon vias which can be used in the fabrication of through-silicon interconnected silicon carriers for 3D system in packaging application. The process consists of two etching steps viz. an anisotropic etch process followed by a global isotropic etch process which causes the vias profile to taper. The 1st etching step is designed to provide high etch rate and throughput while the 2nd etch step is designed to control the taper angle of the via. It has been shown that through this approach of partitioning the via formation process into an anisotropic etch and an isotropic etch process, it is possible to maintain high overall etch rates without compromising on the final via profile and throughput. The via profile achieved has been extensively characterized with respect wide range of critical process parameters and via geometries. It has been demonstrated that regardless of the choice of via formation method, it is feasible to achieve a controllable via taper to realize a void-free copper via-filling by electroplating process.Motivated by the need for increasing chip functionality for portable and hand-held applications, there has been a continuous trend towards down-scaling the critical device dimensions of CMOS devices to build multi-functional system on chip (SOC) The focus of this work is to develop and characterize a novel dual-etch process technology that can be used as a plug-in module in the silicon carrier fabrication technology. The via tapering process can easily be integrated with various high throughput via fabrication methods like BOSCH process The main motivation for via tapering is that it helps in conformal deposition of isolation dielectric, copper diffusion barrier metallization and copper seed metallization over the sidewalls of the deep silicon vias. It further enables a void-free copper via electroplating. The amount of via tapering depends on the capability of dielectric deposition and copper electroplating process. Via taper requirement further depends on the via depth, aspect ratio and finally on the allowable pitch of the interconnects The tapered silicon via etch process development has been done in Surface Technology System (STS) Inductive Coupled Plasma etching system. Although STS ICP etcher is mainly designed for performing BOSCH deep reactive ion etch process, it can also be used in reactive ion etch mode, which is referred as non-BOSCH process in this paper. The system consists of ICP electronics, load lock and carousel wafer loading unit and a process chamber. The plasma is generated by coil assembly which is inductively coupled at 13.56 Test mask with circular and square patterns of critical dimension (CD) ranging from 10 to 100 The dual-etch via tapering technology consists of two silicon etching steps. First a high etch-rate process is performed to form deep silicon vias of required depth followed by photoresist stripping and Piranha clean. The 1st etching step is designed to provide high etch rate and throughput while the 2nd etch step is designed to control the taper angle of the via. This approach of partitioning the via formation process into an anisotropic etch and an isotropic etch process helps to maintain high overall etch rates and thus high throughput without compromising on the final via profile. In this work, two type of via formation methods, viz., the BOSCH process and the conventional reactive ion etching process, also called a non-BOSCH process have been studied by subjecting them to via tapering process through the global isotropic etch. The vertical via formation can also be achieved by other methods like laser drilling and ultrasonic drilling. The wafer is then subjected to a global isotropic etching process which is designed for tapering the deep silicon vias. The global isotropic etch process which is the 2nd etch step can thus be used as a plug-in process in conjunction with other via manufacturing methods as it is independent of the via formation process. As the 2nd etching step is highly isotropic in nature, it is dominated by chemical etching due to abundant supply of F-radical which comes from the main etch gas SF As the BOSCH etch process is based on independent control of etch and sidewall passivation chemistries based on C In the plasma, SF In case of main etch performed by non-BOSCH process, it is however possible to achieve some degree of tapered profile and etch rate of greater than 3 The objective of the 2nd etch process is to slope or taper the sidewall of the via. This is accomplished by an isotropic etch chemistry which is rich in free radicals as shown in Eq. Having a low anisotropicity is particularly important in this process as high lateral etch rate is required for removing the beaks or curvature formed due to the high etch rate 1st etch step, and also to increase the amount of tapering at the top of vias. Figs. The deep silicon via tapering is facilitated by the 2nd etch step or the global isotropic etch step which can potentially increase the surface roughness of the silicon carrier if the process is not optimized. Hence, four different process conditions were evaluated to arrive at major trend due to via tapering process conditions. Samples thus etched with each of the isotropic etch process were scanned in Atomic Force Microscope and its average surface rough (     Through this work it has been shown that the dual-etch process technology provides high degree of process flexibility to the user by independently controlling etch rate and sidewall tapering process. Though the proposed via tapering process was demonstrated for vias formed by BOSCH and non-BOSCH methods, it was shown that this technology can be applied to other methods of forming deep silicon vias. From a detailed characterization of different isotropic etch processes and its impact on surface roughness, it was shown that the most desirable via tapering process should operate under low pressure for optimum performance. It was finally shown that it is possible to realize a void-free deep silicon copper via-filling by standard DC pulsed plating. The results presented thus meets a critical requirement for forming through-silicon copper interconnection for 3D system in packaging application. I would like to thank Institute of Microelectronics, Singapore and Nanyang Technological University, Singapore for encouraging and supporting me in course of this research work. I would also like to thank all the technical support staff in Semiconductor Process Technology Lab for their help me in concluding this work successfully.