Resource quality and availability modify the microbial contribution to soil organic matter turnover and formation. We created a microbial hotspot at the soil-litter interface in a microcosm experiment to better understand and integrate specific microbial habitats into C turnover models. Reciprocal transplantation of 13C and 12C litter on top of soil cores allowed us to follow C flow into specific members of the microbial food web (bacteria and fungi) and to calculate the turnover times of litter-derived C in these microorganisms at three different stages of maize litter decomposition; early stage (0–4 days), intermediate stage (5–12 days) and later stage (29–36 days).
                  Litter age influenced the incorporation rate of C into bacteria and fungi and subsequent turnover in phospholipid fatty acid (PLFA) biomarkers. When fresh litter was applied, both fungi and bacteria were able to assimilate labile litter C in the early stage of decomposition, while lower substrate quality in the intermediate stage of decomposition promoted fungal utilization. Utilization of complex litter C sources was minor in both fungi and bacteria in the later stage of decomposition. Different bacterial substrate utilization strategies were reflected by either a decline of the isotopic signal after exchange of 13C by 12C litter or by storage and/or reuse of previously released microbial 13C. The mean residence time of C in the fungal PLFA 18:2ω6,9 was estimated from 46 to 32 days, which is the same or shorter time than that of bacterial PLFAs. This highlights the role of fungi in rapid turnover processes of plant residues, with implications for implementation of bacterial and fungal processes into C turnover models.Soil organic carbon (SOC) is the largest active carbon (C) pool in terrestrial ecosystems. Historically it was thought that most SOC originates directly from plant residues, but it is now accepted that plant-derived C primarily enters the SOC pool indirectly via soil microorganisms ( The detritusphere, a microbial habitat which includes the litter layer and the soil influenced by litter, harbors a tremendous number of microorganisms which perform ecologically important biogeochemical processes, such as the decomposition and turnover of plant litter C ( Historically, it was thought that resource partitioning between bacteria and fungi in the degradation process of complex substrates was an important driver of soil microbial diversity ( Despite the important role of microorganisms in formation and degradation of SOC, internal bacterial and fungal C turnover processes have rarely been reported in the literature. Prokaryotic bacterial and eukaryotic fungal cells vary substantially in their chemical composition ( Our aims were (i) to quantify the utilization of litter-derived C by bacteria and fungi in the detritusphere and (ii) to assess subsequent C turnover in microbial C pools as a function of residue age by using highly Soil was taken from an experiment on an arable field near Göttingen (Germany, 51°33′N, 91°53′E; 158 m a.s.l.) in May 2014. The dominant soil types on the field were Luvisol and Cambisol with partially stagnic properties ( For the incubation experiment, senescent maize leaves with different Fresh soil was sieved (<2 mm), homogenized and used to fill cylinders (diameter = 5.6 cm, height = 4 cm). Each core contained 45 g air-dried soil which was compacted to a height of 1.5 cm, resulting in a bulk density of 1.2 g cm At the start of the experiment, 0.3 g maize leaves (equal to approx. 250 μg C g The experimental approach consisted of three pulses of The following labeling periods were set up: (i) fresh At each sampling, the mesh with the litter was removed from the soil cylinders. Subsequently, a slice of 3 mm thickness (approx. 9 g soil) was taken from the top of each core to provide soil samples most strongly influenced by the presence of litter ( Carbon dioxide (CO To determine soil organic C (SOC), 0.3 g of soil was dried at 60 °C for three days, then ground with a ball mill. A subsample of 15 mg was weighed into a tin capsule and measured for total SOC and isotopic composition as described above. The chloroform-fumigation-extraction method (1.5 g soil extracted with 15 ml 0.025M K PLFAs were extracted from 4 g soil following the procedure described by For determination of the δ The PLFAs i15:0, a15:0, i16:0 and i17:0 were used as biomarkers for gram-positive bacteria, while cy17:0 and 18:2ω6,9 were used as gram-negative bacterial biomarker and fungal biomarker, respectively ( For the calculation of relative amounts of litter-derived Due to heterogeneity of variance, the non-parametric Kruskal-Wallis H test was used. Significance level α = 0.05 was applied to test the absolute values of the soil C pools for a treatment effect for each sampling date. All errors were reported as standard errors of the mean (SEM). General nonlinear models ( Mean residence time (MRT) of A double exponential decay function The application of maize litter initially increased the respiration rate of soil microorganisms by a factor of approximately 7 in comparison to cores without litter addition ( The highest mineralization rate of litter-derived C was detected at the very early stage of litter decomposition at 73.7 ± 5.4 ng g Nearly 10% of the initially added litter-C was mineralized in the The amount of total SOC was stable during the experiment, approximately 11.9 mg g The total EOC pool decreased slightly over time ( Total microbial biomass (C The incorporation pattern of litter-derived C in bacterial PLFAs corresponded to the findings in total microbial biomass, with highest values in the early stage treatment on day 4 and lower litter-derived C incorporation in the intermediate and later stages of decomposition ( The absolute amounts of single bacterial PLFAs were stable over time with only minor variations at the beginning of the experiment ( In the intermediate and later phases, incorporated litter C was lower than in the early phase in all investigated bacterial PLFAs ( In contrast to the bacterial PLFAs, the fungal PLFA 18:2ω6,9 ( We studied C flow through the microbial community to better understand C dynamics at the soil-litter interface, the detritusphere. In general, the incorporation of maize litter into different microbial and chemical soil C pools was driven by the quality/age of added litter material. Microbial activity increased immediately with the addition of fresh litter, as seen by the 7 fold higher respiration rate in the detritusphere as compared to uninfluenced bulk soil. The isotopic composition of maize litter did not significantly influence its mineralization, as similar rates of litter-induced respiration were found for the The applied litter introduced approximately 2% C of the autochthonous SOC content to the soil system, comparable to the annual amount of fresh C entering the soil in the long-term field experiment in the same soil ( The observed temporal pattern of C incorporation into soil microorganisms during litter decomposition is in agreement with the conceptual model of In our study, all identified PLFAs showed a distinct Fresh litter-derived C was incorporated into total bacterial PLFA-C by 0.5–1.3% in single bacterial biomarkers after 4 days. We assumed that water-extractable litter C was transferred to the adjacent detritusphere (top 3 mm of the soil core) as an effect of rewetting the litter at the start of the experiment, which may have accelerated C access and utilization, especially for less mobile bacteria. Previous studies have shown that a high C/N ratio enhances C incorporation into soil via the fungal food chain ( The substantial role of fungi in the decomposition process is indicated by its high incorporation of C during the early and intermediate stages of litter decomposition, presumably due to hyphal exploration and exploitation of more complex substrates. But distinctly different assimilation patterns between bacteria and fungi of C sources differing in complexity were not apparent. Our findings are in line with findings from Our total PLFA results showed a stable fungal-to-bacterial ratio as well as a gram-positive-to-gram-negative bacterial ratio (data not shown), but we are aware that microbial community composition may change over time, with a succession from generalists (r strategists) to specialists (K strategists), especially in the intermediate and later decomposition stages, as a result of changing substrate quality and availability ( The chloroform-fumigation-extraction (CFE) method extracts C mainly from the cytoplasm of microbial cells and does not extract the cell wall fraction ( It has been suggested that storage of C in biomass is more persistent when mediated by fungi and more labile when utilized by bacteria, mainly as a result of differences in their lifespans ( The MRT of C in different bacterial PLFAs ranged from 26 to 100 days ( We found an increase in the isotopic label in nearly every C pool between the fourth and fifth sampling points in the intermediate and later stages of decomposition. This may be explained by a re-translocation of litter C from bulk soil to the detritusphere, mediated by dying fungi as an effect of species succession in the fungal community from generalists to specialists. Fungal hyphae are considered as “highways” for C and nutrient transport ( Microbial utilization and subsequent release of organic C are major processes contributing to microbially regulated SOC formation. This study investigated C flow through the microbial community in a microbially active hotspot of the soil, the detritusphere. Microbial hotspots are particularly important for C and nutrient turnover in soils; implementing specific parameterizations into C turnover models may improve their predictive power. Our data show that microbially driven C turnover in the detritusphere is a highly dynamic process, which depends on succession within the microbial community and on the consecutive availability from the litter layer of substrates of changing quality and quantity. We have evidence that fungi play an important role in plant residue decomposition, through greater utilization of easily available and more complex litter-derived C than bacteria. In contrast to the literature, fungal PLFA-C showed a rapid turnover, while bacterial PLFA behaved differently, with the potential for enormous impact on soil genesis. We observed either a clear dilution of the This work was funded by the The following is the supplementary data related to this article: Supplementary data related to this article can be found at