Recent advances at JKMRC in modelling mineral liberation required the development of a method to measure ore textural characteristics such as the mineral grain size distribution and the spatial location of mineral grains in three dimensions.
                  This paper describes the development of this method which uses X-ray micro-tomography to provide three-dimensional (3D) measurement of the grain size distribution and spatial location of the minerals in an ore. The methodology was developed on a gold-bearing pyrite ore and used to quantify the textural characteristics which are key inputs for modelling mineral liberation in this ore during comminution. The measurement and image processing steps required to quantify the grain size distribution of the mineral of interest, pyrite, are described together with the image analysis method. The quantification of 3D mineral characteristics together with corresponding two-dimensional (2D) sections through the same particle, provided the opportunity to explore the relationship between 2D and 3D grain size data.X-ray tomography has been used as a tool in medicine for over 40 As with many measurement techniques X-ray tomography has both advantages and disadvantages when compared to other methods. One limitation is that the ability of the X-ray tomography system to discriminate between minerals is a function of the X-ray attenuation of those minerals. While the X-ray attenuation of many common minerals is sufficiently different for X-ray tomography to distinguish between them, there are some where the overlap in X-ray attenuation makes discrimination impossible on the basis of this characteristic alone. An example of this would be chalcopyrite and magnetite. Current models of X-ray tomography systems such as the Zeiss Xradia 520 Versa ( The impetus to develop a method to measure mineral grain size distribution came from researchers seeking to model mineral liberation in a mineral processing simulator which integrated comminution and separation process models. As earlier researchers have noted, mineral liberation is the key link between comminution and separation models ( The ore analysed in this research is a gold-bearing pyrite ore and the industrial processing of this ore recovers the pyrite by flotation. The ore has a relatively simple mineralogy with pyrite being the dominant sulfide mineral in a gangue matrix which consists of silicates and carbonates. The development of a liberation model for this ore required a method to measure the grain size distribution of the pyrite and the spatial location of the grains in three dimensions. X-ray tomography was identified as a suitable tool to obtain the data required. The single size fraction analysed in this work (−6.7 As noted by earlier researchers applying X-ray tomography to mineral samples ( The X-ray tomography measurements were performed using a SkyScan 1172 benchtop micro-tomography system ( After completion of the measurement the raw projected images undergo a sequence of image processing steps in order to quantify the mineral grain size distribution – reconstruction, segmentation, classification and data extraction. The initial image reconstruction stage is performed using the proprietary NRecon software from Skyscan. This image reconstruction step creates a series of images which show slices through the particle in cross-section with each slice spaced 1 voxel apart. After the image reconstruction stage, the next step in the process is image analysis – a key step in the X-ray tomography work which: creates the three-dimensional grains from the set of reconstructed image slices, extracts quantitative data from the three-dimensional image for a range of grain characteristics. The image analysis stage is performed using the Trimble eCognition software package ( To perform the image analysis procedure the eCognition software loads the series of image slices which represent a particle and the rule set defined by the user is used to segment the slices into regions with similar greyscale values. These regions (or more correctly termed objects) can then be classified into the minerals which are known to exist in the ore. A typical X-ray tomography particle section slice which has been segmented and classified using the eCognition software is shown in As can be seen, the mineral classification in this ore identifies the pyrite, silicates and carbonate minerals. Note that the various silicate minerals in this ore (quartz, albite, muscovite) cannot be distinguished individually as their X-ray attenuation values are too similar. Calibration of the classification step to link the greyscale value in the image to the mineral species in the ore is confirmed using an SEM-based automated mineralogy system. The approach used at the JKMRC is to select particles which contain features of interest in their X-ray tomography image, to precisely cut and polish the particle to expose the feature in the cross-section and then to measure the cross-section in an MLA system. The resulting MLA mineral map can be compared to the corresponding virtual slice from the X-ray tomography image, as shown in the example in The final stages in the image analysis are the key steps of creating the three-dimensional grains by stacking together the set of reconstructed image slices and extracting quantitative data from the three-dimensional image for a range of grain characteristics. The outputs generated for each particle image set comprise an image which displays the three-dimensional mineral grains measured in the particle and an Excel workbook which details the quantitative data collected for the grains, including the pyrite grain size distribution which is a key input for the multi-component breakage/ liberation modelling. The textural characteristics quantified from the three-dimensional mineral grains created in the image analysis stage include: Mineral identity of grain (e.g. pyrite). Grain size of each grain (length, width and height). Grain shape information (measures of roundness, compactness, symmetry, etc.). Spatial location of grain ( Orientation of grain. The mineral which is of greatest interest in this work is pyrite, as the application of the grain size distribution data is to model the liberation of pyrite in comminution. The results of the analysis for pyrite are discussed below. The quantitative data are output from the eCognition software as an Excel workbook which facilitates further analysis and graphing of the data. The outputs also include images of the three-dimensional grains as they were measured within the particle. A typical example of this type of image provided in The grain size distribution of the pyrite grains obtained from the X-ray tomography measurements on the set of 315 particles is shown in As the data show, the pyrite grains exhibit a range of sizes, with the majority of the grains occurring in the 106–300 One observation of interest is that as measurements progressed and data were added to the size distribution plot, it became clear that once the number of particles measured reached 120–150 the shape of the size distribution curve did not change significantly. This pattern has been observed previously for mineral grain size data measured on particle cross-sections ( A statistical technique described by For all pyrite grain size classes except the two coarsest (+600 The pyrite grain size distribution data and the spatial location of the grains obtained from the X-ray tomography measurements are the key ore textural characteristics which form inputs to the breakage/liberation model used in the multi-component modelling approach developed in the AMIRA P9 project. This model, the JK Random Liberation Model, and the application of the grain size distribution data obtained from the X-ray tomography analysis are described in detail in The use of X-ray tomography has allowed the measurement of mineral grain size distribution in three-dimensions – data which reflect the result that would be obtained if one could remove the mineral grains from the matrix and physically size them. However, in practice the majority of grain size data is obtained from measurements made on polished sections of ore using optical microscopes or SEM-based automated mineralogy systems. The grain size data collected from polished sections are subject to stereological error which results in the grain size distribution generally appearing to be finer than the actual distribution ( The cross-sectional 2D grain size distribution data were obtained by randomly selecting one reconstructed slice image from each of the 315 particles and quantifying the size distribution of the pyrite grain cross-sections observed. The resulting 2D grain size distribution data are compared with the 3D pyrite grain size distribution in As expected, the grain size distribution from the 2D cross-sectional data is finer than the actual three-dimensional size distribution. The P80 (or the screen size which 80% of the mass passes) is a parameter commonly used to summarise grain size data; in this case the 2D data give a P80 value of 250 X-ray tomography has been applied to measure the grain characteristics of minerals in a gold-bearing pyrite ore. The method developed in this work allowed the grain size distribution of pyrite and other key textural characteristics, such as spatial location, to be quantified from data collected from three dimensional image analysis. The quantitative data have been successfully delivered to other research projects which use the data to model and simulate mineral liberation in comminution. The availability of the X-ray tomography data also provides the opportunity to explore mineral grain characteristics in both 2D and 3D. A comparison of the mineral grain size distribution of pyrite measured from 2D slices and 3D volume provides useful information about the magnitude of the difference between grain size distributions measured in 2D and 3D and the potential errors that stereological bias may introduce in the modelling of grinding requirements to achieve liberation of value minerals. The authors would like to acknowledge the sponsors of the Alcan, Alcoa World Alumina, Anglo Platinum, AngloGold Ashanti Limited, Ausenco Services Pty Ltd, Barrick Gold Corporation, Bateman Minerals & Metals (Pty) Ltd, BHP Billiton, Cayeli Bakir Isletmeleri-INMET, COREM, FLSmidth Minerals, Freeport-McMoRan Mining Company, Hatch Africa, Impala Platinum Ltd, Intellection Pty Ltd, LKAB, Lonmin Platinum, Magotteaux Pty Ltd, Metso Minerals Process Technology, Minerals and Metals Group Ltd, Newcrest Mining Limited, Newmont USA Limited, Outotec Minerals OY, OZ Minerals Limited, Polysius AG, Rio Tinto Limited, Russell Mineral Equipment, Senmin South Africa (Pty) Ltd, Servicios Industriales Peñoles SA de CV, Teck Metals Ltd, Vale, Xstrata Copper Limited, Zinifex The technical leadership provided by Dr Rob Morrison in X-ray tomography research at the JKMRC over many years, and the contributions of his students (I. Gurnett, M. Cakici and S. Bajic) to the development of X-ray tomography capabilities at JKMRC are acknowledged. The authors would also like to thank Jessica Grey, Kellie White and Barbara Zluc for their technical contributions to this work.