When horizontal stirred media mills are used to grind highly concentrated slurries with a large throughput the grinding media tend to be pushed towards the product discharge. This displacement may lead to hydraulic packing which has, in turn, negative consequences for the grinding process like ineffective energy utilisation and increased wear. The IsaMill™ with its internal classifier keeps the grinding media away from the discharge. This technology enabled the fine grinding of minerals in an open circuit. Since the classifier implies a current counteracting the drag forces due to the product flow, it gets more complex to understand the axial distribution of the grinding media. In order to measure the filling ratio along the M4 IsaMill™ a radiometric densitometer with a linear bearing was installed. This method enables the determination of the spatial filling ratio by correlating it with the attenuation of gamma radiation of a Cs137 nuclide. Several tests have been carried out in water as a model fluid to introduce this novel technology and to characterize the general behavior of the IsaMill™. Future experiments will have to identify the impact of the process parameters on the axial grinding media distribution by using different Newtonian and non-Newtonian model fluids.Wet stirred media milling is a well-established top down process for a wide range of organic and inorganic products as for all kind of particle loaded coatings, active pharmaceutical ingredients, fertilizer, ores in particular and many other minerals in general. Whatever the field of application is, the pivotal effect to grind the particles down to the desired size is by stressing them between colliding grinding beads. To understand the whole process on a particle level, the breakage of the particles during one or several stress events is as important as the information about the stress events provided by the mill. Especially on the machine level a lot of effort has been made to the development of models which describe the impact of the common parameters on the power draw of stirred mills. Machine based models treat the grinding media as uniformly distributed along the mill axis. However, as the grinding media are affected by hydrodynamic forces they can be axially transported due to the acting drag, following the product flow to the discharge. In the worst case grinding media accumulate to a packed bed in front of the classification device, the so called hydraulic packing. This tendency of packing was investigated for horizontal ( The radiometric densitometry by gamma radiation uses a radio nuclide as source which emits photons (gamma rays) during its decay process. This technique exploits the phenomenon of the attenuation of gamma radiation as it interacts with materials in order to deduce the phase fractions inside the mill. Therefore, the transmitted beam is detected at the opposite side of the grinding chamber with a scintillator. In the case of mono energetic gamma radiation passing through homogeneous material the resulting exponential loss of intensity can be described according to Lambert-Beer’s law as follows: In this equation, Thus, the radiation intensity in Eq. For the purpose of determining the local grinding media filling ratio Eq. Besides the consideration of the attenuation factors of both phases, the fluid phase ( The attenuation factor of the fluid can be determined by a measurement of the transmitted photons of the purely fluid filled mill without grinding media and by converting Eq. The determination of the attenuation factor of the grinding beads is similar. Therefore, a bead filling ratio of 100% is set while the mill is not running. According to Eq. Referring to different authors ( Inserting Eq. The uncertainty respects the statistical deviation occurring due to the fluctuation in a given small range of the natural gamma decay. Apart from the count rate at any local filling ratio the uncertainty The statistical error in void fraction has then to be translated to the statistical error of the filling ratio. In this work the initial counting rate A radiometric densitometer was set up to determine the axial grinding media distribution in a M4 IsaMill™ while running the mill. The mill consists of six perforated stirrer discs with a diameter of 100 mm and a distance of 35 mm to each other. A classifier is situated behind the last disc to retain the beads in the active grinding zone of the mill. The setup of the radiometric densitometer consists of two main parts, the gamma source above and the detector below the mill chamber ( As this setup enables the discrimination of two phases, model fluids should be used instead of slurries. To establish this method the following tests are performed under reliable conditions using water as model fluid and alumina media with 2.5 mm in diameter. Even though the IsaMill™ is used for the continuous grinding of minerals, the tests were run in circulation mode ( Before running the tests with the new measurement set up the radiometric densitometer has to be calibrated to get the local filling ratio as a function of the photon counting rate as described before. Besides the calibration results will be discussed in the following to show some general grinding media flow phenomena as well as to highlight the mode of action of the IsaMill™. In order to derive the local filling ratios from the measured count rate of gamma photons (see Eq. During a test a count rate reading of approximately 2400 per second would show that no grinding media is detected in the considered axial position of the mill. Whereas a count rate of around 540 photons per second would indicate a media packing. The shape of the calibration curve is given by the logarithmic relation in Eq. Tests were carried out to disclose the general potentials of the densitometer. The distribution of the 2.5 mm grinding media with an overall filling ratio of 70% is shown in Focusing on the compartments C1 to C3 it can be stated that the local filling ratios are higher than the overall filling ratio of 70% whereas the local media filling in the subsequent compartments C4 and C5 are lower. Besides the first impression of an obviously non-uniform axial grinding media distribution, different phenomena can be read out of this one test. Some of them are supposed to occur in all horizontal stirred media mills with stirrer discs whereas others are typical for the IsaMill™. First of all it should be stated that no grinding media are detected in the classifier zone (C6) which shows the effectiveness of the classifier. The geometry of the classifier induces centrifugal streams which are followed by the grinding media and oversized product particles within a grinding process ( Furthermore, an expected distribution between two stirrer discs can be seen in the first three compartments. It can be stated that the local filling ratio directly in front of and behind a stirrer disc is lower than in the middle between the discs. This effect can be described with the typical micro-dynamics occurring in stirred media mills with stirrer discs. Grinding media are accelerated in the vicinity of the discs before they follow an axial impulse in direction of the center between two discs close to the liner. In this area the streams coming from two neighboring discs meet, slow down and flow towards the shaft. As the beads converge in the middle and as the beads are accelerated and pulled apart close to the stirrer disc the detected local filling ratio is lower near the discs. Altogether, the explanation for this phenomenon can be reduced to the strict compliance of the principle of continuity. The small differences in local filling ratio between the two radial positions (up and down) in C1 to C3 are explainable with the slightly higher gravity induced acceleration of the beads while they are on their way down. Thus, the stream is a bit more stretched. This effect is generally in accordance to simulations [5]. The grinding media distribution can be considered as to be almost rotationally symmetric. Nevertheless, a flow pattern which is typical for the IsaMill™ with its internal classifier can be derived. As explained before the fluid dynamic due to the classifier rotation rather presses the grinding media back to retain them in the active grinding zone. The conspicuous difference in the local filling ratio at the two radial positions in C4 and C5 is a result of both the axial and the radial impulses of the caused back flow. A test run with a glass chamber and glass beads has confirmed that the rotational flow axis is declined related to the cross section of the mill ( If more information is necessary smaller increment could be chosen for the measurement positions. To emphasis the media transport in front of the classifier In compartment C4 the grinding media accumulate in flow direction whereas the grinding media concentration drops drastically behind the disc (C5). This result is now explained step by step under the consideration of different flow phenomena occurring in this area. As described earlier, the classifier pushes the grinding media out of compartment C5. Grinding media in C5 are conveyed in direction of C4 where they eventually meet a physical barrier, the disc which separates the two compartments. The grinding media transport between C4 and C5 is limited to the area between the outer circumference of the disc and the liner as well as to the transport through the holes of the disc. Hereby it is possible to have a large gradient between both sides of a stirrer disc. However, due to the back pressing of the classifier a similar trend for the grinding media filling over the length of compartment C4 would be expected. Having a higher concentration at the beginning and reduced filling in direction of the discharge would be in accordance to the grinding media transport in C5. It is assumed that the disc which separates C4 from C5 protects the grinding media from being dragged in direction of the feed end the closer they are to the disc. The first test has introduced the complexity of the grinding media transport behavior in the IsaMill™ and the potential of the gamma radiation densitometry to gain knowledge about it. The axial grinding media distribution is supposed to be more or less the same for a definite parameter set once the mill runs in steady state. At least they should be similar in a certain range taking a standard deviation between repetitive tests into account. As the stirred media milling is a new application of the radiometric densitometry its reliability was proven. The error bars illustrated in The revealed data can subsequently be used to point out the influence of the process parameters and the slurry properties as well as to incorporate the knowledge of the distribution into grinding models. Here, the influence of the overall filling ratio on the axial grinding media distribution is discussed for constant operating conditions. The variation of process parameters and the rheology of the fluid will be discussed elsewhere. In order to underline the impact of the IsaMill™ classifier on the axial grinding media distribution the experiment with an overall filling ratio of 70% is extended to a range of 40–80%. The stirrer tip speed (6 m/s) and the flow rate of water (100 l/h) were kept constant within this series of experiments. By increasing the overall filling ratio the compartments gradually fill up starting from the mill feed inlet. The shift of the local filling ratios at an increasing overall filling is shown in Radiometric densitometry by gamma radiation was introduced as a reliable method to measure the axial grinding media distribution in the IsaMill™. After the calibration of the setup with regard to the used combination of fluid and grinding beads, the reliability of the measurements has been proven. The first results of the axial grinding media distribution clearly demonstrated the impact of the internal classifier. Counteracting the drag of the grinding media by the main flow of the fluid towards the discharge the induced back pressing of the classifier retains the grinding media in the grinding zone. However, this leads to an inhomogeneous distribution of the grinding media along the stirrer axis. The effect of the classifier on the media distribution in the IsaMill™ was further highlighted by a gradually overall filling of the mill showing that the mill chambers fill step by step beginning at the feed inlet of the IsaMill™. Depending on the desired information the increment for measuring the local filling ratio can be adapted. Thus, the radiometric densitometry enables studying the impact of the rheology by using model fluids and the mill parameters on the axial transport of different grinding media as well as the consequences of a certain local media filling on the IsaMill™ performance. For future investigations the knowledge about the grinding media distribution could help to understand the grinding process along the axis during continuous grinding. A further benefit from learning about the grinding media transport in the IsaMill™ is the potential to reduce media and mill wear by obtaining a homogeneous distribution. The authors are grateful to