A new on-line flocculation system (FF) has been developed which is coupled with a rapid flotation to remove the aerated flocs (flocs with entrained and entrapped bubbles). These aerated flocs are formed only in the presence of high molecular weight polymers and bubbles and under high shearing (and head loss) in special “flocculators”. The air excess air abandons the flotation tank (a centrifuge or a column) by the top and the flocs float after very short residence times (within seconds). The aerated flocs are large units (some millimetres in diameter) having an extremely low-density. Process efficiency was found, in all cases, to be a function of the trilogy, head loss, type (and concentration) of flocculants and air flow rate. Mechanisms involved appear to include small bubble formation and their rapid occlusion (entrapment) within flocs, nucleation of bubbles at floc/water interfaces, polymer coiling as a result of “salting out” effects at the aqueous/air interface and plug flow type of mixing (flocculation) instead of perfect. Successful examples of emulsified oil and solids removal from water are shown and because in all cases were obtained high efficiencies (>90% removal), at high hydraulic loadings (>130mh−1) it is believed that this kind of flocculation–flotation appears to have a great potential in solid/liquid or liquid/liquid separation.Flocculation and flotation processes in the mineral industry are primarily designed to separate one particle type from another. In contrast, for wastewater treatment, the flotation is designed to remove all particles—generally encountered as very fine emulsions, suspended solids, microorganisms and colloidal dispersions. Thus, processes are optimized by the maximum recovery of cleaned water with the lowest concentration of pollutants and sludge containing low percentage of solids (or oils) ( Industrial effluents and even flotation tailings commonly bear wastewater that contains a mixture of suspended particles and stable oil emulsions. It is well known that it is difficult to remove fine colloidal particles and highly emulsified oil from process wastewater. Oil can be present as a “free”, non-dispersed surface layer, usually floating at the air/water interface. The oily layers can be readily separated off by gravity but the separation, as in the case of fine particle dispersions, is always very poor in the case of oil-in-water emulsions, especially if oil is present as a physically dispersed phase in the form of fine droplets, say <10 Flotation of organic fluids such as oil spills, oily sewages or oil-in-water emulsions has been known for decades in various fields but is not commonly used in the mining and/or metallurgy industries. Oil in water may be dispersed, emulsified or soluble in concentrations usually up to 1000 The flotation separation of very fine oil droplets (<10 Induced air flotation, IAF and dissolved air flotation, DAF, have been used extensively in the removal of stable oily emulsions or fine particles suspensions ( The addition of polymeric flocculants may, sometimes, assist the particles settling but the efficiency highly decreases when dispersions are diluted or when particles are in the range of ultrafines or colloidal range ( Yet, the classical dissolved air flotation (DAF) is still the most common process removing fine colloidal dispersions and oily emulsions, mainly in refinery wastewaters ( However, future technologies will have to deal with highly loaded (high solids by weight) process wastewaters, exiting mining and metallurgical industries, and DAF might not meet legislation standards and reuse efficiently the water, due to the low carrying power of the tiny bubbles and the low hold-up. For this reason, DAF may be considered a slow process with high residence time (minutes) and requiring high foot print space. Various publications ( The flocculation–flotation system (FF In the flotation tank separator the floc float, within seconds, as large units (some millimeters in diameter) having very low densities. The exceeding air abandons the flotation device by the top through a special water seal (avoiding flow turbulence). Conversely, in conventional flocculation, the polymeric floc (non-aerated) are commonly formed after polymer diffusion and adsorption at the solid particle/water interface under high stirring (agitation) stage, followed by flocs build-up and growth at slow mixing stage. An advanced ASH (air sparger hydrocyclone) type of flotation, which appears to work similarly to FF has been reported in applications to remove oil, grease, BOD, etc. BAF, or bubble accelerated flotation system, uses the contactor-separation concept with very low detention times in the contactor ( FF results for the separation of difficult-to-separate oil from emulsified oil dispersions ( Studies were conducted with a typical petroleum refinery effluent using the same FF equipment used before ( Results in All aqueous suspensions (2% by weight) were prepared by dispersing the solids in water using a high speed stirring. After flocculation–flotation, FF% values were calculated from the dry weights of dispersions, before and after the separation: % FF Particles were ground to 100% less than 37 Bentonite (smectite) from Brasgel-Brazil; Quartz, pure sample from South Brazil; Coal beneficiation tailings, corresponds to a ground jigging tailings sample (South Brazil); Hematite, pure sample from North Brazil (Minas Gerais).   It is believed that in the FF Mechanisms involved are not well elucidated but at least one of the following phenomena may be operating: 1. Small bubble formation and their rapid occlusion (entrapment) within flocs; Nucleation of bubbles at floc/water interfaces and bubbles entrainment. Qualitative measurements of the bubble size generated in the FF system, using the technique developed by Because the uprising rates of the aerated flocs (more than 130 More, because some air must be dissolved in water following the flow pressure inside the flocculator, these microbubbles behave as in DAF. Thus, a very important feature concerns with the mechanisms of bubble/particle (aggregates) interactions other than the common adhesion through hydrophobic forces ( 2. Polymer uncoiling or “salting out” at the aqueous/air interface. The aerated flocs looked like filamentous, elongated and “sticky” (plastic like) units. This characteristic may be the result of an uncoiling phenomenon of the polymer chains at the solid (liquid A new in-line flocculation–flotation unit, named FF-Flocculation–Flotation, was developed for the generation and separation of aerated polymeric flocs. The studies showed a high process efficiency for the separation of oil from oil emulsions, suspended solids and colloidal suspensions [Fe(OH) Jorge Rubio thanks to the students and colleagues from LTMUniversidade Federal do Rio Grande do Sul, for the friendship, and to all Institutions supporting research in Brazil (FAPERGS, CAPES, CNPq, UFRGS). Authors thank also to the graduate and undergraduate students for their assistance in the hard experimental work.