This research investigation aims to characterize the aerodynamic and structural performance of a micro scale axial turbine operated with the Brayton cycle, at various boundary conditions, by using the numerical integration finite element method and 3D computational fluid dynamics; the stresses on the rotor blade, in particular, were investigated. Firstly, the turbine was designed with a power output of 0.5–1 kW and efficiency of 81.3%. Then, together the turbine’s shaft and its blades were structurally investigated under a variety of loading conditions, with the purpose of visualising the effect of different geometrical and operational factors on the stress values, distributions and displacements over the rotor’s blades. After evaluating the structural stresses, rotor blade design changes to decrease these stresses will be proposed, to attain the best turbine performance, using multidisciplinary optimization; these will be reported in the next research publication from this study. The results showed that the maximum Von Mises and maximum principle stresses are highly influenced by the rotor stagger and trailing edge wedge angles, the turbine’s rotational speed, the inlet pressure and the working fluid inlet temperature. Additionally, the maximum allowable deformation was highly influenced by the rotational speed, around 16.5%. Moreover, the fatigue life was also determined and both the rotor stagger and trailing edge wedge angles significantly affected its value. The simulated increases in fluid temperature lead to a decrease in the rotor fatigue life of 38%, at an inlet pressure of 5 bar. Such a result can open the door for more research studies and investigations to develop this (domestic) system for ground based (i.e. sea level) uses.Blade area (m Blade height (m) Axial chord (mm) Absolute velocity (m/sec) Enthalpy (J/kg) Incident angle (deg) Force (N) Blade length (m) Blade mass (Kg) Mass flow rate (kg/sec) Pressure (Pa) Relative velocity (m/sec) Coordinate (–) Blade number in radial turbine (–) blade thickness (m) Strain in X-direction (–) Strain in Y-direction (–) Strain in Z-direction (–) Stress in X-direction (Pa) Stress in Y-direction (Pa) Stress in Z-direction (Pa) Thermal expansion coefficient Blade material density (Kg/m Rotor rotational speed (rad/sec) Loss Coefficient (–) Efficiency (%) Flow coefficient (–) Loading coefficient (–) Blade Centrifugal force Nozzle Root Tip Computational Fluid Dynamics Finite Element Analysis Micro Scale Axil Turbine Micro Scale Turbines Solar Powered Brayton Cycle Small Scale Turbines, Shear Stress Transport Trailing Edge Wedge Angle (Deg.) The ever increasing worldwide requirement for electrical power, which comes at the same time as ever stricter restrictions on gaseous emissions resulting from combustion, have increased the necessity for clean energy systems. Micro Scale Turbines (MSTs) in the application of the Solar Powered Brayton Cycle (SPBC) are capable of producing a wide range of output power values, which make them suitable to be used for small to large scale systems. Solar energy offers sustainable energy sources or solutions, as solar energy is widely available, solar panels are relatively cheap and they are environmentally friendly. Yet, the radiation of the solar which spreads on the Earth’s surface is quiet not efficiently utilized with this technology. The main advantage of Concentrated Solar Power (CSP) over Photo Voltaic (PV) panels is that it does not have the significant environmental dangers accompanied with the solar PV materials for example (Chromium, Cadmium, Germanium, and Gallium). On the other hand, the CSP technology, such as the parabolic dish and central receiver, are completely environmentally friendly, when air (as the working fluid) is operated, like the case of Brayton cycle application. Despite the fact this technology was first investigated around 50 years ago, it is only more recently that this technology has gained the interest of both researchers and investors around the world. Other environmentally friendly technologies are the small scale wind turbines There are varying opinions from previously published research articles about what characterises a small scale turbine; however, the significance of the power output is something which has been commonly agreed upon. Many of the published research articles A few research studies Quite a lot of researchers The performance of a scroll expander was investigated numerically and experimentally by Shahverdi et al. Some research studies have conducted structural analysis of the turbine blade To decrease the thermal stress and improve the aerodynamic operation of a micro-gas radial turbine, a multi-disciplinary optimisation was conducted by Barsi et al. Improving the impeller hub strength as a result of optimizing the shape of the blade was a study established by Feng et al. To the best knowledge of the authors’ of this research article, no research has been put out on the suggested (MSAT) Micro Scale of Axial Turbines, that conducts analysis on the aerodynamic design, the structural strength and the fatigue performance of the turbines. Therefore, this research study has attempted to improve the overall performance of MSAT by conducting all the cited analyses and thus come across the optimized MSAT geometry. The model’s preliminary design was conducted using 1-D analysis in order to determine the preliminary design as well as performance of each model. Then, it was combined with ANSYS CFX In the present study, the preliminary design for the MSAT was developed using the Engineering Equation Solver (EES) software Once these steps were completed, the design was developed using the MSAT model and it was analysed further using the static structural analysis, to create a robust design, with an effective performance, for the required application. By utilising the integrated CFX-FE Workbench feature, which can be found in ANSYS18, the optimum MSAT shape was found, it was extracted from the optimum design point, and then it was analysed in the structural analysis FEA software, in order to conduct both the fatigue and the stress analysis. In the mean line design, dimensionless factors such as the degree of reaction, loading coefficient and the flow coefficient, need to be wisely selected in order to reduce the time and effort required during the 3D analysis, as well as in the aerodynamic optimization. This can be achieved by predicting the velocity triangles, which leads to an estimate of the initial turbine efficiency. As shown in The most relevant equations for the turbine design have been selected from the relevant published research studies and they are shown below The losses in the nozzle and the rotor, in terms of the Enthalpy, are presented in Equations Similarly, the total loss coefficient for the stator and the rotor are respectively presented in the next two correlations For the constant value of the axial component of the flow velocity, the height of the turbine blade can be specified from the continuity equation, by using the mass flow rate of the turbine stage, as shown below: Using Zweifel’s correlation, the turbine blade pitch, Subsequently, the turbine efficiency is resolved by means of equation ANSYS CFX is a high-performance computational fluid dynamics tool which supplies accurate and robust solutions for a wide range of CFD and multi-physics applications. It is recommended because of its excellent robustness, accuracy and computational speed, which are especially designed to deal with rotating machinery such as fans, compressors, pumps and turbines. The turbine geometry has been generated by defining some critical factors such as hub diameter, shroud diameter and blade width and number. The mentioned critical design factors were suggested based on the preliminary design initiated as a code using the EES, while the full turbine model, as shown in Next, the model was imported to the Turbogrid with the aim of creating 3D meshes for the blade body, the hub, the shroud, the inlet and the outlet. With the aim of confirming that the best size of element had been selected, a separate study for the grid sensitivity corresponding to the efficiency of the turbine, as presented in Here, it should be highlighted that all of the mentioned steps are part of what is known as the CFX solver, which offers a particular setup methodology for turbo-machines, in order to make the setup procedure more efficient. Before solving the model, some settings for the thermodynamic and physical properties, such as specifying the state (transient or steady), the rotor rotational speed, as well as the working fluid type, and setting the model boundary conditions, like the pressure and the temperature, need to be input i.e. completed.  The model mentioned in The K equation in the mentioned model is addressed, as shown in the following equation: The velocity distribution, temperature and pressures contours of the MSAT are presented in In order to validate the present research study, the presented results have been successfully compared with a similar model, found in Ref. The stress fields result from the combined consequence of the dynamic stress, the vibratory stress and the thermal gradient. To compute the thermal stress, the following equation is employed:  The dynamic stresses result from both the centrifugal force and the fluid pressure on the blades surfaces. The vibratory stresses, on the other hand, which are caused by the disturbance that takes place during the compressed air flow as well as the resonance phenomena In spite of this, computing the precise centrifugal force value can be attained when considering only a tiny element of the blade and at that point integrating it to take account of the whole blade body, as presented below: And The material of blades density is; As a final point, to calculate the centrifugal force at any position of the blade, equation Once the aerodynamic analysis was successfully completed, the complete rotor of the MSAT was prepared using the Mechanical Workbench, ANSYS18, in order to extract the solid model from its air domains. Then, both the model of the CFD and the model of the “static-structural” were coupled with the aim of evaluating the turbine’s stress and deformation values. This was achieved when the aerodynamic pressure values, which were computed using the CFD model, were passed on the structural model through system coupling. Also, the temperature values, which the initial rotor design was based on, was input into the solid model, in order to conduct the turbine thermal analysis using the ANSYS Steady State Thermal section. Satisfactory 3D solid elements intensity for the rotor’s hub and blades was implemented in the model. Locations of interest for the stresses and strains were necessitated to have a reasonably fine mesh, as contrasted to the parts of the model which were not of interest. One more essential issue is whether the model required the generation of a “full mesh” for the entire rigid body or only a “surface contact mesh”. This was organised using what is known as “the rigid body behaviour”. Perceptibly in this paper, the option of “dimensionally reduced” was chosen, in order to reduce the required computational time. a further important factor in the mesh evaluation is the “transition ratio”, which is controlled using the “elements grow”; the values of the transition ratio can be flanked by 0 and 1. In this paper, the value was set as 0.272 since it is recommended by Ref. At the beginning of the simulation, when the turbine was simulated at the conditions it was optimized for, to achieve around 84.4% efficiency and 7 kW output power, it was observed from the simulation results that the stress was concentrated at the hub where the minimum life point was also located, as shown in From The highest deformation, located at the blades’ tip, as discussed before, can be seen in The third examined factor in this work is the fatigue. In Finally, the overall safety factor of the studied MSAT, as shown As the previous analysis showed, while the present design achieved a relatively high aerodynamic performance, its structural characteristics were not satisfactory. So, an evaluation for the MSAT’s blades was conducted with the aim of decreasing the associated stresses, without adversely affecting the aerodynamic performance of the MSAT. Moreover, from the topology viewpoint, analysing only the most important carefully selected blade parameters will ensure that the excellent aerodynamic performance, achieved with the present design, will be maintained. Thus, the inlet and outlet blade angles were fixed, in order to decrease the relative associated flow angles; only the trailing edge wedge angle and the stagger angle were chosen to be modified in this study, in order to enhance the structural performance for the rotor of the MSAT. Similar parametric studies were conducted in order to investigate the effect of each of the parameters mentioned above on the aerodynamic and structural performance of the MSAT.  In the same way From the aerodynamics viewpoint, decreasing the trailing edge wedge angle contributes in decreasing the mentioned factors without a significant negative influence on the aerodynamic performance; i.e. the efficiency and the power extracted by the MSAT. Finally, The effect of numerous operational conditions, such as the compressed air inlet temperature, its inlet pressure and the rotor rotational speed, on the MSAT performance for solar powered Brayton cycle applications, has been studied in the present work using 3D analysis. The most important conclusions of this study are as follows: The point of maximum deflection was calculated to occur at the blade tip of the rotor, across approximately 16.5% of it, laterally, close to the location of the shroud, thus, a reasonable gap between the shroud and blade tip should be maintained in the turbine design. The maximum studied working fluid temperature contributed to the decline of the rotor fatigue life by around 38%, at the maximum inlet pressure, 5 Bar. The point of the turbine blade which experienced the most fatigue was located in the connection between the blades and the rotor’s hub. This study indicates that structural analysis is an effective tool for the study of the fatigue life, deflections and stresses of a MSAT. Therefore, a parametric study was carried out which focused on two most significant parameters, the trailing edge wedge and stagger angles, in order to decrease the stresses associated, while maintaining the aerodynamic performance of the MSAT. The results of this analysis contributed to an improvement in the turbine rotor design, which resulted in a better distribution of the stresses acting upon the rotor as well as decreasing their maximum values to approximately 81% of their initial vales. Moreover, the deformation above the blade was also decreased to about 75% as compared to its initial value. The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. The authors would like to the University of Birmingham and the University of Mosul for the facilities provided for the present research study.  The launched temperature and load are given respectively in