Liquid-membrane (LM) technology, traditionally used for metals recovery in metallurgy, has attracted increasing interest in chemical analysis in recent years. As a pre-concentration tool for metals determination in natural waters, including seawater, LMs have important advantages over traditional solvent extraction (e.g., minimal risk of sample contamination, shorter analysis times – by simultaneous extraction and re-extraction – reduced generation of waste, possibility of automation, and speciation). Some of these features make LMs environmentally friendly in sample treatment. LMs also have several advantages over solid-phase extraction (e.g., low cost and tenability).
                  We present an overview of recent developments in LMs for trace-metal speciation and determination in natural waters. Unpublished results from our own research illustrate new capabilities and applications. We discuss the most significant contributions to this field, and the advantages and the disadvantages of different LM configurations. We give several examples of using bulk or supported LM systems to focus on a wide variety of trace metals, including essential ones (e.g., copper), metals with toxicological relevance (e.g., cadmium), and industrial and urban contaminants (e.g., lead and silver).
                  Also, taking into account the importance of heavy-metal-species distribution to understand their behavior and bioavailability in aquatic ecosystems, we also review the potential of LMs in speciation.
                  Finally, we analyze and discuss future perspectives and trends within this field.Analysis of heavy metals in natural waters and seawater has become rather frequent, given their high toxicity for aquatic organisms. Due to differences in their bioavailability, attention is often drawn to the concentration of different chemical species of these heavy metals, rather than on their total concentration {e.g., Cr(VI) toxicity is much higher than that of Cr(III) Due to the natural low concentration (sub-ppb or sub-ppt levels) of these samples The use of liquid membranes (LMs) as a sample pre-treatment technique is related to their ability to perform analyte enrichment as well as sample-matrix separation. This procedure has been followed since their first applications within the hydrometallurgical industry in the 1970s Membranes can be defined as selective barriers between two phases with mass transfer taking place from the donor phase to the acceptor phase. In the case of LMs, this barrier comprises a liquid phase separating two immiscible solutions, with the transport of some chemical species across the barrier. The solution containing the transported species is known as “feed solution”, while the solution into which the chemical species is transported is known as “stripping solution”. The LM is usually made of an organic solution, and the feed and stripping solutions are aqueous solutions Many LM configurations are described in the literature, although they can be classified into three basic types: bulk LMs (BLMs); emulsion LMs (ELMs); and, supported LMs (SLMs). We next provide a brief description of each configuration. More detailed descriptions of each, together with their respective applications, can be found elsewhere BLMs need a considerable volume of organic phase separating the donor and the receiving phases to allow analyte transport from the former to the latter ELMs comprise a water-in-oil-in-water emulsion (formed by an organic solvent and surfactant-stabilized water) stirred into an aqueous source solution. Transport takes place between the continuous phase and the inner phase through the immiscible (membrane) phase. Due to their lower membrane thickness and greater surface area, ELMs enable higher transport rates SLMs are undoubtedly the most extensively used LMs due to their high enrichment factor, low reagent consumption and wide variety of configurations. The organic phase in SLMs is used to impregnate the pores of the hydrophobic polymeric membrane separating donor and acceptor solutions. This hydrophobic material [e.g., polypropylene (PP) or polyvinylidene fluoride (PVDF)] can have a flat-sheet or hollow-fiber (HF) geometry. In its simplest design, the planar membrane is placed directly into a cell separating two compartments containing aqueous solutions In the case of HF configuration, the hydrophobic support is tubular. One of the aqueous solutions flows inside the tube and the other remains outside. This configuration provides a very large surface area, thus leading to very high enrichment factors Transport of chemical species across LMs occurs because of diffusivity and solubility differences between the aqueous phases and the membrane. However, dissolving a carrier into the LM may enhance solute flux across it. The carrier acts as an extractant agent favoring analyte transport from the feed solution to the stripping solution, due to its ability to complex with the analyte Carrier-mediated transport across LMs can take place in two main ways. The first, known as facilitated coupled counter transport, is based on the selective extraction by the carrier of charged species from the feed into the interface organic membrane or feed solution. Then, the species moves through the membrane as an uncharged complex, being finally exchanged with charged species on the other side of the membrane. A typical example is metal-cation exchange with H In addition, Cussler et al. introduced so-called “jumping” transport mechanism Fick’s first law is applied to quantify solute mass transport across LMs, since the driving force for the transported species is considered a potential gradient through the different diffusional layers (aqueous and LM). Fick’s law is expressed as Another parameter used is the permeability coefficient, P, defined as: Furthermore, extraction efficiency, E, may help to study extraction selectivity. This parameter is defined as: LMs have traditionally been used for metals recovery in hydrometallurgy and mining activities Different types of LMs have been used for transport of heavy metals in natural waters, as well as in estuarine water and seawater The application of LMs in environmental analysis is still very recent. The earliest works appeared less than 15 Djane et al. reported a method to separate Cu, Ni, and Cd from river water based on the use of an SLM with DEHPA as carrier The same extractant dissolved in di-hexyl ether was used by N’dungu et al. to determine Zn, Ni and Co at μg/L levels in river water using ion-pair chromatography after SLM extraction Triisobutylphosphine sulphur (TIBPS) has been widely used in LLE for silver recovery in industrial effluents Increasing interest has also been observed in applying LMs to seawater analysis, as shown in Simultaneous extraction of Co, Ni, Cu and Cd in synthetic seawater by using an ELM has also been reported. Nevertheless, this system was not applied to real seawater because of reduction in transport efficiency due to co-transport of other cations present in real seawater Irigoyen et al. solved this problem for Cd extraction by adding citric acid to seawater samples so as to mask Ca and Mg ions. Cd-extraction efficiency increased from 38% to 100% Among the advantages of preconcentrating metals in natural waters by LMs, we emphasize the possible use of simple analytical techniques: AAS or even spectrophotometry. For instance, SLM configurations should be used to obtain higher enrichment factors, although very few works in this line can be found in the literature. With this aim, Peng et al. developed an HF-SLM-based system, with which the enrichment factor achieved was as high as 387 for Cd preconcentration in seawater Our research group is currently working on the application of SLMs to lead determination in seawater. This system is based on a flat membrane, containing DEHPA dissolved in kerosene in its pores, and placed into a cell comprising two plastic blocks, each with a machined spiral groove in its inner surface (see Under optimum conditions, lead was transported from seawater to an acidic receiving solution. Maximum efficiency was observed after 2 It is essential to know the different species of heavy metals present in natural waters in order to understand their behavior. Speciation can be generically defined as the distribution of the specific forms of an element (i.e. isotopic composition, oxidation state or complex formation) In order to ensure LM applicability to speciation studies, changes in sample solutions must be avoided during separations. For instance, most acidic extractants (e.g., DEHPA) lead to decreased pH in donor phases, which may affect species distribution, thus becoming inapplicable for speciation purposes and forcing the use of different solvating reagents For natural waters, the most interesting species relate to the oxidation state of metal ions and the formation of inorganic and organic complexes. Studies of oxidation states usually involve use of selective carriers in the membrane The biological activity of some heavy metals may largely depend on their oxidation state. Although other elements (e.g., Se or V) have also been studied, those most widely studied include Cr and As, Cr(VI) and As(III) being more toxic than Cr(III) and As(V). Chromium fractionation with LMs was first conducted with a flat-sheet LM, employing two serially-connected devices, in the first of which selective separation of Cr(III) (mostly as Alguacil et al. used Cyanex 923 for Cr speciation in tannery effluents. Cr(VI) flux across the LM was reported to be 29 times greater than that of Cr(III), allowing separation of both fractions However, Agrawal et al. determined the hexavalent cation by previous separation of Cr(III) into a two-glass diffusion cell with 13,25,31-calix The determination of species formed by metals with inorganic ligands is also essential in analysis of natural waters Among others, inorganic speciation of metals in natural waters involves the difficulty of simple diffusion of neutral complexes (ML An LM system for Cu, Pb and Cd speciation in the presence of the main inorganic anions (e.g., Similar behavior was observed for silver transport, which, in the presence of chloride ions, forms AgCl The aspect of speciation of heavy metals in natural waters that has probably created most interest relates to organic complexes formation, as it measures their bioavailability As inorganic species, neutral organic complexes can also be formed and diffused across LMs The formation of labile metal-organic complexes (e.g., as formed by Cu and sulfosalycilic acid) must also be considered to understand metal transport Humic substances [mainly formed by humic acid (HA) and fulvic acid] are the main source of organic matter in natural waters, so the heavy-metal fractions bound to these humic substances offer a better approach to the free dissolved concentration of metals in real samples. In this sense, the selective transport of free Cu ions was used to calculate the Cu-HA fraction in waters by using a flat-sheet SLM containing 1,10-dibenzyl-1,10-diaza18-crown-6-ether Cu speciation has also been carried out in estuarine waters, where salinity is expected to have influence on Cu fractionation. Nevertheless, evaluation of Cu transport against HAs was not affected by Cl LMs have also been used to deal with Cd and Pb bioavailability Study and quantification of fluxes and pertraction yields allow determination of the different species formed, thus determining the speciation of the free, labile complexes as well as inert Cu compounds Similar studies have also been carried out for the speciation of silver and nickel in natural waters, on the basis of decreased metal permeation through the LM. In particular, a linear decrease of silver-pertraction yield against the logarithm of HA concentration (measured as dissolved organic carbon, DOC) was obtained for a BLM containing TIBPS. Total, free and organic-complexed Ag was then determined by measuring the DOC of a sample and applying the LM system In the same way, decreased nickel permeation in the presence of HAs across a BLM system containing 1,2-CHBBH dissolved in toluene could be correlated to the formation of organic complexes unable to cross the membrane. In this case, a linear relationship was observed between DOC concentration and extracted nickel. This linear relationship was used to estimate the concentration of different species in water samples DOC (and sometimes chloride concentration) measurement may be the basis of a LM-based procedure designed to determine the concentration of the different species present in natural waters (free ions, and inorganic and organic complexes). The application of LMs opens a new window for analytical determination and speciation of trace metals in natural waters. In this sense, the increasing use of LMs in environmental analysis may be related to their advantages when compared to LLE and SPE. LLE involves considerable volumes of organic solvents, tedious procedures and high contamination risks. SPE is expected to provide better yields than LLE. Cleaner conditions (avoiding sample contamination) can be used and lower organic solvent wastes are generated. However, the capacity of SPE to tune chemical conditions is rather limited. LMs therefore appear as a cleaner, greener alternative to LLE and SPE, as supported by LM tuning capabilities and analyte enrichment, which is at the same level as in SPE. In addition, LMs demand less sample volume, cost and time of analysis than LLE and SPE. In spite of these advantages, applications are focused on a few metals and future research is required to extend this technology to other trace elements in natural waters. In addition, multi-element determinations must be considered, as well as the speciation of metals in seawater. In any case, LMs technology allows us to develop not only powerful and cleaner analytical methods, but also safer methods that generate less hazardous waste. This work was supported by