Microwave heating is recognized for its various advantages, such as time and energy saving, very rapid heating rates, considerably reduced processing cycle time and temperature, fine microstructures and improved properties. The present paper investigates the feasibility of consolidating tungsten powders through microwave sintering. A comparative analysis has also been attempted between the sintering response of pure tungsten powder compact in a microwave and conventional furnace.Tungsten belongs to Group VIB of periodic table. As a refractory metal, tungsten is characterized by its very high melting point (3420 Achievement of near theoretical sintered densities for pure tungsten at temperatures below 1650 Another important approach to activate sintering of tungsten is through selection of submicron or nano-sized precursor tungsten powder. However, such powders are expensive and are prone to contamination Because of the characteristic feature and obvious advantages, application of microwave energy in consolidating particulate materials has become a preferred method over conventional (resistant heating) technique. The application of microwave energy in consolidating tungsten powders was first studied by Jain et al. Tungsten of average crystallite size of 72 Metallographic techniques were employed on the sintered samples. The sintered samples were wet polished in a manual polisher (model: Lunn Major, supplier: Struers, Denmark) using a series of 6  Unlike ceramic materials microwave interaction with metals is restricted to its surface only. This depth of penetration in metals, also known as skin depth ( Recently, Prabhu et al.  Usually, the sintering characteristics of the tungsten powders have been investigated in micron-sized powders Jain et al.  To investigate the effect of heating mode on the microstructural coarsening and its homogeneity, the as-sintered compacts were metallographically prepared.  In this study, tungsten powder compact was successfully consolidated through microwave sintering. It is interesting to note that tungsten compact strongly couples with microwaves and gets heated very rapidly. This result in the drastic reduction in the sintering cycle time over the conventional process: up to as high as 90%. Despite being heated at high heating rates, none of the tungsten powder compacts displayed any distortion or cracking during microwave heating. This underscores the volumetric heating aspects of microwaves. Moreover, due to the low thermal mass, microwave heating was less energy (power) consuming as compared to the equivalent volume of material being consolidated conventionally. Another common observation is that the microwave sintered compacts undergo more densification as compared to their conventionally processed counterparts. Because of the rapid heating rates achieved in microwave furnace, the microstructure coarsening was relatively lower. Consequently, as compared to conventional sintering, the mechanical properties of the microwave sintered compacts were higher. The authors would like to acknowledge NEI Corporation, New Jersey, USA for supplying the powder used for this investigation. This study was also partially supported by the