In their recent article, Tilton et al. (2011, Resour. Policy, 36, 187–195) contend on the basis of conceptual and theoretical arguments that spot and futures prices for metals and other commodities should be closely correlated during periods of strong contango and much less correlated during periods of backwardation or weak contango. If true, this hypothesis implies that speculation and investor demand, most of which takes place on futures markets, should affect spot prices much less or not at all during periods of backwardation or weak contango.
                  This study provides an empirical test of this hypothesis using daily changes in LME average copper prices over the 1994–2011 period. It finds that the correlation coefficients between day-to-day changes in spot and futures prices are quite close to 1 during periods of strong contango. During periods of backwardation and weak contango, the correlations are positive but lower. These findings provide empirical support for the hypothesis advanced by Tilton et al. that investor demand on futures markets affects spot and futures prices similarly when the markets are in strong contango but somewhat less so when they are in weak contango or backwardation.Over much of the past decade commodity prices have risen, in some cases dramatically, sparking calls for curbs on speculation in commodity markets. Proponents of such measures argue that investor demand has pushed commodity prices up and harmed consumers. Since most investor demand occurs on futures markets, this argument presumes the existence of a close link between changes in futures and spot prices. Recently in this journal, On the other hand, when the spot and futures markets are in backwardation or weak contango—that is, when the futures prices are either below the spot price or not sufficiently above the spot price to cover storage costs—they contend that the link between spot and futures prices is much weaker (though not entirely absent thanks to the convenience yield of holding physical inventories). This is because inter-temporal arbitrage in the opposite direction is not feasible. One cannot buy physical stocks on futures markets and sell them immediately on the spot market. This leads  This study proposes to provide an empirical test of this hypothesis by examining the relationship between the daily changes in copper spot and futures prices over the period 1994 to 2011. The central question is: Does there in fact exist a high correlation—close to 1—between changes in spot and futures prices when the copper market is in strong contango, and a lower correlation during periods of backwardation and weak contango? The data used in the analysis consist of the following: Average daily London Metal Exchange (LME) copper spot prices and futures prices with 3, 15, and 27 month maturities from April 1994 to April 2011. The LME is the source for this information. Average daily Euro-dollar deposit rates in percent per annum over the same period. The U.S. Federal Reserve Board is the source for this information. LME warehouse storage costs in U.S. cents per ton per day over the same period. The LME is the source of this information. From the finance literature, The convenience yield exists for commodities and other assets that are consumed as well as held as investments. It arises because there are benefits to holding inventories other than the expected profits realized from a change in their price over time. In particular, during periods of unanticipated shortages, consuming firms with greater-than-normal inventories can avoid interruptions in their production. The convenience yield varies greatly over time. During normal conditions when supplies appear adequate over the near term, the convenience yield is likely to be positive but quite small. However, when the market anticipates near-term shortages with adequate supplies over the longer term, the convenience yield can be quite large. It is also worth noting that the convenience yield is what ensures that Eq. If one assumes that unit storage costs ( When markets anticipate that near-term supplies are adequate, the convenience yield, as noted, should be quite small. As a result, In their analysis, When markets are in backwardation or what they call weak contango, this is because the convenience yield is much higher (and no longer negligible compared to the interest rate and storage costs), reflecting concerns about near-term shortages. Such fears, they implicitly assume, are likely to be temporary as additional supplies should eventually become available. As a result, during periods of backwardation and weak contango, the convenience yield is likely to vary considerably over time and the high correlation between changes in spot and futures prices expected during periods of strong contango breaks down. To test this hypothesis, we conducted the following analysis. First, we estimated the storage costs of a ton of copper by multiplying the number of months (3,15, 27) in the contract times the monthly storage costs. Second, we estimated the cost of the capital required to purchase and hold a ton of copper by multiplying the spot price by Then, to determine if changes in the behavior of spot and futures prices were occurring over time, we divided our sample into two periods—1994–2001 and 2002–2011—and estimated the correlation coefficients for each of the six subgroups for both of these periods. We also estimated the correlation coefficients for spot and futures prices during periods of weak contango and then during periods of backwardation (rather than combining the two) to determine if these two market situations affect prices differently. Finally, we redefined strong contango to include a small convenience yield to see if this altered the findings.  When the market is in weak contango or backwardation, according to      The results are similar to those discussed earlier. There is a clear tendency for the correlations to decline as the length of the futures contact increase from 3 to 15 to 27 months. The correlations are quite close to 1 during periods of strong contango and lower during periods of weak contango or backwardation. Finally, the correlations are much closer to 1 during the 2002–2011 period than during the 1994–2001 period. These results provide empirical support for the hypothesis advanced by Tilton et al. In particular, as they predict, during periods of strong contango the correlations between changes in spot and futures prices are quite close to 1. This finding prevails over all three futures prices, for the entire 1994–2011 period as well as for the two subperiods examined, and for convenience yields from zero percent to 10 percent. In addition, as Tilton et al. anticipate, the correlations are lower during periods of weak contango or backwardation. This finding, however, comes with some qualifications. First, the correlations are still—at 0.70 or more—quite high. In addition, the correlations for markets in weak contango or backwardation have risen noticeably since 1991, possibly the result of changes in LME regulations. These caveats suggest that the convenience yield during weak contango and backwardation—periods when concerns about near-term shortages are presumably high—may be more stable and vary less from one month to the next than Tilton et al. assume. If true, this raises the possibility that spot prices may follow a rise (or decline) in futures prices not just during periods of strong contango but during periods of backwardation and weak contango as well.