Dominant crack algorithm (DCA) is a statistical micromechanics model for the dynamic tensile response of brittle materials. In the DCA model, both microscopic and macroscopic material parameters are included to construct the constitutive relation, and the damage evolution is described by the growth of the dominant crack. In this study, the sensitivity analysis of the microscopic parameters (i.e. the characteristic volume size a, the initial crack size c
                     0, and the crack velocity related parameter m) in the DCA model is conducted. The results demonstrate that the dynamic tensile strength is sensitive to the value of c
                     0/a. Compared with the influence of the c
                     0/a on the dynamic tensile strength, the dynamic tensile strength is less sensitive to the variation of the characteristic volume size a or the variation of the crack velocity related parameter m. Furthermore, the DCA model is applied to predict the dynamic tensile response of Laurentian granite (LG). A nonlinear regression method - Particle Swarm Optimization (PSO) - is utilized to optimize the values of the microscopic parameters. The results indicate that the dynamic tensile response of LG predicted by the DCA modeling has a good agreement with that obtained from the experiments. Therefore, the DCA modeling is valid and applicable to describe the dynamic tensile response and predict the dynamic tensile strength of rock-like materials.Rocks are often subjected to dynamic loadings in various engineering problems, such as blasting, earthquakes and rockbursts. It is thus critical to investigate the dynamic response of rocks for ensuring safety and maximizing profit in engineering projects, both theoretically and experimentally. There have been extensive experimental studies on the dynamic response of rocks Johnson et al. Physically-based constitutive models consider the physical mechanisms of damage development with the strain rate effect. Ashby et al. Some physically-based constitutive models were introduced to simulate the macromechanical behaviors of rock materials through a physically-based microcrack propagation criterion under dynamic loads Curran et al. It is therefore desirable to develop a micromechanics model with a few fitting parameters. This was achieved by the dominant crack algorithm (DCA). In the DCA model, the rate-dependent damage evolution is based on the strain energy release rate associated with the critical crack orientation, which is defined as the most unstable orientation for cracks that are isotropically distributed in the material. A new damage surface is found by applying the generalized Griffith instability criterion to the dominant crack, rather than by averaging the instability condition over all crack orientations. In addition, the evolution of damage, which is based on the energy-release rate for the dominant crack, has a physical basis, whereas in the ISOSCM approach, the damage growth rate is assumed to be an exponential function of the distance from the stress state to the damage surface without specific physical justification. To illustrate the features of the DCA model, Zuo et al. The DCA model has been applied to predict the dynamic tensile stress and strain history for ceramic This paper is organized as follows. In Section The three-dimensional DCA modeling assumes that the material is homogenous with only penny shaped microcracks distributed in the material and only the propagation of most vulnerable crack in the characteristic volume leads to the failure of the material, which is the tensile crack. Therefore, only Mode-I crack is considered in this study. Further, the tensile failure of rocks in two-dimension (2D) is investigated using the DCA model in this study. Thus, the theories of the DCA model are modified for 2D Mode-I fracture. In the DCA model, the crack number density function is approximated by an exponential function, which has been supported by experimental data In the DCA model, the strain of the characteristic volume The elastic strain can be further divided into the deviatoric strain tensor According to the assumption that the crack number density is constant during the failure process, Addessio et al. From Eqs. Taking the derivative of the equation with respect to time leads to the relation between the crack strain and the stress tensor: In order to describe the opening and propagation of the 2D microcracks, the propagation velocity is assumed to be related to the stress intensity factor. When the crack local stress intensity factor is lower than the critical value, the crack still propagates with a relatively low speed and the process is quasi-static rather than dynamic. Solving Eqs. Therefore the crack propagation velocity can be described as: The local stress intensity factor The theoretical algorithm of the DCA modeling is illustrated in As described in Section In this study, the physical and mechanical properties of Laurentian granite (LG) are used as material parameters in the DCA modeling to conduct the sensitivity analysis because the quasi-static and dynamic mechanical properties of LG have been extensively studied. The DCA modeling is conducted on LG with the characteristic volume size of 2 mm, 4 mm, 6 mm and 8 mm, while the initial crack radius is 0.1 mm and the crack velocity parameter According to the sensitivity study of the characteristic volume size, it is expected that with the constant characteristic volume size, the failure would occur more easily with larger initial crack size than with smaller initial crack size. Thereby, five different initial crack sizes (i.e., 0.1 mm, 0.2 mm, 0.3 mm, 0.4 mm, and 0.5 mm) are used in the DCA modeling with the constant characteristic volume size As shown in Furthermore, as given in Based on the above analysis about the influence of the characteristic volume size and the initial crack size on the dynamic tensile strength, one can see that larger characteristic volume size leads to higher dynamic tensile strength, while larger initial crack size results in lower dynamic tensile strength. In such case, it seems that the effect of the increment of the characteristic volume size on the dynamic tensile strength would counteract the effect of the increment of the initial crack size. Consequently, it is necessary to conduct the sensitivity analysis of    Other than the initial crack size and the characteristic volume size, another important parameter that affects the dynamic tensile behavior is Moreover, the dynamic tensile strengths derived from the different values of In this study, LG is chosen to demonstrate the feasibility of the DCA model for predicting the dynamic rock tensile response. The material parameters of LG (e.g., the Young's modulus, the Poisson's ratio, and the fracture toughness) used in the DCA modeling are obtained from previous research. As discussed above, the initial values of PSO method is a recent global optimization method, which is based on the idea of collaborative behavior and swarming in biological populations.  In this study, the physically-based DCA modeling is introduced, including its historical development and working principles. The sensitivity analyses of the parameters in the DCA modeling are then conducted. There are two groups of parameters: (a) the macroscopic material parameters and (b) the modeling parameters. The microscopic modeling parameters (i.e., the characteristic volume size Both the dynamic tensile strength and the increment of the dynamic tensile strength increase with the characteristic volume size. This is easy to understand that when the initial crack is constant, it will take longer to reach the critical stress level as the characteristic volume size is larger. The dynamic tensile strength increases with the decrease of the initial crack size and the increment between the dynamic tensile strengths becomes larger as the initial crack size gets smaller. This can be explained by the fact that when the characteristic volume size is constant, it will take longer to reach the critical stress level as the initial crack size is smaller. The dynamic tensile strength at the same characteristic volume size decreases with the increase of the initial crack size, and the dynamic tensile strength increases with the increase of the characteristic volume size when the initial crack size is constant. When the ratio of the initial crack size to the characteristic volume size is constant, the values of dynamic tensile strength with different initial crack sizes are close to each other, except when the characteristic volume size is 2 mm. In addition, the dynamic tensile strength at the characteristic volume size of 2 mm is much larger than that at other values of the characteristic volume size. The dynamic tensile strength is much more sensitive to the initial crack size than to the characteristic volume size, and the dynamic tensile strength is not that sensitive to the change of Furthermore, the DCA model is applied to predict the dynamic tensile response of LG. The PSO method is employed to optimize the values of these modeling parameters (i.e., This work was supported by the