In this study, a hydrometallurgical treatment involving the solvent extraction and recovery of some heavy metals from a sulphuric acid leach solution of galvanic sludge, using di-(2-ethylhexyl)-phosphoric acid (D2EHPA) and bis-(2,4,4-trimethylpentyl)-phosphinic acid (Cyanex 272), both diluted in kerosene, has been investigated.
                  The preliminary tests revealed the necessity to remove other metal species than zinc and nickel, contained in the leach solution, and therefore, processes to cement copper and precipitate chromium were then applied to finally obtain a Zn and Ni pregnant solution prior to solvent extraction. For the experimental conditions studied, Cyanex 272 showed a good recovery of Zn after the stripping stage using H2SO4, but D2EHPA effectively promoted a higher Zn extraction than Cyanex 272 did. The dependence of the solvent extraction method on variables such as pH, contact time and concentration of extractant, as well as the effect of different concentrations of sulphuric acid on stripping, are discussed.
                  The discussion also includes the previous conditions developed to separate the main interfering metallic species from the leach solution in order to improve the extraction and recovery of zinc by solvent extraction. The final objective has been to achieve a solution as pure as possible to recover nickel sulphate.It is extremely important to develop viable ways to recycle industrial sludge if either environmental or economical concerns are to be taken into account. Among the Portuguese industries, galvanic plants are usually those where the environmental problems caused by their effluents have serious repercussions. However, due to the actual economical condition of the country and also to the fact that the majority of these enterprises exhibit a small or medium dimension, this matter has rarely been considered a national priority to solve. Nowadays, however, a lot of waste producers have begun to pay a greater attention to these effluent problems, trying to solve them as better as possible, due to the rising and stringent environmental regulations determined by an effective control policy. Unfortunately, the usual way to overcome the problem is frequently the disposal of the sludge as hazardous waste in special landfills located outside Portugal, since these residues do not have an accessible alternative treatment within the country. These wastes contain metals of interest like nickel, copper, zinc and others This disposal attitude leads to serious disadvantages, as it contributes to a great build up of environmentally hazardous materials on the earth's crust; on the other side, it does not consider the recovery of the heavy metals for re-use, which might represent an economy of raw materials and potential profits. Recent estimations point out to the generation of about 4000 and 150,000 A good way to treat and recycle these materials can be the utilisation of the several hydrometallurgical technologies, the traditional and modern ones, since they are economical and environmentally suitable to recover valuable metal elements. Solvent extraction is now a very well-established process in hydrometallurgy. It is used for the hydrometallurgical processing of copper, nickel, cobalt, zinc, uranium, molybdenum, tungsten, vanadium, rare earths, zirconium, hafnium, niobium, tantalum, indium, gallium, germanium, the platinum group metals, boron, reprocessing nuclear fuels, purification of wet process phosphoric acid, nitric acid recovery, etc. Leaching of sludge coming from galvanic plants is mainly carried out using sulphuric acid solutions, the most abundant metallic species being nickel, chromium, copper, zinc, calcium and iron. From an economical point of view, nickel, zinc and copper are the most interesting metal values to recycle, but the toxicity allied to the high levels of chromium cannot be forgotten A literature survey covering the most recent information on the above metal separations reveals that organophosphorous acids are often the chosen extractants. Hence, di-(2-ethylhexyl)-phosphoric acid (D2EHPA) allows an efficient recovery of Zn and Cu from sulphuric acid solutions of low pH (2.5–3.5). At this pH, if Fe is present in the leach solution, it would be totally extracted Another organophosphorous acid also reported to be quite suitable for these separation purposes is Cyanex 272 (its active ingredient is bis-(2,4,4-trimethylpentyl)-phosphinic acid). Several works report the adequacy of Cyanex 272 to extract, for instance, Fe, Zn, Cr, Cu and Ni from sulphuric and/or sulphate solutions (their average pH Generally it can be pointed out that Cyanex 272 needs higher pH values than D2EHPA to extract the same metal ions, this behaviour being explained by the fact that phosphinic acid derivatives are weaker acids than the phosphoric ones Although being an important basis for work, it should not be forgotten that most of the solvent extraction research referred to herein has been carried out with synthetic aqueous solutions. When leach solutions – frequently with much higher metal ion concentrations than those considered in synthetic ones – are obtained directly from industrial plants, the extraction systems become much more complex, as several equilibria established between the metallic species in the aqueous phases are likely to occur. Therefore, it is not strange that somehow different solvent extraction results from those already known for a given system could be obtained if “real” solutions are involved, this feature clearly justifying an additional point of interest of this research. Jha et al. In this work, several aqueous solutions were obtained from sulphuric acid leaching of a polymetallic complex sludge, produced by a physicochemical treatment of wastewaters from a Cr/Ni plating plant located in the north of Portugal. D2EHPA and Cyanex 272 were chosen as solvent extraction reagents, in an attempt to purify the leach solutions and allow the final recovery of nickel under the form of nickel sulphate. All the leach samples (referenced therein as samples A–E) were generated from sulphuric acid leaching of a polymetallic complex sludge using a 100 All the leach samples were previously neutralized through pH adjustment by the same kind of sludge (fresh, dried and ground <1 Di-(2-ethylhexyl)-phosphoric acid (93% purity) was gently provided by Albright & Wilson Americas Inc., and used as received. Cyanex 272 – bis-(2,4,4-trimethylpentyl)-phosphinic acid, 80–87% purity – was kindly supplied by Cytec Canada Inc., and also used without further purification. Both extractants were diluted in kerosene (Fluka, purum, boiling point range 190–250 Unless otherwise stated, the following conditions were generally adopted for the solvent extraction tests, carried out in stoppered flasks: extractant concentrations in the organic phase of 1 Analyses of the metal contents in the aqueous solutions before and after extraction, and also of the stripping ones, were carried out by flame atomic absorption spectrometry (AAS) on a “GBC 904 AA” model. Metal concentrations in the organic solutions were calculated by mass balance. The feed solution corresponding to sample A contained Cr Under the adopted experimental conditions, Second feed solution (sample B) contained Cr Hence, for sample B, single-extraction stages performed with 1 Loaded organic phases from the extraction tests at pH 3.0 and 4.0, for each extractant, were stripped by equal volumes of H In According to the results presented in Anyway, it can generally be said that the increase of the pH values to 4 in the aqueous solutions, before the second extraction stage, resulted in an enhancement of the Zn and Cu extraction, this latter result verified only for D2EHPA. Moreover, although some Cr and Ni extraction was sometimes observed for both extractants, none of those metals was detected in the stripping phases. Concerning the nature of the extractants, D2EHPA seems to be more effective than Cyanex 272 to recover Zn, at least for the experimental conditions established, but Zn stripping from the latter reagent revealed to be easier. As mentioned earlier, considering the information data reported in literature In view of the results displayed in The main differences between samples A, B and C, D, and E are the order of magnitude of the concentrations of the metal species and the initial pH values. Almost 90% Cu was recovered as metal powder from the cementation process, by applying Zn dust, for all the three samples. Moreover, it is now taking place the characterisation of the precipitate Cr–CaCO Starting from the new feed solutions C, D and E, the aim is now to separate and recover Zn and Ni. For samples C and D, feed solutions had their pH adjusted to pH 3.0 by addition of H Zinc and nickel were extracted in two stages: firstly, a pH adjustment to 3.0 by addition of H  With the adopted procedure, a significant increase in Zn recovery has been accomplished, mainly due to a better performance attained in the Zn stripping stage by the H After evaluation of the results obtained in the former test performed with sample C, it was decided to optimize the Zn recovery by solvent extraction and try to maintain the maximum Ni content in the original solution. At the same time, a minimization of the use of D2EHPA was envisaged. Therefore, the pH of the sample D was lowered to 3.5 with H  The results displayed in A feed solution for a solvent extraction process, generated from the sulphuric acid leaching of a polymetallic complex sludge, with a pH adjusted to 3.5 and pregnant with Ni and Zn contents of about 10 and 2 Concerning the Cu and Cr metal species, almost 90% Cu was recovered as metal powder by the cementation process through the use of Zn dust, whereas at the moment the characterisation of the Cr–CaCO