Lignocellulosic fibers extracted from sugarcane bagasse were treated with NaOH solutions of different concentration (0-40 wt%) to study the effect of alkali treatment on the composition, structure and properties of the fibers. Composition was determined by the van Soest method, structure was characterized by X-ray diffraction (XRD) and scanning electron microscopy (SEM), while mechanical properties by tensile testing. Hemicellulose and lignin content decrease, while cellulose content goes through a maximum as a function of alkali concentration. Crystallinity changes only slightly and microfibril angle (MFA) remains constant thus structural effects and especially MFA are not the primary reasons for changing properties. The Young's modulus of the fibers shows a slight maximum at around 2-4 wt% NaOH content, while tensile strength goes through a much more pronounced one at around 5-8 wt%. Direct correlation between structure and mechanical properties was not found indicating that composition is more important in the determination of properties than structure. Regression analysis proved that the combination of several compositional variables determines mechanical properties in a non-linear manner. The improvement in fiber properties was explained with the dissolution of weak amorphous fractions and the relative increase of cellulose content.Because of the continuous search for new materials and the increasing environmental awareness of the industry as well as the public, the interest in materials from renewable resources increases continuously [ One of the approaches to improve the inherent properties of natural reinforcements and thus those of their composites is the alkali treatment of the fibers. Mercerization is a commercial technology developed a long time ago which consists of the treatment of the fibers with a sodium hydroxide solution of 20–27 wt% under tension [ The effect of alkali treatment on the structure and properties of fibers was studied by numerous groups and the increase of stiffness and strength was observed quite often [ Nevertheless, it is a fact that under certain conditions the stiffness and strength of natural fibers are improved by alkali treatment [ In spite of the contradictions published, the beneficial effect of alkali treatment for fiber characteristics is clear and it often results in better composite properties as well. Considering the contradictions mentioned above, the goal of our study was to treat sugarcane bagasse fibers with sodium hydroxide and then thoroughly characterize their composition, structure and properties including strength and stiffness. Sugarcane bagasse was selected, because it is a cheap, natural raw material, which can be obtained from local sources in Indonesia. Bagasse fiber form a waste and its value added application would be beneficial for the country. In a part of the study, flax fibers were used as reference material in order to extend the validity of our conclusions. An attempt was made to correlate the measured variables and find a plausible explanation for the increase of fiber strength with alkali treatment. The consequence for practice is also mentioned in the final section of the paper. The bagasse fibers were obtained directly from the sugar mill. They were washed with ethanol, dried and sieved. The fraction between the sieves of 45 and 20 mesh was separated; the length of the fibers was 4560 ± 1870 μm and their diameter 340 ± 156 μm. Longer individual fibers were separated for mechanical characterization, tensile testing. A solution containing 40 wt% sodium hydroxide was prepared from NaOH flakes (Molar Chemicals, Hungary). The solution was diluted to obtain solutions with 1, 2, 4, 8, 15, 20 and 40 wt% alkali content. 1 g of fiber was weighed into a beaker and 40 ml NaOH solution was poured on it. The treatment lasted for 1 h, when the fibers were separated from the solution and placed into 50 ml acetic acid (Molar Chemicals, Hungary) for 10 min. Subsequently the fibers were washed on a filter with water until the pH of the washing water became neutral. pH was checked by litmus paper. Finally, the fibers were soaked in distilled water and then the pH was checked again. The fibers were dried at 105 °C in an air circulation oven for 48 h. Fibers were prepared in a similar way for tensile testing with the only difference that fibers of 8–12 cm length were separated first and then dried under tension to avoid curling. All treatments were done at ambient temperature. Fibers had to be milled for X-ray diffraction and FTIR measurements. Two grams of the fibers were placed into a Retsch MM 400 ball mill (Retsch GmbH., Germany) and the fibers were ground for 2.5 min at 30 s The chemical composition of the fibers was determined by the van Soest method. The detailed description of the method can be found in the paper of van Soest [ The mechanical properties of the fibers were characterized by tensile testing. Fibers were slightly stretched and fixed onto paper frames for the measurements. An Instron 5566 tensile testing machine (Instron, Massachusetts, US) was used for the tests at the gauge length of 20 mm and crosshead speed of 0.5 mm/min. Ten parallel measurements were carried out for each sample. Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) was used for the characterization of the morphology of the neat and treated fibers. The equipment used was a Jeol JSM 6380 LA (Jeol, Japan) apparatus. Before the recording of the images, the samples were sputtered with gold. The results of the experiments are presented in several sections. First, the effect of chemical treatment on the composition of the fibers is discussed, followed by the presentation of changes in their structure. Properties are analyzed next and then correlations between composition and properties are shown in the last section together with relevance for practice. The analysis of results published in the literature clearly showed that one of the consequences of the alkali treatment of fibers is a change in their chemical composition. The amorphous parts of the fibers, mainly hemicellulose, lignin and waxes, are dissolved in different extents. At larger concentrations of NaOH and at longer times, also cellulose crystals disintegrate and dissolve. The change of chemical composition inevitably leads to the modification of properties as well. Accordingly, the effect of treatment on composition was followed by two methods, chemical analysis and FTIR spectroscopy. The cellulose and lignin content of the fibers are plotted against the concentration of the treating solution in As mentioned above, compositional changes were followed also by FTIR spectroscopy. The spectra of the fibers at selected NaOH contents are presented in The chemical composition of the fibers changes because some of the components are dissolved during treatment. The rate of dissolution is different for the various components, but all lead to the decrease of the weight of the sample. Weight loss is plotted against the NaOH concentration of the treating solution in Cellulose has various crystal forms. In plants, it crystallizes in the cellulose I form, which may transform into the cellulose II modification as the result of alkali treatment [ The improvement of the mechanical properties of the fibers is often explained with the change of the microfibril angle (MFA) during alkali treatment [ For polymers reinforced with natural fibers, the changes in properties are often explained with the modification of the surface of the fibers. The removal of waxes and increased surface roughness are claimed to improve interfacial adhesion and thus stiffness and strength [ The effect of alkali treatment on the stiffness of the fibers is presented in The tensile strength of the fibers is plotted against NaOH content in The results presented above indicate clearly that composition and structure determines properties and that alkali treatment modifies both factors. In publications, mechanical properties are very often related to the crystallinity of the fibers [ The unambiguous determination of the dominating factor is very difficult, because probably more than one influence properties and their weight might be dissimilar. Moreover, various factors are related to each other, they either change similarly as a function of NaOH concentration or even depend on each other, thus the identification of the dominating one is very difficult or even impossible. Since the correlation between mechanical properties and crystallinity is weak, we decided to analyze the combined effect of various compositional factors on properties. We carried out multiple regression analysis, in which we considered all compositional variables and their interactions. Subsequently we neglected components, which were not significant and arrived to the conclusion that a non-linear model taking into account first-order compositional variables and an interaction term describes property change quite well. The following model:  Although the correlation shown in The results on the alkali treatment of sugarcane bagasse fibers proved that the treatment modifies the composition, structure and properties of the fibers. Hemicellulose and lignin content decrease, while cellulose content goes through a maximum as a function of the alkali content of the treating solution. Crystallinity changes only slightly and microfibril angle remains constant with increasing NaOH content thus structural effects and especially MFA are not the primary reasons for changing properties, contrary to many reports published in the literature. The stiffness of the fibers shows a very slight maximum at around 2-4 wt% NaOH content, while strength a much more pronounced one at around 5-8 wt%. The increase in fiber strength is quite considerable. Direct correlation between structure and mechanical properties were not found indicating that changes in composition are more important in the determination of properties than structure. Regression analysis proved that the combination of several compositional variables determines mechanical properties in a non-linear manner. The improvement in fiber properties was explained with the dissolution of weak amorphous fractions and with the increase of cellulose content. The optimum concentration of the treating solution is around 5 wt% NaOH content if the time of treatment is fixed at 1 h. The increase of fiber strength is expected to result in the improvement of composite properties. The raw/processed data required to reproduce these findings cannot be shared at this time as the data also forms part of an ongoing study.  None. The authors thank Enikő Vinkler for her help in the alkali treatment of flax fibers. The National Research, Development and Innovation Fund of Hungary ( The following is the Supplementary data to this article: Supplementary data to this article can be found online at