With changes in how electricity is generated, there may be a gradual reduction in available fly ash for use in concrete and other applications. The significant quantities of fly ash stored around power plants in stockpiles and ponds, in some cases over many years, represent a source of material that could help address this situation. Wet-stored fly ash can undergo physical and chemical changes during storage, affecting its reactivity potential and it may be prone to variability. Recovery of this is therefore likely to involve evaluation of the material properties, and development of processing strategies. This chapter examines (i) the characteristics of wet-stored fly ash, (ii) methods of sampling material, (iii) various wet processing techniques that can be used to remove or concentrate components, and (iv) use in cementitious systems. Consideration is also given to the direct use of conditioned/stockpile fly ash in concrete.Recent figures indicate that 780 At the same time, power generation by coal is reducing due to environmental concerns and competition from other fuels, primarily natural gas, with renewables also playing a role. Indeed, the United Kingdom is likely to see its remaining coal-fired power stations taken out of service by 2025 ( The effects that fly ash has on concrete and its use in this application are well known ( The drop in geographic density of coal power plants, which are the sources of fly ash, is increasing its delivery costs and changing its pricing and cost structure. These disruptions in supply are already creating changes in the fly ash market, with continued increases in the seaborne trade of fly ash likely ( It is estimated in the United Kingdom that levels of up to 50 The Authors have worked with stockpile and ponded ash at power plants over the past 30 years. These have been located throughout the United Kingdom, in parts of the Eastern United States (Kentucky, Alabama, Tennessee, West Virginia, Ohio, New York, Florida, Georgia, and North and South Carolina), and more recently in China. With this background, we can safely state that each ash deposit is unique and would need a tailored approach to recover the resource efficiently. Nevertheless, there are generalities that can still be drawn. This chapter is concerned with the characterization and recovery of stockpile and ponded ash, specifically the effects of wet storage, its influence on reactivity, and possible options for using fly ash as a product of beneficiation or directly in wet form. Fly ash is commonly recovered by electrostatic precipitators; however, smaller plants may use mechanical devices such as baghouses (     There is no prohibition in international standards for the use of fly ash recovered from stockpiles or ponds. However, both the United States and European standards cover the moisture condition of fly ash when it is used in concrete. This is given in terms of a limit on the moisture content of fly ash [e.g., 3.0% in ASTM C618 ( At least when broadly considered, stockpile and ponded ash have different properties. Conditioned and stockpile ash may be relatively homogeneous, but they are often found to have agglomerated, at least to some degree, which can affect their performance when used in concrete. The agglomerates show varying degrees of induration and may be cemented by sulfate or carbonate deposition, or by self-cementing or pozzolanic processes, including the formation of silicate gel-like materials. The presence of higher levels of free lime in the fly ash tends to increase these effects ( All fly ashes have some level of soluble salts that may include alkali-chlorides, nitrates, or sulfates. If not washed from the ash, these will most likely contribute to the formation of agglomerates. Undoubtedly, the compaction of the ash in stockpiles also plays an important role. Ash is typically moved to ponds in a dilute slurry. Since many older ponds did not have liners, the washing processes may continue over a longer period of time as rainwater percolates through the ash substrate. As the ash flows into the pond, it sorts and stratifies, resulting in a heterogeneous body of material. Overcoming this heterogeneity and producing a consistent material is a challenge for the recovery of ash from ponds. The storage of fly ash in an excess of water has been found to give similar effects to those at lower moisture levels, with agglomeration occurring ( The codisposal of scrubber materials also has an impact on ash agglomeration. In a recent study of a large ash pond in China (  In a paper from the 1960s, an early example of the effects of combining water with fly ash was noted during a survey of storage areas in northwestern England, where hardening had occurred ( In fill applications, it appears that a combination of effects occur with the addition of water to fly ash (  Research ( Agglomeration was generally greatest at moisture contents of 10%–20%, with lower levels (1%) appearing to give insufficient water for reaction and higher levels (40%) causing dispersion. The effects of added moisture tended to occur more rapidly and to a greater degree when the free lime content of fly ash was higher (see LOI was found to increase slightly with time, moisture level and free lime content. For example, LOI increases of up to 1.0% were obtained by 6 months for the materials/moisture condition shown in Several studies have been carried out to investigate the recoverability of fly ash stored in ponds ( A detailed survey of a pond at Kentucky Utilities Ghent power plant, following 20 years of service, found that of the 13 cores taken (~ Oxide analysis data corresponding to the different sample colors are shown in Processing circuitry for ash recovery was also conducted on the ash pond. Processes that were tested included two levels of screening, teeter bed and lamellae classifiers, and froth flotation and thickening ( Data from tests investigating ash in a UK pond are given in There do not appear to be any processing plants that are operating exclusively on stored fly ash. However, the thermal processing unit (SEFA's STAR process, discussed in this volume) operating at the Winyah power station in South Carolina is currently processing ponded ash along with fresh ash from the plant. A full-scale production unit is based at the Fiddler's Ferry power plant in the UK (RockTron process), but it is not currently in use ( Strategies for the recovery of wet-stored fly ash for use in concrete are different from the processing of dry fly ash. Typically, these are single-process steps, such as air classification to increase fineness, or electrostatic separation to reduce LOI. The recovery of ash from a stockpile or pond is closer to a mining or quarry operation. The raw ash needs to be removed, slurried, and separated by particle size, then thickened and dried. If appropriate, steps may also be required for the separation of carbon and de-agglomeration. There are two approaches that are used in ash recovery. The first involves traditional truck and shovel operations. Even if the ash is agglomerated, it can be readily recovered from stockpiles and ponds with a backhoe or front-end loader. For wet active ponds, a long-armed backhoe or a dredge is typically employed. Recent work has used a dredge to feed a classifier during a demonstration in Ohio. The dredge delivered a slurry, which ranged in solids content from essentially 0% up to 35%, averaging about 15%. The large variation in solids content was due to the relatively small size of ash ponds, which required frequent starts and stops. Nonetheless, the dredge proved capable of delivering large volumes of ash cheaply and efficiently. Slurrying of fly ash for processing at water-to-solids ratios of up to 15% is used to provide the medium for particle separation; it also enables washing and de-agglomeration of the material ( Typical screen sizes for preliminary treatment (i.e., “trash screens”) are of the order of several millimeters (i.e., 3/8″ to 1/2″). A ~ If required by the ash composition, froth flotation is a well-established technique that can be effective for separating carbon char from fly ash. Froth flotation is used for processing many types of ores, including cleaning coal fines ( Unburned carbon in fly ash is mainly present as partially oxidized coke particles ( Flotation release analyses (to examine fly ash suitability for the process) using a batch flotation cell indicated differences in carbon reduction/yield for fly ashes from the same and different sources ( The efficacy of carbon separation is influenced by various factors, including the carbon concentration, dose and type of reagents, and flotation procedure ( Depending on the characteristics of the ash, wet vibratory repulping screens can be a reasonable choice in size separation. Due to its shape, fly ash causes the excessive blinding of woven screens, known as the “egg crate” effect. Thus slotted screens are best employed, which are made from steel wedge wire or polymers such as urethane. Screening provides a sharp cut that is only dependent on particle size. However, the proportion of screen openings decreases with their size, reducing separation efficiency and throughput. Although both polymer and wedge wire as fine as 45 Hydraulic classification involves the separation of particles by differential settling. The forces involved are best described by Stokes' Law, which states that: Using this formula, 1-, 10-, and 45-μm-diameter particles with a density of 2.4 In general, there are two approaches for hydraulic classifiers. One uses an upward flow of water to separate particles. The flow will elutriate particles with a lower fall velocity than that of the flow. These are sometimes referred to as teetered bed classifiers; a good example of this is the McLanahan Hydrosizer ( Of course in practice, none of the above is true. Many ash particles are not round, they have a range of densities, and there is considerable particle-particle interaction. The latter results in hindered movement and blanket settling. In addition, the smallest ash particles have such low mass that they don't follow Stokes' Law, and effects such as Brownian motion become factors. These particles partition with water and not the other solids. Unlike most minerals produced by crushing and milling, fly ash is formed from a molten state and has a low surface charge. This, plus storage in fresh water with low conductivity and near neutral pH, produces a surface with low zeta ( Another approach to hydraulic classification is the hydrocyclone, which looks like a miniature pneumatic cyclone. The slurry is spun around an axis, sweeping large particles to the outside wall. Thus centrifugal forces are added to that of gravity to achieve the separation. Given that the density contrast between the particle and fluid is much smaller in water and cyclones only provide seconds of retention time, hydrocyclones that operate on silt-size particles have small diameters, with lower throughput compared to their pneumatic relatives. For this reason, multiple hydrocyclones are often grouped together, for example the SWECO company offers both manifold and packed vessel configurations that group up to 300 individual cyclones ( Another process that has gained interest over time is the recovery of magnetite from ash ponds. Magnetite is a useful product with an attractive value; it is surprising that there has not been more success with it. There may be two reasons for this: first, although the efficiency of the magnetic separating and materials recovery is high, the yield is low, as typically there is a very small percentage of magnetite in ash. Thus a lot of ash must be processed for a modest amount of product. Second, the product itself is not pure magnetite (Fe Particle separation by hydraulic methods generally results in a product with a high water content that requires further processing. There are several choices for this including conventional thickeners/clarifiers that use a round tank, therefore providing settling time. The solids concentrate at the bottom of the tank, where rakes move them to a central discharge point and they are pumped out, while clarified water discharges from the top of the tank. Another approach is adopted in deep cone thickeners, which use a tall vessel that narrows towards the bottom. Here the weight of the solids helps in the dewatering, as do stirrers. Both approaches work well and can be assisted by the addition of flocculating chemicals. It has been found that classified fly ash slurries with solids densities over 60% can still be readily pumped. Further water reduction can be achieved with vacuum filtration, or if space and time permits, simple stacking and draining, a potentially lower-cost approach. Moisture levels of 20%–25% are readily achievable with these approaches. Standards and conventional handling equipment would indicate that drying is necessary. In the United States the current price of natural gas makes attractive the selection of a proven rotary direct-fired natural gas dryer, like that manufactured by the Louisville Dryer Company ( A number of studies have been carried out (e.g., The initial approach taken in the United States was to produce a highly beneficiated ash that could offer superior performance. The strategy was that the added cost of beneficiation would have to be offset by a premium price. Using a pilot-scale lamellae classifier, as described above, ponded ash samples from the Ghent and Kingston power plants in Kentucky and Tennessee were produced. The ashes from these ponds appeared to have little or no agglomeration and were not difficult to beneficiate. Dispersants were used for both materials; the median ( Strength activity index testing of these samples (by ASTM methods) achieved levels that exceeded 100% within the first week and reached as high as 120% in 28 days ( Durability testing also indicates good performance. For example, data from rapid chloride tests ( To date, the work on stored ash suggests the restoration of gradation is important in maintaining a high level of activity in the recovered ash. This is illustrated in Stockpile fly ash may be comparatively homogeneous, and although it can undergo changes affecting performance, it may have the potential for recovery and direct use in concrete. Several projects have been carried out to examine this ( A reasonable approach for using wet fly ash from stockpiles in concrete is to take account of the moisture condition during the batching stage, much like wet aggregates. This involves: Measuring the moisture content of fly ash Taking the water content of concrete as that batched plus that in the fly ash Adjusting the fly ash content to allow for water present in the material The moisture in fly ash is therefore assumed to contribute to the mix water in concrete. This method was followed in the work described below, which considers laboratory-stored ash, unless noted otherwise. Measurements of workability (in terms of slump) on concretes of equal w/c ratio (0.5), with 30% ash and no admixture are shown in While the action of the concrete mixer may break down some agglomerates, the results appear to relate to the effects that wet storage has on some of the water-reducing properties of ash and increased water requirement due to rough particle surfaces. This may be expected to influence superplasticizing admixture requirements with regard to controlling workability. The bleeding of the concrete (relevant to the material's stability) tended to reduce with wet-storage period and for high free lime ash. Results from tests for compressive (standard cube) strength on the above concretes are shown in Engineering properties of wet-stored ash (free lime Measurements of water/air transport rates into concrete can provide an indication of potential durability. Data from tests ( The effects of conditioned/stockpile ash on most aspects of concrete durability have been investigated, including carbonation, chloride diffusion, freeze-thaw scaling, and abrasion ( In general the effects of stockpile fly ash on concrete are relatively small compared to dry material and can be dealt with by adjustments to the concrete mix. However, moistening of the material may introduce certain effects that could affect handling during concrete production. Trials ( In some cases, it was possible to feed wet-stored ash through the hopper and transport system at these plants. Where this was carried out, aggregate hoppers were used to store the material (generally introduced in small quantities, shortly before use), which was then transferred to the concrete mixer. Laboratory tests on wet ash using a model aggregate hopper suggest that certain factors, including the quantity stored, the period of time in the hopper before discharge, and external vibration at the outlet, may need to be considered for the material. Changes were made to wet ash concrete mixes to match the properties of those with dry fly ash, which normally involved small reductions in w/c ratio and adjustments to superplasticizing admixture dose. Overall, the examples demonstrate that the fresh and hardened properties of concrete containing stockpile fly ash could be controlled by adjustments to the mix in order to match those achieved by dry fly ash concretes. Clearly, the economic viability associated with these types of changes to concrete and practical issues associated with handling would require evaluation for specific materials and plants used. As noted above, the drying of fly ash could be an option for recovery of handling properties. Efforts to date leave little doubt that stockpile and ponded ash have great potential as concrete additions or supplementary cementing materials. When processed to meet current standards, these materials can perform adequately, and with some additional beneficiation, they may be capable of improved performance. It is important to recognize that these materials have been subjected to hydration, weathering, and in some cases sedimentological processes, resulting in changes to particle-size gradation and a level of particle agglomeration for some deposits. The last of these seems more prominent for ash codisposed with scrubber material, conditioned/stockpile ash, ash with high free lime content (see After examining many samples and cases of stored ash in the United Kingdom, the United States, and China, it is safe to conclude that each ash deposit is different and will require site-specific testing and evaluation to determine recoverability and processing strategies. In this sense, stored ash is more like a mineral deposit than an industrial by-product. A number of ash ponds in the eastern United States have been studied. They show little or no agglomeration and have been amenable to high levels of beneficiation. Test data to date indicate that the restoration of gradation to levels approaching or exceeding the original ash is important to the performance of recovered ash. There is a wide variety of processing techniques available for ash recovery and to separate unwanted components such as carbon, classify the ash particles by size and thicken the beneficiated ash, and dry the product. Following initial screening, froth flotation has been demonstrated to achieve significant reductions in carbon and magnetite has been recovered with spiral and magnetic separators. Hydraulic classification has been demonstrated to be effective for producing a range of particle sizes, including high-performance ultrafine fractions at high levels of recovery. These processes may be aided by the proper selection of dispersants or flocculating agents to improve classification efficiency and dewatering. The existing mineral processing industry is more than adequate to meet the needs of processing and recovery of stored ash. Companies, in some cases with more than a century of experience, are capable of providing individual components as well as complete processing systems. Other options such as combustion or drying, followed by dry processing methods, may also play a role in recovery. The direct use of conditioned/stockpile fly ash in concrete has been shown to have promise, although some losses in workability—which tended to increase with storage time—were found. Reductions were also noted for compressive strength, particularly with prolonged storage and at later test ages. In comparing concrete mixes with wet ash at equal slump/28-day strength to those with dry ash (e.g., changes in w/c ratio, superplasticizing admixture dose), various aspects of performance were generally similar. Most properties tended to become poorer if fly ash had a high free lime content, hence this type of material may not be suitable for wet storage and recovery. The economics associated with modifying concretes and requirements for handling are other issues that would need to be considered with regard to the adoption of conditioned/stockpile ash.