Coal plays an important role in energy supply. However, low rank/oxidized coals are difficult to float with the common oily collectors, and hence effective collectors are urgently needed to be found or created. The difficult-to-float reason of low rank/oxidized coals primarily includes two aspects, i.e. abundant oxygen-containing groups on coal surface and porous surface of coal particle. The common oily collectors are difficult to adsorb on hydrophilic sites on low rank/oxidized coals surface and a porous structure of coal surface needs large consumption of collectors. This review is to highlight recent advances in the effective collectors for enhancing the flotation of low rank/oxidized coals, especially an overview of effective collectors proposed in the past decade. The effective collectors are achieved through the emulsion of common oily collectors, the mixture of several collectors/surfactants, the special collectors and bio-collectors. Throughout this review, the mechanism of the effective collectors enhancing the flotation of low rank/oxidized coals is discussed and the development directions of effective collectors in the future are also recommended.As the demand for energy growth, coal plays an important role in energy supply and hence fine coals are urgently needed to be effectively recycled. Froth flotation is usually considered to be the most effectual method to upgrade the fine coal (< However, there are lots of low rank coals which are difficult to float with typical oily collectors in moderate additions In other words, low rank and oxidized coals are similar in the surface properties and the role of collectors in the flotation of low rank coal is also similar to that in the flotation of oxidized coal. This review is to highlight recent advances in the effective collectors for enhancing the flotation of low rank/oxidized coals. The mechanism of the effective collectors enhancing the flotation of low rank and oxidized coals will be also discussed. This review does not focus on the reverse flotation collectors of low rank/oxidized coals because an overview of reverse flotation process for coal has been published Low rank coals include peat, lignite and some sub-bituminous coals. All of these coals are characterized by low metamorphic degree. Coal is formed from plant materials after the long periods of compression and hardening. During the periods of the formation of coal, the oxygen content is reduced while the carbon content is increased. The carbon content/oxygen content ratio decreases with the increase of coal rank. The carbon content of anthracite coal reaches the highest value while the oxygen content is the lowest compared with other coals at different ranks, i.e. lignite, sub-bituminous coals and bituminous coals. The oxygen exists in the coal as the primary forms of oxygen-containing functional groups. Carboxyl, phenolic and carbonyl are the primary oxygen-containing functional groups in low rank coals. These oxygen-containing functional groups can be bonded with water molecules by hydrogen bonding, which reduces the hydrophobicity of low rank coal surface. Therefore, low rank coals are difficult to float with common oily collectors. The common oily collector cannot easily spread on the surface of low rank coals. According to this situation, the collectors containing the oxygenated functional groups have an important role on the flotation of low rank coals At the same time, the flotation of oxidized coal is a key issue. The two types of coal, i.e. bituminous and anthracite coals are usually easy to float with the common oil collectors due to their high natural hydrophobicities. However, they can be oxidized in the air. The oxidation reduces the hydrophobic sites on the coal surface. The oxidation reaction also results in the formation of oxygenated functional groups on the coal surface and hence the natural hydrophobicity of the coal will be reduced after the oxidation. The oxidation of the coal surface makes the coal difficult to float using common oily collectors The grinding pretreatment has been widely used in the recovery of the hydrophobicity of oxidized coal. The oxidized layer on coal surface can be removed and the fresh and hydrophobic surfaces are exposed. After the grinding or attrition pretreatments, the surface hydrophilicity of the oxidized coals is generally reduced In coal flotation industry, the common oily collectors are fuel oils, such as kerosene and diesel oil. In the experimental study, the common oily collectors are dodecane and hexadecane. The oily collectors primarily consist of carbon and hydrogen elements. In some cases, the common oily collectors are named as hydrocarbon oils. The carbon and hydrogen elements usually exist as the forms of In addition, the dosage of oily collectors is also very high in order to create a high reagent concentration for the effective spread or adsorption of the oily collectors on the coal surface. Especially for low rank and oxidized coals, the high reagent concentration is somewhat useful for obtaining the high flotation recovery Usually, the common oily collectors spread on the coal surface as the form of small oil drops. The oily collectors, such as kerosene and diesel oil are broken into amounts of small oil drops by the impeller or stirring devices. The diameter of small oil drops is usually several microns. The hydrophobicity of coal surface can be enhanced by the adsorption of the small oil drops on its surface. In recent years, the emulsion technology for the effective distribution of the oily collectors is widely applied in the conditioning and flotation processes. Benefiting from this emulsion technology, the collector dosage is decreased as well as the distribution condition is improved Shen et al. In another study, Laskowski and Yu Xie et al. Mixing the common oily collectors with the surfactants or other hydrocarbon oils to form an effective collector is useful for the enhancement in the flotation of low rank and oxidized coals. The usage of various surfactants could improve the dispersion and adsorption of oil collectors on the coal particles Wen and Sun Jena et al. Vamvuka and Agridiotis Xia et al. The surfactants are also used as pretreatment reagents for the flotation of low rank coal. Ni et al. Jia et al. Sis et al. Chaudhuri et al. Sonmez and Cebeci Vegetable oil has been found to be an effective collector for coal flotation. Alonso et al. Xia et al. The oxygen contained groups in the collectors are very important in the effective adsorption on the surface of low rank/oxidized coals. In other words, introducing the oxygen contained groups into the conventional oily collectors is considered as a feasible way to the enhancement in the flotation of low rank/oxidized coals. Even though the surfactants are good at improving the flotation of low rank coal and somewhat can be used as the collectors in low rank coal flotation. The oily collectors are still essential for coal flotation because the surfactants may be non-selective Recently, Xing et al. Gui et al. In the 21st century, biotechnology has been developed and applied in many industrial fields. The bio-separation processes of minerals have also been developed, such as bio-desulfurization of high sulfur coal, bio-flocculation and bio-flotation Recently, Ramos-Escobedo et al. As is known, low rank/oxidized coal surface has amounts of oxygen-containing functional groups which are the main negative factors reducing the surface hydrophobicity of coal surface. If the special bacteria can be bonded with these oxygen-containing functional groups on low rank coal surface, the improvements in the hydrophobicity of low rank/oxidized coal surface can be achieved. In addition, the special bacteria should have its selectivity of adsorption such as the bacteria have its hobby especially on the oxygen-containing functional groups (  The flotation of low rank/oxidized coals is a key issue in the coal preparation industry and energy supply. However, the surface hydrophobicity of low rank/oxidized coal is relatively low and hence they are difficult to float using both the common oily collectors and conventional flotation technologies. As the demand for energy supply increases, low rank/oxidized coals should be utilized. The emulsion of oily collectors by surfactants not only enhances the surface hydrophobicity of low rank/oxidized coals but also reduces the collector dosage required in coal flotation. The floatability of low rank/oxidized coals can be improved by both emulsified oily collectors and the addition of surfactants. The mixture of surfactants and oily collectors are economic and effective for the flotation of low rank/oxidized coals. Because low rank/oxidized coals have amounts of oxygen-containing functional groups, introducing both the oxygen-containing functional groups and aromatic hydrocarbons into the oily collectors becomes a good way to produce some effective collectors, such as oxidized diesel, α-furylacrylic acid and THF esters. These effective collectors can bond with low rank/oxidized coal surface through hydrogen bonding, π-bonding, and hydrophobic bonding. Converting vegetable oil/waste oil into biodiesel or other oily products as coal flotation collector is environmentally friendly and sustainable. The biodiesel contains both hydrocarbon oils and fatty oils. In addition, there are amounts of oxygen-containing functional groups in biodiesel which can be easier bonded with the oxygen-containing functional groups on coal surface. In addition, the creation of bio-collector, such as bacteria may be a new way to solve low rank/oxidized coals flotation in the future. This work was supported by the