In Part 1, a REFLUX™ Classifier, which consists of a lower fluidized bed system and upper system of parallel inclined channels, was operated in continuous mode and used to beneficiate a dense mineral ore covering a nominal particle size range up to 300 μm. The improvements in performance when the inclined channel spacing was reduced from 6 mm down to 3 mm were investigated and reported (Galvin et al., 2020). Here in Part 2, samples of the feed, product and reject streams from two of the Part 1 steady-state runs were subjected to water-based batch fractionation using a REFLUX™ Classifier with 1.77 mm inclined channel spacing. The algorithm proposed by Galvin et al. (2018) was then used to extract the partition curve from the batch fractionation data, and the results compared with the partition curve obtained using the conventional heavy-liquid sink-float method. The results confirmed that the D
                     50 values are accurately determined by the algorithm, regardless of the accuracy of the batch fractionation method. However, as expected, the algorithm under predicted the true Ep by an amount proportional to the accuracy of the batch fractionation method. A simple Ep correction was therefore applicable, making the water-based fractionation approach a viable method for determining partition curves. Comparison of the 3 mm and 6 mm performance confirmed that the variation in the separation density with particle size was higher when using the wider 6 mm channels. Moreover, with 6 mm channels the Ep varied with particle size to the power −1.02, causing a significant increase as the particle size decreased, whereas with 3 mm channels there was little variation in Ep over this size range. This led to a 20% lower composite Ep when using 3 mm channels.The REFLUX™ Classifier is a relatively new technology used for achieving gravity separation of fine particles. This technology consists of a lower fluidized bed section, and an upper section of parallel inclined channels. It is now widely used in the coal industry and there is growing interest in its application for beneficiation of denser minerals ( This technology can also be used in semi-batch mode as a density fractionation technique (e.g. Water-based density fractionation methods provide a potential solution to the problems associated with the sink-float method, namely the often hazardous nature of the dense liquids and also the lack of liquids with densities high enough to be relevant to the minerals industry (  Steady-state feed, product and reject samples were collected from two continuous beneficiation experiments performed in REFLUX™ Classifiers with 6 mm and 3 mm channel spacing operated at control density set points of 2400 and 2500 kg/m Each of the steady-state feed, underflow (product), and overflow (reject) samples from Runs 2 and 9 were then fractionated in a REFLUX™ Classifier operated under semi-batch conditions ( The fluid reporting to the overflow carried particles from the system. Particles were collected in filter bags at a fixed fluidization rate. The collection continued until the rate of particle elutriation became negligible. The elutriated solids were collected, and then the fluidization rate was increased, thus carrying a second increment of denser and/or larger particles to the overflow. In this study, typically five overflow increments referred to as Flow 1, Flow 2, …, and Flow 5, were collected. The material remaining inside the unit at the end of the run was discharged through the underflow valve and named as if it were an additional flow e.g. Flow 6 (this final fraction is often referred to as “Remains” in other publications). This set of typically six, or occasionally seven, unscreened flow fractions from each sample is referred to here as a “Single Fractionation” (SF). These flow fractions, once dried, were then sieved using a √2 series of seven screens (300, 212, 150, 106, 75, 53, and 38 μm) to produce up to eight size increments. This set of typically 48 flow by size sub-samples is here referred to as a “Double Fractionation” (DF). The full data set is presented in Appendix A. Photographs of the resulting flow by size increments from the Run 2 feed are shown in Water-based pycnometry was performed using a nominal 50 ml specific gravity bottle to measure the average density of the riffled sub-samples from each of the flow fraction/size increments of the feed, product and reject streams. A new interpolation and mass-balancing algorithm (referred to here simply as the “algorithm”) was then applied to these mass and density data to extract the density distributions of all three streams and the partition curve of the original steady-state separator. This algorithm is explained and evaluated in detail by The raw double fractionation (DF) data for the 150–212 μm size fraction from all three streams of Run 9 are shown in For low-density coal it is well established that REFLUX™ Classifiers operated at steady-state have a symmetrical partition curve with satisfactory closure at both ends (e.g. Note that in the actual numerical mass-balancing procedure, an alternative but mathematically equivalent form of Eq. Compared to Eq. When initial guess (subscript G) values of  As often happens with numerical search routines, variations in the initial starting conditions can result in different “best fit” solutions. Hence for each set of fractionation data, the algorithm was applied multiple times using different initial guesses. Taking the average of these then provides some robustness to the final answer. A total of 66 trials were conducted using six different equally spaced initial guesses for From the successful trials (ones that did converge), the average As alluded to above, high precision does not give any indication of how accurate the results are (i.e. how close the algorithm results are to the true partition values of the continuous separator from which the feed, product and reject samples were obtained). For Runs 2 and 9, the above analysis was applied to each of the six narrow size fractions between 38 and 300 μm in size. The composite 38–300 μm performance was also analysed in two different ways. To simulate a single fractionation (SF) where no screening was performed, the masses in each of these six size fractions in each flow were added together, and the average density of the combined total mass calculated (i.e. average density = Σmass/Σ(mass/density)) to give (usually) six pairs of mass and density data for each stream ( The interpolation and mass-balancing algorithm given in   Note that This section is focussed on the 38–300 μm composite fractionation data from Run 9, which involved the 3 mm inclined channel spacing. In this section, we examine progressively better fractionation data sets for determining the composite partition curve, commencing with the water-based single fractionation (SF), then water-based double fractionation (DF), and finally the sink-float data from  For Run 9 (3 mm channels), feed, product and reject 38–300 μm composite samples were also sent to an external laboratory for sink-float separation at densities of 3300, 3500, 3700, 4000, 4200 and 4400 kg/m Based on the float-sink data, if we now take the true composite The sink-float density fractions were also screened into narrow size fractions using 300, 212, 150, 106, 75, 53 and 38 μm screens. We shall refer to this as double fractionated sink-float data, analogous to double fractionated water-based fractionation data. However, there was insufficient mass in these sink-float samples to accurately measure the density of each individual size fraction using water pycnometry. So instead, The sink-float data in As expected based on the simulations of  This work has used real data to validate the interpolation and mass-balancing algorithm proposed by  The algorithm is more flexible than the standard mass-balancing approach because it can be applied to any fractionation data, without any need to have the same density intervals for all three streams. Whilst the sink-float method is the most accurate of the existing fractionation methods, the liquids used are often hazardous, the procedure is costly, and there are no suitable liquids for densities above roughly 4600 kg/m The Part 1 results ( This study has two main conclusions. Firstly, this work has helped to validate the interpolation and mass-balancing algorithm ( Secondly, this study has demonstrated the reason behind the improvement in separation performance when narrower 3 mm inclined channels are used in the REFLUX™ Classifier for the beneficiation of fine dense minerals. The variation in  The University of Newcastle holds international patents on the REFLUX™ Classifier and has a Research and Development Agreement with FLSmidth Pty Ltd. One of the authors, K. P. Galvin, is the inventor of the REFLUX™ Classifier and is a beneficiary of the University’s intellectual property policy. The authors gratefully acknowledge the support of the <ce:grant-sponsor xlink:type="simple" id="gp005">ARC</ce:grant-sponsor> funded Industrial Transformation Research Hub for Advanced Technologies for Australian Iron Ore, grant <ce:grant-number refid="gp005">IH130200031</ce:grant-number> including industry funding.  