Investigation and simulation of naturally occurring mineralization can offer some new ideas in the design and fabrication of new functional materials for bone analogues. In this paper, a model dual membrane diffusion system (DMDS) was used to study the mineralization behaviour of collagen. The process of mineralization was observed by atomic force microscope (AFM). The results showed that the surface roughness and hardness of mineralized collagen fibers increased with time during the process of mineralization. The adhesion force of mineralized collagen fibers decreased with mineralization time. The micromechanical properties and microstructure changes of mineralized collagen fibers suggested that the mineralization was a step-by-step assembling process.Mineralized collagen fibrils are the basis for various tissues such as bone In this present paper, atomic force microscope (AFM) was used for the first time to observe the process of collagen self-organization and the crystal growth of HA in the DMDS. It provided the first direct visual evidence of step-by-step process of biomineralization in vitro. AFM was also used to investigate microstructure and mechanical properties of mineralized collagen fibrils. It gave us better insight into understanding mechanisms of mineralization. A cation-selective and an anion-selective membrane, both with a pore size of 3 The self-organization of mineralized collagen was carried out in the DMDS at 37 During the collagen-mineralization, calcium and phosphate ions diffused into the center room between the membranes from mutually opposite sides, through the cation- and the anion-selective membranes, respectively. Hydroxide ions diffused into the center room and acted as an automatic pH controller to induce a successful mineralization. Several micas were immersed into the reaction solution to obtain mineralized collagen. The samples of mineralized collagen were taken out of the DMDS after different ionic diffusion times. The precipitates fixed on the micas were rinsed superficially with distilled water and air dried after removal of water. MColl-8 The process of collagen-mineralization was observed by an AFM (Autoprobe CP Research, Veeco, USA). An AFM (Autoprobe CP Research, Veeco, USA) was used in the tapping mode to obtain topographic images and the AFM-based force spectroscopy mode was used to perform force detection. Nitride silicon tips (UL20B, Park Scientiﬁc Instruments) were employed in all AFM measurements. The silicon nitride tips were irradiated with ultraviolet in air for 15 The imaging was repeated three times for each sample. The acquired images (256×256 pixels) were only processed with the instrument-equipped software (Image Processing Software Version 2.1, IP 2.1) to eliminate low-frequency background noise in the scanning direction or to level the images. The surface roughness value Ra was analyzed for each sample. This value defined the mean value of the surface roughness in the area being analyzed (1×1 The Youngs modulus of mineralized collagen fibers was evaluated based on a standard formula according to reported methods TEM examination was used to study crystal morphology within collagen fibers. The collagen monomer is about 300 There were many droplets of calcium phosphate solid-phase (demonstrated by black circle) surrounding the collagen fibers ( These loose assembled fibers mentioned above could be cross-linked by formation of intermolecular disulfide bonds upon oxidation. Hydrogen bonds also existed between fibers running closer to each other. Olszta reported that capillary action was responsible for deeper penetration of the biopolymer  The crystallographic structure of mineralized collagen (MColl-3d) was investigated by X-ray diffraction. Compared with the XRD pattern of pure hydroxyapatite published in the literature The instrument-equipped software (IP 2.1) was used to measure the surface roughness of collagen fibers.  The Youngs modulus of collagen, MColl-8 In this paper, AFM was used for the first time to observe the process of collagen-mineralization in the DMDS. Based on the results, we offer a hypothesis that collagen-mineralization was a step-by-step assembling process. In the first step, monomeric collagen converted into larger fibrils when the supersaturated condition was created in the DMDS. In the second step, these mineralized fibrils self assembled into loose-arrayed fibers. In the third stage, loose-arrayed fibers arranged closely with each other and further assembled into slenderer, but tighter ones. In the final step, the fibers became thicker and stiffer due to the further growth of an HA crystal within collagen fibrils. In a word, the mechanical properties and microstructure changes of mineralized collagen fibers verified that the collagen-mineralization was a step-by-step assembling process. High-resolution AFM topographs revealed microstructural details of mineralized collagen fibers. The micromechanical data of mineralized collagen fibers provided better insight into mechanism of collagen-mineralization. The investigation and simulation of naturally occurring mineralization can offer some new ideas in the design and fabrication of new functional materials, for applications such as bone analogues or for use as scaffolds in tissue engineering. This research project was supported by the