In this study, the effect of some common alumina refinery process gas species on the response of a surface acoustic wave (SAW) based elemental mercury (Hg0) vapor microsensor was investigated. The developed sensor was based on a SAW delay line, fabricated on a ST-cut quartz substrate with nickel (Ni) interdigitated transducer (IDT) electrodes and gold (Au) film sensitive layer. Ni was chosen as IDT material due to its immiscibility in mercury and thus allowing the sensor to operate for a longer time, as required by the industries. The sensor was exposed to mercury vapor concentrations between 24 and 365ppbv without/with the presence of ammonia, acetaldehyde, ethyl mercaptan, dimethyl disulphide, methyl ethyl ketone and humidity. The detection limit of the sensor toward Hg0 vapor was calculated to be 1.4ppbv and 4.0ppbv at operating temperatures of 35 and 75°C, respectively. The coefficient of variance of the sensor response magnitude was found to be within ±1.86 and ±5.73% at 75°C when exposed to repeated pulses of 365ppbv of Hg0 vapor without and with the presence of interfering gas species, respectively. This indicates high precision of sensor while measuring low concentrations of Hg0 vapor. Results showed that when any one of the interfering gas species was exposed along with Hg0 vapor, the response magnitude of the sensor deviated up- to 7% (93% selectivity) at an operating temperature of 75°C. Furthermore, the sensor showed a selectivity of 87% when Hg0 vapor was tested along with a mixture of all interfering gases. There was insignificant cross-sensitivity effect when the humidity content was increased within the range of 15,300 to 30,600ppmv (equivalent to 50 to 100% relative humidity at room temperature). The overall results indicate that the developed sensor is able to detect Hg0 vapor selectively even in simulated industrial conditions and can be a potentially cheaper and more reliable alternative to the current Hg0 monitoring methods used in alumina refineries.Mercury (Hg) is a well-known toxic element ( Acoustic wave based micro-sensors such as the quartz crystal microbalance (QCM) and surface acoustic wave (SAW) are considered as a potential solution for online monitoring of Hg In this study, we developed a SAW based sensor with Ni electrodes and Au sensitive layer for Hg Typically, a SAW based gas sensor operates by the means of generation and propagation of an acoustic wave through the surface of a piezoelectric material ( In the current study, a thin film of gold (50 In this equation, A standard SAW delay line device was employed to function as a Hg The developed SAW sensor was tested over 24 to 365 The oscillatory circuit was constructed by connecting a RF amplifier in the feedback path of the sensor. An Agilent 53131A frequency counter was used to continuously monitor the oscillation frequency. A total flow rate of 200 The developed SAW sensor was first tested toward 24 to 365 The effect of the operating temperature on the developed Au sensitive layer based SAW sensors response toward Hg To determine the relationship between the response magnitude of the sensor and the exposed Hg In this equation, The method of three standard deviations was applied to the noise profiles of SAW sensor to obtain the LoD of the sensor toward Hg To further understand the sorption and desorption behaviour of the developed SAW based Hg The coefficient of variance (CoV) of the sensor's response magnitudes for repeated pulses of the same concentration of Hg To study the cross-sensitivity effect of some interfering gas species that are commonly available in Alumina refinery stack effluents, the developed SAW based Hg The cross-sensitivity effect of Alumina industry related gas species (referred to as interfering gas species) on the sensor's response was further analyzed by calculating the selectivity (%). This calculation was done by using Eq. As shown in In a ‘real’ gas stream of alumina refinery, it is very common that several interfering gas species will be present together. It is therefore very important that the developed sensor is able to detect Hg To study the effect of Hg exposure on the surface morphology of Au surface, SEM characterization of clean and Hg-exposed Au film surface was performed. It can be observed from A gold sensitive layer based SAW sensor was developed for Hg Authors acknowledge RMIT University MicroNano Research Facility (MNRF) for allowing the use of cleanroom facilities to fabricate the sensor device. Authors also acknowledge the  Supplementary data to this article can be found online at