The extraction and stripping characteristics of CYANEX 301 binary extractant systems were investigated for the recovery of cobalt and nickel from chloride solutions. The selectivity of these systems against calcium, manganese and magnesium was also studied. These binary extractant systems consisted of mixtures of CYANEX 301 with basic extractants (Primene® JMT, Amberlite® LA-2, Alamine® 336 and Aliquat® 336). Based on criteria such as extraction and stripping characteristics (efficiency and rates) and selectivity against calcium, manganese and magnesium, screening experiments were performed to select the most appropriate binary extractant systems. From this screening work, the CYANEX 301–amine systems all demonstrated that cobalt and nickel could be selectively extracted from calcium, manganese and magnesium. A large synergistic effect on the stripping kinetics and efficiencies of cobalt and nickel was also observed when either amine was added to CYANEX 301. Depending on the amine concentration, near complete stripping of cobalt could be achieved with all systems, while the stripping of nickel still remained very low with the amines Primene JMT, Amberlite LA-2 and Alamine 336. Among the amine extractant systems, CYANEX 301–Aliquat 336 was shown to be the most promising binary extractant system. McCabe–Thiele extraction and stripping isotherms with this system were then constructed to determine the number of stages required. Complete extraction of cobalt and nickel could be achieved in 2–3 stages while still maintaining a high selectivity against calcium, manganese and magnesium. A decrease in cobalt stripping was observed when the hydrochloric acid concentration was increased from 2 to 4 M. The hydrochloric acid concentration had a reverse effect on nickel where nickel stripping was shown to increase with increase in acid concentration from 2 to 4 M.In a previous work ( It was the objective of this study to examine further the effect of adding a second extractant to CYANEX 301 in order to improve not only the stripping efficiency of cobalt and nickel but also their stripping kinetics. Unlike the previous work ( The solvent extraction reagents used in this study were primary amine (Primene JMT from Rohm and Haas), alkyl secondary amine (Amberlite LA-2 from Rohm and Haas), tri C8 and C10 alkyl tertiary amines (Alamine 336 from Cognis), tricaprylyl methyl ammonium chloride (Aliquat 336 from Henkel) and bis(2,4,4-trimethylpentyl)dithiophosphinic acid (CYANEX 301 from Cytec Canada). The diluent employed was Isopar M supplied by Exxon Mobil Chemicals. All inorganic salts were of analytical reagent grade. All extractants and diluent were used as received. The aqueous solution was prepared by dissolving the chloride salts of the metals in deionized water and contained approximately 0.08 g/L cobalt, 0.07 g/L calcium, 0.18 g/L manganese, 1.3 g/L nickel and 1.7 g/L magnesium. The organic solution contained either CYANEX 301 (10% v/v) in Isopar M or CYANEX 301 (10% v/v) combined with a second extractant in Isopar M. The additional extractants studied were the basic extractants Primene JMT, Amberlite LA-2, Alamine 336 and Aliquat 336 and their concentrations varied between 2%, 5% and 10% v/v. Distributions of cobalt, nickel, magnesium, calcium and manganese between organic and aqueous phases as a function of time were determined. Equal volumes (25 ml) of the two phases were transferred into conical flasks in a wrist action shaker at 50 °C. No initial pH adjustment was effected. Samples (i.e., each represented by one conical flask) were withdrawn from the water bath at different time intervals. The pH of the aqueous samples was measured using a Ross combination pH electrode. The pH meter was calibrated at room temperature with pH 1.00 (potassium chloride–hydrochloric acid buffer), 4.00 (potassium biphthalate buffer) and 7.00 (potassium phosphate monobasic–sodium hydroxide buffer) buffer solutions. For all experiments, the aqueous samples were analyzed by ICP. The metal concentration in the organic phase for each sample was deduced by subtracting the raffinate concentration from the initial metal concentration in the feed solution. The aqueous solution was prepared by dissolving the chloride salts of the metals in deionized water and contained approximately 0.08 g/L cobalt, 0.07 g/L calcium, 0.18 g/L manganese, 1.3 g/L nickel and 1.7 g/L magnesium. The organic solution contained 20% v/v CYANEX 301 in Isopar M. Initial metal loading of the organic phase was carried out by contacting both aqueous and organic phases at an A/O phase ratio of 2 and at room temperature for a contact time of 30 min. The two phases were mixed by rapid mechanical stirring. No initial pH adjustment was effected. After the loading, the organic solution was filtered through phase separating paper to remove any entrained water. The raffinate was analyzed by ICP. The metal concentration in the organic phase was deduced by subtracting the raffinate concentration from the initial metal concentration in the feed solution. After loading, the organic solution contained approximately 2.6 g/L nickel and 0.16 g/L cobalt. Co-extraction of calcium (2 ppm), manganese (4 ppm) and magnesium (<1 ppm) was negligible and their distribution data for the stripping experiments will be omitted. For the stripping kinetic studies, the loaded organic phase, as described above, was diluted to the appropriate factor to make up the different solutions. The organic solutions contained either CYANEX 301 (10% v/v) in Isopar M or CYANEX 301 (10% v/v) combined with a second extractant in Isopar M. The additional extractants studied were the basic extractants Primene JMT, Amberlite LA-2, Alamine 336 and Aliquat 336, and their concentrations varied between 2%, 5% and 10% v/v. All organic solutions contained approximately 0.08 g/L cobalt and 1.3 g/L nickel. The aqueous solution was 74 g/L hydrochloric acid. Distributions of cobalt and nickel between organic and aqueous phases as a function of time were determined. Equal volumes (25 ml) of the two phases were transferred into conical flasks in a wrist action shaker at 50 °C. Samples (i.e., each represented by one conical flask) were withdrawn from the water bath at different time intervals. For all experiments, the aqueous samples were analyzed by ICP. The metal concentration in the organic phase for each sample was deduced by subtracting the aqueous metal concentration from the initial metal concentration in the organic phase. The aqueous solution was prepared by dissolving the chloride salts of the metals in deionized water and contained approximately 0.45 g/L cobalt, 0.41 g/L calcium, 0.88 g/L manganese, 6.5 g/L nickel and 9.1 g/L magnesium. The organic solution contained 20% v/v CYANEX 301 and 10% v/v Aliquat 336 in Isopar M. Unlike in Equilibrium distributions of cobalt, nickel, magnesium, calcium and manganese between organic and aqueous phases were determined. The experiment was carried out in conical flasks in a wrist action shaker at 50 °C. No initial pH adjustment was effected. A contact time of 15 min was applied and the aqueous to organic phase ratio values (A/O) ranged from 0.1 to 10. The pH of the aqueous samples was measured using a Ross combination pH electrode. The pH meter was initially calibrated at room temperature with pH 1.00 (potassium chloride–hydrochloric acid buffer), 4.00 (potassium biphthalate buffer) and 7.00 (potassium phosphate monobasic–sodium hydroxide buffer) buffer solutions. For all experiments, the aqueous samples were analyzed by ICP. The metal concentration in the organic phase for each sample was deduced by subtracting the raffinate concentration from the initial metal concentration in the feed solution. The experimental procedure was identical to the one described in The organic solution (20% v/v CYANEX 301+10% v/v Aliquat 336 in Isopar M) was pretreated with water as described in For the stripping isotherm experiment, the organic solution containing the metals was as mentioned above and the aqueous solution was 74 g/L hydrochloric acid (2 M). Equilibrium distributions of cobalt and nickel between organic and aqueous phases were determined. The experiment was carried out in conical flasks in a wrist action shaker at 50 °C. A contact time of 15 min which was shown to be sufficient to reach equilibrium (i.e., referring to the stripping kinetic studies) was applied and the aqueous to organic phase ratio values (A/O) ranged from 0.1 to 10. The acidity of the produced strip solutions at equilibrium was not determined in the present study. For the stripping isotherm experiment, the aqueous samples were analyzed by ICP. The metal concentration in the organic phase for each sample was deduced by subtracting the aqueous metal concentration from the initial metal concentration in the organic phase. The experimental conditions were as described in The extraction of cobalt and nickel at 50 °C with the binary extractant systems of CYANEX 301 as a function of time is shown in The stripping of cobalt and nickel at 50 °C with the binary extractant systems of CYANEX 301 as a function of time is shown in From With the CYANEX 301/Primene JMT systems ( With the CYANEX 301/Amberlite LA-2 systems ( With the CYANEX 301/Alamine 336 systems ( With the CYANEX 301/Aliquat 336 systems ( The extraction isotherms for cobalt and nickel from chloride medium at 50 °C with the system 20% v/v CYANEX 301+10% v/v Aliquat 336 are shown in A water treatment of the organic phase prior to the extraction was therefore undertaken to remove any hydrochloric acid that may be present in the organic phase. The extraction isotherms for cobalt and nickel were reconstructed and are shown in The stripping isotherms for cobalt and nickel from chloride medium at 50 °C with the “washed” 20% v/v CYANEX 301+10% v/v Aliquat 336 and 74 g/L hydrochloric acid (2 M) are shown in The stripping behaviour of cobalt and nickel from the same organic phase was further studied by increasing the hydrochloric acid concentration to 4 M. These results are shown in In comparison to CYANEX 301, a large synergistic effect on metal stripping was observed with the binary systems CYANEX 301/Amine. More particularly, CYANEX 301-Aliquat 336 demonstrated that cobalt and nickel could be much more easily stripped with 2 M hydrochloric acid as compared to CYANEX 301 alone, while still exhibiting quantitative cobalt and nickel extraction and also high selectivity against calcium, manganese and magnesium. However, cobalt stripping was shown to be dependent on the hydrochloric acid concentration with a decrease in cobalt stripping observed when the hydrochloric acid concentration was increased from 2 to 4 M.