The sorptive removal of arsenic from water by synthetically-prepared magnetic Fe-hydrotalcite (M-FeHT) seeding by nano magnetite was investigated. The synthesis of M-FeHT was achieved by a co-precipitation method. M-FeHT was characterized using X-ray diffraction (XRD), transmission electron microscopy (TEM), and magnetic susceptibility analysis. Batch tests were conducted to investigate the removal mechanism of As(III) and As(V) by M-FeHT. Kinetic studies revealed that uptake of As(V) (95% removal) and As(III) ions occurs rapidly within the first 15min, and slows thereafter. The adsorption data follow a pseudo-second-order kinetic model and fit the Langmuir isotherm well. The experimental results show that stable arsenic removal efficiency, and the capability to reduce As levels, make M-FeHT a suitable adsorbent for the treatment of As-polluted waters. After adsorption, tests were conducted with magnetic separation to determine the separability of M-FeHT from solution. At magnetic field intensity of 2T, the efficiency of M-FeHT separation was 91%. Finally, after adsorption by M-FeHT, residual arsenic concentration decreased to less than 10μg/L (i.e., below the threshold specified by the WHO). Fe-hydrotalcite-supported magnetite nanoparticles were not only more efficient in the removal of As but also in recovery by the magnetic separator.Arsenic is toxic and carcinogenic, and is therefore of interest in processes related to water decontamination In recent years, magnetic nanoparticles have attracted increasing research attention in the field of environmental remediation The advantages of the magnetic properties of nano magnetite and selectivity of Fe-hydrotalcite were determined in previous studies Fe-hydrotalcite-supported nano magnetite (M-FeHT) was synthesized by the co-precipitation method. Firstly, aqueous solutions were prepared by mixing NaOH (32 The obtained materials were dried in an oven at 373 The magnetization properties were measured using Cryogenic Q-3398 vibrating sample magnetometer (VSM) made by the Quantum Design PPMS system for the respective constant temperatures such as 300 Magnetic susceptibility was measured with a Bartington MS2B system, a portable laboratory sensor that can make measurements at two different frequencies. Measurements of frequency-dependent susceptibility involve making two readings in magnetic fields created at two different frequencies (0.46 and 4.6 Magnetic separations were performed with a model L-1CN Frantz Canister Separator. High gradient magnetic field column which had a plastic rod column (4 In experimental studies, 0.5 Adsorption isotherms and kinetics were obtained by the batch equilibration technique. Langmuir and Freundlich isotherms were used to fit the adsorption data from equilibrium experiments. Equilibrium As concentrations (Ce, μg/L) were fitted with Langmuir Adsorption kinetics was used to explain the adsorption mechanism and adsorption characteristics of M-FeHT. The pseudo-first-order linear kinetic rate Eq. here  In a previous study, the BET specific surface areas of FeHT (Fe-hydrotalcite) and Nanomagnetite (NM) were 1.5 In order to obtain more direct information on particle size and morphology (to better understand the nucleation), a TEM image was produced of M-FeHT particles. Magnetic nanoparticles with an approximate spherical shape and an average diameter of 50 The room temperature magnetic hysteresis loops of the FeHT, NM and M-FeHT are shown in Magnetic susceptibility measures the ‘magnetisability’ of a material. The influence of pH on arsenic adsorption on M-FeHT was studied at an initial value of 3, 5, 7, 9 and 12. The results also showed that the amount of adsorption of As(III) and As(V) by M-FeHT was only weakly dependent on initial pH. The maximum adsorption of arsenic on M-FeHT was observed around pH 9.0. The experimental results are shown in The adsorption isotherm models were used to analyze adsorption data. The adsorption isotherm for As(V) and As(III) uptake by M-FeHT is shown in Agitation time was one of the most important factors affecting adsorption efficiency. The removal of As(III) and As(V) increases with time, and attains equilibrium in 15 Adsorption kinetics was used to explain the adsorption mechanism and adsorption characteristics of M-FeHT. The time-dependence of arsenic adsorption at pH 9 (shown in Figs. The estimated kinetic models, related parameters, and linear regression coefficient ( After adsorption, magnetic separation tests were carried out to determine the separability of Fe-hydrotalcite-supported magnetite nanoparticles from the solution. In addition to M-FeHT, FeHT and NM were also investigated. As shown in Fe-hydrotalcite-supported magnetite (M-FeHT) nanoparticles were synthesized by a co-precipitation method to remove As ions in water. M-FeHT can be removed from the medium by a simple magnetic process, due to its strong paramagnetic properties. Following adsorption, magnetic separation tests were carried out to determine the separability of M-FeHT from solution. At a magnetic field intensity of 2 The kinetic studies show that high efficiency for arsenic adsorption can be achieved for short durations. For example, approximately 95% removal of As(V) and As(III) was achieved within the first 15 Finally, after adsorption using by M-FeHT, residual arsenic concentration was less than 10 The authors would like to thank