The rare earths in phosphate ores are not effectively utilized and they cannot be directly extracted from leach liquor with the traditional extractants, such as organic phosphoric acid. This paper presents a new solvent extraction method for rare earths from nitric acid leaching of phosphate rock using N,N,N′,N′-tetraoctyl diglycol amide (TODGA) without interfering with the normal route for fertilizer production. When the concentration of extractant increased to 0.1 mol/L, the extraction rate of lanthanum, cerium, praseodymium, and neodymium have been found to be 98.1%, 99.1%, 98.8% and 98.6%, respectively. The recovery rate reached to 99.9% when a three-stage countercurrent extraction was carried out on the simulated leach solution. There was almost no extraction of other impurity ions and the rare earths could be separated with TODGA from Ca2+, PO4
                     3−, Fe3+, and Mg2+. The presence of phosphoric acid in solution enhanced the extraction of rare earth ions. The stripping of the loaded rare earth in the organic phase was readily carried out with water under room temperature with high efficiency. The mixed rare earth oxides (REO) with an assay of >95% could be recovered as a final product.The rare earth elements (REEs) are the fifteen lanthanides in the periodic table along with scandium and yttrium. They have become a significant topic of interest in the metals industry due to a global supply shortage and increasing demand ( Many research efforts have been dedicated to developing more efficient methods of recovering REEs ( A number of extractants have been used for the recovery and separation of REEs from leach liquors. Several neutral extractants have shown good extraction properties of rare earths. Tributyl phosphate (TBP) was used to extract rare earths from an aqueous solution produced by nitric acid leaching of phosphate ore concentrate, and about 95%, 90%, 87% and 80% of neodymium, cerium, lanthanum, and yttrium, respectively, could be extracted in optimum conditions ( Certain organic acid extractants have also shown good extraction properties of rare earths. The recovery of Dy with 97% purity and Tb with 83% purity from rare earth chloride solution of monazite mineral using PC 88A has been reported ( We have extended our work to the extraction of REEs from the phosphate ore leaching liquor with TODGA as the extractant. The new process is proposed to recover rare earths from phosphate ore without interfering with the production of phosphoric acid, because almost no phosphoric acid is extracted. TODGA has been synthesized and applied in REEs separation in our laboratory owing to the high extractability, good stability and interfacial property of the TODGA-REE complex. TODGA has shown lower water-solubility compared to other extractants ( The extractant TODGA with high purity (>96%) was prepared in our lab according to the established procedure ( Different REE oxides with purities >99.5% were dissolved in dilute nitric acid and mixed to prepare the simulated REEs feed solution. Prior to the extraction experiments, the hydrogen ion concentration of the liquor was adjusted using analytical grade nitric acid and phosphoric acid. According to the composition of phosphate rock acid leach solution ( The organic phase composed of TODGA and 1-octane, and aqueous phases were mixed in oscillating tubes and shaken for 30 min. The mixtures were then transferred to a centrifuge for two-phase separation, then the aqueous phase was used for the analysis. The effects of rare earth ion concentration, pH of the aqueous phase, contact time, temperature, and concentration of extractant in the organic phase were investigated. All the elements in the aqueous phase, were analyzed by inductively-coupled plasma atomic emission spectrometry (ICP–AES) and UV/Vis spectrophotometry. The back extraction of the rare earth metal ions was carried out with deionized water. The stripping solution was subjected to precipitation of rare earths with H The concentration of rare earth metal ions in the organic phase after the extraction experiments was calculated using a mass balance equation. The distribution ratio (D) and extraction rate (E%) were calculated from the equation given below: The effects of acidity of HNO The experimental results obtained were used to compare the acidity effects of the pure nitric acid system, pure phosphoric acid system, and mixed nitric acid/phosphoric acid extraction system. TODGA showed almost no extraction of rare earth elements in the presence of pure phosphoric acid. The extraction efficiency in the mixed acid system was better than that of the pure nitric acid system ( (a) lanthanum (b) cerium (c) praseodymium (d) neodymium. When keeping the concentration of H Fast extraction kinetics is beneficial for industrial process. To study the effect of extraction time, the extraction of REEs was performed by shaking the two phases for different duration ranging from 5 to 60 min. The other parameters are: TODGA: 0.02 mol/L, HNO TODGA concentration: 0.02 mol/L, temperature: 25 °C, phase ratio: 1:1. The effect of temperatures was studied on the TODGA extraction efficiency at 15, 25, 35, 45, and 55 °C while keeping all other experimental conditions constant. TODGA concentration of 0.02 mol/L, HNO TODGA 0.02 mol/L, phase ratio 1:1, and contact time 30 min. In order to understand the extraction mechanism, it is helpful to obtain the thermodynamic parameters of the extraction because entropy and enthalpy changes could significantly affect the extent of the metal ion extraction equilibrium. The values of enthalpy change ( By keeping [TODGA] and Y From The gibbs free energy change and entropy change were calculated by the following equations: The thermodynamic function values of extracting La, Ce, Pr, Nd were calculated with Eqs. The volume ratio of the two phases plays an important role in the extraction process. The ratio of organic to aqueous phase (V The rare earths were extracted by varying the concentration of TODGA from 0.02 to 0.1 mol/L dissolved in 1-octane. The extraction experiments were conducted using 5 mL of the pregnant liquor and 5 mL of the organic phase at a temperature of 25 °C, a contact time of 30 min, and concentrations of phosphoric acid and nitric acid in the aqueous solution were 1.0 and 3.0 mol/L, respectively. Contact time 30 min, temperature 25 °C, phase ratio 1:1. In this experiment, the effect of the cerium concentration on extraction efficiency of TODGA with the increase in HNO Usually, the rare earth ions were stripped by mixing the solutions with aqueous mineral acids (typically, hydrochloric acid or nitric acid), which lead to the production of additional wastewater. In this research, deionized water was first tested to strip REE The organic phase, after extraction, was stripped with water and the phosphorus molybdenum blue method was used to detect if phosphorus was present. The test was done by taking 2–3 mL of the stripped aqueous liquid in a small beaker, adding 3–5 drops of 6 mol/L nitric acid, after shaking 1 mL of ammonium molybdate was added. A clear colorless solution indicated that there was no phosphoric acid in the organic phase. These results indicated that the TODGA extraction can achieve complete separation between the rare earth elements and phosphoric acid. The extraction of the coexisting ions, such as Ca To obtain the oxides of the lanthanides, 5% H According to the IR spectra of the ligand and the complexes ( A structural model was proposed for the TODGA-rare earth metal complex as shown below. In this proposed mechanism, each TODGA ligand with its O Based on the studies above, In this work, we investigated a novel method to separate rare earths from phosphorus ore nitric acid leach liquid with a recently developed extractant TODGA. The influences of phase ratio, acidity, extractant concentration and contact time on extraction efficiency were investigated. TODGA showed high extractability for rare earths from simulated leach solutions. The extraction efficiency increased with the concentration of HNO The distribution ratios of rare earths from nitric acid or mixed acid system of nitric acid and phosphoric acid increase with increasing atomic number, so heavy rare earth can also use this extractant to extract and separate from phosphoric ore leaching solution. The deionized water was selected to strip RE This study was supported by