High stresses lead to comminutions of curd during pumping of curd-whey mixtures. There are three factors that could have an effect on this comminution, which were tested in this study. Two different types of curd were produced and tested, and each had different dimensions and textural properties. The effects of volume flows were tested in accordance with the volume flows used in the cheese industry (3.2–4.7m3 h−1). Two types of pumps – a rotary lobe pump and a centrifugal pump with a vortex-type impeller – are tested. The particle size distribution of the curd, the characteristic parameters of the distribution and the concentration of curd fines were measured and calculated to evaluate the pumping process.
                  With an increasing volume flow and, in particular, the pumping of larger, semi-hard curd, the median of the particle size distribution is reduced by 0.61 mm. The comminution of small, hard curd was low (<0.20 mm) and independent of the tested volume flows. No differences between pumps regarding all of the measured parameters were observed. Due to the small amount of curd fines uprising during pumping (<0.28 g l−1), no factor shows a significant influence on the evaluated parameters.adjusted average mean cumulative masses, F(x), of particles > 3.15 mm for HS and F(x) of particles > 5.6 mm of SL curd-whey mixture degrees of freedom hard and elastic curd with the desired small particle size of 3.0 mm number not significant particle size distribution pump standard deviation semi-hard, more fragile curd with the desired large particle size of 6.0 mm volume flow wet sieving method Dairy products, particularly cheese, constitute an important food group and are staples in Germany. To produce the demanded amounts of cheese, production methods have changed from traditional artisanal processes to the use of large-scale production plants with specified standard operating procedures. Curd is an important intermediate in the process of manufacturing cheese. A curd and whey suspension is obtained following steps such as milk selection, heat treatment, standardisation of the fat content, the addition of a starter culture and ripening, renneting and coagulation as well as cutting and syneresis ( Curd properties such as acidity and water content are essential for the production of different types of cheese ( In addition to the dimensions of the curd, the texture is a quality indicator that is controlled by cheese makers during the syneresis process. The texture is related to both the dimensions and the water content and is specific to the type of cheese. The dimensions and texture of the curd can be controlled by the intensity of cutting (speed, duration, cutting knives) and the settings during the syneresis process (speed of the stirrer, temperature, time) ( Small curd particles are referred to as curd fines and are mainly lost during whey draining ( After syneresis, the curd must be separated from the whey through drainage. In commercial cheese manufacturing plants, the curd of soft cheeses is directly deposited in a perforated mould, while the curd of hard and semi-hard cheeses is pumped into perforated screens, batch pre-press vats or semi-continuous pre-pressing moulding systems. ( In general, every pumping process generates shear, compression and centrifugal forces ( The objective of this study is to compare the influence of two different types of pumps – a traditionally used rotary lobe pump and a specially designed centrifugal pump - on the degree of comminution of curd during pumping of a CWM. Additionally, the influence of the volume flow and the type of curd on the degree of comminution is tested. For the pumping experiment, two different types of curd were produced: a hard and elastic curd with the desired small particle size of 3.0 mm (HS) and a semi-hard, more fragile curd with the desired large particle size of 6.0 mm (SL). In this study, the curds were produced manually with a modified process in relation to The density differences between the curd and whey were measured with a pycnometer and were found to be negligible (1.02 ± 0.02 kg l  In this study, two different types of pumps were compared: 1) a rotary lobe pump with biwings (NOVAlobe 30/033 (Hilge GmbH & Co. KG)); and 2) a centrifugal pump with a vortex-type impeller (Euro-Hygia I Adapta-Super (Hilge GmbH & Co. KG)). The two pumps have different delivery principles ( Mechanical properties of the curds, such as the breaking strength and breaking strain before pumping, were evaluated using a TA.XT2 texture analyser (Stable Micro Systems LTD). Sample preparation was conducted in a water bath and a 1.0 l beaker, similar to the production of the curds as described in 2.1.1. Curds of both types were cut with a cork borer. The samples produced were cylindrical, with a diameter of 11.5 mm and a height of 15.0 mm. At 22.0 ± 2.0 °C, the samples were compressed to 6.0 mm by a cylindrical plate (100 mm) at a cross-head speed of 3.0 mm s The comminution of the curd during pumping was assessed by evaluating the particle size distribution (PSD) using a modified wet sieving method (WSM) compared with In contrast to the method of The mesh sizes of the sieves were chosen to fulfil the demands of Finally, the drying process was modified in relation to the WSM of In particle size analyses, it is a common practice to fit the measured PSD to a 2-parameter statistical model ( The method of Three factors (volume flow, type of curd, type of pump), with two settings each, were taken into account in the experimental design. Regarding the volume flow, the two types of pumps could be compared in the range of 3.2 The differences in the average values for the curd fines and the parameters of the PSD prior to, versus after, the pumping process were used as response for the evaluation of the pumping trials. Determination of the concentration of curd fines was conducted in triplicate for each vessel, and the measurement of PSD was conducted in duplicate for each vessel.  In contrast to the uniaxial compression test, the results of penetrometer tests performed on rennet casein curds by The cumulative mass distributions of the obtained curds are shown separately in The particle sizes determined prior to the pumping process ( Moreover, there was great variation between the single curves in Generally, gentle product handling during pumping is achieved if the curd is not comminuted; i.e., it shows the same characteristics in terms of the PSD and characteristic parameters before and after the pumping process. Thus, the influence of the tested factors on the pumping process was evaluated on the basis of the differences between the parameters prior to, and after, pumping shown in A more detailed analysis of the comminution of the curd was performed by analysing the influence of the factors related to the pumping experiment, such as the volume flow, type of curd and type of pump. No transformation of the differences in the parameters prior to and after the pumping process was performed because all were normally distributed (Shapiro–Wilk test, α = 0.05, R 3.1.0). As shown in The volume flow and type of curd had a significant influence on the difference in the parameters prior to, versus after, pumping (cp. The interaction plot shown in An increasing volume flow led to great comminution of SL (ΔQ2 = 0.61 mm at 4.7 m These results can be explained by the fact that SL was more fragile in comparison to HS ( Neither parameter k nor the difference between Q3–Q2 showed a significant difference prior to, versus after, pumping (paired two-sample t-test; α = 0.05; IBM SPSS Statistics 20). This means that the shape of the PSD represented by k for Weibull distributed data remains constant during pumping. Furthermore, the comminution of mainly larger particles was characterised by a smaller difference between Q3–Q2 prior to and after pumping. Hence, these findings further support the idea that comminution occurs at all particle sizes. To evaluate the examined methods, the reproducibility values presented in The results of curd analysis prior to and after pumping, as well as the difference between them, is shown for all 13 trials in The concentrations of curd fines prior to the pumping process were widely dispersed (MA 0.38 g l In this study, the production process resulted in intermediate concentrations of curd fines in relation to industrial values. A higher concentration of curd fines (0.522–2.292 g l Comparisons with the data reported by Generally, the concentrations of curd fines generated by pumping (AM 0.11 g l Before analysing the influence of the factors related to the pumping experiment, such as the volume flow, type of curd and type of pump, logarithmical transformation of the “difference” values shown in This study evaluated the impact of two different pumping principles on the quality of curd whey mixture of different properties. Contrary to expectations, the results demonstrated that the two tested pumps were equal regarding the gentle handling of a curd-whey mixture during pumping. Hence, a centrifugal pump can be substituted for a rotary lobe pump to convey curd-whey mixtures. By replacing the expensive rotary lobe pump with a cheap centrifugal pump, the cheese industry can benefit financially. Furthermore, an increasing volume flow was critical for the quality of semi-hard, more fragile curd with a particle size of 6.0 mm. Therefore, low volume flows should be preferred for pumping this type of curd. The volume flow had no influence on the comminution of the curd within the tested range (3.2 Further work must be performed to confirm these screening results and to extend the range of tested settings (types of curd, volume flows). Additionally, future trials require improvement of the analysis method for curd fines. It would also be useful to separately assess the effects of the texture and dimensions of the curd on comminution during pumping. Moreover, evaluation of textural data for both different types of acid and enzymatically precipitated curds would be of interest. The authors would like to thank Leo Bernard, Torben Jacobsen and Frank Euring for their assistance in the pumping trials.