Following on from the success of The conference was divided into two, 2-day symposia – the first on ‘Flotation Fundamentals’ and the second on ‘Applications and Plant Practice’. MEI Conferences are characterised by attendance of a range of delegates, practitioners and researchers, from across the world, and attending with different agendas. This was no exception with plenty of sharing and debating from various perspectives. As expected, best value was obtained by those who attended both symposia, as discussion certainly built up through the week, drawing on aspects from various previous presentations and discussions. Between the discussions during coffee and lunch breaks, and the technical sessions, the purpose of the conference was fulfilled in providing a forum for new insights and contacts with the flotation industry for all those who attended. A new innovation was the introduction of keynote presentations at commencement of both symposia, Professor Cyril O’ Connor of The University of Cape Town opened the first. Cyril’s keynote highlighted the complexity of flotation showing that the chemical reactions are still not fully understood, and are influenced by many factors. Prof. Graeme Jameson of the University of Newcastle, Australia opened the second. Graeme’s keynote lecture highlighted recent advances in flotation technology, with a focus on scalping or flash flotation, improving the flotation rate of ultrafines, extending the upper limit for coarse particle flotation, and reducing the energy consumed in the flotation process. The conference was attended by 193 delegates, and, with a record number of 13 exhibitors and 12 sponsors the Vineyard was full to capacity. There were 78 oral presentations and 20 poster presentations. The standard of authorship and presentation did justice to an important era of change and development in flotation, and was well-balanced between academic fundamentals and industrial practice. The authors thank the sponsors of the conference for their support and the authors for their valuable contributions, and our many reviewers, who have assisted us in the post conference editing process – now resulting in this special issue of