I have read the article title “Interlocking nailing of femoral shaft fractures with an extremely narrow medullary canal is associated with iatrogenic fractures” by K.L. Hsu, F.C. Kuan and W.L. Chang et al. A total of 29 iatrogenic fracture were noted in the study. Fracture site extension was noted in 9 patients in narrow canal and 14 patients in normal canal. although comparison was statistically insignificant, authors do not mentioned in the study when these fracture had occurred means while reaming or on passing nail or after complete insertion of the nail. It is known that large diameter reamer, over reaming or large diameter nail can lead to iatrogenic fracture or fracture comminution even in normal canal femur. Iatrogenic fracture over proximal femur were noted in 6 patients only, 4 in the narrow canal group and 2 in the normal canal group. Comparison is statistically significant but data is too small to conclude that narrow canal nailing is associated with iatrogenic proximal femur fractures. In 5 patients femoral neck fractures were noted after the interlocking nail insertion. it is possible that those femoral neck fracture were actually missed occult fracture which were evident after passing nail. In one patient intertrochanteric fracture was noted and by looking at its shared image, its seems more like it resulted from proximal locking screw rather than nailing. The mean age of patients in the study (±standard deviation) was 32.5±18.6 years which mean patients as young as 13.9 years underwent interlocking nail for femoral shaft fracture. In adolescence patient femoral canal tend to be narrow. Authors do not mentioned how many were adolescent patient in the study and how many had iatrogenic fracture. Study found out that narrow femoral canal were significantly correlated with female but do not discuss about the sex distribution of complications associated with Interlocking nailing in smaller femoral canal. Stratification could have actual picture. No conflict of interest of any kind. I acknowledge that no funding of any kind was received for writing this letter to Editor.