Comminution and attrition are processes in which particles become broken or damaged. It occurs when a load higher than the particle strength is statically or dynamically applied. Breakage could also occur with lower loads that are applied repeatedly, a phenomenon that is known as fatigue. Fatigue is the real cause for the breakage of particles in many industrial systems such as grinding or transporting in pneumatic conveying pipelines. In this paper, experimental results of the fatigue behavior of an assembly of particles of several materials are analyzed. Fatigue curves of constant damage are presented for compression stress with the number of cycles.Attrition includes all types of damage to particles in granular material during handling, conveying, and storing. It is not restricted to any particular type of process. The effects of attrition, fragmentation, degradation or any other damage can be loss of product through increasing the amount of undersized particles, the necessity of additional reprocessing and filtering, loss of flowability, environmental pollution due to a large quantity of dust, and greater tendency for cacking during storage and shipment. Wearing, fracturing and chipping initiated by impact, compression, frictional or shear forces can occur immediately if the applied stress overcomes the material's resistance to these modes of failure, or it can occur after repeated loading below the critical stress level, a process known as fatigue Two approaches are commonly used to characterize attrition in bulk solids handling systems. The first approach is a comparison between different types of materials by measuring different definitions of friability in a variety of so-called “standard systems”. The second approach is by conducting simulation experiments with the system in question or a similar one. Many different types of tests for assessing the attrition tendency of particulate materials have been described by the British Materials Handling Board Because attrition is actually a failure of the particles to withstand the applied loads (in this sense comminution and attrition are distinguished only by the user application and demonstrate the same physical phenomena), an analogy to the common failure design observed in metal parts is obvious, at least qualitatively This paper concentrates on the right-hand side of the design equation to enable pure fatigue strength characterization without any linkage to the system in which the particles will perform. A new test method that allows characterizing granules with their attrition resistance, fatigue lifetime and breaking mechanism under impact loads was presented recently by Beekman et al. A sample of the tested material was compressed in a cylindrical die under repeated compression forces. The rate and maximum value of the compressed force are adjustable and the number of cycles is preset for every test. The test rig (schematically described in The attrition criteria was defined in this study as the weight ratio that passed through a sieve size that defines the lower limit of the initial particles. Since this study consider only particles at a narrow size range, this definition was found to be sufficient. Obviously, for particles that have initially a wider size distribution, another definition should be used. In any case, sieving was conducted for only 5 min using only horizontal shaking in order to minimize the attrition that could be caused during the sieving process. A typical stress and displacement curve as a function of time is shown in Since the bed height was changed during the compression cycles, first significantly and than slightly, the bulk density was increased and the voidage was consequently decreased. However, in order to start each experiment from the same condition, as much as possible, the bed was vibrated to reach the tapped bulk density. The breakage percentage was measured using three dies of diameters sized 25, 45 and 60 mm (where the smaller one have a ratio of matrix to particle diameters greater than 8). The maximum compression stress is kept constant on 1.27 MPa for the three dies and the height of the samples is kept constant at 17.7 mm. The tested material was a sharp cut of spherical particles ranging in size from 2.38 to 3.33 mm. The results show The influence of the bed height on the breakage behavior was tested under two different compression stresses (1.27 and 2.54 MPa) at 500 cycles for the GSSP granules in a 25-mm die diameter as presented in For simplification of measurement, materials initially having monosize particles were tested. The samples were prepared by sieving a gross of raw material between two successive mesh sieves. In this way, defining the damage caused to particles is quite easy. The undersize percentage is measured by sieving the sample after loading with the lower sieve. We performed this test on three types of materials: one that was hard and brittle, a second that was high-strength granulated and last a material that was soft and ductile. The fatigue behavior of potassium sulfate (PS), which is a brittle material, is shown in The percentage of undersized particles, as shown in It should be emphasized that during the test Another type of material we tested is the GSSP granule. These granules have a very porosive and multi-grained structure. The particles used for these tests are spherical and are used for slow-release of fertilizer that granulated with steam. The granules tend to be hard and brittle under compression. Unlike potassium sulfate, this material is highly impure. The results of the cyclic compression tests are shown in A comparison of A figure similar to that which was plotted for potassium sulfate and GSSP For engineering applications, a fatigue curve could be useful   For the GSSP granules, an additional parametric analysis was carried out. As can be seen in Stabilization of the breakage is influenced by an increase in the number of contact points that support the undamaged particles. This increase causes the stresses in a single particle to be distributed more homogeneously. To evaluate this process, several tests were carried out with GSSP granules. The entire experiment was conducted similarly to the former tests except that the experiment was stopped after every 25 or 50 cycles and the sample was sieved. The undersize material was removed and the remaining material was fed again to the die to proceed with the experiment. From the results shown in In this paper, we demonstrated and analyzed the fatigue characteristics of particulate assemblies. The experimental rig introduced here enables the performance of fatigue tests for many loading cycles. By testing three different materials, we demonstrated that the effect of the loading cycles and fatigue are undoubtedly proved to contribute to the damage process of particles that can be applicable for engineering design of comminution and attrition. The fatigue curves used in this paper for three different materials seems to be an effective tool for characterizing materials and can facilitate appropriate engineering designs. In some cases, as for soft materials, such tests could provide the agglomeration rate as well. However, the borderline between the agglomeration and size reduction zones is also significant for characterizing the fatigue behavior of a material. The last figure emphasizes the significance of classification in size reduction systems. The broken fragments reduce the attrition rate of the remainder material. In order to increase the size reduction rate, the fragments have to be removed continuously. This research was supported in part by THE ISRAEL SCIENCE FOUNDATION founded by the Israel Academy of Sciences and Humanities.