The strain hardening is an effective mode of enhancing mechanical properties in alloys. In this work, the strain hardening behaviors of Mg-xY (x = 1, 2, and 3 wt%) after extrusion process was investigated using uniaxial tensile tests. Results suggest that the Mg–xY alloys are composed of α-Mg with a little amount of Mg24Y5 phase. The average grain size reduces from 19.8 µm to 12.2 µm as the Y content adds from 1 wt% to 2 wt%. Nevertheless, when Y content reaches 3 wt%, the grain size reaches to 12.9 µm, which is close to that of Mg–2Y. The strain hardening rate decreases from 883 MPa to 798 MPa at (σ–σ0.2
                     ) = 40 MPa, and Mg–2Y and Mg–3Y have the similar strain hardening response. Moreover, Mg–1Y shows an obvious ascending stage after the steep decreasing stage, which is mainly caused by the activation of twinning. The strain hardening behavior of Mg–xY is explained based on understanding the roles of the deformation mechanisms via deformation microstructure analysis and Visco-Plastic Self Consistent (VPSC) model. The variation of strain hardening characteristics with increasing Y content is related to the effects of grain size and texture.Although magnesium is the lightest metallic structural metal, applications of Mg alloys have been strongly limited by the insufficient strength, ductility and formability Stain hardening theory indicates that an effective approach to enhance the strength of Mg alloys Y is an important alloying element in Mg alloys. The addition of Y to Mg alloys has been used to improve their mechanical properties and to produce materials applied to defense industry, vehicle transport, aerospace and 3C products This work investigated the effect of Y concentration on the strain hardening behavior of Mg– Sheltered by a mixed protecting gas, Mg (99.95 wt%) and a Mg–Y master alloy (30 wt%) was melting in an electric resistance furnace and then cast into a preheated cylindrical mold. These prepared binary alloys contained Y element with 1, 2, and 3 wt.% and were designated as Mg–1Y, Mg–2Y and Mg–3Y. The homogenizing treatment of 80 mm diameter ingots was operated at 520 °C for 20 h. Then extrusion process applying a XJ-500 Horizontal Extrusion Machine extruded the ingots into 16 mm diameter bars at 450 °C. CMT5105 material testing machine was used to carry out tensile tests using a at a strain rate of 10 The X-ray diffraction patterns presented in   True stress–strain curves converted from the engineering curves are presented in The strain hardening behavior of Mg–   Slip is of fundamental importance in plastic deformation process and increases the dislocation density. The strain hardening behavior is intimately linked to dislocation interactions because the dislocation can hinder further dislocation movement and thereby enhance the strength of alloys. On that account, higher dislocation density is found in alloy with better strain hardening ability after plastic deformation. In other words, the Taylor dislocation contribution  σ The macro texture of rare earth-containing Mg alloys is different from common Mg alloys To further investigate the effect of Y on the deformation modes of Mg– The grain size also acted a significant function in the strain hardening response of the Mg–Y alloys. As shown in The effect of grain size on the dislocation storage in Mg– The hardening rate related to dislocations storage is obtained as follows: Because dislocation density ρ In general, although weaker texture and more solute atom enhance the strain hardening respond in many alloys The effects of Y on the strain hardening behavior of Mg– As Y content increases from 1 wt% to 2 wt%, the average grain size decreases from 19.8 µm to 12.2 µm, and the grain size of Mg–3Y is close to that of Mg–2Y. The amount of second phase Mg As the Y content increases from 1 wt% to 3 wt%, the strain hardening rate decreases from 883 MPa to 798 MPa at (σ–σ The variation of the strain hardening behavior of Mg– The authors thank the National Key R&D Program of China (2016YFB0301100),