An amphiphilic fluorescent polymer (Ply-EP3) combining an aggregation-induced emission monomer and ε-polylysine was prepared through epoxy ring-opening polymerization. 1H NMR, FT-IR, and X-ray photoelectron spectra were conducted to characterize its chemical property. Such amphiphilic Ply-EP3 could assemble into nanoparticles in water and form fluorescent polymeric nanoparticles (FPNs) with high water dispersibility. Dynamic light scattering result of Ply-EP3 FPNs demonstrated the size distribution of 106 ± 8 nm with the polydispersity index of 0.268. Transmission electron microscopy image of Ply-EP3 FPNs showed spherical nanoparticle morphology with a size range of 50–100 nm. The optical property of FPNs indicated intense green fluorescence with a fluorescence quantum yield of 33%. The Ply-EP3 FPNs further proved excellent stability with low critical micelle concentration of 0.042 mg mL−1. The prepared FPNs also revealed high photostability after UV light irradiation for 120 min. Such FPNs showed excellent biocompatibility as the cells retained high viability at the concentration range of 10–120 μg mL−1 of Ply-EP3 for an incubated period of 12 h or 24 h, and exhibited excellent performance for cell imaging. Thanks to the high-performance Ply-EP3 FPNs, including bright fluorescent emission, high water dispersibility and particle stability, and excellent photostability, this work provide an approach to prepare robust cross-linked biocompatible fluorescent polymers for cell imaging.Polylysine (Ply), comprising α-polylysine and ε-polylysine, is featured by high positive charge density, and has been widely used for delivery of DNA and proteins In this work, we report the strategy of epoxy ring-opening polymerization of ε-Ply and an AIE monomer (EP3) with two epoxy groups to form the amphiphilic cross-linked fluorescent polymer of 2-(4-Hydroxyphenyl)acetonitrile (95%, J&K), 3-chlorobenzenecarboperoxoic acid (75%, J&K), terephthalaldehyde (99%, J&K), and 3-bromoprop-1-ene (99%, J&K) were used as received. ε-Poly- Gel permeation chromatography (GPC) experiment was carried out on a Shimadzu LC-20AD pump system and a Shimadzu RID-10 A refractive index detector. DMF was used as the eluent at a flow rate of 1.0 mL min The AIE monomer of EP3 was synthesized according to our previous literature The cytotoxicity of the To synthesize The chemical composition of ε-Ply is a homopolypeptide and cationic polymer containing a positively charged hydrophilic amino group. By combination of ε-Ply and the hydrophobic EP3, the as-prepared polymer of By introduction of the AIE component of EP3, the The previous literature have demonstrated robust FPNs with improved stability showed low CMC value, which would extend their application in low concentration of solution Before applying the FPNs for cell imaging, the cytotoxicity of the In summary, we reported epoxy ring-opening polymerization of ε-Ply and an AIE monomer with two epoxy groups to form a novel amphiphilic cross-linked fluorescent polymer of This research was supported by the