The microwave-assisted leaching was a new approach to intensify the copper recovery from chalcopyrite by hydrometallurgy. In this work, the effect of microwave-assisted heating on chalcopyrite leaching of kinetics, interfacial reaction temperature and surface energy were investigated. The activation energy of chalcopyrite leaching was affected indistinctively by the microwave-assisted heating (39.1kJ/mol) compared with the conventional heating (43.9kJ/mol). However, the boiling point of the leaching system increased through microwave-assisted heating. Because of the improved boiling point and the selective heating of microwave, the interfacial reaction temperature increased significantly, which gave rise to the increase of the leaching recovery of copper. Moreover, the surface energy of the chalcopyrite through microwave-assisted heating was also enhanced, which was beneficial to strengthen the leaching of chalcopyrite.Chalcopyrite is one of the main copper-bearing minerals Microwave is a kind of penetrable electromagnetic wave with frequency in the range of 0.3–300 Many studies have reported that the microwave is an effective method for accelerating the leaching rate of chalcopyrite The chalcopyrite concentrates and pure chalcopyrite were obtained from Daye Nonferrous Metal Corporation, Hubei, China, which were preserved in the refrigerator to avoid oxidation. The size distribution curve of concentrates is presented in The chemical composition and mineral composition analysis of the chalcopyrite concentrates have been analyzed in our previous research The pure chalcopyrite was selected by hand firstly. Then the sorted pure chalcopyrite was crushed and grounded to below 74 All the chemicals used in this experiment were of the analytically pure grade from Sinopharm chemical reagent Co., Ltd. The sample of 1 The phases and the chemical composition of chalcopyrite were analyzed using X-ray diffractometer (XRD) with Cu-Kα radiation and induction coupled plasma spectroscopy (ICP), respectively. The leachate of copper was taken out from the leaching system. After adding the chromogenic reagent, the leachate was tested by spectrophotometry. The chromogenic reagent was prepared by ammonia, ammonium citrate, neutral red, sulphuric acid and BCO. The leaching recovery of copper were given by: Force tensiometer (KRUSS K100, Germany) was used to determine the contact angles of the chalcopyrite under microwave and conventional heating. The measurement of the contact angle was according to Washburn formula The rising height of liquid Through deforming and substituting with Eqs. According to the theory of Owens-Wendt-Kaelble The following formula will get by substituting Young’s equation into Eq. If surface tension of the liquid contains only nonpolar component, Eq. Obviously, only if the contact angle between the solid and nonpolar liquid is given, Basic properties of liquid in this test (from kruss-database) is in  A shrinking core model, in which the surface reaction controlled the rate, was reported to fit the conventional and microwave-assisted leaching of chalcopyrite The values of According to Arrhenius equation: The boiling points of different media which contain different sulphuric acid concentration were measured, which was presented in The direct effect of the increasing boiling point on the leaching rate is the improvement of the interface temperature. Hence, the leaching rate accelerates with the improvement of chemical reactive temperature. The literatures reported that the microwave could selectively heat the system of leaching chalcopyrite, which was proved by a numerical simulation In summary, the effect of both improved boiling point and the selective heating make the interfacial temperature of reaction higher to increase the leaching rate through microwave-assisted heating. Moreover, it can be reasonable to infer that the surface energy of chalcopyrite will change on account of the increasing interface temperature.  As the results shown in Chen The activation energy of the chalcopyrite leaching was affected indistinctively by the microwave-assisted heating compared with the conventional heating. However, the boiling point of the leaching system increased through microwave-assisted heating. Owing to the incremental boiling point and the selective heating of microwave, the interfacial reaction temperature enhanced significantly, which contributed to the increase of the leaching recovery of copper. In addition, the surface energy of the chalcopyrite by microwave heating was also enhanced, which was beneficial to intensify the leaching of chalcopyrite. This research was supported by the