A relation between the kinetics of flotation and particle size is complex, therefore different flotation ranges for ultrafine, fine, medium and coarse particles, are usually considered. Our data on kinetics of froth flotation and particle size of metahydrophobic shale as well as experimental data of other authors for different materials were analyzed to find a general pattern of the relation between a flotation rate constant and a particle size, and the most suitable mathematical formulas relating these two parameters. The tried formulas included Nernst-, Zuniga-, direct proportionality-type as well as one Tomlinson-Fleming formula and two Arrhenius-type equations. It was found that the best approximation was provided by the Tomlinson-Fleming relation in the form of k = Bd
                     n, where k is the first order flotation rate constant, d particle size, while B and n are process empirical constants. Values of the particle size kinetic power n were calculated and discussed in the light of the efficiency of particle capture by a bubble. Also a modified Arrhenius equation k = Hexp(−E/RT(log(d/d
                     o))), where E is the activation energy, T absolute temperature, R gas constant, as well as H and standard particle size d
                     o = 1 μm are constants, was suitable for experimental data evaluation, while other empirical equations provided worse fittings.Due to complexity of a flotation process, there are numerous models of flotation [ The aim of this paper was to find, for different flotation systems, suitable mathematical formulas to relate the size of floating particle Flotation experiments were carried out using a metal-bearing shale sample, which originated from the Kupferschiefer stratiform copper deposit. The sample was collected from the Polkowice-Sieroszowice Mine located in Poland. It contained ca. 7% Cu and ca. 8% C A non-ionic surfactant, tri(propylene glycol) butyl ether (CH A mass of 51 ± 1 g of shale sample was subjected to flotation. Flotation tests were carried out in a Denver D12 laboratory machine equipped with a 1.5 dm Each product of flotation was dried and weighed to determine the mass yield (the ratio of the mass of a particular product to the mass of feed). The particles size distribution of the feed and flotation products was determined using a laser diffraction Mastersizer 2000 (Malvern). Based on the obtained results the recovery of particle size fraction in products was calculated (product yield x content of fraction in product/fraction in feed). The particle size distribution of the flotation feed is given in The results of collectorless flotation of shale in the form of kinetic curves relating a recovery of different size fractions as a function of time are shown in The relations between The Yoon and Mao [ Eq. Thus, there is a need to find another, a possibly simple, equation relating Since the capture of a particle by a bubble is the main step in flotation, it should be expected that the rate constant should be proportional to the same power of particle size as the efficiency does in a given range of particle size. Thus, the suitable form of equation is: Our data for collectorless flotation of shale also follow Eq. It should be noticed, that each flotation set of data has the same general shape of inverted ditch but different locations on the Tomlinson-Fleming plot. The inversed ditch (channel)-like shape moves up with the hydrophobicity of the floating material because oleate flotation of quartz, which in fact represents entrainment, has low values of The simplest graphical representation of the relation between the rate constant The equations listed in The approximations presented in It appears from The Arrhenius Another Arrhenius-type equation is: A list of constants calculated for collectorless flotation of shale using the Tomlinson-Fleming and Arrhenius  The size of particles is an important parameter of flotation process. It influences the size fractions recoveries, that in turn depend on the time of flotation. The recovery can be combined with the flotation time into a rate constant, while this constant can be related to the particle size. Literature and our own data indicate that the relation between the flotation response and particle size is complex, therefore it is convenient to distinguish four process ranges, that is flotation of ultrafine, fine, medium, and coarse particles. This three- (size fraction recovery  concentration standard concentration particle size bubble size standard state particle size equal to 1 μm activation energy efficiency kinetic energy kinetic energy detaching particle from bubble first order rate constant particle size power constant gas constant Reynold number superficial surface area of bubbles absolute temperature flotation time energy barrier recovery maximum (ultimate) recovery contact angle surface free energy at the liquid/gas (vapor) interface The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper.