Urban canal sediment provides an opportunity to investigate the processes controlling P geochemistry in a system dominated by anthropogenic input. To achieve this a combined study was undertaken of pore water geochemistry and petrology of the top 25 cm canal bed sediment from two urban canals in the English West Midland conurbation. Processes in the sediment are dominated by the geochemistry of Fe, P and organic matter. Results indicate that sediment re-suspension by boat traffic has a major influence on pore water chemistry. In addition to the sediment water interface an additional interface at 6–7 cm depth was identified and corresponds to the maximum depth of sediment re-suspension by boat traffic. Phosphorus in the sediment occurs predominantly as vivianite. Low PO4 concentrations occur close to the sediment water interface in summer due to frequent re-suspension and Fe oxidation. High PO4 concentrations occur close to the sediment water interface in winter when boat traffic is infrequent. The greatest potential to exchange phosphate between sediment and water column will therefore occur during infrequent boat traffic regimes.Urban canal bed sediment receives predominantly anthropogenic input and has a composition markedly different from most natural sediments ( To enable interpretation of the geochemical processes controlling P geochemistry in urban canal sediment, seasonal pore water composition profiles were integrated with petrographic observations in samples collected from sites in the West Midland conurbation, England. The canal network in this area is particularly suited to studying anthropogenic sediment as it is isolated from the natural drainage system and does not receive significant natural clastic input. Samples were collected from two sites in the West Midland conurbation, the Old Birmingham Mainline Canal, an urban canal, near Smethwick in Birmingham ( The cores were a uniform black colour from the sediment water interface to the base of the core. The core with overlying water was sealed and brought back to the laboratory where it was extruded within 3 h of collection in a glove bag under a N For ICP-AES analysis the supernatant was re-centrifuged at 3200 rpm for 10 min in Whatman, Vectraspin 0.2 μm filter-centrifuge tubes prior to being diluted by 50% with de-oxygenated Milli-Q water and acidified with concentrated BDH AnalaR HNO For anion analysis the supernatant was drawn into a 10 ml plastic syringe and injected through a Whatman 0.2 μm Anotop filter and Dionex Onguard-RP and Onguard-H pre-treatment cartridges (to remove particulates, organic molecules and transition metals respectively) directly into a Dionex DX500 Ion Chromatography (IC) system fitted with an AS11 column and a 25 μl sample loop. Analysis of pore waters by IC was conducted as swiftly as possible and completed within 24 h of sample collection. The analytical method used was a 20 min gradient method with a starting eluant concentration of 0.15 mM and a maximum concentration of 40 mM; 10 min was allowed for re-equilibration between runs. Samples were randomized prior to analysis and quality control was maintained through the analysis of blanks and standards. Duplicate analysis could however not be performed due to small sample volumes and oxidation during prolonged storage. Relative 3 Alkalinity, Eh and pH were measured on one extra core collected in the spring. The reason for this was that these variables could not be routinely measured without compromising the rapid processing of the pore water for anion and metal analysis. Alkalinity of water samples was determined titrimetrically by the addition of 0.02 M H Petrographic analysis was undertaken using a LEO435VP variable-pressure digital scanning electron microscope (SEM), fitted with an Oxford Instruments CT1500 cryogenic sample preparation and transfer system and cold stage. Mineralogical and chemical characterisation of features observed under the SEM was aided by semi-quantitative energy dispersive X-ray analysis (EDXA) using an Oxford Instruments ISIS 1300 digital EDXA system fitted to the electron microscope. Operating conditions were a vacuum of 0.15 Torr, a beam current of 500 pA and an accelerating voltage of 20 kV. Vivianite (Fe pH ( A small peak in Fe concentration of 0.02–0.04 mM occurred close to the sediment water interface ( With the exception of the summer profile, PO The concentration of SO The main petrographic observation relevant to this study is that crystals of vivianite occurred throughout the top 30 cm of canal bed sediment. Euhedral clusters of vivianite crystals first occurred at the sediment-water interface. At depth, euhedral vivianite ( Before interpreting the data the cause of the seasonal variability must be considered. A possible key to this is influence of boat traffic, which is highly seasonal and causes sediment re-suspension. Evidence of sediment re-suspension by passing boat traffic is the turbid wake observed behind barges. Statistics provided by British Waterways (pers. com.) for 1999 confirm the seasonal influence of boat traffic with averages of 0.1 boats per day in winter (December–February), 2 boats per day in spring (March–May), 4 boats per day in summer (June–August) and 3 boats per day in autumn (September–November) and peak traffic of 7 boats per day in August. From this it can be inferred that the marked increase in the depth of measurable SO The general increase in Fe concentration with depth is similar to patterns observed in lake sediment ( The peak in Fe concentration near the sediment water interface is probably due to the reduction of easily reducible Fe oxyhydroxides produced by oxidation of Fe The transient peak in pore water Fe at 6–7 cm depth in autumn and summer probably results from the reduction of Fe oxyhydroxides at the boundary between the resuspended and undisturbed sediment, the position of which is inferred from the maximum depth of measurable SO The main sources of PO The presence of authigenic vivianite is typical of sediment receiving high concentrations of anthropogenic waste ( Apparent etching of vivianite and a reduction in its abundance with increasing depth appears to indicate vivianite undersaturation at depth. This interpretation is however inconsistent with the saturation indices for vivianite, which indicate that in all seasons, vivianite generally becomes more saturated with increasing depth ( A mineral that commonly occurs under Fe-reducing conditions is siderite, which although over-saturated in the deeper pore waters ( In terms of the impact of the sediment chemistry on water quality the high concentrations of P in the sediment pore waters and low concentrations in the water column should result in a net transfer of PO In this study the geochemical processes operating in canal bed sediment, dominated by anthropogenic and biogenic input, have been examined. One of the most important conclusions is that sediment re-suspension exercises a considerable influence on canal sediment geochemistry. In particular two interfaces occur in the sediment; a transient sediment-water interface at the maximum depth of re-suspension and the sediment-water interface under undisturbed conditions. The main source of PO We wish to acknowledge the University of Nottingham and the British Geological Survey for supporting this research. Chris Somerfield, Dave Clift, Bill Culley and Tony Gospel are thanked for analytical and technical assistance. British Waterways are thanked for allowing site access. Brian Atkin, Paul Beckwith, Kevin Taylor and two anonymous reviewers are thanked for their comments and advice.