Radiotracer investigations were carried out in two identical phosphoric acid production reactors and a triple super phosphate (TSP) production reactor in three different plants in Tunisia. The main objective of the study was to investigate and compare their flow behavior and identify flow abnormalities, if any. Residence time distribution (RTD) of the process material (ore pulp) was measured in the three reactors using Iodine-131. The measured RTDs were treated and analyzed to obtain flow parameters such as the mean residence time (MRT), dead volume, and extent of bypassing. The treated RTD curves were modeled using a suitable mathematical model, and the values of the parameters were obtained. The results of the investigations were used to evaluate and compare the flow performance of the reactors, quantify the degree of mixing, and visualize the prevailing flow patterns. The results of the investigations are expected to be used to make necessary modifications to enhance the efficiency and optimize the performance of the reactors or the production process.Tunisia is one of the major producers and exporters of minerals such as phosphate rock, phosphate-based commodities, aluminum fluoride, gypsum, iron ore, lime, mineral-based fertilizers, cement, common clays, crude oil, natural gas, refined petroleum products, and salt ( In Tunisia, until 1979, phosphoric acid was produced from the phosphate ores mined from Gafsa mines without preliminary grinding because of the ores’ reactivity and specific advantages of the SIAPE process. However, the poor quality of the phosphates produced from some of the mines in Tunisia posed serious problems in the implementation of the SIAPE process and operation of the PA and TSP production reactors. In addition to this, deterioration in product quality and decrease in process efficiency were also observed. Therefore, M/s GCT modified the SIAPE process and design of the PA and TSP production reactors to maintain the desired quality of the product and optimize the efficiency of the process. After modification of the SIAPE process and the design of the reactor, the desired quality of the product could be achieved. At present, M/s GCT Tunisia owns and operates four different plants for the production of phosphate-based fertilizers and associated chemicals, namely, Skhira, Gabes, Sfax, and M'dhilla. The Skhira plant was commissioned in 1979 and produces PA, whereas the Gabes plant commissioned in 1985 produces PA, diammonium phosphate (DAP), dicalcium phosphate, and ammonium nitrate (AN). The Sfax and M'dhilla plants were commissioned in 1992 and produce TSP ( Residence time distribution (RTD) is a characteristic parameter of continuous flow reactors and provides information about flow parameters such as residence time, presence of dead volume, degree of mixing, and flow patterns. These parameters in turn help to identify the reason(s) for the deterioration in product quality and decrease in process efficacy ( The process was specially developed for processing low-grade phosphate rock ore having a relatively high carbonate content. The process involves the mixing and reaction of phosphate ore (Ca   CaF (Phosphate rock) The schematic diagram of the SIAPE process for the production of PA is shown in The entire reactor is made of concrete ( The Skhira plant was commissioned in 1979 and produces merchant-grade phosphoric acid (MGPA) using the SIAPE process. The reactor that is used for the production of PA is discussed in the preceding section. The Skhira plant comprises two lines for the production of MGPA (28%) and four lines for the production of concentrated MGPA (54%) from the diluted acid. The central compartment of the reactor is fitted with a double - impeller agitator, while the outer ring-shaped compartment is installed with seven radial impeller agitators to assist the recirculation and homogenization of the pulp within the reactor. The geometric volume of the reactor is 900 m The schematic diagram of the Skhira reactor and experimental setup are shown in The Gabes plant was commissioned in 1985 and has three lines for the production of MGPA and two lines for the production of DAP according to the SIAPE process. All the three lines produce MGPA with identical reactors and minor variations in operating conditions. The SIAPE process and the reactor for the production of DAP are the same as those used for the production of PA. The details of the SIAPE process and the reactor are discussed in The Sfax plant, commissioned in 1992, has a single line for the production of TSP with a capacity of 1000 t/day using the “modified SIAPE process.” The schematic diagram of the process and the reactors used are shown in A radiotracer test was carried out to measure the RTD of the liquid phase within the reactor. Iodine-131 ( Radiotracer concentration recorded as a function of time at the outlets of the reactors was treated for background and tail correction. RTD0 software was used for data treatment ( The new curve, i.e., E(t) versus t, is called the normalized radiotracer concentration curve and has an area equal to unity. In the present investigation, the radiotracer was injected as an impulse, and the normalized radiotracer concentration curves measured at the outlet of the system directly provide the RTD of the process material within the reactors. The treated and normalized RTD curves measured at the outlets of the three different reactors are shown in A representative F(t) curve obtained in the reactor at the Skhira plant is shown in If V is the volume of the reactor and Q is the flow rate of slurry through the reactor, the theoretical mean residence time (τ) of the slurry within the reactor for a steady condition is given as follows ( The feed is fed into the central compartment of the reactor at a flow rate of Q that flows into the outer compartment through the top-pass and subsequently flows toward the outlet of the reactor. It was visually observed that a fraction of the feed (Q Therefore, on the basis of the above facts, a priori information about the internal design of the reactors, and the nature of the measured RTD curves, a physically representative model was conceptualized and used to simulate the measured RTD curves. The model consists of a plug flow component in the beginning followed by three parallel flow streams, namely, a main flow stream, a bypass flow stream, and a recirculation flow stream. The flow in each of the three parallel flow streams is represented by a simple tank-in-series model (TISM). The block diagram of the model is shown in The RTD of the pulp in the reactor at the Skhira plant was measured with a sampling time of 3 min and is shown in The RTD curve E(t) measured at the outlet of the reactor, as shown in The RTD (E(t)) and cumulative RTD (F(t)) curves of the pulp within the reactor are shown in  The F(t) curve of the reactor at the Gabes plant is shown in The reactor at the Sfax plant produces TSP according to the modified SAIPE process. The treated and normalized RTD curves measured at the outlets of the two reactors, i.e., main reactor (R1) and an additional reactor (R2) with a sampling time of 10 s, are shown Similar to the RTD curves measured in the reactors at the Skihra and Gabes plants, the RTD curve measured at the outlet of the primary reactor (R1) at the Sfax plant also had a small but sharp peak at the beginning of the curve, which indicates the bypassing of the pulp. The same model as shown in The RTD curve recorded at the outlet of reactor R2 by detector D2 represents the flow of a continuously recycled flow stream. The simple tank-in-series model was used to simulate the RTD curve, and the comparison of the experimental and model-simulated curves corresponding to the best fit is shown in The F(t) curve measured at the outlet of reactor R1 is shown in The bypass fraction in all the three reactors was very small and equal (1%); furthermore, it alone would not cause a significant change in the product quality and process efficiency. However, together with other flow abnormalities, it might contribute to the deterioration in product quality and decrease in process efficiency. The amount of dead volume in the reactor operating at the Sfax plant according to the new modified SIAPE process was negligibly small and could be within the experimental error. However, the dead volumes in the reactors operating according to the old SIAPE process at the Skhira and Gabes plants were significantly higher than that in the reactor operating according to the new modified SIAPE process at the Sfax plant. The significantly higher amount of dead volume in the reactor at the Skhira plant could be because this reactor is older than that at the Gabes plant. Therefore, there is a possibility of more deposition/settling of the solids, thereby leading to the presence of a higher dead volume. The variation in the residence time of different fractions of the pulp was smaller in the reactor at the Skhira plant than those in the reactors at the Gables and Sfax plants. This could be primarily due to the existence of the high amount of dead volume within the reactor. The degree of mixing in the main flow stream was identical in all the three reactors. Radiotracer investigations were successfully carried out in two phosphoric acid and one triple super phosphate production reactors in three different fertilizer plants in Tunisia, namely Skhira, Gabes, and Sfax. The RTD of the phosphate pulp in three reactors, MRTs, and dead volumes were estimated. The dead volume estimated in the three reactors was found to range from 7.6% to 27.7%, with the maximum in the reactor at the Skhira plant and the minimum in the reactor at the Sfax reactor. It was observed that the amount of dead volume estimated in reactors (Skhira and Gabes) operating according to the old SIAPE process was significantly higher than the amount of dead volume estimated in the reactor operating according to the modified SIAPE process (Sfax plant). This validates that the modified SIAPE process is more efficient than the old SIAPE process. The higher amount of dead volume in the reactor at the Skhira plant could be because the fact that the reactor is older than the reactor at the Gabes plant. The amounts of dead volumes present inside the three reactors were visually confirmed during the shutdown and cleaning process. The amounts of dead volumes estimated in the three reactors were found to be approximately matching with the volume of the solid material (gypsum) deposited inside the reactors. Therefore, it can be concluded that despite the intense mixing within the reactors, the solids have a tendency to settle at the bottom and corners of the reactors during the flow and form the dead volume. A model consisting of a plug flow component connected in series with three parallel flow streams was proposed and used to simulate the measured RTDs. The three parallel streams represented the bypass flow, the bulk flow, and the recirculation flow. The flow in each stream was described by a simple tank-in-series model. A fairly good fitting between the experimental and model-simulated RTD curves showed that the proposed model is suitable for describing the flow patterns of phosphate slurry in all the reactors. The flow fractions, residence time, and degree of mixing in each stream were estimated. The estimated bypass fractions in the three reactors ranged from 0.5% to 1.1%. The estimated bypass fraction in the reactor at the Skhira plant was higher than those in reactors at the Gabes and Sfax plants. The fraction of flow estimated in the recirculation stream (Q The radiotracer investigations enabled to visualize and compare the flow behavior of three different reactors. From the RTD analysis, it is concluded that the presence of dead volume together with other flow abnormalities such as bypassing and inadequate intensity of recirculation could be the possible reasons for the deterioration in product quality and decrease in process efficacy. The lower amount of dead volume, analysis of flow patterns, and laboratory tests indicated that the performance of the reactor operating according to the modified SIAPE process (Sfax plant) was better than that of the reactors operating according to the old SIAPE process (Skhira and Gabes plants). This implies that the modifications in the SIAPE process resulted in improved product quality and process efficacy. Tunisia does not have nuclear reactors to produce radioisotopes; furthermore, it is not possible to import radiotracers for industrial applications in Tunisia from neighboring countries because of regulatory, financial, and logistic constraints. However, there exists an adequate regulatory and logistic framework for importing radioisotopes for healthcare applications. The present investigations carried out with the leftover/unused radionuclide Iodine-131 obtained from the nuclear medicine department of a hospital in Tunisia demonstrate that it is possible to carry out some of the radiotracer applications in Tunisia with the radiotracer obtained from radioisotope generators. The investigations were carried out as a part of research and development programme of CNSTN Tunisia and were partly funded by IAEA, Vienna and GCT Tunisia. Authors wish to acknowledge and thank concerned authorities of CNSTN, IAEA and GCT for providing necessary financial, technical and logistic support for conducting the investigations. Authors also wish to thank Mr. Sunil Goswami of BARC, Mumbai India for help extended in analyzing the data.