The strength of a rock mass is the major factor affecting the design and construction of civil and mining structures built in or on rock. Rock masses are usually fractured, as a result of various geological processes over time. The effect of joints on the strength of a rock has been studied mainly using analytical or experimental methods, whereas the strength of fractured rock is usually expressed in terms of empirical failure criteria. In this study, the original plane of weakness theory is presented and applied to rock models with various numbers of joint sets persistent or not. Biaxial compressive tests are then performed on the same specimens using a discrete element code. To account for the roughness of the discontinuities, the original theory is extended, by imposing the non linear Barton–Bandis shear strength criterion for the discontinuities. This extended theory of one plane of weakness is validated against the responses of discrete numerical rock models with various combinations of fracturing. Both, the original and extended theories, are then applied to simulate the response of physical experiments undertaken by several researchers, in order to investigate their validity and the bounds of their usage. The numerical results are in accordance with the theoretical ones, while the theoretical results have an either quantitative or qualitative similarity with the experimental ones. Quantitative differences appear especially when the specimens fail in different modes than assumed by the models.Developments in the mechanics of solids and fluids, the evolution of sophisticated computer codes and the availability of powerful computers nowadays enable the evaluation, under any loading conditions, of the response of complex engineering structures made of any industrial materials. However, the design and construction of surface and underground structures, for civil and mining purposes, requires particularly the understanding of the engineering behavior of geomaterials. The lack of repeatability and representative testing and of knowledge on their exact position, their multi-phase nature, their complicated constitutive laws, their spatiotemporal variation and their loading history dependence, renders the definition of their properties to be made in a totally different way than for industrial materials. Therefore, assignment of properties should allow for homogenization in order to include facets of large portions of them. Strength and deformability may be considered to be the most important engineering properties of geomaterials. The study of the behavior of the rock mass in complex stress fields and the quantitative assessment of parameters related to its strength and deformability remains one of the great issues in geotechnical engineering. Rock masses in nature have sustained various geological processes during their existence. They usually contain planes of weakness, such as faults, joints and bedding planes, they may be weathered, and rarely appear to be homogenous and isotropic. The complexity of their structure, the variation in their loading, and the intricacies in their failure mechanisms exclude full mathematical treatment of their engineering behavior. However, applying simplifications and homogenization to their properties, the strength of a fractured rock mass may be estimated using analytical, numerical or empirical methods. Below, the strength of the rock mass is evaluated, by assuming it to consist of intact rock blocks which interact on their contact surfaces. The plane of weakness The strength of rock containing discontinuities may be assessed by the theory of the plane of weakness (PW), developed by Jaeger In order to examine the possibility of slip, the Mohr–Coulomb (MC) failure criterion is used as an upper boundary for the stress components on the discontinuity. Replacing the previous expressions on the Mohr–Coulomb failure criterion, we obtain: This expression, which provides the strength of the rock mass, according to the theory of one plane of weakness in two dimensions, for a given confining pressure and strength of the intact rock, varies with the dip This minimum strength corresponds to a rock mass with the strength of the joint. As shown in Various researchers, such as for example, Goldstein et al. Einstein et al. Brown Arora Ladanyi and Archambault Generally, all experiments showed the dominant role of the joints for the rock strength. The failure mechanism depended mainly on the shape, number, orientation, and persistence, of the joints and on the confining pressure. The failure of the jointed rock is complicated and any theoretical approach for the evaluation of the strength has to be validated against the observed failure patterns of the tested rocks. The original theory of the plane of weakness in two dimensions is examined using the discrete element code UDEC. Biaxial compressive tests are performed on fractured rock models. Models may contain one or more joint sets. Numerically evaluated responses are then compared to those evaluated analytically. The three specimens A, B and C, shown in Initially, the original theory of one plane of weakness, given by Eq. The theory of one plane of weakness may be employed for any number of crossing joints. It is applied for each discontinuity separately, and the rock strength is determined as a lower strength envelope. The three specimens A, B and C, shown in Next, the three specimens shown in the first column of The discontinuities very often appear with limited persistence forming rock bridges, which have an important role on the strength of fractured rocks. The strength of such a fractured rock may be considered analytically with the plane of weakness theory. The concept is to assume the equivalent shear strength of a persistent discontinuity, which includes a percentage of the strength of the original discontinuity and a percentage of the strength of the intact rock In order to examine the validity of this approach, the rock specimen shown in The Mohr–Coulomb failure criterion is unable to describe adequately the shearing behavior of rock joints, because their surfaces are rarely smooth, and their strength is a non-linear function of the existing normal stress. Experiments on discontinuities We now consider a specimen crossed by a single rough discontinuity. Any increase in the normal stress, due to the dilation of the discontinuity during shearing, is assumed to be negligible. The stresses applied to the specimen are then analyzed on the joint plane into normal and shear stress, according to Eqs. In Biaxial compressive tests are simulated for a rock specimen containing a single joint set. The three specimens A, B and C, shown in Initially, the extended theory of one plane of weakness, given by Eq. The extended theory of one plane of weakness may be employed for any number of crossing joints. It is applied for each discontinuity separately and the rock strength is determined as a lower strength envelope. The three specimens A, B and C, shown in Initially, the extended theory of one plane of weakness is applied to determine the strength in biaxial compression of the rock specimen A, containing two crossing joints which are rotated together. As the extended theory of one plane of weakness does not take into account the spacing of the discontinuities, the theoretical solution is again assumed to hold similarly for specimens B and C. Specimens A, B and C are then tested numerically. Their strength is computed for various angles of the simultaneous rotation of the joint sets. In the diagram of Further, the three specimens shown in the first column of Following the same methodology, as for the case of the MC discontinuities, the strength of the rock with non-persistent BB joints is considered. For the application of the Barton–Bandis criterion, the equivalent instantaneous values of joint cohesion and friction angle, are estimated. The numerical solution of Eq. The mechanical parameters of the intact rock are The numerical evaluation of the strength of jointed rock showed that this, slip or intact rock, shear failure may be predicted satisfactorily by using the original and extended theory of the plane of weakness. However, the failure of rocks is caused by a variety of mechanisms, which depend on geometry of the joints and applied confining pressure. This analysis cannot take into account many of those mechanisms; therefore it is useful to investigate any deviation between theoretical predictions and observations, when the failure mechanism is more complicated. For this purpose, both the original and extended theories of the plane of weakness are applied to experimental studies, where complicated failure patterns have been recorded. There, the experimentally evaluated strength is compared to that derived analytically. In order to apply the extended theory of the plane of weakness, the Brown, in his experiments discussed in For the intact rock, the Hoek–Brown failure criterion is assumed to hold. The Hoek–Brown parameter The analytical calculations are performed initially to specimen T60 ( The same procedure is then applied to specimen T45 ( The experiment discussed in The analysis is based on both, the original and the extended theory. The engineering parameters of the joint for the analysis with the original theory are, This experimental study, discussed in For the intact rock, the Hoek–Brown failure criterion is assumed to apply. According to Hoek The joint surface is considered to be unweathered, and therefore According to For dip angle values between 45° and 80°, the experiments indicated failure of specimens caused by the formation of kink bands. In this range, the analytically evaluated strength is larger than the experimentally evaluated. There, the analytically evaluated strength for low values of confining stress diverged highly, whereas this divergence reduced gradually with the increase of the applied confining stress. This mitigation of error is evident for the strength evaluated by the extended theory. In Generally, the strength predicted analytically is higher than that determined experimentally. This is highly illustrated in the experiments, where the strength of the specimens, for 0° and 90° joint dip angles, never reaches that of the intact rock. This is one explanation for the low experimental values. Further, the formation of kink bands leads to experimental low values of strength, which are not simulated analytically, especially for confining stresses below 1 The original plane of weakness theory is suitable to determine the anisotropic strength of jointed rock, containing single or multiple joint sets with a single discontinuity in each, due to shear failure along an existing relatively smooth discontinuity. Initially, a numerical distinct element code has been employed to examine the applicability of the theory for more than one discontinuity and sets, and for non persistent joints. Numerical tests performed on various joint configurations proved the applicability of the theory to multiple parallel discontinuity configurations for multiple sets. Further, the theory is proven to be applicable for jointed rock with discontinuities interrupted by rock bridges, if higher equivalent shear strength for the discontinuities is employed. Therefore, the strength of the non persistent joint is calculated as an equivalent shear strength which includes a percentage of the strength of joint and a percentage of the strength of intact rock. Small differences in the strength appear for the dip angle range where the strength of the rock specimen depends on that of the non-persistent discontinuity, whereas the strength values according to both methods practically coincide for the dip angle range where the strength of the rock specimen depends on the persistent discontinuity. Next, an extension of the original theory of plane of weakness is attempted to account for any non linear strength envelope of the joints. The Barton–Bandis failure criterion is chosen, as it is suitable to account for the roughness of the discontinuities. The strength of a specimen containing a single discontinuity is not symmetrical to a minimum value in contrast with the original theory. The dip angle for which the rock strength minimizes, does not depend only on a basic angle of friction, but on the three parameters of the BB criterion and on the value of confining pressure. A quite accurate statistical relation, to evaluate this lowest strength dip angle of the discontinuity, is proposed. This extended theory of the plane of weakness is applied to determine the strength in biaxial compression of jointed rock. A series of models is tested numerically with the discrete code UDEC, for various dip angles. It is observed that the strength, evaluated numerically, is independent of the number of joint sets and the joint spacing, and it coincides with the analytically evaluated one. Further, the shear strength of non persistent joints may be calculated as an equivalent shear strength which includes a percentage of the strength of the joint and a percentage of the strength of the intact rock. Small differences in the strength appear for the dip angle range where the strength of the rock specimen depends on that of the non-persistent discontinuity, whereas the strength values according to both methods practically coincide for the dip angle range where the strength of the rock specimen depends on the persistent discontinuity. In all cases described above, model specimens failed either in shearing along joints or in compression of intact rock. Thus, for shear failure of rock along its discontinuities, it may be concluded that both theories can be used for the estimation of jointed rock strength. However, the behaviour of jointed rock is much more complicated, as it fails by various failure mechanisms which depend on many factors, such as lateral pressure, orientation and spacing of discontinuities, strength of intact rock, etc. Hence, the realm must be defined, in which the application of the theories of plane of weakness can successfully predict the strength of jointed rock for engineering purposes. Therefore, the application of these, plane of weakness, theories has been compared against the responses of three selected experimental sets of tests, undertaken by researchers, on physical jointed rock specimens of weak rock (R2). The first set of experiments made to specimens, containing persistent and non persistent discontinuities, with no rotation of the joint system, indicated lower strength for low values of confining stress, due to axial splitting of intact material. However, for the rest of the confining stress regime the predicted and experimentally determined failure mechanisms coincide. Therefore, the analytically evaluated envelope, according to the extended theory, is in relatively good agreement with the experimental results, especially for the applied higher values of confining stress. Further, the curved nature of the experimentally determined envelope is obvious. Such an envelope may be only simulated by a curvilinear criterion, such as the BB one. The second set of experiments on a specimen configuration that contains a single joint, indicates anisotropic response for low values of confining stress which tends to isotropic with the increase in confining stress; this particular transition may be simulated excellently by the theories. According to both plane of weakness analyses, for dip angles of the joint either in the range from 0° to ∼30° or close to 90°, the existence of the joint does not affect the specimen's strength. This is not confirmed by the experiment for low values of confining stress, as for these dip ranges the joint still has influence on the specimen's strength, which remains lower than that of the intact material. On the contrary, for these low confining pressures, experimental values of strength in between are higher; thus anisotropy is mitigated. However, in general the predictions made by both theories seem to adequately evaluate the strength of the specimen. The third set of experiments is performed on specimens with two rotating joint sets, one with persistent and one with non persistent discontinuities. The confining pressure range is lower and the intact rock is higher than in the previous two experiments. The application of both theories of weakness leads to higher strength values than the experimental, for low and high values of dip angles. Also, the formation of kink bands, especially for confining stress lower than 1 Concluding, the estimation of jointed rock strength using original and extended theories of weakness has quite good validity in cases of shear failure on planes containing joints and/or bridges of intact rock. Particularly, the extended theory may be relevant for rocks containing rough joints. However, both theories overestimate the strength in cases of failure due to axial splitting of intact rock or due to the formation of kink bands, for low values of confining stress. Nevertheless, for such weak rock and values of confining stress larger than 1.5–2.0