The effect of calcium ions on the separation of scheelite from fluorite was studied using atomic force microscopy (AFM) measurement, X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) analysis and micro-flotation experiment. The XPS results confirmed the adsorption of calcium on scheelite and fluorite surface, and adsorption difference existed between calcium solution and gypsum solution. According to the AFM results, the adhesion forces between scheelite and fluorite would increase in the presence of calcium, so did the corresponding jump-in distance and separation distance. Besides, jump-in distance and separation distance in calcium solution were larger than those in gypsum solution. When using sodium silicate as depressant, the adhesion forces between scheelite and fluorite decreased observably, while regained in the presence of calcium ions. Micro-flotation results confirmed the depression of calcium on scheelite and fluorite. Besides, both scheelite and fluorite were depressed strongly by sodium silicate in the presence of calcium. These indicated that the adsorption of CaOH+ would increase their hydrophilicity and enhance the interaction forces. Meanwhile, the selectivity of sodium silicate was depressed in the presence of calcium ions. The combined results could help to understand how calcium-mineral surface properties would cause the difficult separation.As an important rare metal, tungsten has been widely used in modern industry. Scheelite is a significant tungsten-bearing mineral, and it is always associated with other calcium-bearing minerals such as fluorite, calcite and apatite [ In the application of flotation, metal ions accumulation is unavoidable with the recycle water [ Recently years, AFM has been widely used on mineral processing [ In the current study, the depression of calcium ions on scheelite and fluorite was studied using micro-flotation. The adsorption of different calcium sources from calcium chloride and gypsum were compared using XPS analysis. The interaction behaviors between scheelite surface and fluorite particle were analyzed by AFM measurements. This research could help to understand the interaction behaviors between calcium-bearing minerals, and provide a guidance in separation of scheelite from other calcium-bearing minerals. Pure minerals of scheelite, fluorite and gypsum were collected from Shangri-la of Yunnan Province, China. The X-ray diffraction (XRD, measured by D8 Advance with a Cu Kα X-ray source, Bruker) analysis in The sources of calcium were from calcium chloride (CaCl XPS spectra of scheelite and fluorite treated before and after were recorded using a Thermo Scientific ESCALAB 250Xi (Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA) with an Al Kα X-ray source. Charge compensation of all spectra was calibrated based on C 1s binding energy of 284.8 eV. Samples were prepared by adding 1.0 g single mineral to 100 mL DI water with certain conditions. The suspension would be stirred for 20 min and pH was adjusted followed. After the settlement completed, the suspension would be filtrated and rinsed with DI water for three times, then dried in vacuum oven. In this section, all experiments were performed with a Multimode 8 AFM instrument (Bruker, Germany). N-type silicon AFM probe (ScanAsyst-air, Bruker, Germany) was used to obtain the typical AFM images of tested mineral surfaces; N-type silicon AFM probe (CSC37/Tipless/No Al, MikroMasch, Estonia) was used to prepare the fluorite colloid probe for interaction force measurements. The experimental setup and schematic representation are generally presented in The cleavage surface of scheelite was acquired by cutting a natural scheelite crystal. To obtain the received scheelite surface, fine grinding, lapping, and polishing with aluminium powder (0.05 μm) were performed using a metallographic polishing machine (ZMP-2000). After that, the surface would be washed with ultrapure water and ethanol, and then dried with nitrogen. Meanwhile, a fluorite surface was prepared in the same way. The typical AFM images of scheelite and fluorite surface were obtained with the scanasyst-air mode imaging at 1 Hz rate. According to the AFM images results in To prepare a fluorite colloid probe, a particle with diameter of approximately 30 μm was collected and adhered to the apex of a tipless cantilever probe using epoxy resin. The whole process was operated under an optical microscope using a micromanipulator. The details of the procedure have been described by Ducker et al. [ The interaction forces between scheelite and fluorite were analyzed in different calcium concentrations solution using contact mode. The interaction forces were obtained by recording the cantilever deflection via the change in the path of a laser light beam deflected from the upper side of the cantilever end. Before each test, the surface and colloid probe would be soaked in condition solution for 30 min, and each measurement was carried out at three locations. Micro-flotation experiment was carried out using a mechanical XFG machine at an impeller speed of 1600 rpm in a 40 mL plexiglass cell. The single mineral suspension was prepared by adding 2.0 g single mineral to 35 mL DI water. When the required dosage of sodium oleate or sodium silicate was added, the suspension would be stirred for 3 min, and the required pH was regulated followed. The flotation would last for 4 min, then the froth product and tailings were separately filtered, dried and weighed, to calculate and assay the product grade and recovery. Each test would repeat three times. XPS is often used to detect the surface chemical composition and the chemical state of each element. In this paper, scheelite and fluorite treated in calcium solution and gypsum saturated solution were detected at pH of 9. The XPS spectra results of Ca 2p on scheelite and fluorite surface before and after treated in different calcium solution are presented in The interaction force curves were mainly analyzed to study the separation of scheelite from fluorite in different solution conditions. The interaction forces between scheelite surface and fluorite particle in DI water at pH of 9 are shown in The interaction forces between scheelite surface and fluorite particle after treated in calcium solution and gypsum solution are shown in Sodium silicate is commonly used as depressant on fluorite and other calcium-bearing minerals when scheelite flotation. As shown in The effect of calcium ions on the performance of sodium silicate has been systematically studied in the separation of monazite and calcite [ The corresponding flotation experiments were carried out to match with AFM measurements. The pulp pH of 9, collector concentration of 2.5 × 10 Calcium ion is unavoidable for calcium-bearing minerals in solution. Here the interaction forces between scheelite surface and fluorite particle in calcium solution and gypsum solution were studied. The corresponding flotation experiments and XPS analysis were also carried out to verify the AFM results in the paper. The presence of calcium ions in solution would adsorb on scheelite and fluorite surfaces according to the XPS results. The interaction force measurements indicate that the interaction forces between scheelite and fluorite increased to strong adhesion forces significantly in both calcium and gypsum solution, and increased with the increasing calcium concentration. The addition of sodium silicate could decrease the adhesion forces between scheelite and fluorite to realize the separation of scheelite from fluorite. However, the decrease of adhesion forces would regain in the presence of calcium. According to the XPS analysis and the AFM results, the adsorption of CaOH The AFM measurements results were verified by the corresponding flotation results. When using sodium silicate as depressant, the presence of calcium ions would depress the floatability of both scheelite and fluorite. It was mainly attributed to the adsorption of calcium silicate colloid precipitation on both scheelite and fluorite. The flotation results and the increasing adhesion forces between scheelite and fluorite indicate that, the presence of calcium ions would enhance the interaction between scheelite and fluorite. Besides, it was still hard to realize the separation of scheelite from fluorite in the presence of calcium ions when using sodium silicate as depressant. The authors would like to thank the financial support of this work by