Hydrometallurgical process routes are seen to be the future of treatment of the lower grade nickel laterites ores. Hydrometallurgical projects of recent years have focused on HPAL and have been largely unsuccessful economically so far, with huge capital cost overruns.
                  The simplest and least capital intensive of the possible alternatives to HPAL is atmospheric heap leaching. Development work is also underway by several companies into atmospheric tank leaching which is also a potentially viable alternative.
                  The natural product for a leaching process is a high grade nickel intermediate either from a direct precipitation process (containing approx. 36% Ni) or via ion exchange (>50% Ni).
                  There are many existing pyrometallurgical facilities which could easily be adapted to take this nickel intermediate giving them significant potential benefits especially as nickel laterite ore grades diminish. The nickel production from these plants could also be increased and for new plants large capital and operating cost savings achieved by using suitable intermediates.
                  There are also potential environmental benefits with much less energy consumed and lower greenhouse gases emitted per tonne of nickel produced.
                  In the future an integrated hydrometallurgical plant with attached existing smelter or a more advanced pyrometallurgical smelting process (e.g. a DC arc furnace) could well be the way forward for new projects.The world’s resources of nickel are found as sulphides and laterites and while almost ¾ of the world’s resources of nickel are found as laterites, currently less than half of the primary nickel production comes from laterite sources as illustrated below ( Total production of nickel has increased more than 10-fold since 1950, when sulphides accounted for as much as 90% of the world’s nickel, laterites do now produce more than 40% and this is expected to break the 50% mark perhaps even this year. Laterite ores are divided into three main ore types which until now have largely been treated differently to release the nickel within.  The higher grade more saprolitic deposit regions like New Caledonia, Brazil and Indonesia were commercialised first by pyrometallurgical routes in the late 19th and into the 20th century; however as these higher grade deposits became more and more difficult to find, the industry looked to develop technologies that could process the vast amount of lower grade nickel laterites around the world by hydrometallurgical routes. The chart in However the chart in These planned H and EPAL based projects may not continue as was thought a few years ago ( If we include the newly planned projects along with current laterite production into the chart, the move is clearly towards hydrometallurgical process routes as shown in If there is more integration between the hydro and pyro routes then the HL and AL sections could be expected to increase significantly. Nickel laterites are currently processed with the exception of the hybrid Caron process by either a pyrometallurgical route or a hydrometallurgical route. Most pyrometallurgical routes (ferronickel and matte smelting) use a conventional flow sheet which includes steps for upgrading in the mine, drying, further upgrading, calcining/reduction and electric furnace smelting followed by either refining to produce a ferronickel product or converting to a low iron-containing matte. Currently the only operational hydrometallurgical processes are High Pressure Acid Leaching (HPAL). The current FeNi Nickel Pig Iron (NPI) and Ni matte smelters operate with nickel laterite ore that meet fairly specific criteria in terms of their Ni grade, Fe/Ni, Ni/Co and SiO These are shown in FeNi smelters require Ni grades of typically over 1.5% and Fe/Ni, Ni/Co and SiO This is to ensure that the cost of production is potentially viable, the nickel grade and recovery are over 20% and 90% respectively, the cobalt level in the FeNi is less than around 0.5% and the slag liquidus temperature is not significantly less (or greater) than that of the FeNi metal. FeNi alloys have a liquidus temperature of around 1500 High slag super-heat levels of over 100 The conventional approach to resolving this issue is to smelt a low liquidus temperature matte by adding sulphur normally as pyrite instead of producing FeNi. This allows the furnace (electric and in some instances coke fired shaft furnaces) to be operated at temperatures of around 1350–1400 An alternative approach is to overcome the slag superheat constraint by decreasing the FeO content of the slag using additional carbon-containing reductant in the feed to the furnace. The reduction of the FeO in the slag can have a major impact on the liquidus temperature in slags with high SiO However the additional reduction of iron oxide lowers the Ni grade (albeit normally increasing the Ni recovery to some extent) and can result FeNi with Ni contents well below the normal specification of 20% (i.e. typically between 5% and 15%). These low Ni grades are typical of Nickel Pig Iron (NPI) that has grown significantly as a source of nickel units in the past ten years especially in China. The best way to overcome this lowering of the FeNi grade and achieving an acceptable slag liquidus temperature is to blend a suitable proportion of NIP into the feed to the furnace. Additions of between 5% and 10% calcined NIP containing over 90% Ni as oxide can result in a FeNi grade of over 25% Ni and a slag with a liquidus of 1650 This approach can allow existing FeNi smelters to expand their operations or extend the life of their projects by introducing higher Fe/Ni and SiO Other than the hybrid Caron process the only operating hydrometallurgical process for nickel laterites are HPALs. The first commercial HPAL plant started production in 1959 at Moa Bay in Cuba and still continues today and Sherrit a 50% joint venture (JV) partner in Moa is a partner in the construction of the similar Ambatovy project in Madagascar. HPAL processes require ores that are predominantly limonitic; have lower Mg-usually limited to <4% and require lower Al content. The pressure leaching is carried out either in After Moa Bay no new plants were built until the late nineteen nineties which saw first Bulong, then Cawse and finally in 1999 Murrin Murrin was completed. Once built all of these projects produce nickel in products at relatively low operating costs but the cost of construction was significant and both Bulong and Cawse are now closed. While many projects have studied the use of HPAL and still do there have only been two recent additions to the HPAL family. Vale’s Goro Nickel project in New Caledonia. This plant is now in operation but has suffered many technical difficulties and still is far from operating successfully at anywhere near its design capacity. Ravensthorpe Nickel project in WA. BHP Billiton built this EPAL plant which commenced operation in 2008 only to shut-down due to technical issues and a low nickel price and was then sold to First Quantum who refitted the plant and started production in 2011 and are now well advanced with the ramp-up phase. There is another plant, Rio Tuba, in the Philippines operated by Sumitomo and partners which is smaller and has operated successfully. An expansion and a possible further new plant is planned in the near future by the partnership operating Rio Tuba. Heap leaching is well established process used for the treatment of copper, gold and uranium and it is now being used in varying degrees by established companies such as Glencore (Minara), Vale, BHPB and Xstrata for nickel laterites. The heap leach process has the potential to be the lowest capital cost and most environmentally friendly of the leach processes for nickel laterites. It has been demonstrated on a large scale by companies as follows: European Nickel (ENK) at its Çaldağ project this project has since been sold and new Turkish owners are continuing to commercialise the heap leach, site preparation has begun for the commercial heap leach operation with full construction expected Q1 2013. ENK at the Acoje project in the Philippines. Glencore (Minara) at Murrin Murrin which has commercially heap leached more than 1,000,000 tonnes of nickel laterite ore to give greater flexibility to the HPAL circuit. BHP Billiton has demonstrated on a large scale the heap leach process at Cerro Matoso. Both Vale and Xstrata have conducted various testing with respect to heap leaching. The following Atmospheric tank leaching whereby the saprolite or limonite is leached in a tank at elevated temperatures but at atmospheric pressure. This process has not yet been seriously demonstrated on a large scale but several projects are considering commercialisation. Reviews of hydrometallurgical process routes include those of ( There have been some advances to both the pyro and hydro routes over recent years these outlined briefly below.  The smelting of Nickel Pig Iron (5–10% Ni mostly in China) from laterite ore grades that are not suitable for producing standard grades of FeNi (20–45% Ni). The low liquidus temperature of NPI with higher carbon and silicon contents allows lower furnace operating temperatures and hence lower melting point slags to be used with SiO The smelting of Ni laterite ore fines in suitably designed unit operations such as fluidised bed (FB) systems and DC arc furnaces (for example the 12  EPAL – this a process which combines the HPAL for the limonitic ore and a further atmospheric tank leach for the saprolite ore. This step neutralises acid remaining in the pregnant liquor of the HPAL stream with the saprolite ore, also achieving some extraction from the saprolite (approx. 60–70%) with no further acid addition. Ravensthorpe is an EPAL plant. Staged AL – this process uses different ore fractions in later stages of AL to utilise excess acid remaining from the initial limonite AL. Ion Exchange of PLS – most new HL & AL projects are currently looking to incorporate some form of ion exchange into the downstream treatment of the PLS to produce a higher grade purer nickel product and perhaps other separate saleable products. The approach of using a smelting process downstream of the hydrometallurgical stages allows for greater flexibility in regard to the composition of the NIP in most regards compared with an SXEW plant. However the cobalt content is a consideration due to the specification of Ni/Co of over 30 and in particular over 40 for nuclear applications for the stainless and alloy steel products. The Fe, Al, Mg, Mn content of the NIP is not a major consideration in the smelting of NIP since these components will form part of the slag especially in the case of co-smelting with nickel laterites. The drying and calcining of the NIP is important to ensure a low LOI (<1%) and sulphur level (<1%) in the calcined intermediate product. The calcining temperature required is typically over 1000 and up to 1200 The physical characteristics of the calcined NIP are important too since the NiO is a classified material according the safety data sheet for this substance. Great care in its handling and the avoidance of dust generation are critical health and safety considerations. The addition of a binder and sintering into a handleable agglomerate is one approach to controlling the generation of dust. However the downstream feed handling requirements into the smelting furnace need to be accommodated. A number of blending options can be used to produce FeNi with grades from around 20% up to almost 100%. The Ni/Co ratio can reach over 100 when the content in the NIP is lowered to less that 0.25% which is a premium grade FeNi product that can be used as a trimming addition at the end of the converting stage in the stainless and alloy steel production processes. One of the most critical considerations in the overall process flow sheet and in particular the pyrometallurgical stages is the nickel recovery. The main aspect here is the nickel losses in the slag phase. It is difficult to achieve levels of Ni below 0.05% with values of 0.1–0.2% more typical. The relatively high cost of the NIP at 70–75% of LME implies that a recovery of over 99% must be achieved especially if the NIP is purchased by a non-integrated producer. Typical recoveries for smelting laterite ores are between 90% and up to 95%. Conditions that favour a high recovery include: A high Ni head grade in the feed (>2.5%). A low slag to metal ratio (typically less than 1/1-FeNi smelting from ore has typically a slag to metal ratio of from 10 to 20/1). Strongly reducing conditions (over 25% Fe reduction). A high operating temperature (over 1600 Sufficient residence time in the furnace. Batch tapping to allow metal coalescence and settling. Good slag metal separation. The benefits of using a high proportion of NIP apart from the lower Capex include the decrease in furnace power rating required and the lower slag to metal ratio that favour increased Ni recovery. For example a 10 The size and rating of furnaces to smelt blends of nickel laterite with NIP obviously need to be considerably larger depending on the ratio of laterite feed to NIP. For example a 40 This example would require about 4 A conceptual process flow sheet can be found in A range of feed ore grades and percentages of NIP in four blends were modelled all producing approximately 20,000 The flowsheet for a stand-alone heap leach operation with an ion exchange included in the downstream processing plant to produce a high purity NIP for case study 1 is illustrated in the Schematic in A generic deposit was used rather than a specific case with an average run of mine ore according to A Metsim model was used to generate the mass balance, the results of which were used in the economic studies of Section The ambient temperature heap leach operation results in a PLS solution of composition shown in It can be seen from the table above that the final PLS of a heap leach process is lower in unwanted impurities, i.e. it shows higher selectivity towards nickel extraction in comparison to say iron. The solution formed by both a HL and an AL can be treated by a simple precipitation process to remove the impurity metals and then further precipitation steps produce a mixed hydroxide product containing >30% nickel and some cobalt. An improved downstream process looks to use ion exchange technology to remove nickel and cobalt as separate products. There are several ways to do this and much work is currently in progress by various parties including major mining companies and AVL. The flowsheet discussed here includes the IX step in the downstream treatment. Typical product analyses for the various processes are shown in  The pyrometallurgical process flow sheet comprises drying and calcining of the laterite ore and blending with the separately dried and calcined NIP. Drying is carried out at around 130–150 Partial pre-reduction is achieved by adding coal to the rotary kiln. The main impact of this is to reduce the volume of gas released and to some extent the electrical energy required in the downstream smelting stage. The calcined blended feed is smelted in a direct current furnace to produce the FeNi alloy and a disposable slag. The amount of coal reducing agent added is based on the residual carbon in the kiln and what is needed to achieve the target Ni grade in the FeNi of 25%. The FeNi alloy is refined and any metal that is entrained in the refining furnace slag is recovered. The typical feed compositions of calcined NIP and Ni laterite ore are shown in Pyrosim ( The assumptions used in the modelling are as follows: The nickel ore contained Ni as three different head grades 1.16%, 1.6% and 2.4%. The alloy produced contained 25% Ni in FeNi with the balance of 75% comprised of iron plus minor amounts of carbon, silicon and other elements adding up to less than 1% .The addition of carbon reducing agent and scrap iron were used to adjust the extent of reduction of the iron oxide in the feed and composition of the FeNi to the 25% Ni grade in the FeNi alloy. The indicative operating temperature was 1650 One of the main cost considerations in the smelting of FeNi is the head Ni grade. The addition of Ni intermediate product (NIP) increases the Ni content significantly. The head grade increases from 1.6% to 70% Ni contained in NiO as the percentage of Ni increases proportionately as shown in  Assumptions The compositions of the feed material and products used are as shown in The electrical energy consumption for smelting is based on the feed materials being at 25 The results of the modelling are tabulated in Where FI is a fully integrated system, i.e. the NIP is produced at cost and used as a feedstock for an existing smelter. The case studies where no FI is suffixed it is assumed that NIP is purchased at market rates from a Heap Leach project including IX in the downstream, which are currently approximately 80% of LME nickel price. The significance of introducing a NIP into an existing smelter is illustrated clearly in    The case studies generated operating costs on per tonne of produced nickel basis. If we add increasing amounts of purchased NIP the cost curve for the 1.16% is significantly reduced and there are worthwhile reductions for the medium grades with higher % of NIP feeds as shown in When we look to a fully integrated circuit however they are even savings to be had with a higher grade nickel feed, as expected these savings are much greater where the feed ore is low grade as shown in Case study economics have been assessed using AVL developed Excel economic models for the case studies to be assessed. In this case the numerous variables required for the model are taken from typical projects or generated by model for individual case studies. Where any data is unavailable reasonable assumptions are made. Main variables in the model relate to: Deposit tonnage and chemical composition – in particular Ni and Co grades. Mining parameters and unit costs. Metallurgical parameters (acid consumption, metal extractions, plant recovery, reagent usage). Basic costs such as diesel price, electricity purchase/sales price. Adjustments for distances to water, limestone and customers. Infrastructure development needs. NB labour rate adjustments are not used as productivity and labour rates are considered inversely proportional. The estimate is based on AVL’s internal database for revenue calculations, project capital and operating costs, modified for the conditions at site. The cash flow is then calculated from an Excel spreadsheet model. The principal assumptions of the evaluation are: When NIP is purchased for use in an existing smelter the assumption is that it has been produced via a HL with an IX, so at 80% payable nickel. On the above basis therefore the case studies would have the economic characteristics shown in   There are other cases that would be profitable at the long term nickel price of US$ 8.50/lb but the economics for these are marginal and payback time for capital expenditure lengthy. The nickel and cobalt prices were adjusted upwards to review how this affects the commercial sensitivity. All cobalt prices are assumed to be double that of the selected nickel price. The main conclusions from the modelling both metallurgical and economic are as follows. For integration of NIP into an existing smelter Reduced operating cost per tonne of nickel produced. Reduced energy consumption per t Ni produced. Integration on one site could reduce reliance on grid power completely by utilisation of acid plant excess power for pyro plant. Possible increase in Ni grade of FeNi product (if selected and/or required by customer). For integration of new Greenfield projects in addition to those above Reduction in the necessary size of the furnace capacity and hence capital costs. For an integrated site Increased resource utilisation. Commercialisation of hitherto uneconomic resources. Commercialisation of new technologies. Increased cobalt production earlier in the production chain. Reduction in CO Environmental improvements per tonne nickel produced. Mike Oxley (AVL) for assistance with and use of the AVL project economic models.