To recover valuable metals from Bayan Obo tailings, thermodynamic analysis and experiments were conducted to extract Fe, Nb, and rare earth elements (REE) from low-grade REE–Nb–Fe ore by reduction roasting, magnetic separation, and sulfuric acid (H2SO4) leaching. The separation efficiency of Fe increased with the increase in reduction roasting temperature to 1100°C. Once the reduction roasting temperature reached 1150°C, the aeschynite ((Ce,Nd)NbTiO6) as the main mineral phase of Nb was reduced to NbC. After a magnetic treatment, it was observed that ~79.1% of Fe was separated, and the grade of total Fe in the magnetic materials was 88.2wt.% when the ores were reduced first at the optimum temperature of 1100°C. As the Fe was removed, the content of Nb2O5 and REE oxides ((REE)O) in magnetic separation tailings also increased. A H2SO4 solution was used to separate Nb and REE from the magnetic separation tailings at 160°C. The results showed that ~98.2% of Nb and 99.0% of REE were extracted; they could be used to obtain Nb or REE-bearing products by further purification.Bayan Obo ore deposit located in Inner Mongolia, China is one of the well-known polymetallic ores in the world, containing 1.4 billion tons of Fe, 1 million tons of Nb In China, the Nb in Bayan Obo ore is first reduced with hot metal in a blast furnace and then selectively oxidized in a converter ( Hydrometallurgy is an attractive method for mineral processing because of reduced energy consumption and high-purity products. This method has been widely used in the treatment of Nb or REE-bearing ore using an alkali or acid solution.  With the generation of CO in reaction of Eq. In Man's investigation, at the heating rate of 10 Therefore, the reduction of metallic oxides depends on the reaction equilibrium of Eq.  The predominance area diagram of Nb at 1000 At a mixed atmosphere of CO and CO A low-grade REE–Nb–Fe ore was used in this study; the chemical composition is shown in The reduction roasting experiments were carried out in a muffle furnace shown in H   A SEM image of the magnetic separation tailings reduced at 1150  The grade and recovery of Nb A series of leaching tests for the magnetic separation tailings were carried out in H The residues obtained from the leaching at 160 In this study, the separation and recovery of valuable metals from a low-grade REE–Nb–Fe ore were investigated. A large quantity of Fe was separated from the ore as DRI by reduction roasting and magnetic separation. The results showed that the separation efficiency of Fe increased with the increase of reduction temperature, and 1100 In the future, reaction kinetics of the carbothermic reduction of REE–Nb–Fe ore, phase transition during the leaching, and efficient extraction of Nb and REE from the leaching solution will be investigated. Financial support to this project is provided by the