Pure strain is an important component of the total displacement vector in fold-thrust belts like the Himalayan orogenic belt. We describe a methodology to compute cataclastic strain from external thrust sheets using the Bootstrapped Modified Normalized Fry Method and validate it in two different structural settings in the frontal Himalaya. In the frontal imbricate zone of the Dharan salient in the Darjiling Himalaya we measured the highest strain from a central imbricate thrust (T3) and found that strain decreased away from the fault zones within individual thrust sheets. Modelling of our results indicated that there was significant layer-perpendicular flattening in the fault zones while layer parallel shortening related strain dominated the thrust sheets. Also, fault parallel shear decreased away from the fault zones. In contrast, layer-perpendicular flattening was largely absent in the fault zone associated with the Main Frontal thrust (MFT) and the MFT sheet in the Mohand Range of the Dehradun recess. Here the strain distribution pattern was consistent with a trishear fault propagation monocline which is our preferred model for the structure of the MFT sheet in the recess. Modelling of our results suggested that fault parallel shear decreased away from the MFT fault zone like in the thrust sheets from the Dharan salient and that the fault propagation folding was accomplished by flexural slip folding. We contend that our methodology can be effectively used to quantify and study the pure strain part of the total displacement vector in external thrust sheets from fold-thrust belts worldwide.Crustal evolution in fold-thrust belt (FTB) settings like the Himalayan orogenic belt involves kinematic analysis of deformation. This requires the quantification of the total displacement vector in individual thrust sheets and their step-wise restoration in balanced cross sections in a foreland-to-hinterland sequence. The total displacement vector consists of rigid-body translation and rotation. In addition, pure strain, which is shape change without any rigid-body deformation, is also recognized as an important component of the total displacement vector in internal and transitional thrust sheets ( Strain can be developed in thrust sheets in a FTB in different ways. In FTBs, strain can develop during early stage layer parallel shortening (LPS) prior to thrusting and emplacement of thrust sheets (e.g. Deformation of rocks in a fault zone results in an overall grain-size reduction by brittle, brittle-ductile or ductile deformation processes (e.g. GSPO development, irrespective of the deformation mechanism and conditions, systematically changes the spacing between grain centers during deformation (e.g., In the Himalayan FTB most of the strain work has been carried out in the higher Himalayan high grade metamorphic rocks from internal thrust sheets. Strain has been quantified from the Tethyan, Greater, Lesser and Sub-Himalayan thrust sheets from Garhwal and Bhutan Himalaya ( Low magnitude strain (~1.1–1.2) was found from the foreland in the Siwaliks rocks in the Bhutan Himalaya (  The Himalayan boundary is sinuous in plan forming salients and recesses from west to east (e.g. The Dharan salient lies between the Kosi River, Eastern Nepal in the west and the Gish River, West Bengal in the east ( We carried out geological fieldwork along the Tista and the Lish River sections in the Dharan salient, Darjiling Sikkim Himalaya ( Regional transport-parallel (N-S and NE-SW for the Dharan salient and the Dehradun recess, respectively) thin sections were prepared for our study ( We used the centroid coordinates and grain area computed from each of the thin-sections to compute cataclastic strain using the nearest neighbor, center-to-center Bootstrapped Modified Normalized Fry method to compute Finally, we used StrainSim v.3.6.1 ( We first discuss our results from the microstructural and cataclastic strain analysis from the Middle Siwaliks samples in the Lish and the Tista River sections from the frontal schuppen zone in the Dharan salient, Darjiling Himalaya. We then describe our results from the MFT thrust sheet in the Dehradun recess, Garhwal Himalaya. Microstructural analysis of Middle Siwaliks samples in the frontal Dharan salient in the footwall of the MBT was mainly done to identify deformation features and mechanisms. Sub-Himalayan thrust sheets associated with frontal thrusts (e.g. MFT) predominantly exhibited elastico-frictional (brittle) deformation features. Subsequently, we studied the cataclastic strain distribution from the two sections in the frontal schuppen/imbricate zone. Twelve imbricate thrusts (SKT, T1-T11) were reported from the schuppen zone of the Tista River section south of the MBT ( We studied 6 Middle Siwaliks (TV1-TV6) and 1 Lower Siwaliks (TV7) sandstone samples ( The Lish River section in the Dharan salient consists of five imbricates (BT1-BT5, Microstructural analysis results confirmed brittle deformation in the Middle Siwaliks sandstone from the frontal schuppen zone and the presence of GSPO. We quantified finite cataclastic strain ( Finite strain values ( Finite cataclastic strain values ( We collected 21 oriented, Middle Siwaliks sandstone samples from two regional NE-SW transport parallel transects (in areas BB, KJ and MR in We observed predominantly brittle deformation microstructures such as intragranular fractures (IF) within individual grains and intergranular fractures (InF) that cut across more than one grain ( Finite strain ( Microstructural study of all the Siwaliks sandstone samples reveal elastico-frictional (brittle) and quasi-plastic (ductile) microstructural deformation features in both the Dehradun recess and the Dharan salient. However, random distribution of ductile deformation features from the sandstones in both the Dharan salient and the Dehradun recess suggests that they were inherited from the high grade rocks in the Himalayan FTB ( Some of our samples exhibited GSPO under these conditions. The GSPO in the quartz grains from the Middle Siwaliks sandstone was not random like the quasi-plastic features in both the Dharan salient and the Dehradun recess. Presence of GSPO in Siwaliks rocks is intriguing and, if not inherited from a higher provenance within the Himalayan FTB, must be systematically developed due to cataclastic flow under brittle conditions. GSPOs are typically recognized as ductile features formed from alignment of flaky-minerals due to deviatoric stress under ductile deformation conditions ( The Middle Siwaliks sandstone samples from the lower (170–239 m) Tista River valley section was more deformed as the TV7 was the northern most sample in the SKT sheet in the Dharan salient. In the hanging wall of the SKT (sample TV7), which was last active around ~40 ka (cf. Table 1 of Cataclastic strain analysis in the T1 sheet, south of the SKT ( Sample LV4 was the only sample collected from the T2 sheet near the T2 fault zone - south of the T1 sheet ( We collected 3 samples from north-dipping beds in the T3 sheet from the T3 fault zone (TV4), in the T2 footwall proximal to T2 fault zone (TV5) and the center of the T3 sheet (LV3) ( Sample LV2 from the T4 sheet measured The cataclastic strain in the sample TV3 from the T5 fault zone ( In the T6 sheet, sample TV2 measured Our strain analysis, and subsequent StrainSim3.6.1 modelling of our results, suggests that the Middle Siwaliks rocks were subject to a maximum of 10.7% LPS (LV2 from T4 sheet). We also modelled LPS of 5% and 8% in the frontal T8 (TV1) and T1 (LV6) sheets. An upper bound of 11% LPS in the frontal schuppen zone appears to be reasonable considering that the LPS in LV2 was modified by only 2.6° top-to-the-SE fault parallel shearing related to T4. We, therefore, removed 11% LPS between the mountain front and the SKT from the balanced cross section in the Tista valley section ( Fault-parallel shear models in the imbricate thrust fault zones and sheets varied between 1.25° and 23.5° top-to-the-south/dextral to 0.5° and 21.5° top-to-the-north/sinistral on north-dipping imbricate thrusts and south-dipping faults conjugate to the thrusts observed in the schuppen zone, respectively. In addition, two samples were also taken from south-dipping limbs of meter-scale folds in the SKT (TV7) and the T5 (LV1) sheets. These were modelled by ~7° top-to-the-north (TV7) and top-to-the-west (LV1) bedding-parallel slip in the folds. Layer-perpendicular flattening ranging from 2.5 to 33.3% was also modeled in all samples except LV2, LV6 and TV1 where LPS was measured. The flattening percentage was highest close to the fault zones (TV3, TV4 & TV5) of the imbricate thrusts and decreased into the thrust sheets ( Thrust sheets T1, T3 and T5 contained samples from both the Lish and Tista River sections. In T1, samples LV5 and TV6 had almost identical cataclastic strain ( Our results in the Dharan salient suggest (i) cataclastic flow related strain exists in the imbricate thrust sheets in the frontal schuppen/imbricate belt (ii) measured strain values within an individual thrust sheet show consistency both in We mapped a fault-related monocline in the MFT sheet ( We observed a systematic trend in The sample (KJ1) from an island in the gouge dominated part of the MFT fault damage zone in Khajnawar Rao ( In the frontal horizontal limb of the fault propagation monocline in the central and western Mohand Range, respectively samples MR1, MR2 and BB1 measured Near the hinge zone of the monocline, samples MR3 and BB2 measured Measured Our results from both the Dharan salient and the Dehradun recess record systematic variation in finite strain within individual as well as across multiple thrust sheets. This implies that our methodology can be used as a new method to systematically study cataclastic strain from rocks exhibiting GSPO in external thrust sheets like quasi-plastic strain that has been traditionally studied from internal sheets in FTBs worldwide. In the Himalayan FTB, our methodology opens up the possibility of quantification of cataclastic strain from the Siwaliks sandstone. Our methodology, therefore, can be applied to quantification of cataclastic strain in addition to translation and rotation components of the total displacement vector in the kinematic analysis of FTB deformation from external thrust sheets worldwide. This also implies that GSPO in rocks can be effectively used from internal, transitional as well as external thrust sheets to quantify pure strain from FTBs resulting from dislocation creep or cataclastic flow. We describe a new methodology to quantify cataclastic strain from GSPO observed in the Middle Siwaliks sandstone from the Himalaya that was deformed by cataclastic flow. We have validated this methodology using samples from (i) the frontal schuppen zone in the Dharan salient along the Tista and the Lish River sections in the Darjiling Himalaya, (ii) the fault propagation monocline in the MFT sheet in the Mohand Range of NW Himalaya. Major outcomes of this study are as follows: Microstructural analysis shows presence of dominantly brittle or elastico-frictional deformation features and grain shape preferred orientation (GSPO) in the Middle Siwaliks sandstone from the frontal Himalaya. GSPO in Middle Siwaliks rocks is best explained by matrix- and block-supported cataclastic flow as all the samples were collected from thrust sheets deformed in the elastico-frictional or brittle deformation regime. GSPO induced cataclastic strain was quantified successfully using the Bootstrapped Modified Normalized Fry method. Our results from both the Dharan salient and the Dehradun recess record systematic variation in finite strain within individual as well as across multiple thrust sheets. In the Dharan salient, higher strain values ( In the Dehradun recess, maximum finite strain ( Modelling of our results in the Dehradun recess indicates that fault parallel shear decreased away from the MFT fault zone. Bedding parallel shear was also modelled in the NE-dipping limb of the monocline suggesting that the fault propagation folding involved flexural-slip folding. This work effectively allows the quantification of pure strain part of the total displacement vector of deformation in internal, transitional and external thrust sheets from FTBs worldwide. The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. The fieldwork and sample collection for this paper was supported by