The purpose of this study was to investigate the effects of Fibrin Glue (FG) and activated platelet-rich plasma (a-PRP) on the proliferation and osteogenic differentiation of human dental pulp stem cells (h-DPSCs). Therefore, we planned to investigate in vitro behavior of porous composite scaffolds based on chitosan-gelatin/nanohydroxyapatite (CS–G/nHA) treated with FG and a-PRP. The porous structure of CS–G/nHA was prepared using combination of particle leaching and freeze-drying methods. The a-PRP was prepared from the centrifugation of whole blood activated with calcium chloride. Four groups of composite scaffolds were fabricated to seed h-DPSCs: (1) a-PRP–FG/CS–G/nHA; (2) FG/CS–G/nHA; (3) a-PRP/CS–G/nHA; (4) CS–G/nHA. The 14 days SEM image reveled organized fibrin network on scaffolds surface. All groups treated with FG and a-PRP, showed improved adhesion of seeded h-DPSCs compared to CS–G/nHA. Cytotoxicity of the composite scaffolds was assessed by MTT. Alizarin red staining confirmed the formation of bone minerals by h-DPSCs after 21 days of cell seeding. In addition, the a-PRP–FG treated scaffolds exhibited significantly elevated bone gamma-carboxyglutamic acid-containing protein (BGLAP), bone morphogenetic protein 2 (BMP2), and runt-related transcription factor 2 (RUNX2) gene expression. The present result the composite scaffolds treated with FG and a-PRP showed a fibrin network, preferentially on the surface of composite scaffold increasing the mineralization and osteoblastic differentiation of harvested cells. In addition, a-PRP–FG/ CS–G/nHA scaffold increased bone marker gene expressions from day 7 to day 21.The need for bone defect repair arises because of different conditions such as congenital malformations, tumors, trauma and bone fractures [ Acetic acid, gelatin powder (microbiology), and sodium chloride (NaCl) were obtained from Merck (Germany). High molecular weight chitosan (CS), nano-hydroxyapatite (nHA, mean particle size<200 nm), N-(3-Dimethylaminopropyl)- In our previous work we synthesized a porous CS-G/nHA composite scaffold [ For sterilization, the scaffolds were placed in 12-well plates and immersed in a 70% ethanol until ethanol was evaporated. Then, scaffolds were placed under the UV lamp for 20 min. In the next step, scaffolds were washed with phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) solution to remove ethanol residues prior to overnight incubation in the Dulbecco's Modified Eagle's medium (DMEM) at 37 °C Normal impacted third molars were collected from adults (20–30 y of age, n = 15) at the Department of Dentistry, Tabriz Dental Hospital (Tabriz, Iran). All study participants provided written informed consent prior to study initiation. Tooth surfaces were cleaned and cut around the cementum-enamel junction with sterilized dental fissure burs to reveal the pulp chamber. The pulp tissue was separated from the crown and root and digested in a solution of 2 mg/mL collagenase and 4 mg/mL dispase for 1 h at 37 °C. The tissue suspension was filtered through a 70-μm cell strainer, and the cells were pelleted by centrifugation at 630 × g for 7 min at 25 °C. These cells were cultured in a high-glucose Dulbecco’s modified Eagle’s medium (DMEM) with 10% fetal bovine serum (FBS, Gibco) and 1% penicillin (Gibco). The medium was refreshed every 3 days. When reaching 80–90% confluency, h-DPSCs were detached and passaged, and passage 4 cells were used. In order to prepare fibrin glue first 1.5 mg fibrinogen (from bovine plasma, Sigma) solubilized in 500 μL DMEM and then 125 units of thrombin (from bovine plasma, Merck) dissolved in 2.4 mL of 10%calcium chloride solution. Finally, 100 μL of the prepared thrombin solution was added to the fibrinogen solution. 100 ml of human plasma were centrifuged at 3500×g for 5 min at room temperature and the supernatant was discarded. Activated PRP was prepared by addition of 250 μL of calcium chloride 10% w/v for every 10 mL of PRP solution [ For group 1, a-PRP–FG/CS–G/nHA, the pre-cultured h-DPSCs were trypsinized and resuspended in 500 μL fibrin glue and seeded on the scaffold (60,000–70,000 cells per scaffold). The next step, 500 μL of activated-PRP was added to composites and incubated at 37 °C for 30 min. Then, h-DPSCs-seeded scaffolds were taken out the incubator to allow differentiation and osteogenesis to begin. In this way, medium on the scaffolds was removed and replaced by providing osteogenic medium composed of DMEM-low glucose completed with 10% FBS, 10 mM β-glycerol-phosphate (Sigma), 100 nM dexamethasone (Sigma), 0.05 mM L-ascorbic acid and 1% penicillin/streptomycin (Gibco). The medium was regularly refreshed every 3 days. For group 2, FG/CS–G/nHA, the pre-cultured h-DPSCs were trypsinized and resuspended in 500 μL fibrin glue and seeded on the scaffold (60,000–70,000 cells per scaffold). The scaffolds were incubated at 37 °C for 30 min before osteogenic medium was added. The medium was regularly replaced every 3 days. For group 3, the pre-cultured h-DPSCs were trypsinized and resuspended in 500 μL activated-PRP and seeded on the scaffold (60,000–70,000 cells per scaffold). The scaffolds were incubated at 37 °C for 30 min and treated alike previous groups. For group 4, the pre-cultured h-DPSCs were trypsinized and resuspended in DMEM and seeded on the scaffold at a seeding density of 60,000–70,000 cells per scaffolds. Other preparatory steps were taken similarly. The morphology of the h-DPSCs and cells attachment on the porous CS–G/nHA scaffold was assessed in different groups by SEM after 14 days of cell culture. The cell-seeded composite scaffolds were washed with PBS (pH 7.4) and then fixed in a solution 2.5% glutaraldehyde for 2 h. The specimens were dehydrated in a series of ethanol/water solutions, 50%, 70%, 90% and 100% ethanol solutions (15 min for each solution) and dried at room temperature. The MTT assay was performed for evaluating mitochondrial activity and cell proliferation. Based on this measure, living cells can reduce the MTT substrate (3-[4,5-dimethylthiazol-2- yl]-2,5-diphenyltetrasodium bromide) to a dark-blue formazan in presence of active mitochondria and, therefore, is an accurate measure of cell proliferation in a culture. To perform this assay, 80,000 cells/well were seeded in scaffolds and cultured in 24-well plates and incubated in 37 °C for 3, 7 and 12 days. The h-DPSCs cultured on tissue culture polystyrene including DMEM without scaffold served as control. After those periods, the scaffolds were removed and transferred to 24-well plates and MTT (1 mL of 5 mg/mL) was added prior to incubation at 37 °C for 4 h. The MTT solution was removed, and 1 mL of DMSO was added to dissolve the purple formazan crystals. Then 300 μL of each sample was transferred to a 96-well plate. The absorbance was measured at 570 nm with ELISA reader. The osteogenic differentiation of h-DPSCs seeded on composite scaffolds was studied using the alkaline phosphatase (ALP) activity [ Alizarin Red S (ARS) staining was carried out to evaluate bone mineralization. ARS staining is routinely applied to measure calcium-rich deposits by cells in culture media [ A quantitative real-time reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction (qRT-PCR, Rotor-Gene, Germany) method was used. After culturing in the osteogenic medium for 7 and 21 days, the total cellular RNA of cells were extracted by means of TRIzol reagent (Invitrogen) according to the manufacturer’s protocol. Reverse-transcribed to cDNA was carried out using the RevertAid First Strand cDNA Synthesis Kit (Fermentase, Life Science, and USA). The concentration and quality of isolated RNA was determined based upon OD value 260/280 ratio, and its quality was assessed on 1% agarose gel electrophoresis. Following reverse transcription, cDNA was quantified on a Rotor-Gene Q real-time PCR detection system (QIAGEN, Hilden City, Germany) using a SYBR Green PCR Master Mix (Takara Bio Inc., Japan). The sequence of the primers used in the Q-PCR were as follows: BMP2 forward 5′-GAGAAGGAGGAGGCAAAGAAAAG-3′, reverse 5′-GAAGCAGCAACGCTAGAAGAC -3′; RUNX2 forward 5′-ACCTTGACCATAACCGTCTTC-3′, reverse 5′-GGCGGTCAGAGAACAAACTA-3′; BGLAP 5′-ATTGTGGCTCACCCTCCATCA -3′, reverse 5′- AGGGCTATTTGGGGGTCATC-3′; Glycerol-3-phosphate dehydrogenase (GAPDH) 5′-CAAGATCATCAGCAATGCCTCC-3′, reverse 5′- GCCATCACGCCACAGTTTCC -3′. PCR profile was 95 °C for 10 min, followed by 40 cycles of 94 °C for 10 s, 63 °C for 22 s, and 72 °C for 15 s. Relative expression for each target gene was calculated using the All results are presented as the mean ± standard deviation. Data analysis was performed using The effects of the FG, a-PRP and a-PRP-FG on the proliferation and cellular viability were assessed using a MTT assay. The results in The images indicated a fibrin network preferentially on the surfaces of composite scaffolds treated with both FG and a-PRP. The h-DPSCs were capable adhering and spreading well on the surfaces of all studied scaffolds. The SEM of the scaffolds presented countless cell colonies on the surface scaffolds at day 14. The aggregation of adherent h-DPSCs on FG and a-PRP treated were higher than that of the CS–G/nHA (p < 0.05), suggesting that the FG and a-PRP were responsible for adhesion of cells. Also, h-DPSCs increased after 14 days, implying that addition of FG and a-PRP is non-toxic and is appropriate for the growth and attachment of h-DPSCs. The ALP activity among of the h-DPCs cultured on a-PRP–FG/CS–G/nHA, FG/CS–G/nHA, and a-PRP/CS–G/nHA increased significantly with comparison to the CS–G/nHA and control groups after two cultured weeks ( The osteogenic differentiation of h-DPSCs seeded on CS–G/nHA scaffold with FG and a-PRP was examined by alizarin red S (ARS) staining, well known as a late indicator of osteogenesis, to specify matrix mineralization. After 21 days of culture, the intensity of ARS on the CS–G/nHA scaffold with FG and PRP was significantly higher than that of the other groups ( In order to investigation the effects of FG and a-PRP on osteoblast differentiation, osteogenic marker genes including RUNX2, BMP2 and OC were analyzed by quantitative real-time PCR. The relative gene expression of each treated group compared to the control. As shown in In this study, we investigated the impact of combination of CS–G/nHA scaffolds with FG and a-PRP on differentiation and proliferation of h-DPSCs. Images of SEM provide evidence implying that h-DPSCs adhered to the fibrin glue and a-PRP. So, it can be suggested that these cells can be stimulated without further migration. A process that can be potentially useful, because it can inhibit mesenchymal cell mobility [ The osteoblastic differentiation is managed by groups of cytokines, hormones, growth factors and many transcription factors. Also the osteogenic cells began cell differentiation and maturity. They initiated to express special markers for osteoblasts including genes such as runt-related transcription, factor-2 (Runx2) and relevant protein mineralization process such as alkaline phosphatase (ALP), collagen type I, osteocalcin (OC), osteopontin (OPN) and bone morphogenetic protein 2 (BMP-2) [ The ration of selection of h-DPSCs in present study was the facility of harvesting in large enough numbers needed for grafts. In addition, they have a great potential for differentiation into osteogenic cells [ Several articles claimed that presence of the a-PRP and FG on the scaffold plays an important role in the cell viability and proliferation of the osteoblast cells [ Although FG and a-PRP have been applied in medicine for decades [ Fibrin glue and activated platelet-rich plasma were combined with CS–G/nHA scaffold. A fibrin network was constituted as a result, preferentially on the surface of composite scaffold increasing the mineralization and osteoblastic differentiation of harvested cells. In addition, a-PRP–FG/ CS–G/nHA scaffold increased bone marker gene expressions from day to day 21. Our finding strongly offers that a-PRP–FG treated scaffolds are capable of providing a microenvironment rich in growth factors to promote differentiation and proliferation of h-DPSCs. None. This work was supported by we would like to express my special thanks to everyone who supported us during the course of this project.