It is crucially important to select a proper TBM and define its basic specifications such as installed cutterhead torque and TBM thrust capacities for a special job. Underestimation of these parameters would reduce excavation performance. In order to generate a general guidance on determination of some of TBM specifications, a database including 262 TBMs’ design parameters is established. The statistical relationships between the design parameters of 262 TBMs (72 open, 24 single shield, 41 double shield, 86 EPB and 39 slurry TBMs) manufactured after 1985 in the world are investigated and theoretical concepts behind the relationships between TBM diameter and installed thrust capacity, nominal cutterhead torque capacity, total weight, maximum rotational speed of cutterhead, and number of disc cutters are discussed. Some of the correlations between these parameters are found to be strong. The results are summarized in a table given upper and lower limits of predicted values. At the end, some data obtained in different 30 tunnels excavated in different geological conditions with different TBMs in Turkey are discussed to test the validity of predictor equations developed within the frame of this study.Tunnel boring machine (TBM) technology has been improved steadily and the use of TBMs has been increased after introduction of modern tunnel boring machines in early 1950s. TBMs provide a safe working area for crew, high advance rates in favorable ground conditions and minimal ground disturbance. When ground conditions are reasonably good, a TBM may be two or four times faster than drilling and blasting ( Suitable TBM type for a project should be selected to avoid problems; however, a universal method for TBM selection has not been developed yet. German Committee for Underground Construction Two important design parameters, which are available cutterhead torque and TBM thrust capacity, should also be properly defined for any project in addition to proper selection of TBM type. There were many projects driven by different types of TBMs suffered from inadequate cutterhead torque and/or TBM thrust capacity ( Many studies were performed for predicting thrust and torque requirement of open type hard rock TBMs.  TBMs used in squeezing ground conditions require more thrust and cutterhead torque than other TBMs. Comprehensive studies were made and empirical methods were developed for predicting thrust and torque requirement of TBMs used in squeezing and/or swelling ground ( There are also some empirical methods developed for predicting thrust and torque requirement of soft ground TBMs ( Analysis of the literature indicates that estimation/prediction models of installed TBM thrust and cutterhead torque for different types of TBMs are either very complicated requiring many machine features, which are very difficult to obtain or unknown before the construction or bidding process, or they are out of date since the TBM technology has been improved. On the other hand, there is not much model or information about some other parameters such as TBM weight, number of cutters, and maximum cutterhead rotational speed. Therefore, any databases on TBM specifications should be renewed from time to time, and the data should be well classified based on purpose of end use. A large database of specifications of different types of TBMs and project information along with the geological conditions to some extend and excavation performance is generated in this study. The database includes design parameters/specifications of total 262 TBMs (72 open, 24 single shields, 41 double shields, 86 EPB, and 39 slurry TBMs) manufactured after 1985 in the world until now. Relationships between TBM specifications are analyzed statistically. Simple statistical models are developed for predicting some of TBM design parameters such as installed cutterhead torque, TBM thrust, TBM total weight (shield The most widely used empirical model for predicting installed cutterhead torque of soft ground TBMs is as follows (  Friction torque on frontal surface ( Friction torque on circular side surface of cutterhead ( Friction torque on back surface of cutterhead plate ( Torque of cutting the ground by cutting tools ( Shearing torque on cutterhead openings ( Torque of agitating the ground by mixing/stirring bars ( Torque of rotation of main bearing ( Torque of cutterhead sealing (  The other issue with the theoretical torque estimation suggested by It should also be noted that for estimation of cutterhead torque, only soil pressure should be used; buoyancy effect of the water on the soil load and weight of the water are not taken into consideration. According to the best knowledge of the authors, TBM manufacturers perform their estimations by using only soil pressure; however, there is not any suggestion in literature on this respect. Cutterhead torque requirement of an open TBM ( Estimation of net cutterhead torque requirement of single or double shield TBMs ( Total thrust requirement of the soft ground TBMs is suggested as sum of 5 thrust components by Japan Society of Civil Engineers Thrust force required for overcoming friction (adhesion) between shield and ground due to earth pressure ( Thrust force required to overcome chamber pressure acting on bulkhead ( Thrust force required to overcome the drive force caused by direction changes ( Thrust force required to overcome the frictional force acting between the segments and the tail seals ( Thrust force required to overcome the hauling force of trailing (backup) units ( Thrust force to overcome the penetration force of the cutting tools, assuming ( Similar to torque, not all of these parameters have a big influence on total thrust and Estimation of thrust requirement for single and double shield TBMs is considered to be similar to the ones for soft ground TBMs with one exception that is thrust force required to overcome chamber pressure acting on bulkhead ( Open TBMs have no shield and the main component of total thrust is normal force acting on the cutters for a given advance (penetration) per revolution of cutterhead. For this reason, estimating only pulling force required for backup trailers ( The TBM performance in swelling grounds is badly affected and requires increased thrust and torque. If the ground has squeezing and/or swelling characteristics or heavily fractured and/or faulted, it can be considered as a difficult ground. These geological conditions should be taken into consideration for cutterhead torque and thrust estimations. In squeezing and swelling grounds, overcutting and duration time become important factors. The effect of squeezing and swelling conditions on TBM performance was investigated by The main reason of TBM squeezing is swelling clay minerals like smectite minerals. The type of cation present in clay minerals affects the degree of swelling to a great extent, hence swelling pressure. Na+, for example, will cause a high degree of swelling, while Ca+ will cause a lower one. Usually under wet tunneling conditions swelling pressure increases, blocking TBM shield and in most case breaking concrete of support system. In such conditions, the need of thrust and torque to move the cutterhead increases tremendously. A large database is generated in this study including specifications of different types of TBMs and project information along with the geological conditions to a limited extend and excavation performance. The database includes design parameters/specifications of total 262 TBMs (72 open, 24 single shield, 41 double shield, 86 EPB, and 39 slurry TBMs) manufactured after 1985 in the world until now. TBMs manufactured before 1985 are not used in this study, since these TBMs utilize V-type disc cutters, which has an important effect on TBM’s thrust and torque. After 1985, manufacturers started to use constant cross-section (CCS) disc cutters and V-type disc cutters only used in special conditions ( Relationships between TBM diameter and other specifications are analyzed statistically in this section, since the literature survey indicates that TBM excavation diameter is very significant parameter for defining the design parameters of any type of TBM along with geological and geotechnical properties of excavated formations. Simple statistical models are developed for predicting some of TBM design parameters such as installed cutterhead torque, installed TBM thrust, TBM total weight (shield Correlations between TBM diameter and installed cutterhead torque are very strong for EPB and slurry TBMs ( Strength of the relationships between TBM (excavation) diameter and installed cutterhead torque for hard rock TBMs are moderate ( Strength of the relationships between TBM (excavation) diameter and TBM thrust capacity for different types of TBMs are not as strong as the relationship between TBM (excavation) diameter and cutterhead torque capacity as seen in Earth pressure is a very important parameter affecting thrust requirement of soft ground TBMs and it is used for estimation of Thrust requirement of open TBMs, as expected, does not have any significant correlation with diameter ( There are 2 different thrust requirement/capacity for double shield TBMs: main thrust and auxiliary thrust as seen in There are strong correlations between installed cutterhead torque and TBM thrust ( Correlations between TBM diameter and total TBM weight (shield machine There is a strong linear correlation between TBM diameter and number of disc cutters ( Correlations between TBM diameter and maximum cutterhead rotational speed are presented in Significant correlations are found between TBM diameter and other TBM specifications. For all TBM types, installed cutterhead torque and TBM thrust increase with increasing TBM (excavation) diameter. However, as can be seen from the scatter of the data, it may be concluded that diameter is not the only important parameter for determining installed cutterhead torque and TBM thrust. Especially geological and geotechnical parameters are very important to make a reliable prediction. It should be remembered that some geological conditions, like weak and fractured ground, need special TBM design for reasonable advance rates ( Results obtained from theoretical concepts and statistical equations derived from the database are compared for installed cutterhead torque and TBM thrust in this section. Without a detailed geological data, which is partly available on the database, installed cutterhead torque and TBM thrust cannot be predicted accurately. For this reason, some general assumptions are made for the required geotechnical parameters and all of the assumed geotechnical parameters are presented in the related figures and within the manuscript. The model developed by Only cutting torque ( A similar estimation is performed for single and double shield TBMs. The data for TBMs used in fractured formations are separated from the others, and new correlations are found between TBM diameter and installed cutterhead torque for weak ground conditions. For comparison, only cutting torque (Eq. 11) is first estimated and plotted in Using only cutting torque in estimations gives close results to the installed cutterhead torque for some of the TBMs. However, it is far beyond the installed torque in some cases. The data indicates that, in these cases, TBMs are generally used in highly fractured grounds, which increases friction between cutterhead and rock. Moreover, in highly fractured grounds, rocks flow through the openings on the cutterhead, which requires very high torque values. By analyzing Frictional torque on cutterhead’s frontal ( The additives used to condition the muck can make the soil plasticized and reduce the friction on EPB and slurry TBMs ( Comparison of installed and estimated cutterhead torque for slurry TBMs is presented in Installed and estimated torque comparison for EPB TBMs is seen in It should be remembered that dynamic friction coefficients for estimations and nominal torque values for comparisons are used. To estimate breakout torque, which is required torque for restart the cutterhead after a standstill, static friction coefficients should be used. The biggest proportion of the total thrust of an open TBM comes from the thrust force required to push disc cutters to the rock ( Thrust force required for overcoming friction between shield and ground ( Estimated and installed thrust values for single and double shield TBMs are presented in It should be remembered that jamming is also related with overcutting and it is a time dependent phenomenon ( It is also possible to say that TBMs used in highly fractured, weak and fractured grounds have higher thrust values than estimated ones. Thrust force required for these types of grounds can be estimated by increasing the arching height according to geology. Sometimes in these types of formations, arching height can be a lot higher than average. Estimated and installed thrust capacities for slurry and EPB TBMs are presented in It is possible to say that the installed thrust values from the database are generally between estimated values for all types of TBMs. Moreover, it should be remembered that face pressure is an important parameter for thrust values, especially for slurry TBMs, which can be used under 1200 Summary of the statistically derived equations from accumulated data are presented in Some of the statistical relationships are strong while others are quite weak. The weak relationships are mainly due to some data gaps (insufficient data) and due to the dependency of the excavation performance on geotechnical and geological conditions. Therefore, the proposed correlations should be used cautiously and they are mainly derived to give the designer or practical engineer a preliminary guide in decision making. TBM specifications and project data of 31 tunnels currently under construction or completed in the past are summarized in It consists of driving 3 tunnels having total length of 31.5 Three Herrenknecht double shield TBMs (S-690, 691, 692) of 5.57 The main reason of selecting double shield TBM for this project was to obtain maximum advance rate in competent rock and to cope with problems encountered in the contact area of two different geologic formations. The contact zones between two different geological formations are usually weak and highly fractured causing tunnel face collapses, jamming of the cutterhead and causing sometimes several weeks to rescue the TBM. However, the performance values of TBMs are still within the best ones obtained in Turkey. As it will be noticed in The Kargi Hydroelectric Power Plant consists of an earth dam approximately 500 The geology consists of Eocene aged Beynamaz volcanites mainly of agglomerate, andezite, basalt and tuff and Kunduz Metamorphites and 2500 This is one of the most problematic tunnel ever been excavated with a TBM in Turkey. The tunnel is still in progress and only limited data could be obtained for this tunnel due to current disputes between the contactor, job owner, and TBM manufacturer. Karakaya formation is the main formation in tunneling area with Pazarcik mélange. Tunnel will pass through the pre-dominated graphitic schist. Graphitic schist includes frequently chlorite schist with size of some tens of meters and rarely marble shear bodies with dimension of some few tens of meters. Graphitic schist is medium weathered to fresh and very weak to weak and extremely sheared along the foliation surface. Therefore, schistose surface is polished and coated with clay. Thin quartz veins with size varying from some centimeters to few centimeters are also foreseen. A hard rock single shield TBM was selected for this tunnel. Several problems were encountered during tunnel drivage due to the jamming characteristic of the ground and machine was converted to EPB and thrust and torque values of TBM were increased. Sometimes the geology encountered during tunneling is complex such as in case of T26 tunnel in this paper. In such cases, it is strictly advised to increase the number of drill holes during the site investigations for proper selection of TBM. Uluabat power tunnel with a length of 11.4 Sewerage tunnel between Kavacik and Beykoz is a part of an environmental protection project concerning of renewing the inadequate network around Beykoz and to collect the waste water in a treatment plant and to clean the polluted water of Istanbul Bosphorus. The tunnel having a length of 7 In this study a data base of covering 262 different type TBMs are analyzed statistically and the relationships between the TBM diameter and installed TBM thrust capacity, installed cutterhead torque capacity, total TBM weight (machine Statistical analyses are compared with some theoretical concepts to understand better the role of geological and geotechnical characteristics of the formations to be excavated. Significant correlations are found between TBM diameter and other design parameters, especially for soft ground TBMs. However, it should be emphasized that geological parameters and friction coefficients are playing also very important role in predicting thrust and torque values. EPB TBMs generally have the highest installed cutterhead torque and TBM thrust, whereas the open TBMs have the lowest values for a given TBM diameter. The data of around 30 tunnels excavated in the past or currently under construction in Turkey are analyzed to test the validity of the predictor equations. It is concluded that the installed TBM thrust and cutterhead torque lie between upper and lower limits of the predicted values. However, it is concluded than in a few tunnels constructed in weak and fractured ground, the installed thrust and torque values are underestimated resulting in several times of jamming of cutterhead, and hence, very low advance rates. In a few tunnels, using slurry TBMs in hard and fractured rock formations gave unsatisfactory results regarding to daily advance rates, although their installed thrust and cutterhead torque were in estimated limits. It is hoped that the results of this study would give a quick and preliminary reference to select a proper TBM for a given geological condition. However, one should bear in mind that the TBM diameter is not just enough to estimate design parameters of the machine. Extreme conditions like residual tectonic stresses, the frequency of the dykes to be encountered along the tunnel route, swelling pressure of the smectite minerals in wet tunneling conditions, quick changing of the geology and geotectonic conditions to be expected, the existence of zones having very high strength values should be considered in selecting the design parameters of a TBM.