Infected non-union of subtrochanteric fractures is challenging to treat. We experienced two cases and had good clinical results. Treatment strategy comprised debridement without hesitation after considering later limb lengthening; insertion of the proximal lateral bone edge spike into the distal bone marrow cavity until achieving medial-side bony contact and holding good alignment to compensate for the medial-side bone loss, according to the modified Dimon method; and internal fixation with an angled plate in the decubitus position. The angle of the angled plate should be directed toward the abundant cancellous bone using preoperative computed tomography. Residual limb shortening after ORIF was improved by limb lengthening.Subtrochanteric fractures are known for intraoperative difficulties with reduction and high rates of postoperative complications including non-union [ A 19-year-old man had left subtrochanteric fracture in a traffic accident. According to the AO classification, the diagnosis was 32C3i ( A 24-year-old man had right subtrochanteric fracture in a traffic accident. According to the AO classification, the fracture was diagnosed as 32B3a. Initial surgery was performed with a long-type CHS at another hospital ( Bone support on the medial side and maintenance of good alignment are two of the most important aspects of surgery for subtrochanteric fractures [ Choosing the optimal implant type is also important. A long femoral nail is the first choice for subtrochanteric fractures because of its biomechanical advantage, which reduces the bending moment compared with extramedullary devices [ Plate selection is another issue. We used different angled plates in the treatment of Cases 1 and 2. Proper use of an angled plate depends on the residual bone stock of the femoral head after removing the initial lag screw. The angle of the angled plate should be directed toward the abundant cancellous bone. Therefore, preoperative computed tomography and surgical planning are mandatory. We have herein described the treatment strategy for infected non-union of subtrochanteric fractures. The modified Dimon method and ORIF with an angled plate yielded good clinical outcomes. None. None. None.