Phospho-gypsum is a by-product of processing phosphate rock for phosphoric acid production by acidulation with sulfuric acid. The size distribution of phosphor-gypsum is a major factor for the economics of the process as it greatly affects the filterability of the acid. Surface active agents proved to be very effective additive for growth of gypsum crystals. Two phosphate concentrates, one from Egypt (New Valley) and the other from USA (South Florida) were tested for phosphoric acid production with modification of gypsum crystals using non-ionic surfactant (CMR-100) containing a mixture of C6–C22 sorbitan esters. The studies were carried out using a semi-continuous laboratory-scale unit simulating the dihydrate process conditions.
                  The mean diameter of the phospho-gypsum crystals increases in the presence of surfactant for both phosphate concentrates. The surfactant leads to decreasing the viscosity and modification of gypsum crystals through decreasing the fine size fractions and attainment of large and uniform crystal shape. The mean diameter of New Valley phosphor-gypsum increases from about 30.0 μm to 36.6 μm while the mean diameter of South Florida phospho-gypsum increases from about 30.3 μm to about 38.4 μm. On the other hand, the average surface area of both New Valley and South Florida phosphor-gypsum were decreased from 4461 and 8069 cm2/g without surfactant to 3284 and 3995 cm2/g with surfactant, respectively. In addition, the surfactant leads to an increase in P2O5 recovery of 1–2%, which consequently improves plant productivity.Phosphoric acid is an important intermediate product for production of fertilizers. It is mainly produced by the dihydrate process in which phosphate concentrate [fluor-apatite Ca Although the reaction time is fast (2 to 10 min), the retention time is very long and extends from 2 to 8 h ( The basic objective of phosphoric acid manufacture is to obtain the highest concentration of phosphoric acid possible with the maximum yield ( It is known that the filtration rate depends on characteristics of filter cake such as crystal size, size distribution and morphology of the crystals. In other words, large, spherical and narrow size distribution crystals give a better filtration rate ( Many materials are tested as crystal modifiers for crystallization of calcium sulfate dihydrate e.g., aluminum sulfate, clay and calcined clay ( The present paper summarizes the results of phosphoric acid production from Egyptian New Valley phosphate concentrate and South Florida phosphate concentrate with addition of non-ionic surfactant aiming at increasing the filtration rate by 25% and more. Understanding the effects of the applied surfactant on filtration rates and crystal size distributions of formed phospho-gypsum crystals is another main objective. The phosphate concentrates samples used in the study are from New Valley (Egypt) and from South Florida (USA). Chemical analyses of these samples are given in On the other hand, South Florida phosphate concentrate contains high MgO content (1.58%). High MgO contents increase the acid viscosity and consequently decrease the filtration rate. The accepted industrially limit in commercial phosphate concentrates is less than 1.0% MgO. New Valley and South Florida phosphate concentrates contain 80% and 52% − Pure (95.5%) sulfuric acid of 1.835 g/ml specific gravity is used for the digestion. The recycle (return) acid (18–20% P The reaction was carried out in cylindrical 1 L reactor of 10 cm diameter. It was fitted with teflon-coated stirrer and placed in water bath adjusted at 80 °C. The impeller tip speed was adjusted at 1.44 m/s (550 rpm). The phosphate concentrate was fed using vibrating rock feeder. Also, the sulfuric acid was pumped using a peristaltic pump with Viton tubing. The surfactant/water suspension was added using small graduated separating funnel at a dosage of 1.5 kg CMR-100 surfactant per 1 ton P Detailed experimental procedure including reaction and filtration techniques, and determination of crystal size distribution as well as calculation of filtration rate, reaction efficiency, P Reaction efficiency (digestion or process efficiency, % of extraction or conversion) is defined as the % of P A: % total P Also, P The main objective of the washing operation is to extract, with wash liquor, as much as possible of the phosphoric acid held by the capillary forces in the interstices of the gypsum cake. Wash liquor displaces the impregnating phosphoric acid. The washing (filtration) efficiency is defined as the % of water-soluble P  Tests at optimum free sulfate content (about 2.0% The obtained filtration and reaction data are given in The obtained reaction efficiencies and P One of the most important factors affecting filtration rate is gypsum morphology. For the best filtration rates, large crystals of uniform sizes are most desirable. In this study, the aspect ratio of phospho-gypsum crystals from New Valley phosphate concentrate is increased as seen in SEM photomicrographs, The effect of the CMR-100 sorbitan ester surfactant on phospho-gypsum filtration rate and size distribution has been investigated and compared on two phosphate concentrates with an addition dose of 1.5 kg CMR-100 surfactant per 1 ton P The Particle Engineering Research Center (PERC) at the University of Florida is acknowledged for carrying out particle size distribution analyses. Also, the authors want to thank New Valley Phosphate Project (Egypt) and IMC-Agrico Co. (USA) for providing the phosphate concentrates samples used in this study.