Introduction
                  Distal humerus fractures in elderly patients are often complex fractures that are difficult to treat. The goal of this study was to report on the results of a multicentre series of internal fixation of AO type A, B and C distal humerus fractures in elderly patients and to identify the pros and cons of various fixation constructs.
               
                  Patients and methods
                  Two studies were performed. One was a prospective multicentre study with 53 patients and the other was a retrospective multicentre study with 289 patients, all above 65 years of age and with a recent distal humerus fracture. Patients were evaluated based on clinical criteria (history, health condition, joint range of motion, Mayo Elbow Performance Score) and radiological criteria (fracture type, union of fracture, presence of malunion, hardware condition).
               
                  Results
                  Based on the MEPS, the clinical and functional results were relatively satisfactory: average of 92 points for type A, 82 points for type B and 88 points for type C. In both series, type B fractures were the most difficult to treat and had less good clinical, functional and radiological outcomes. Most of the complications occurred with type C fractures; these consisted mainly of nerve injuries and fixation failure/non-union.
               
                  Discussion
                  Although these fractures are difficult to treat and have an appreciable number of complications, the functional recovery was fairly satisfactory. One of the most challenging aspects of surgical treatment is the existence of osteoporosis in these patients. This must be carefully analysed to determine if an indication exists for total elbow arthroplasty.
               
                  Level of evidence
                  IV.Displaced distal humerus fractures in the elderly (more than 65 years old) are a surgical challenge because of the high frequency of comminution and underlying osteoporosis The goal of this study was to report the results of various types of internal fixation for the management of distal humerus fractures in patients above 65 years of age, and to compare the various types of constructs used by fracture type and also compare the results of fixation with conventional reconstruction plates versus locking compression plates. Only fractures stabilized by plate fixation are included in this article. Data on total elbow arthroplasty (TEA) and conservative treatment will be described in another article. Two multicentre studies were conducted: one prospective and one retrospective. The inclusion criteria were the same for both studies: age of 65 years or more; clinical and radiological follow-up of at least six months; isolated, non-pathological distal humerus fracture; less than 45 days between fracture event and treatment. The case review forms captured similar for both studies: preoperative clinical evaluation of the patient (history, general condition, Katz score The prospective study involved 53 patients having an average age of 77.2 The retrospective study consisted of 289 patients files involving 62 type A fractures, 46 type B fractures, 181 type C fractures (C1 In this group, the average age of patients was significantly lower than in the TEA group (79 years, range 65–93) and conservative treatment group (84.7 years, range 68–100). The preoperative Katz score was also higher in the group of patients treated by internal fixation relative to the two other groups (5.8 points vs. 5.0 points vs. 4.8 points). Information on patient positioning and surgical approach used by fracture type is given in Other than the initially identified nerve injury described previously (type A fracture, with radial nerve lesion), three patients had immediate postoperative signs of nerve injury (one radial nerve, thus 3.8% and two ulnar nerves, thus 7.7%) in the type C fracture group. Early fixation failure was observed in one patient having a type A fracture and in four patients with a type C fracture. Revision surgery was performed in all these patients and a plate or additional fixation screws were added. Clinical results in terms of range of motion and MEPS are shown in The radiological results are summarized in Patients in the retrospective study were also younger than in the total elbow replacement group (79 years, range 65–93) and conservative treatment group (84.7 years, range 68–100), and had a better preoperative Katz score (5.7 points vs. 5.5 points vs. 4.5 points). Open fractures were present in 20.1% of these patients (65% Cauchoix type 1, 29.3% type 2 and 5.1% type 3). Fourteen patients (4.8%) had a nerve injury at the time of fracture. Details about the procedure (patient positioning, surgical approach, construct used) are given in Complications associated with the fixation are reported on The range of motion data are given in Radiological results are given in Because of methodological factors, we could not statistically compare results from the prospective and retrospective studies. However, we were able to identify certain trends. No patient-specific factors were identified that affected the MEPS performance index. But there were trends for gender, injured side, patient's living situation, neuropsychiatric history and especially radiological signs of osteoporosis. There were no differences in the type of construct and fixation material used between the two series. The type of fixation material used (plate with or without locking screws) was compared to the number of revisions, non-union rate and clinical results. No patterns were found. LCPS do not need to be used in this type of fracture to obtain satisfactory clinical and radiological results. Results with type C fractures were worse in the retrospective study than in the prospective study, which had fewer cases of olecranon non-union. The results deteriorated over time, probably because of the development of osteoarthritis, although its impact was not significant. The main limitations of this work are its multicentre design, retrospective nature and lack of control group, even in the prospective study where the cohort was followed prospectively, with all the biases this includes. Lack of consistency in surgeon preferences and experience (junior, senior) is also a factor. Although it was not possible to draw any broad statistically-significant conclusions, trends could be identified. Distal humerus fractures in persons above 65 years of age remain difficult to treat because of the presence of osteoporosis, which can be hard to quantify and can make the hold of the fixation hardware precarious. Often these fractures are complex because of joint involvement and comminution. The success or failure of these reconstructions is based on factors related to the patient, the surgical procedure itself and the postoperative period. Age is the main predictor of poor outcome in our series and other published studies The treatment strategy seems crucial, including the choice of surgical approach. The chosen approach must allow the fracture to be reduced adequately, plates to be inserted and soft tissue and nerves to be managed to achieve acceptable morbidity. Many surgical approaches have been described High-quality fixation is essential for good results It is also essential for the construct to be immediately stable postoperatively, as this allows patients to start moving their joint and limits the development of stiffness This study did not allow us to paint a picture of the ideal fracture that should be treated by internal fixation. At least for AO type A and B fractures, fixation provides the best results if the patients had little medical history, no neuropsychiatric disorders and if the fracture occurs on the dominant side. But for type C fractures, no predictive variables were found in our two series. But in all cases, independent of the fracture type, the main predictor of failure is osteoporosis, which increases four-fold the risk of clinical and radiological failure regardless of the type of construct or hardware used. The authors declare that they have no conflicts of interest concerning this article. The authors wish to thank all the 2012 SOFCOT symposium participants who contributed to this study: L. Hubert, F. Mallard and N. Bigorre (Angers), A. Gabrion (Amiens), L. Obert and M. Ferrier (Besançon), T. Fabre and H. Demezon (Bordeaux), C. Hulet, B. Lebel and F. Dordain (Caen), D. Saragaglia and M. Milaire (Grenoble), J. Tonetti, A. Djahangiri and A. Cikes (Lausanne), L. Pidhorz, P. Alligand and E. De Keating (Le Mans), J.-L. Charissoux and M. Benassayag (Limoges), G. Herzberg (Lyon), B. Coulet (Montpellier), F. Sirveaux and A. Jacquot (Nancy), A. Galey and B. Augereau (HEGP-Paris), S. Levante, N. Mebtouche and T. Begué (Paris), F. Duparc (Rouen), P. Clavert and G. Ducrot (Strasbourg), P. Mansat and H. Nouaille Degorce (Toulouse), L. Favard and J. Brunet (Tours).