A bench scale investigation on the hydrogen reduction of a highly acidic copper bleed solution to produce high purity copper powder is discussed in this paper. A titanium lined autoclave of 1 L capacity was used for this study. The parameters optimized on the bench scale were validated by performing hydrogen reduction of copper in a larger autoclave. Effect of various parameters viz., time of reduction, temperature of reduction, pressure variation, iron dose, volume of copper solution etc. were studied. Experiments were performed with synthetic and actual solution obtained from a copper plant. A 99% copper powder recovery is achieved by hydrogen reduction at a pressure of about 2400 kPa, reaction temperature of 453 K, stirring speed of 400 rpm for a reaction time of 2 h. The fine copper powder thus obtained had a good metallic lustre. Kinetics of reduction of copper was examined by drawing samples at different times and analyzing the percent copper reduction. The copper depleted solution was further purified with respect to the residual copper and can be processed for the recovery of nickel powder by hydrogen reduction.
                  Properties of the copper powder obtained from the large-scale experiments from actual plant and synthetic solutions have been evaluated for powder metallurgical applications. The raw and annealed copper powders obtained from the synthetic copper solution were found to have an apparent density of 3.50 g/cm3, flow rate 35.6 g/min, hydrogen loss 0.2%, purity 99.8% and green density of 8.6 g/ cm3 while the powder from actual plant solution was found to have an apparent density of 3.59 g/ cm3, flow rate 46.0 g/min, hydrogen loss 0.6%, purity 99.4% and green density 8.6 g/ cm3. Thus, the copper powder produced by hydrogen reduction was found suitable for the application.Copper powder occupies a premier position in powder metallurgy and is produced almost all over the world by different techniques. Having various applications such as the manufacture of self-lubricating bearings, electrical and electronic components and different mechanical parts, it is one of the most useful products because of its unique combination of high electrical and thermal conductivity. Copper powder has no substitute in the manufacture of iron base bearings; 5–15% copper powder is added as an alloying element to enhance the mechanical properties and control the dimensional changes during sintering, it is largely used in the production of printing inks, as a constituent for welding electrodes, dispersing strengthened alloys and infiltrates. It is also used in the chemical and pharmaceutical industries. Copper powder is produced mainly by four methods viz. reduction of copper oxide, atomization of molten metal, chemical precipitation and electrolytic deposition. Various low-grade materials are used for the production of copper powder by reduction method. They are mainly copper oxide obtained by the oxidation of chemical precipitate or, finely divided electrolytic copper. In the process, the oxides are ground and reduced to the metal by treatment in continuous reduction temperature ranges from 673 to 873 K. The reducing atmosphere is a combustion gas containing chiefly CO, H Other sources of copper are the solid and liquid wastes generated during the processing of various primary ores. Copper bleed stream is one such rich source of copper and nickel, which is generated during the electrorefining of copper anode wherein various impurities present in anode, dissolve and/or settle as sludge in the cell. The dissolved impurities (nickel, iron, antimony, bismuth, manganese) build up in the electrolyte solution with the recycling of the electrolyte. Since these impurities degrade the quality of the deposited copper cathode, the electrolyte solution is required to be purified to control the purity of metal. This is done by various methods depending on the nature and extent of impurities. Discarding a part of the electrolyte as copper bleed stream (CBS) and replenishing it with the pure solution, is standard global practice. Recovery of valuable metals like copper and nickel from the CBS is achieved using different methods, some of which are discussed below. In the conventional method, a portion of the electrolyte is bled from the circulation tank to the liberator where decopperisation, purification and electrolysis takes place. In the decopperisation section the copper contained in the electrolyte is deposited on the cathode up to a concentration level of 10–15 g/L. The decopperised solution containing impurities is sent to the purification section, where the impurities co-deposit on the cathode with remaining copper. The purified solution is then crystallised to recover NiSO Purification of crude nickel sulphate by precipitation methods has recently been reported by A new approach on selective reduction of copper and nickel powder is being reported here to obtain value-added products from such solutions. Many investigators have studied the hydrogen reduction of aqueous copper solutions and, in fact the production of copper powder has been applied on a commercial scale. However, a limited work has been reported dealing with highly acidic solutions like copper electrolyte or the mother liquor from a copper sulphate plant. It can be seen from a potential-pH diagram for the Cu–H Copper bleed solution from an Indian copper smelter and a synthetic copper bleed solution of a similar composition were used for the reduction studies. Hydrogen reduction studies were carried out in a titanium lined pressure vessel of one litre capacity in an autoclave (Parr), which can be operated up to 8000 kPa pressure and 573 K temperature. The effect of a range of reduction parameters were optimised on bench scale using synthetic solution. After this the experiments were performed on larger scale in a larger autoclave with titanium lined vessel of 20 L capacity using synthetic and actual solutions. Analysis of sulphuric acid, copper and nickel were performed using conventional methods, trace metalanalysis was by atomic absorption spectrophotometer (Thermo Jarrel Ash 8000). All other chemicals used were of AR grade from E Merck. Bench scale work on the hydrogen reduction of copper was performed with synthetic copper bleed stream with a chemical composition similar to that of the CBS from Indian Copper Smelter at Ghatsila. A known amount (600 mL) of copper bleed stream was poured in the autoclave vessel and was mixed with the stirrer. A known amount of metal powder seed was then added to the solution in the vessel, the pressure and reducing atmosphere were maintained using hydrogen gas. The reduction was carried out under various operating conditions viz. volume of the solution, reaction temperature, pressure of hydrogen, temperature of reaction, effect of time at constant temperature and pressure and amount of various additives. The stirring was performed with a titanium stirrer with a fixed rate of stirring at 400 rpm in all the experiments. Liquor samples were withdrawn and analyzed for the amount of unreduced copper. Thus effect of various parameters were studied and optimized for the maximum recovery of the copper as powder. After reduction of metal the autoclave was allowed to cool to room temperature and the solution and metal powder were taken out. The powder was washed with distilled water, then sodium carbonate (Na After the optimisation of the parameters on bench scale, experiments on a large scale were carried out in 20 L capacity titanium lined autoclave. The liner with a dimension of 225 mm diameter and 340 mm height was fabricated using Grade 2 Titanium with a pulsating mixer made up of two perforated discs with a pulsating speed of 90 pulse/min. Four sets of experiments were conducted with 9.0 L of copper solution in each set. In the first three sets reduction time was varied keeping other variables constant i.e. electrolytic copper powder as seed: 50 g, temperature of reduction: 453 K, pressure applied: 2000 kPa. The fourth experiment was performed for 2 h reduction with the addition of 25 g of copper seed at a pressure of 2400 kPa, keeping rest of the variables same as above. Copper powder formed in each set was filtered after cooling the solution in the autoclave to 323 K and releasing the pressure. It was then washed, neutralized and treated as given above and was dried and stored for characterization and properties evaluation. Bench scale experiments for optimizing the parameters for the recovery of copper by hydrogen reduction from the copper bleed stream were performed under different conditions. Synthetic solution containing 40.0 g/L of Cu and 10.43 g/L of Ni as major metallic values along with a high acid concentration (194 g/L) was prepared for these studies and the results are discussed in the following text.  The effect of reduction time is shown in Temperature of reduction was varied from 423 K to 463 K, Temperature effect on the reduction of copper was also examined in terms of the kinetic curves by taking the slopes of the plots in Iron is generally present in the copper bleed streams at ppm levels, therefore the effect of iron was studied on the yield and the purity of the reduced copper powder formed. Hence iron salt was added to the CBS in the range of 0 to 750 ppm. The effect of volume of CBS taken in autoclave was studied keeping other parameters constant. The volume of the solution was varied from 0.4 L to 0.6 L. The results are presented in  Thus with the optimization of reaction parameters for the maximum recovery of copper selectively from the synthetic copper bleed stream at bench scale, a few experiments were performed in 20 L autoclave to ensure the validity of the small-scale data with the synthetic and actual copper bleed stream. An autoclave, with a titanium liner, of a capacity of 20 L solution was used for the experiments on a large scale. Four sets of the experiments with 9.0 L solution in each set were taken in the autoclave. In first three sets of experiments reduction time was varied keeping other variables constant i.e. electrolytic copper powder as seed: 50 g, temperature of reduction: 453 K, pressure applied: 2000 kPa. As can be seen in The copper powder formed in each experiment was filtered after cooling to 323 K, washed as described earlier and characterized. After successful experiments with a synthetic solution, experiments were performed with the actual leach liquor from ICC Ghatsila. 9 L of the actual copper bleed solution was added to the titanium-lined vessel along with seed copper powder. Copper powders produced from synthetic and actual solution on large scale were annealed at 973 K for two hours with a soaking time of 30 min under a hydrogen atmosphere at a flow rate of 10.5 L/min. The powder was then cooled for about 5 h and was used for property evaluation. Annealing is basically done to remove any entrapped gases. It also helps to remove the stress developed during the reduction process and improve the physical properties such grain size, morphology, softness etc. Particle size analyses shown in The annealed powders were examined for various properties such as apparent density, acid insoluble, impurity levels, flow rate, hydrogen loss, and are given in After the complete recovery of copper from the CBS the filtrate or the spent electrolyte was used for the recovery of nickel powder. Copper powder produced in the bench scale experiments with the synthetic CBS at a pressure of 2000 kPa, reaction temperature of 453 K, stirring speed of 400 rpm for a reaction time of 2 h was found to be 99.99% pure with about 98.5% yield. Large-scale synthesis of copper powder from synthetic solution with 25 g of copper powder as seed, pressure of 2400 kPa, temperature of 453 K, gave about 99.4% pure copper powder and under the similar experimental conditions the yield of copper powder produced was 95%. The copper powder obtained was lustrous in nature. Thus highly pure copper powder can be produced by the hydrogen reduction of CBS which can be used for powder metallurgical applications. Thanks are due to the management of ICC, Ghatsila/HCL, Kolkata for providing the copper bleed solution. Financial assistance from Dept of Mines is thankfully acknowledged.