Membrane distillation (MD) has several important attributes for the desalination of challenging solutions. These attributes include the ability to concentrate feed solutions to saturation, low operating hydraulic pressure and hence a reduction in capital and operational costs, and compatibility with low-grade waste heat and solar thermal energy. However, MD application as a stand-alone desalination system remains restricted mostly due to the risk of pore wetting (caused by membrane fouling and scaling) and high energy demand. In this context, the integration of MD with other processes is a practical approach to alleviate pore wetting and to strategically use MD for hypersaline solutions. This article highlights the key attributes, potential, and technical challenges of notable MD integrated systems. The influences of operating conditions on the performance of MD alone as well as the MD integrated systems are also analyzed. Complementary processes for the integration with MD examined in this article include microfiltration/ultrafiltration, reverse osmosis, multistage flash distillation, forward osmosis, crystallization, membrane electrolysis, and liquid desiccant dehumidification for air conditioning.Membrane distillation (MD) has emerged as a potentially low cost and robust alternative to conventional separation processes for a range of desalination applications. The utilization of the microporous membrane in MD renders it more compact than thermal distillation processes such as multi-stage flash (MSF), in which a large vapor space is required to maintain an intimate vapor–liquid contact. Despite a great potential for desalination applications, there remain several technical challenges to the practical realization of MD as a stand-alone system. These challenges include membrane pore wetting and high energy demand. Integrating MD with other processes is a pragmatic approach to mitigate membrane pore wetting and to strategically use MD for the treatment of challenging saline solutions. Examples of these solutions include, but are not limited to saline wastewater with high oil and organic matter contents, and hypersaline solutions such as brine from RO and MSF desalination plants, draw solutions from forward osmosis (FO) processes, and liquid desiccants used for air conditioning. In an integrated process, MD can function either as a pre-treatment or a post-treatment step for other complementary processes to mitigate issues associated with the extreme osmotic pressure and fouling propensity of these challenging saline solutions. This article aims to discuss the key attributes, potential, and remaining technical challenges of notable MD integrated systems for the treatment of challenging saline solutions. The influences of operating conditions on the performance of MD and complementary processes are systematically analyzed. Complementary processes for integration with MD examined in this article include microfiltration (MF)/ultrafiltration (UF), RO/MSF desalination, FO, crystallization, membrane electrolysis (ME), and liquid desiccant dehumidification for air conditioning. Membrane fouling is an inherent issue for the treatment of challenging saline solutions using MD. Similar to other membrane processes, MD can encounter all four types of fouling, namely colloidal fouling, organic fouling, scaling, and biofouling. MF/UF has been widely used as an integral treatment process for potable water production around the world. UF/MF can effectively remove all large organic molecules and particulate matter. On the other hand, given the membrane pore size in the range of 0.01–0.1 µm, MF/UF membranes are not capable of removing any dissolved inorganic salts. The vital role of MF/UF as a pre-treatment process can be highlighted for MD of feed waters that can pose serious problems to the performance of MD. A notable example is oily-saline wastewater, which is mostly in the form of oil-in-water emulsion with oil droplets having a diameter from 0.2 to 50 µm. MF/UF in combination with chemical precipitation has also been used to pre-treat feed water prior to MD for seawater desalination applications. The complementary between MF/UF and MD can be further demonstrated in the integration of a novel wastewater treatment process termed thermophilic anaerobic membrane bioreactor (TAnMBR) with MD It is noteworthy that fouling during MF/UF operation can be effectively controlled by process optimization and membrane cleaning. MF/UF membrane fouling can be avoided by operating the filtration process at water flux below a critical flux. MSF and RO processes are the backbone of the desalination industry. MD is a promising technology platform for further treatment of RO/MSF brine. Numerous RO–MD integrated processes have been demonstrated for fresh water production and minerals extraction from seawater and oil/gas produced water. Membrane scaling caused by the precipitation of sparingly soluble salts has been reported in most MD processes of RO brine. For the MD treatment of seawater RO brine, the precipitation and then the accumulation of calcium and magnesium sulfate and carbonate on the membrane when their concentrations exceeded saturation limits led to a discernible decrease in MD water flux and distillate quality. Several demonstrations of MD for the treatment of MSF brine have also been conducted. The great potential of MD for treating hypersaline solutions has paved the way for zero-liquid discharge treatment of the brine following RO and MSF desalination processes. A schematic diagram of an MD integrated process for zero-liquid discharge treatment of the MSF brine is shown in FO has significant promise in reclaiming fresh water from impaired sources, including wastewater, brine from seawater desalination processes, and oil/gas produced water. FO–MD combined processes can be the most feasible treatment platform for the impaired feed waters ( FO–MD combined processes embody an inherent flux balancing mechanism that enables them to achieve stable water flux. This mechanism results from the inverse relation of FO and MD water fluxes to the salinity of the draw solution. As demonstrated in The improved process efficiency resulted from the combination between FO and MD has been demonstrated for the treatment of wastewater from various sources. Notable examples include the FO–MD combined treatment of human urine for fresh water reclamation and nutrients recovery. Contaminant accumulation in the FO draw solution might be a major issue for the practical application of FO–MD combined processes. The accumulation of contaminants in the FO draw solution results from the difference in their rejection offered by the FO and MD membranes in the combined process. It has been confirmed that the contaminants permeate through the FO membrane due to their interaction with the membrane, whereas their transport through the MD membrane is governed by their volatility. MD can be combined with seawater thermal distillation or RO desalination for further fresh water production and brine volume minimization as discussed in the Crystallization is a process in which a crystalline solid is obtained from a supersaturated solution. MD can be potentially combined with a salt crystallization or eutectic freeze crystallization process for a zero-liquid discharge treatment of brine following seawater desalination processes. As abovementioned, MD is negligibly affected by the osmotic pressure of the feed solution, thus MD processes can be operated at brine concentration close to the saturation limits of salts. As a result, the initial concentration of the MD brine introduced to the crystallization process is more likely on the right or at the eutectic point ( A critical condition for a stable MD–crystallization combined process is that the crystallization must only occur in the crystallizer to prevent membrane scaling of the MD process. This condition can be achieved by controlling operating conditions of the MD and the crystallization process. As demonstrated in Operating conditions (e.g., MD feed temperature, crystallization temperature, and feed circulation rates) can exert a strong influence on the performance of an MD–crystallization combined process. Elevating feed temperature of the MD process leads to increases in not only the process water flux but also the yield of NaCl crystals. For an MD–crystallization combined process, there is a critical MD water flux, above which salt crystallization will occur at the MD membrane surface, and thus hindering the sustainable operation of the combined process. Edwie and Chung Operating conditions of the MD–crystallization combined process also affect the sizes of salt crystals obtained. The combined process at a higher MD feed temperature produces more salt crystals at smaller sizes. It is noteworthy that impurities have detrimental impacts on the performance of the MD–crystallization combined process of seawater desalination brine. As reported by Ji et al., In addition to membrane scaling, high energy consumption can be a technical challenge to the realization of zero-liquid discharge treatment for seawater desalination brine using MD–crystallization combined processes. As a thermally driven separation process, MD requires huge amounts of thermal energy for the phase conversion of water. To induce a sufficient driving force, heating is required on the feed side while cooling must be provided on the permeate side of the MD membrane. On the other hand, for crystallization, a lower solution temperature facilitates the yield of salt crystals; thus, cooling is also required by the crystallizer. For this reason, the brine temperature difference between the MD unit and the crystallizer greatly determines the global energy consumption of the combined process. Compared to the salt crystallization process, the eutectic freeze crystallization is operated at a much lower temperature (i.e., at eutectic temperature of −21.1 °C for the NaCl brine). Thus, the thermal energy consumption of the MD–eutectic freeze crystallization combined process is much higher compared to the MD–salt crystallization combined process, mostly attributed to the increased cooling demands of the eutectic freeze crystallization process. However, eutectic freeze crystallization allows for the simultaneous production of ice (i.e., fresh water) and salt crystals. Thus, the high energy consumption of the MD–eutectic freeze crystallization combined process can be offset by the additional fresh water production obtained. It is noteworthy that there have been no studies on the integration of MD with eutectic freeze crystallization in MD literatures. ME is a widely used process by the chlor-alkali industry for the production of NaOH. Compared to other electrolysis processes (e.g., diaphragm and mercury cells), ME exhibits a significantly lower energy consumption and minimal environmental risk. In the cathode cell, Na Thus, NaOH together with chlorine and hydrogen gasses can be obtained from the ME process of NaCl brine. The membrane separates the produced H Operating conditions, including current density, pH of NaCl brine, cell temperature, anolyte and catholyte flow velocities and concentration, strongly affect the efficiency of ME processes. The detailed analysis of the influence of each operating condition on the ME process efficiency can be found elsewhere. MD can be an ideal alternative to MED for concentration of NaCl brine prior to ME for NaOH production. Compared to MED, MD can be operated at a lower temperature (i.e., the feed temperature of MD can be as low as 35 °C A flow diagram of an MD–ME integrated process for NaOH production from NaCl brine is demonstrated in The combination of MD and ME for the production of NaOH also brings about benefits with respect to energy savings. For ME process efficiency, heating of the brine feed is required. NaOH production using the MD–ME combined process can be sourced from rock salt, concentrated salt lake, and brine from seawater desalination processes. Liquid desiccant air conditioning (LDAC) has emerged as an attractive technology for improving indoor thermal comfort and air quality, particularly in humid and hot climate areas. In LDAC, a liquid desiccant solution is circulated through a dehumidifier for removing moisture from the air to simultaneously regulate the air humidity and temperature. The latent load of the air can be controlled by the absorption rate of moisture to the liquid desiccant solution in the dehumidifier. The liquid desiccant solution can then be reconcentrated in a regenerator by removing excess water via a desalination process. Regeneration of liquid desiccants is a critical step to maintain the dehumidification efficiency of LDAC. Aqueous LiBr and LiCl solution are the most commonly used liquid desiccant in LDAC. Regeneration of liquid desiccants in most current LDAC applications is performed using conventional thermal evaporation. In a conventional thermal regeneration process ( To address the issue of desiccant carryover, membrane separation processes, including RO and electro-dialysis (ED), have been proposed for regeneration of liquid desiccants in LDAC. MD can be a promising candidate for regeneration of liquid desiccants used in LDAC ( Very few attempts have been made to demonstrate the feasibility of MD for regeneration of liquid desiccants used in LDAC. As a notable example, Choo et al. Several major technical challenges need to be addressed before the full realization of MD for regeneration of liquid desiccants. These challenges include intensive thermal energy consumption, high risk of membrane wetting associated with the extreme salinity of liquid desiccants, and limited water flux due to significantly low water activity of liquid desiccants. High thermal energy consumption of MD can be tolerated with the availability of a waste heat source. However, it is worth bearing in mind that waste heat sources are not always available in buildings where LDAC units are used, and the utilization of waste heat or solar thermal energy also involves considerable costs. Therefore, it is of vital importance to reduce thermal energy consumption of MD regeneration of liquid desiccant to make integrated liquid desiccant dehumidifier–MD an energy-saving and environmentally friendly LDAC process. MD embodies notable attributes that make it a low cost and robust alternative to conventional desalination processes. These attributes include the ability to concentrate feed solutions to saturation, the exclusion of a high hydraulic pressure and hence a reduction in capital and operational costs, and the compatibility with low-grade waste heat and solar thermal energy. Despite of these attributes, the application of MD as a stand-alone system for the treatment of various impaired water sources has been restricted mostly by the high risk of membrane pore wetting induced by contaminants (e.g., organic matter, precipitated salts, and surfactants) in the feed waters and the process intensive thermal energy demand. Membrane pore wetting eventually results in deterioration in water flux and quality, and possibly the total failure of MD for severe cases. Intensive energy requirement orientates MD applications toward the treatment of challenging saline solutions that pose serious problems to other conventional desalination processes. Integrating MD with other separation processes is a practical approach to mitigate membrane pore wetting, and thus enable MD to effectively treat challenging saline solutions. In the integrated systems, MD can function as a pre-treatment to concentrate the feed solutions prior to another process (e.g., crystallization and ME), or a post-treatment to improve the effluent quality (i.e., for MF/UF and TAnMBR), to enhance the water recovery and simultaneously minimize the brine volume (i.e., for RO and MSF), and to regenerate draw solutions (i.e., for FO) and liquid desiccant solutions (i.e., for LDAC). The hybridization of MD with other processes helps improve the efficiency of not only MD but also its complementary processes. Moreover, operating conditions strongly affect the performance of the MD combined processes. Thus, process optimization is of importance for the MD combined systems to achieve optimal process efficiency. 