This paper addresses the exploration of an unconventional route for potentially cost effective and cleanly technology by partial oxidation of methane with zinc oxide to co-producing metallic Zn and synthesis gas. The results of thermodynamic analysis indicate that the direct gas–solid reaction is possible theoretically. The experimental investigates have been carried out in a molten salt reactor at the temperature range of 850–950°C. The GC analysis results of exhaust revealed that the gases compositions were H2, CO and CH4, in which the CO2 could not be detected. Both the CH4 conversion and the ratio of H2/CO increased with the increasing of reaction temperature, the ratio of H2/CO was 2 at around temperatures 925°C. After the reaction completed the product of metallic zinc was successfully collected in the reactor and was characterized by X-ray diffraction (XRD) and electron probe microanalysis (EPMA). The results showed that the eutectic mixture of K2CO3 and Na2CO3 (weight ratio is 1:1) acts as the reaction medium and the thermal storage in this process was feasible. Furthermore the XRD analysis results of molten salt after reacting with CH4
                     +ZnO indicated that there were other complicated chemistry reactions in this reaction system, in which alkali molten carbonates maybe also act as the catalyst.Zinc is a widely used commodity in the galvanization, pharmaceutical and food industries. It may also be reoxidized with steam to generate hydrogen or be used in zinc-air batteries Synthesis gas (syngas) is also an important commodity It is well known that coal (carbon) gasification with catalyst of alkali carbonate had been studied extensively Alkali molten carbonate to apply this system to provide thermal storage because of its high heat capacity had been reported Jin et al. The reasons are that the features of the molten salt bed in these systems mainly are: Salt systems are cheaper and less hazardous, low pressure and non-flammable; Low viscosity and longer fluid life; Have superior heat storage and transfer properties to avoid the loss heat capacity. Presently, our co-works team have reported that the technologies of nonflame combustion technology (NFCT) These facts suggest that the alkali molten carbonates mixture was one of promising molten salt for applying to the proposed system described that follows. This paper reports the results of theoretical and experiments designed to test this concept. We proposed “a molten salt reaction system”, as shown schematically in This system is composed of a molten salt reactor (MSR), a zinc separator (ZS) and two molten salt storage tanks. In the MSR process, ZnO is deoxidized by CH Using ZnO as an oxidant combines the partial oxidation of CH The thermodynamic calculations of the reactions in Eqs. The thermodynamic equilibrium analysis is performed by means of Gibbs free energy minimization method. As will be shown in the following analysis, the HSC Outokumpu code was used to compute the equilibrium compositions of ZnO The ratio of ZnO/CH The apparatus was shown schematically in The K The gas composition and species concentration in reaction and exhaust gases were analyzed by a gas chromatography (Shanghai Precision & Scientific Instrument Co. GC112A) equipped with a thermal conductivity detector (TCD) using a TDX-01 column, The acquisition of chromatograms was performed with an appropriate control/data handling software (Zheda Zhida Co. N2000) and all data were recorded and stored on a PC workstation. The X-ray powder diffraction (XRD) experiments were carried out on Japan D/max-R apparatus with Cu K All the chemicals (99.0% for ZnO and 99.5% for Na  From Thus, it can be seen that optimizing the reaction temperature is necessary for higher CH The separation of Zn(s) from the molten salt mixture was accomplished by cooling the reaction system. When the experiment was terminated and the temperature was decreased to room temperature, the target product of this reaction, zinc particles were collected in the bottom of the reactor (silver-grey, hard, metallic appearance and with little white substance on its surface). It is well known that metallic Zn can be readily vaporized at the range of temperature range (920–950 When CO could not be detected by gas chromatography, the ZnO was exhausted, nitrogen was introduced to the reactor for removing the superfluous CH As shown in The authors purposed a novel molten salt reaction system, which makes it possible to co-generation metallic zinc and synthesis gas from the partial oxidation of methane with zinc oxide. This work was focused on the theoretical and experimental study of this reaction system. The thermodynamic equilibrium analysis at above 930 Alkali molten carbonates were used as the reaction medium and thermal storage in this system. However, the reaction become complication due to the present of the molten salt, maybe which also act as the catalyst in this process. For cost effective and cleanly co-producing metallic Zn and synthesis gas, investigation of the detail reaction process and optimization of the reaction conditions using alkali molten carbonates and improvement of this reaction system for the duration of high reactivity are now in progress. The financial support of the Chinese Nature Science Foundation (Nos. 50574046, 50774038) and the Chinese Natural Science Foundation of Major Research Projects (No. 90610035) are gratefully acknowledged.