Batch experiments were carried out on the dry ball milling of commonly used ceramic raw materials quartz, kaolin and feldspar, singly and as ternary mixtures. The modified form of the Charles energy-size reduction equation was used to calculate the energy consumed by each of the components in the mixture. The results confirmed the validity of the mass fraction hypothesis for energy split between the components that had been defined and verified for the binary mixtures of equal-density minerals. The distribution and size module of the minerals remained the same whether they were ground separately or in a ternary mixture.Grinding is an energy intensive unit operation and usually consumes a major proportion of the power drawn by a typical mineral processing plant and consumes approximately 3% of the electricity generated in the industrialized countries of the world ( In grinding practice, heterogeneous mineral systems are more common than homogeneous single-mineral systems. The heterogeneity of raw materials in mineral beneficiation grinding circuits results by virtue of the varying properties of mineral constituents in an ore. Heterogeneity in ceramic raw materials grinding circuits, however, results because the raw material is an admixture of two or more minerals charged into mills in certain prescribed proportions. Fundamental studies of size reduction phenomena and modeling of grinding kinetics have mostly centered on nominally pure homogeneous minerals to intentionally avoid the complexity likely to be encountered in heterogeneous systems due to interaction effects of minerals of different physical properties. Despite its industrial importance, there have been a limited number of attempts to describe the energetic and kinetics of heterogeneous grinding systems, and these attempts were mostly confined to the study of binary mineral mixtures. The present work was undertaken to study how the applied energy is distributed among the components of ternary mixtures of ceramic raw materials, namely, quartz, kaolin and feldspar. This system is of practical importance in the ceramics industry. A study of this nature may provide some insight into the means of better energy utilization in the preparation of ceramic raw materials. Since most of the published data with regard to mixture grinding have been carried out with binary mixtures, this work tests the applicability of the previously developed binary-mixture grinding energy split rules to ternary-mixture systems. The ceramic raw materials used for the tests were quartz and kaolin obtained from Turkey, and K-feldspar obtained from Egypt. The specific gravities of quartz, kaolin and feldspar, measured by a pycnometer, were 2.68, 2.61 and 2.61, respectively; therefore, their volume fractions in the mill were essentially their mass fraction. The quartz and feldspar samples, having Mohs hardness indices of 7 and 6, respectively, are relatively harder than the kaolin sample (Mohs hardness of 3). Chemical analyses of these minerals are given in 3.350   The linearity of the plots supports the validity of the Charles energy-size reduction relationship for the systems studied here. The slopes of the lines are −0.92 for quartz, −0.75 for feldspar, and −0.52 for kaolin, in close agreement with the values of the distribution modulus from the size distribution plots in  For the ternary mixtures of the minerals tested in this study, Eq. Similar calculations were made for the other combinations of the mixture ratio and grind time and the results are presented in The data generated in this investigation of the grinding of quartz, kaolin and feldspar, minerals of equal density, in a ball mill substantiate the previously proposed hypothesis of This research was supported by the Osmangazi University Scientific Research Projects Committee.