Vertical femoral neck fractures (Pauwels type III classification) in young adults generally occur as a consequence of high-energy trauma and are frequently seen in association with multiple injuries. Considering the controversies regarding the optimal fixation for this fracture, our aim was to evaluate the clinical outcome of a closed fixation strategy for vertical femoral neck fractures in young adults using two parallel and one transverse cancellous lag screws. This was a single-surgeon, prospective study including 20 young adults with average age of 38.75 years (range 18-59 years) with a high-energy Pauwels III femoral neck fracture. Closed reduction and internal fixation with three cancellous lag screws were performed. The first screw was inserted crosswise to avoid further shear forces. Second and third parallel screws were placed above the lesser trochanter and centrally on the greater trochanter, respectively. Clinical outcomes were assessed by comparing postoperative and final follow-up radiographs 24 months post-injury. Eleven patients had an isolated vertical femoral neck fracture. Of these, five had further femoral neck comminution. Nine patients had an associated ipsilateral femoral shaft fracture. All fractures were displaced at the time of the first radiological evaluation. Closed reduction quality was considered excellent or good in 15 patients. After 24 months, bone union was achieved in 16 cases. Osteonecrosis of the femoral head developed in association with two fractures, and a nonunion developed in association with two fractures. We conclude that vertical high-energy femoral neck fractures can be treated successfully with internal fixation with two parallel cancellous lag screws positioned above the lesser trochanter and a third screw inserted centrally on the greater trochanter at an angle perpendicular to the fracture line.Vertical femoral neck fractures (Pauwels type III classification) in young adults generally occur as a consequence of high-energy trauma and are frequently seen in association with multiple injuries, including ipsilateral femoral shaft fracture Considering the controversies regarding the optimal fixation for Pauwels III femoral neck fracture in young adults, we propose a fixation strategy using two parallel 7.0-mm lag cancellous screws inserted towards the neck at a 125 Between 1 October 2002 and 31 December 2012, all adult patients with a high-energy vertical femoral neck fracture, categorised as type III according to Pauwels original classification Plain radiographs of the pelvis at the anteroposterior position (AP) were used to determine the vertical angle of the fracture by measuring the angle of the fracture line with a line perpendicular to the femoral shaft. When this angulation was greater than 50 All patients were submitted to fluoroscopy-guided closed reduction in a regular radiolucent table. With the patient in the supine position, initial anatomic or nearly anatomic reduction was achieved through movements of internal and external rotation, abduction and adduction of the limb. The drainage of articular haematoma through capsulotomy was not used in any of the cases. Reduction was secured with 2.0-mm guide wires, followed by definitive fixation with three 7.0-mm lag cancellous screws. The guide wires were inserted according to the following sequence: the first guide wire was placed posteriorly to the femoral neck and the second was placed parallel to the first and anteriorly to the femoral neck. Both guides were inserted at a 125 Antibiotic prophylaxis with cefazolin for 24 hours and thromboembolic prophylaxis with low molecular weight heparin was given to all patients. Partial weight-bearing using crutches was allowed 6 weeks postoperatively. Plain radiographs were performed monthly after surgery until the sixth month, when the clinical and radiographic evaluation defined bone healing. The quality of fracture reduction was graded according to Haidukewych and co-workers based on the degree of residual angulation and the amount of displacement, and categorised as excellent (<2 Demographic and local fracture data were strictly descriptive. Fisher exact test was used for analysis of categorical data regarding outcome. The level of statistical significance was set at P<0.05. The statistical analysis was performed with GraphPad Prism version 5.00 software for Windows. A total of 20 patients, 3 female and 17 male, with an average age of 38.75 years (range 18–59 years), were enrolled in the study ( After 24 months of follow-up, bone union ( Despite advances in surgical techniques and implants for vertical femoral neck fractures, treatment failure rates for these fractures are still of concern. Even for a physiologically young and active adult, these fractures are problematic and challenging. The goal is to preserve the femoral head, avoiding osteonecrosis, nonunion, and femur shortening. Among trauma surgeons, it is generally agreed that proper anatomic reduction and stable internal fixation are paramount for a good outcome The use of crossed screws for fixation of femoral neck fracture was discouraged in a systematic review of studies analysing the results of such surgical treatments In this prospective series, we evaluated the clinical outcome of 20 patients with high-energy vertical femoral neck fractures treated with a novel assembly strategy, based on the old concept of Garden crossed screws The use of perpendicular, transverse screws in different types of assemblies has been tested previously in biomechanical models using cadaveric or synthetic femurs Using synthetic bones, Nowotarski et al. compared the CS and XCS methods to a femoral neck locking plate (FNLP) with two 5.7-mm locking screws, one lag screw into the calcar, and two screws into the shaft. Their results showed that the FNLP method had a superior rotational stiffness and attributed the enhanced stability of the FNLP to both the multiple locking screw configurations and the compression afforded by the transverse calcar lag screw Of the 20 selected patients, the quality of fracture reduction was considered excellent or good in 15 and poor or fair in five. Among those four patients who failed in fracture healing, two (a 28-year-old man and a 33-year-old woman) were due to nonunion and two (a 42-year-old man and a 51-year-old woman) were due to avascular necrosis of the femoral head. Three of these four patients had femoral neck comminution and/or poor/fair quality of fracture reduction, which might have contributed to the impaired outcome. Therefore, our results agree with previous studies reporting fragment comminution as an important risk factor for failure Another important finding from our study was that all patients with an associated ipsilateral shaft fracture (n=9) had uneventful bone healing. None of them had comminution, which leads us to hypothesise that the trauma energy must have been mainly absorbed in the femur shaft, minimising the degree of neck injury Several factors, such as fracture displacement, poor fixation quality, and time of surgery, have been suggested to be associated with the development of avascular necrosis The limitations of this study were the small sample size and the lack of comparison with current standard methods. Thus, larger, multicentre, prospective, randomised series are necessary to determine the effectiveness of the presented technique. On the other hand, the strengths of this study include the involvement of a single surgeon, the accurate reduction obtained in the majority of patients with a healing rate of 80%, and a good clinical and radiographic follow-up. In addition, this technique enables easy conversion for total hip arthroplasty or osteotomy, when necessary. It is also worth mentioning that despite the results reported in the literature with the use of transverse screws for fixation of vertical fracture of the femoral neck, our study is the first clinical series to investigate this novel type of screw mounting The use of two parallel and one transverse cancellous lag screws to treat vertical fractures of the femoral neck has been shown to be an efficient approach to achieve bone healing in young adults. Our findings might give potentially important contributions towards the improvement of surgical treatments for high-energy femoral neck fractures in young patients through a less invasive and less timeconsuming surgical approach. The authors declare no conflicts of interest.