The Double Cantilever Beam (DCB) test is the most widely used measurement technique for Mode I interlaminar fracture toughness of composite structures. However, the traditional testing methodology is based on the optical tracking of hand-marked scales on the specimen edge, which reduces its accuracy and makes it particularly dependent on human skills. Here, we present a novel Top Surface Analysis (TSA) method which overcomes these difficulties by analysing the top surface of DCB test samples via Digital Image Correlation. The automated measuring and data analysis procedure minimise the influence of human errors. This approach is able to simultaneously measure crack length and crack tip opening displacement. In order to verify the accuracy of the method, a comparison between TSA and conventional side-view evaluation methods was carried out on carbon and glass fibre reinforced composite laminates. The proposed method proves to be a promising tool to automate crack length measurements in arbitrary laminated structures and to provide more accurate fracture toughness properties for the prediction of damage tolerance in composite structures.Charge Coupled Device Carbon Fibre Reinforced Polymer Crack Tip Opening Angle Crack Tip Opening Displacement Double Cantilever Beam Digital Image Correlation End-Notched Flexure Finite Element Method Fibre Metal Laminates Glass Fibre Reinforced Polymer Hybrid Titanium Composite Laminates Modified Beam Theory Strain Energy Release Rate Top Surface Analysis Interlaminar delamination and debonding are common failure modes in composite and fibre-metal laminates (FMLs) respectively Double Cantilever Beam (DCB) tests identify Mode I Strain Energy Release Rate (SERR)  One of the main challenges associated with the determination of Digital Image Correlation (DIC) is another optical technique which is based on advanced pixel recognition and interpolation algorithms This paper presents a novel automated measuring technique and data analysis method to simultaneously determine crack length and crack tip opening displacement by analysing the top surface of a DCB specimen via DIC. This Top Surface Analysis (TSA) offers accurate crack length measurement and minimises influence of human errors since it only requires simple post-processing and DIC can be applied to continuous, non-fractured speckle patterns. TSA is applied to symmetric carbon and glass fibre reinforced polymer laminates respectively to characterise Mode I strain energy release rates by the MBT reduction scheme. Results are compared to conventional side-view analyses described in the guidelines of the The  SERR The correction factor Additional correction factors take into account large displacements and stiffening effects due to end blocks The correction factor End blocks can cause stiffening effects. The measured values of displacement The values In Mode I testing, the remaining parameters are Hence, SERR The correction factor Three dimensional Digital Image Correlation (DIC) is used to measure the displacement on the top surface of a DCB specimen. This allows for calculating interfacial fracture properties as explained in the following. The displacement analysis using the ARAMIS 3D (GOM GmbH) DIC system The CTOD parameter Note that The current crack length By knowing the current crack length This Top Surface Analysis (TSA) provides simultaneous calculation of CTOD DCB tests were carried out at room temperature on an Instron 4505 testing machine with a 10 Symmetric laminates were laid up using Similar to previous CFRP laminates, 0.104 A fine speckle pattern was painted on the DCB samples over the area of interest to create a random textured pattern on the surface. The facet size is set to be 19 In the following, TSA results are compared with a manual crack tracking technique which uses optical side-view observation of markings on a hand-written or printed scale  This experimental data is applied to the MBT reduction scheme in Section The findings in The conventional side analysis indicated by a cross yields Sager et al. The variation of Load-displacement results of three tested GFRP samples are shown in The experimental load-displacement data in SERR values at steady crack growth Compared to similar studies of glass-fibre reinforced laminates in literature, results by the novel TSA method are in line with these findings. Deng et al. As shown in The comparison of SERR values in GFRP between the conventional side-view analysis and TSA shows again the accuracy of the novel method. The analysis of all three averaged CFRP and GFRP composite samples is shown in A video animation to illustrate the TSA analysis is available in the electronic version of this paper ( In conclusion, the results derived from the symmetric woven composite laminates validate the novel TSA crack length inspection method and its application to estimate SERR The novel crack length inspection method and data analysis offer several advantages over existing methods. It is an automated measuring technique which is simple to set up and to analyse. Influence of human errors in crack length measurements is minimised. Compared to side-view DIC measuring techniques where fractured speckle patterns lead to incomplete or failed pattern recognition, TSA guarantees continuous DIC measurement of the displacement field on the top surface. In addition, thin asymmetric DCB sample can be analysed which is not possible with side-view techniques and common reduction schemes. Furthermore, TSA yields the distribution of SERR along the width of the DCB sample which has only been identified in computational studies so far. This paper presents a novel Top Surface Analysis (TSA) method using Digital Image Correlation (DIC) to characterise Mode I interface properties in Double Cantilever Beam (DCB) specimens. TSA is able to simultaneously measure crack length and Crack Tip Opening Displacement (CTOD). The method was applied to symmetric, balanced carbon and glass fibre reinforced composite laminates respectively. A study compared TSA to conventional SERR evaluation methods and it demonstrates that TSA yields similar Mode I SERR values. Numerous advantages over other crack length measurement techniques were discussed. The novel crack length inspection method and data analysis is an automated technique which is simple to set up and to analyse. Thereby, influence of human errors in crack length measurements is minimised. High resolution side-view DIC measuring techniques introduce fractured speckle patterns which leads to incomplete or failed pattern recognition. In contrast, TSA guarantees continuous DIC measurement of the displacement field on the top surface. Furthermore, it is possible to determine the distribution of SERR along the width of the DCB sample which has only been identified in computational studies so far. In conclusion, TSA is a promising tool to simplify cumbersome DCB analyses while preserving accuracy and repeatability. Future research will study complex asymmetric DCB samples to characterise interface properties between dissimilar material settings. Furthermore, TSA will be applied to End-Notched Flexure (ENF) tests in order to quantify in-plane Mode II delamination in laminated structures. Similar to this paper, results will be compared to conventional analysis techniques The authors would like to recognise the experimental work by Wan Mohamad Amir Hafiz and Gregor Veith in the scope of their Undergraduate thesis project. The authors would also like to gratefully acknowledge the support of the Defence Materials Technology Centre (DMTC) and the Defence Science and Technology Group (DSTG). The DMTC was established and is supported under the Australian Government’s Defence Future Capability Technology Centres Programme. This work was also supported by an Endeavour Postgraduate Fellowship granted by the In addition to the The back-calculation incorporates the measured load  Flexural four-point bending tests according to ASTM D-6272-10 were performed on GFRP samples of the same material system as described in Section It is worth mentioning the evaluated correction terms Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at  