The separation and concentration of gallium from acidic leach solutions, containing various other ions, such as iron, cobalt, nickel, zinc, cadmium, lead, copper, and aluminium, by an emulsion liquid membrane (ELM) technique using trioctylphosphine oxide (TOPO) as carrier has been presented. Liquid membrane consists of a diluent, a surfactant (ECA 4360J), and an extractant (TOPO), and 0.1 M HCl or 0.1 M H2SO4 were used as the stripping solution. The important variables governing the permeation of gallium and their effect on the separation process have been studied. These variables were membrane type and composition, mixing speed, surfactant concentration, HCl concentration in the feed, feed concentration, diluent type, extractant concentration, the acid type of stripping phase, and treatment ratio. The optimum conditions were determined. It was possible to selectively extract 97.0% of gallium from the acidic leach solutions, containing Fe, Co, Ni, Zn, Cd, Pb, Cu, and Al, at the optimum conditions. The separation factors of gallium with respect to Fe, Co, Ni, Zn, Cd, Pb, Cu, and Al, were experimentally found to be of 24.2, 16.2, 43.1, 28.3, 18.2, 25.2, 7.1, and 64.7, respectively, in 30 min.The industrial needs for gallium metal are expected to increase because of the high potential of gallium arsenide for electronic or optoelectronic devices such as large-scale integrated circuits (LSI), light emitting diodes (LED), and semiconductor lasers. Due to the increasing demand for gallium in electronics, the recovery of gallium from primary and secondary sources is of a great importance. Gallium is usually present in small amounts compared to common metals especially (Al, Fe, Zn) since the main sources of gallium are the Bayer solutions of aluminium and the acidic sulphate or chloride solutions from hydrometallurgical production of zinc ( The ability of solvent extraction to concentrate gallium, and to perform the difficult separations required has been extensively demonstrated in process development work and in commercial applications. Consequently, solvent extraction plays an important role as a separation and concentration technique. The use of high-molecular weight amines, organophosphorus compounds such as tributyl phosphate (TBP), trioctylphosphine oxide (TOPO), and di-(2-ethylhexyl phosphoric acid) (D2EHPA) for gallium extraction in chloride media appears to have attracted much attention and has been studied by several workers: extraction of gallium with TOPO ( The organophosphorus compounds such as tributyl phosphate (TBP) and trioctylphosphine oxide (TOPO) were used in conventional liquid–liquid extraction system ( The following balance exists when TOPO extracts gallium from strong hydrochloric acid solutions ( When the organic phase containing HGaCl The overall stripping reaction may be equivalently given by the following reaction: Liquid membrane is certainly a promising method for the separation and concentration of such species from aqueous streams, because it combines the extraction and stripping processes. Extraction of Ga by ELM process is governed by several parameters. The choice of an extractant and an organic diluent is vital for the success of ELM process and this choice can be made on the basis of conventional liquid–liquid extraction studies. Liquid membranes utilize a water-immiscible phase into which a component from an aqueous solution is preferably distributed. In that respect, it is similar to solvent extraction, and much of the theory in that field can be applied. However, unlike solvent extraction, there is no stage in which the water-immiscible phase comprises a marked part of the separated component (A). Instead, it forms a thin membrane through which component A transfers from one aqueous phase (feed) to another (stripping solution or product phase). The extraction chemistry involved in liquid membrane transport is essentially the same as that in solvent extraction, but the overall transport is governed by kinetic rather than equilibrium parameters ( The extraction rate of gallium from an acidic leach solution by ELM is a series of various transport processes, namely: (i) mass transfer of gallium ions from the bulk of feed phase to the external interface of the emulsion globule; (ii) interfacial complexation reaction between Ga ions and TOPO at the external interface; (iii) diffusion of the Ga complex into the emulsion globule; and (iv) stripping reaction between the Ga complex and internal acid at the interface of the stripping phase. The major parameters influencing the extent of extraction may be the level of agitation in the external phase, acid concentration in the external phase and the type of organic diluent, surfactant and extractant concentrations, feed concentration of Ga, and treatment ratio. The nature of extractant which forms a complex with gallium ion is also important. In order to have a better understanding of dynamics of ELM technique, these parameters need to be studied. In the present work, the selective separation and concentration of gallium has been investigated from the acidic leach solutions, containing such ions as Fe, Co, Ni, Zn, Cd, Pb, Cu, and Al, by emulsion liquid membranes using trioctylphosphine oxide (TOPO) as carrier. The liquid membrane phase is composed of a surfactant, a carrier, and a diluent. The surfactant is a nonionic polyamine which is commercially known as ECA 4360J. The mobile carrier is trioctylphosphine oxide (TOPO) which is purchased from Merck. A commercial kerosene (density 830 kg/m Rotary filter cake of the zinc plant residue (CINKUR Co., Turkiye), together with gallium, consists an average of 12% Zn, 15% Pb, 7% Fe, 0.06% Co, 0.10% Ni, 0.15% Cd, 0.19% Cu, 4% Al, and 380 ppm Ga on mass basis, was leached with hydrochloric acid. The acidic leach liquors were obtained by leaching the rotary filter cake or leach residue. Iron (III) in the acidic leach solution had to be reduced to iron (II), with the addition of iron dust, in order to increase the selectivity of Ga towards iron, since Fe The stripping solution (25 mL) was added dropwise to the membrane solution (25 mL), stirred at 2,000 rpm for 20 min, and passed through a burette in about 10 min. The appropriate liquid membrane emulsion was added to a feed solution (250 mL) in a 600-mL baffled beaker, which contained the acidic leach solution to be extracted. The acidic leach solution contained 100 mg/L Ga together with 8715 mg/L Fe, 60 mg/L Co, 80 mg/L Ni, 265 mg/L Cd, 24,020 mg/L Zn, 6592 mg/L Pb, 315 mg/L Cu, and 3,100 mg/L Al, unless otherwise stated. The two-phase system was stirred by a variable speed mixer equipped with a turbine-type teflon impeller. Mixing speed of feed solution, HCl concentration in the feed solution, type of diluent, surfactant concentration, extractant concentration, type of stripping solution were varied to observe their effect on gallium separation. The uptake of metal ions was monitored by removing samples of the feed solution periodically for analysis with an atomic absorption spectrophotometer. At the end of each run, the emulsion was recovered and subsequently broken into its constituent organic and aqueous phases using a high-voltage splitter with niobium electrodes. All the extraction experiments were carried out batchwise and at the ambient temperature of 20±1 °C. All aqueous solutions were prepared using triply deionized water. The details of the experimental technique is reported elsewhere ( In a mechanically mixed contactor, a high mixing speed promotes mass transfer, however, the shear exerted may break the membrane (  It is recognized that the organic diluent influences the performance of many liquid membrane systems (  The reason that kerosene provides better performance may be due to solvation effect in the membrane solution apart from viscosity. It is argued that a diluent which strongly solvates the extractant will probably tend to remove this reagent from the interface which would have an adverse effect on the rate of attainment of equilibrium. However, a diluent which does not solvate the extractant will probably be unable to dissolve sufficient of the reagent for a commercial extraction process (    Since both the extraction and stripping processes in liquid membrane system occur simultaneously for continuous transport of metal ion, it is significant to explore the effect of acid type in the stripping phase. The treatment ratio, defined as the volume ratio of aqueous feed solution ( It is anticipated from Eq. The effect of the volume ratio of aqueous phase to emulsion phase (V The optimum conditions were obtained from the earlier experiments. The membrane phase consisted of the surfactant ECA 4360J (2% w/w), the carrier reagent TOPO (6% w/w), and the diluent STA90 NS (92% w/w). HCl concentration in the feed solution, concentration and type of acid in the stripping solution, mixing speeds of emulsion and of feed solution, and volume ratio of stripping phase/organic phase/ feed phase ( From The variations in concentration of Ga, Fe, Co, Ni, Zn, Cd, Pb, Cu, and Al against time, at the optimum conditions, are indicated in The effect of initial gallium concentration in the solution on the extent of extraction is shown in The separation factors ( At the end of one experiment, in 30 min., liquid membrane selectivity of gallium with respect to other ions is reasonably high. The separation factors for gallium are shown in The two major contaminants were iron and zinc. Iron tends to be in ferric state and has a great tendency to form complexes with chloride ion, in the form of FeCl Complete reduction to Fe From the experiments in An emulsion liquid membrane process using TOPO as a carrier to extract the gallium from a complex acidic leach solution has been investigated. From this study, the following conclusions can be drawn:  Increasing the surfactant concentration caused a decrease in the gallium extraction due to mass transfer resistance of the surfactant film. When using STA90 NS as diluent, a low concentration was found to be the best for separation of gallium, only a small effect was observed with kerosene as diluent. This indicates that diluent–surfactant interaction may be significant in liquid membranes. The highest gallium extraction rate was obtained with 6% w/w TOPO concentration. Though the kerosene appeared to show a better performance than STA90 NS, diluent–surfactant and/or diluent–extractant interactions in the membrane phase could be significant in liquid membrane separations. A 7 M HCl concentration in the feed solution was found to be the best, below this the extraction rate decreased and above this the membrane was unstable. The conditions are possible that 99% of the gallium could be selectively extracted within 5 min from strong acidic leach solutions containing gallium, iron, cobalt, nickel, zinc, cadmium, lead, copper, and aluminium, using TOPO as a carrier. The liquid membrane selectivity of gallium with respect to the other ions, that existed in the leach solutions, was reasonably high. The gallium concentration could be increased about ten times in one stage, and using more stages the selectivity and concentration of gallium could be further improved. At the optimum conditions, the higher the gallium concentration in the feed solution, the lower the extent of gallium extraction was obtained, as the gallium concentration ranged from 100 to 300 mg/L. The authors wish to express their sincere gratitude to ExxonMobil, U.K. and Belgium, for supplying the surfactant ECA 4360J, and the solvent STA90 NS.