The Odiel watershed drains materials belonging to the Iberian Pyrite Belt, where significant massive sulfide deposits have been mined historically. As a result, a huge amount of sulfide-rich wastes are deposited in the watershed, which suffer from oxidation, releasing acidic lixiviates with high sulfate and metal concentrations. In order to reliably estimate the metal loadings along the watershed a complete series of discharge and hydrochemical data are essential. A hydrological model was performed with SWAT (Soil and Water Assessment Tool) to solve the scarcity of gauge stations along the watershed. The model was calibrated and validated from daily discharge data (from 1980 to 2010) at the outlet of the watershed, river inputs into an existent reservoir, and a flow gauge station close to the northern area of the watershed. Discharge data obtained from the hydrological model, together with analytical data, allowed the estimation of the dissolved pollutant load delivered annually by the Odiel River (e.g. 9140t of Al, 2760t of Zn). The pollutant load is influenced strongly by the rainfall regime, and can even double during extremely rainy years. Around 50% of total pollution comes from the Riotinto Mining District, so the treatment of Riotinto lixiviates reaching the Odiel watershed would reduce the AMD (Acid Mine Drainages) in a remarkable way, improving the water quality downstream, especially in the reservoir of Alcolea, currently under construction. The information obtained in this study will allow the optimization of remediation efforts in the watershed, in order to improve its water quality.The Iberian Pyrite Belt (IPB) is one of the largest polymetallic massive sulfide deposits in the world, with original reserves in the order of 1700 The most significant example of this type of pollution is the Tinto River ( The main aim of this work is to develop an effective methodology to obtain discharge data, and estimate the pollutant contribution of each sub-basin of the Odiel River reliably, in order to identify priority areas for remediation. This methodology has been applied successfully in the Meca River Basin, which is considerably smaller than the Odiel but is also affected by AMD ( The Odiel River (SW, Spain) has a total length of 140 With the exception of the northernmost area, the Odiel River Basin flows through materials from the IPB, which belongs to the South Portuguese Zone of the Iberian Massif. The IPB includes three units of different lithological characteristics ( The VSC hosts numerous massive sulfide deposits. Among them is the world’s largest deposit of polymetallic sulfides: the Riotinto mining district with original reserves of 500 The average rainfall in the Odiel watershed is close to 740 The main tributaries of the Odiel River ( The average streamflow of the Odiel River at Gibraleón is 17.5 The methodology applied in this study relies on a hydrological modeling of the Odiel watershed to obtain a complete discharge dataset for each sub-basin, coupled with synoptic samplings in the whole watershed to obtain detailed hydrochemistry information. These data will be used to establish relationships between discharge and pollutant concentrations and thus to estimate the pollutant fluxes along the watershed. This will be explained in more detail in the following sections. A hydrological modeling of the Odiel River was performed using the SWAT code (Soil and Water Assessment Tool; The model represents spatial variability in the watershed, by discretizing it into smaller units in two steps. First, a division into sub-basins is made and the water network is calculated. Second, each sub-basin is divided into several Hydrologic Response Units (HRUs), with homogeneous characteristics of use, coverage and soil type. To calculate the surface runoff, the SCS (Soil Conservation Service) curve number procedure was used ( The portion of rainfall that does not turn into surface runoff is removed from the soil by percolation and evapotranspiration. The Hargreaves method was used to calculate potential evapotranspiration because only needs daily values for minimum and maximum temperatures and geographical location ( A gauge station placed at the watershed outlet was considered for model calibration and validation purposes (Gibraleón; In order to assess the simulations performed during the calibration and validation steps, hydrographs obtained by SWAT were compared visually to those obtained by the gauge stations. In addition, the following statistic parameters were calculated: Pearson’s correlation coefficient ( Several synoptic samplings were performed along the watershed ( Concentrations of dissolved Al, As, Be, Ca, Cd, Co, Cr, Cu, Fe, K, Li, Mg, Mn, Mo, Na, Ni, P, Pb, S, Sb, Si, Se, Sn, Sr and Zn were determined by Inductively Coupled Plasma Atomic Emission Spectrometry (ICP-AES Jobin-Yvon Ultima2), although only the most relevant will be discussed in this study. Multi-elemental standards solutions prepared from single certified standards, supplied by SCP SCIENCE, were used for calibration. They were run at the beginning and at the end of each analytical series. Certified Reference Material SRM®-1640 NIST fresh-water-type and inter-laboratory standard IRNM-N3 waste-water test material (European Commission Institute for Reference Materials and Measurements) were also analyzed. Detection limits were calculated by average and standard deviations from ten blanks. Detection limit was below 0.1 There are different methods to estimate the pollutant load carried by a river ( The topography was obtained from the Digital Elevation Model (DEM) of the Andalusian Regional Government, with an accuracy of 10 Weather data (daily rainfall and maximum and minimum temperatures) were obtained from 23 rainfall stations and 12 temperature stations, respectively. The series of daily data underwent quality control. Anomalous values were corrected, and missing data were replaced with interpolated values from linear regression with nearby gauges, in order to have a homogeneous and complete data series available. As SWAT does not reflect adequately the spatial distribution of rainfall with orographic variations in the basin, a more reliable methodology was applied to estimate the rainfall distribution ( The first step was the calibration and validation of the Múrtigas and Meca sub-basins, in order to obtain the hydrogeological parameters in the northern and southern parts, respectively, of the watershed. The calibration and validation of the model for the whole watershed was performed subsequently using discharge data from the Gibraleón gauge station ( The available dataset of daily water inputs to the Sancho Reservoir comprises the periods 1982 to 2002, and the hydrological year 2009/10. The calibration period for the Meca River was from 1982 to 2000, devoting the rest of data for validation purposes. Some variables were modified initially by manual calibration, and afterwards using the SWAT-CUP program, in order to minimize observed differences between simulated and measured flow: baseflow recession constant of the aquifer (ALPHA_BF); groundwater “revap” coefficient (GW_REVAP), which controls the evapotranspiration from the aquifer when the saturated zone is close to the surface or where deep-rooted plants are growing; initial depth of water in the shallow aquifer (SHALLST); threshold depth of water in the shallow aquifer required for base flow to occur (GWQMN); threshold depth of water in the shallow aquifer for “revap” to occur (REVAPMN); groundwater delay time for aquifer recharge (GW_DELAY); percolation fraction to deep aquifer (RCHRG_DP); SCS curve number (CN2); soil evaporation compensation factor (ESCO) which regulates the direct evaporation from soil water; and the available water capacity of the soil (SOL_AWC). Parameters values after the calibration step are shown in In order to obtain the hydrological characteristics for the northern sub-basins, a manual calibration was performed in the Múrtigas River using the following variables: ALPHA_BF, GW_REVAP; GWQMN, REVAPMN; GW_DELAY; CN2; and SOL_AWC. The values of the parameters linked to groundwater ( Once the main parameters of the northern and southern parts of the watershed were obtained, the model for the whole Odiel watershed was performed. Parameters obtained from the Múrtigas River were utilized for the northern sub-basins (1, 2, 6, 9, 14 and 21, Considering the whole modeled period (from 1982 to 2010), the Odiel River had an average contribution of 550  The Oraque headwaters receive the acidic lixiviates from the San Telmo, Lomero-Poyatos, Confesionarios, and Perrunal mines ( The Meca River (point 88) is also affected by acidic lixiviates coming from the Tharsis mines, showing a high level of AMD pollution (average values of 88 The Odiel River (point 91), just before the confluence with the estuary, shows lower metal concentrations than those recorded upstream (e.g. 39 The dissolved pollutant load delivered by the Odiel River was estimated for the period 1982/2010, by establishing relationships among discharges obtained with SWAT and metal concentrations at several control points. The outstanding main contributors of pollutants to the Odiel River are the lixiviates originated in the Riotinto Mining District, delivered by the Agrio Creek (point 14), with an annual load of 4400 The Odiel at its upper course (point 15) carry a high pollutant load (6300 In the middle course of the Odiel River (point 34) a significant increase in Zn, Cd and Ni loads ( The pollutant load carried by the Oraque River before the confluence with the Odiel was of 1600 The Meca River (point 88), the last tributary of the Odiel before the confluence with the estuary, carries a high pollutant load into the Sancho Reservoir, standing at 420  Comparing the results obtained in this study with those estimated by A comparison with estimations from The SWAT model is a useful tool to reproduce a historical discharge data series, and to infer discharge data when missing gaps are recorded at gauge stations. The reliability of the model relies logically on the quality of input data. The calibration with experimental data at selected points of the watershed, and otherwise in watersheds of similar characteristics, is of paramount importance to obtain reliable results. In the Odiel River a good fit between simulated and measured discharges was observed for all sub-basins considered during the calibration and validation steps. The highest differences were observed at low stages during the dry season, due to the high uncertainty of measurements under those conditions at the Gibraleón gauge station, which does not have a channeled section. Concerning the average loads of dissolved elements, the Agrio Creek, which receives the acidic lixiviates from the Riotinto Mining District, is by far the main pollutant contributor of the Odiel watershed (around 40–60%). Other areas of high AMD pressure are the Odiel upper course, where the effluents from the Concepción, San Platón, Esperanza, and Poderosa mines join the river before its junction with the Agrio Creek, and the Olivargas sub-basin, which collects the drainages coming from La Zarza mine. Contrary to other contaminants, the Fe dissolved load decreases in some areas downstream of the mining zones, due to intense precipitation along the riverbed. The Oraque River, affected by several mines located in its headwaters and by the Tharsis mines downstream, also contributes to the pollutant load delivered by the Odiel River; around 18 and 32% of the total load. Recently, the construction of a new reservoir in the watershed has commenced, just at the confluence of the Oraque and Odiel Rivers. The pollutant load into the projected reservoir calculated in this study supports previous estimations that forecast the acidic composition of stored waters if remediation measures on AMD sources are not put into practice. The Tharsis mines also release a high pollutant load into the Meca River (418 It has been estimated that the average dissolved pollutant loads delivered by the Odiel River for Al (9138 This work has been financed by the projects