In the present study, boriding response of AISI W1 steel and prediction of boride layer properties were investigated by using artificial neural network (ANN). Boronizing heat treatment was carried out in a solid medium consisting of Ekabor-I powders at 850–1050 °C at 50 °C intervals for 1–8 h. The substrate used in this study was AISI W1. The presence of borides FeB and Fe2B formed on the surface of steel substrate was confirmed by optical microscope and X-ray diffraction analysis. The hardness of the boride layer formed on the surface of the steel substrate was over 1500 VHN. Experimental results indicated that there is a nearly parabolic relationship between boride layer and process time for higher temperatures. Optical microscope cross-sectional observation of the borided layer revealed columnar and compact morphology. Moreover, an attempt was made to investigate possibility of predicting the hardness and depth of boride layer variation and establish some empirical relationship between process parameter of boriding and boride layer, and hardness changes using back-propagation learning algorithm in ANN. Modelling results have shown that hardness and depth of boride layer were predicted with high accuracy by ANN.Boronizing, which is a thermochemical diffusion surface treatment in which boron atoms are diffused into the surface of work piece to form hard borides with the base material, can be applied to a wide range of steel alloys including carbon steel, low alloy steel, tool steel and stainless steel. The boriding process is a prominent choice for a wide range of tribological applications where the control of friction and wear is of primary concern. Thermal diffusion treatments of boron compounds used to form iron borides typically require process temperatures of 700–1000 °C in either gaseous, solid or salt media As it is well-known, boronizing which performed at high temperature is a time-consuming process. The selection of process parameter is important in order to attain the desired thickness of boride layer and hardness variations. In addition to investigation of boriding response of AISI W1 steel, one of the objective of present study is to investigate the possibility of predicting the boride layer thickness and hardness distribution after different boriding conditions by using artificial neural network (ANN). ANNs, which are relatively new modelling techniques, have shown remarkable performance when used to model complex linear and non-linear relationships. ANNs have been successfully applied to model complicated processes in many engineering applications: electronics, manufacturing and robotics. Recently the interest to the ANNs modelling in the fields of the materials science and physical metallurgy has increased rapidly AISI W1, water hardening plain carbon tool steel essentially containing 0.86 wt.% C, 0.18 wt.% Cr, 0.36 wt.% Mn, and 0.24 wt.% Si was used as test material. Test materials had a rectangular shape and were 10×10×2.5 mm The type and morphology of borides formed on the steel substrate were confirmed via optical microscopy. The presence of borides formed in the boride layer were determined by X-ray diffraction (XRD) analysis. A CoKα radiation with a wavelength of 1.7902 Å was used over a 2θ range of 20–88°. The hardness of boride layer was measured three times for each point having the same distance from the surface by means of Vickers indenter with a load of 1 N. The thickness of the boride layer was identified via a digital measurement instrument attached to the optical microscope. The thickness values are average of at least three measurements. ANNs are computational models, which simulate the function of biological network, composed of neurons. The system has three layers of neurons: input layer, a hidden layer and an output layer. The neurons or units of the network are connected by the weights. Input layer consist of all the input factors, information from the input layer is then processed through one hidden layer, and following output vector is computed in the final (output) layer. The structure of the network used in this study is shown schematically in The neural network was written in the C++ programming language and all tests were performed on a personal computer. The activation and error function used in this study is a logistic sigmoid function and standard sum-of-squared error function, respectively. Neural network requires that the range of the both input and output values should be between 0 and 1 due to restriction of sigmoid function, consequently, the data must be unified. In order to facilitate the comparisons between predicted values for different network parameters and actual values, there is a need for error evaluation. Mean error (ME) is defined as ratio of absolute error to number of data and following form is used in error analysis.  The aim of the ANN usage is to predict hardness variation in borided layers including transition zone and thickness of the borided layer versus process time. Two networks were established for prediction of hardness profile and thickness of boride layer. The network (Network-I) was trained using 84 hardness measurements referring to hardness profile of materials borided at 950 °C for 1, 4 and 8 h. Process time and distance from surface are input factors and predicted hardness ( In the second network (Network-II) the data used 45 measurements referring to thickness of materials borided at 850, 950 and 1050 °C for 1–8 h and the network was trained using for prediction of boride layer as a function of time. The measurements of layer thickness of materials borided at 900 and 1000 °C for 1–8 h were used in the test set. Input layer consists of two factors, process temperature ( In order to decide the optimum structure of neural network, the rate of error convergence was checked by changing the number of hidden neurons and by adjusting the learning rate and momentum coefficient. A learning rate of 0.4, with momentum coefficient of 0.8 resulted in the fastest convergence for the first network. In the second network, the best results were obtained at 0.5 and 0.9 for learning rate and momentum coefficient, respectively. The five hidden units were concluded to be most efficient design for both networks. The networks were trained up to 140 When the result of second network is examined, it was recognized that there is also a good agreement between experimental data for prediction of boride layer thickness ( When the graphical representation given in In general, boronizing of carbon steels usually leads to formation of two borides, FeB and Fe The investigation of this study indicates that the ANN can successfully predict the variation of hardness as a function of time and depth of boride layer depending on the process temperature with high accuracy of approximately 95% ( When the above results are taken into consideration, the following conclusions can be derived as: The progress of boride layer thickness can be expressed by a power function of boriding time, depending on the temperature. The surface hardness of the borided AISI W1 steel is in the range of 1690–1800 VHN, while the unborided steel substrate is 260 VHN. This study has shown the capability of an ANN to predict the hardness profile and boride layer thickness with high accuracy of approximately 95%. It was observed that ANN is superior to regression method. The prediction accuracy of ANN is satisfactory for industrial applications.