The grindability of a diasporic ore was studied by wet grinding in a laboratory ball mill and its breakage parameters were determined based on the population balance model (PBM). Four different feeds with unnatural size distributions were designed to save grinding and sieving work. It was found that three size-intervals fitted the first-order breakage, but the coarsest interval did not. The non-first order breakage was most probably caused by the heterogeneity of the material. The heterogeneity was then confirmed by experiments. The breakage rate and the breakage distribution parameters were back calculated by treating the non-first order breakage as two linear segments according to the grinding time. The back-calculated breakage rates were in good agreement with the values calculated directly from the experimental data, and non-normalizable breakage distribution was observed. The model with the obtained parameters simulated the experimental product size distributions with good accuracy. These findings are valuable to the simulation and optimization of the industrial grinding processes of diasporic ores.Diasporic bauxite is the principal raw ore for alumina production in China. It is composed of diaspore and silicate minerals (kaoline, illite, pyrophyllite, chamosite, etc.) with low ratio of Al Population balance model (PBM) has been widely used for design, simulation, control and optimization of the grinding process ( The objective of this study is to determine the breakage parameters of a diasporic ore for further modelling and optimization of the industrial grinding process. The grindability of the ore was investigated by wet grinding in a laboratory ball mill. The phenomena observed from the experimental data were discussed. The breakage parameters were finally evaluated by back-calculation method. It is worth to mention that, to the authors' knowledge, publications about the grinding kinetics of diasporic bauxite have not been found. The time-continuous, size-discrete PBM for batch grinding is, Many researches have found that the disappearance rate of the top size fits a first-order assumption ( For the top-size interval, Eq. If Taking natural logarithm on both sides of Eq. So, when Eq. There is no analytically derived breakage function or matrix for a grinding problem. For the industrial grinding process, S can be scaled up from laboratory batch or closed-loop test data, or estimated directly from the real plant data ( If the breakage distribution function is insensitive to the precise mill conditions and the starting size, and only related to the properties of the being ground materials, it can be empirically expressed in a normalizable form ( If the breakage distribution depends on the starting size, it is called non-normalizable and then, Some researches stated that The ore used in the experiment was the feed to the industrial ball mill which was smaller than 12 The − Mono-size intervals of the being studied materials were usually ground. However, it was time-consuming and expensive to prepare and grind all the mono-size intervals of the diasporic ore, especially the medium size intervals. Hence, feeds with unnatural size fractions, as shown in The experiments were performed in a laboratory ball mill, whose characteristics and the test conditions are described in Wet grinding was employed to avoid dust loss. The grinding time, determined by pre-tests, was chosen to make an amount between 20% and 80% of the material break out of the top-size intervals. At the end of each grinding period, the mill was immediately emptied into a grid screen by washing the mill and the balls. The products were dried and sampled for sieving using the cone-and-quartered method. Different amounts of sample for each grinding product, calculated as Eq. Due to the high viscosity of the fine particles, the sample was washed firstly using the finest screen ( Reproducibility of the tests was confirmed as some of the results illustrated in From the grinding results of the MUFs in The non-first order may be caused by many reasons, for instance, the materials are heterogeneous, or the particles are too large to be nipped by the balls. However, the non-first order of the diasporic ore has a feature that the breakage rate decelerates with respect to the weight fraction at 0 In order to confirm the heterogeneity of the material, two different − These findings are valuable for the engineers to find the optimal operating conditions to liberate the useful mineral, and avoid overgrinding. They are also useful for the design of the bauxite grinding and classification process. Due to the feed design in the experiment, the breakage rate and breakage distribution functions must be determined by back-calculation method. The non-first order breakage is usually treated by the false time concept ( Therefore, the breakage rate of the coarsest size interval was treated as two segments according to its feature shown in From the experimental data, During the procedure of the parameter identification, it was found that the non-normalizable breakage distribution function, expressed in Eqs.  In order to validate the breakage parameters, the comparison of the measured and the simulated size distribution of the products is shown in The feed to the industrial mill may change for it is a mixture of ores from different mine sources as aforementioned. So, the breakage parameters were also validated using another feed of the industrial mill collected at a different date which was 3 Although the back-calculated values of The wet grindability of a diasporic ore was studied in a laboratory ball mill. The medium particles fit the first-order breakage and the coarse ones do not. It is most likely due to the heterogeneity of the minerals in the ore, where silicate minerals break faster than the diaspore mineral and produce more fine particles with very low ratio of Al The breakage parameters were back calculated by dividing the non-first order breakage into two linear segments according to the grinding time. The breakage distribution function of the tested ore is found non-normalizable. The back-calculated breakage rates fit well with the direct-calculated values from the experimental data. The simulated size distributions of the products show reasonable accuracy compared with the experimentally measured data. Different feeds to the industrial ball mill still need to be further studied because their grindability may be not the same. The authors are grateful to the Zhongzhou Branch, China Aluminium Corporation for their support for the experiments. The authors acknowledge the financial support from the