This work is an attempt to improve the mechanical and tribological properties of nanostructured TiAlN coatings through the plasma nitriding/TiN/TiAlN/Ti(2)N process for metal forming applictions. The coatings were deposited using the pulsed DC plasma-assisted chemical vapor deposition (PACVD) method at the constant working conditions including the frequency of 10 kHz, the deposition temperature of 470 °C, and the duty cycle of 33%. H2, Ar, and N2 gases and TiCl4 and AlCl3 precursors were fed to the chamber as the depositing agents. The results indicated that the three-layered coatings (TiN/TiAlN/Ti(2)N) have the enhaced adhesion strength and wear resistance than the single-layered ones (TiN or TiAlN). This is also showed that the surface morphology, grain size, and friction coefficient of the TiN coating are respectively smoother, smaller, and lower than those of the TiAlN coating. Accordingly, it was concluded that the Ti(2)N coating as a top coat is an appropriate material to improve the tribological and mechanical properties of nanostructured TiAlN coatings.Over the past decades, TiN coatings have been widely utilized to enhance the lifetime and performance of numerous components of machineries, e.g. dies and cutting tools, because of their unique properties such as high hardness, low friction coefficient and excellent chemical stability [ Despite the high levels of hardness, the TiAlN coatings have some critical drawbacks such as poor adhesion and a high friction coefficient. In this study, the poor adhesion of TiAlN coating was eliminated by depositing the TiN coating before the TiAlN coating. In addition, the high friction coefficient of the coating was reduced using the another TiN coating including the Ti In this work, AISI H13 (DIN1.2344) hot work tool steel with the chemical composition of 5 at% Cr and 1 at% V was used as the substrate. The specimens were machined into two cylinders with 10 mm in height and 20 and 50 mm in diameter, and after austenitizing at 1050 °C for 30 min, were quenched in oil and tempered at 550 °C for 45 min [ At first, a nanostructured TiN coating was deposited on a nitrided substrates as an intermediate layer for about 30 min. Then, the nanostructured TiAlN coating was applied for 90 min, and the other TiN coating was deposited for 90 min as an upper layer. All coatings were deposited by a DC-pulsed PACVD system (Plasmafanavar Co., Iran) in a continuous manner. The stoichiometry of TiN (TiN The treated samples were evaluated by the field emission scanning electron microscope (FE-SEM, ZEISS S4800), X-ray diffraction (XRD, N8 Bruker) with CuK As the gas flow changes, the stoichiometry of the coating varies [  The full width at half maximum (FWHM) values for the TiAlN and TiN coatings in the T/T/T and single-layered coatings were measured from their XRD patterns. According to the Shcerrer equation, the FWHM and the grain size are inversely related. Thus, the narrower the peak, the coarser the grains. As seen from The adhesion property of the coating is an important factor to achieve the appropriate tribological properties. A coating with poor adhesion bonding is not favorable for mechanical applications. However, in the current study, the values of hardness for the untreated steel, the nitrided steel, TiN and TiAlN were 400, 750, 1520, and 2820 HV, respectively. In addition, the values of thermal expansion coefficient for H13 steel, TiN and TiAlN were 11.9, 9.4, and 7.5 ☓ 10  The friction coefficient is one of the most importanr parameters for evaluating the tribological properties of coatings [ As shown in  It is believed that the hardness difference between the T/T/T and the TiAlN is attributable to the dislocation accumulation in the interface area in the T/T/T coating [  This work is an attempt to improve the surface properties of nanostructured TiAlN coatings through the plasma nitriding/TiN/TiAlN/Ti The adhesion strength of the three-layered TiN/TiAlN/Ti The friction coefficients of the TiN/TiAlN/Ti The micro-hardness value of the TiN/TiAlN/Ti The authors wish to express their sincerest gratitude to the