Subsurface fluid injections can disturb the effective stress regime by elevating pore pressure and potentially reactivate faults and fractures. Laboratory studies indicate that fracture rheology and permeability in such reactivation events are linked to the roughness of the fracture surfaces. In this study, we construct numerical models using discrete element method (DEM) to explore the influence of fracture surface roughness on the shear strength, slip stability, and permeability evolution during such slip events. For each simulation, a pair of analog rock coupons (three-dimensional bonded quartz particle analogs) representing a mated fracture is sheared under a velocity-stepping scheme. The roughness of the fracture is defined in terms of asperity height and asperity wavelength. Results show that (1) Samples with larger asperity heights (rougher), when sheared, exhibit a higher peak strength which quickly devolves to a residual strength after reaching a threshold shear displacement; (2) These rougher samples also exhibit greater slip stability due to a high degree of asperity wear and resultant production of wear products; (3) Long-term suppression of permeability is observed with rougher fractures, possibly due to the removal of asperities and redistribution of wear products, which locally reduces porosity in the dilating fracture; and (4) Increasing shear-parallel asperity wavelength reduces magnitudes of stress drops after peak strength and enhances fracture permeability, while increasing shear-perpendicular asperity wavelength results in sequential stress drops and a delay in permeability enhancement. This study provides insights into understanding of the mechanisms of frictional and rheological evolution of rough fractures anticipated during reactivation events.Human interventions into the subsurface, such as hydraulic fracturing, enhanced geothermal stimulation, and carbon sequestration, involve injecting large volumes of fluid at high overpressures. Such interventions disturb the stress field by elevating pore pressure and altering far-field stress ( Previous laboratory shear experiments on faults and fractures showed that permeability declines over shear slip, which may be caused by clay swelling or clogging of wear products ( Classic experimental studies have suggested that the shear strength of fractures are closely linked to surface roughness ( Numerical approaches have been adopted to investigate the effects of roughness on the shear strength of rock joints. While continuum numerical models are implemented to simulate the onset of shear failure of rough joints and fractures, the discrete element method (DEM) ( In this study, we report DEM simulation results regarding the influences of surface roughness on the evolution of shear strength, slip stability, and permeability of fractures by utilizing a series of rough surface profiles with variations in asperity roughness, wavelength, and degree of wavelength anisotropy. We use a simplified stochastic algorithm to create rough fracture surfaces and utilize the DEM to construct our numerical model. A modified slip-weakening friction constitutive model is implemented on particle–particle contacts to represent slip evolution and the evolution of fracture porosity and permeability. Three key parameters may be used to define fracture roughness: (1) The RMS roughness; (2) The length scale for degree of mismatch; and (3) A fractal parameter/dimension. Each of these parameters plays a role in influencing the dynamic response of fractures during reactivation events. In this study, we focus on the first-order effect of roughness on the shear strength, slip stability, and permeability of mated fractures prone to reactivation. Therefore, we simplify the characterization of the surface roughness by considering only the statistical size and distribution of asperities. We use the two key parameters: (1) The RMS height ( The model ( Virtual rock samples (10 cm × 1 cm × ∼0.5 cm (length × width × thickness) each half) with a predefined rough fracture (mated) are sheared to simulate the dynamic response of intact fractures during reactivation events. Specifically, each rock coupon is generated by filling particles in a virtual container with one side replaced by a predefined rough surface ( The interaction of particles in the DEM model is determined by contact models. We use a modified parallel bond contact model ( The force and moment within a bonded contact are The tensile and shear stresses within the parallel bond are defined as The frictional response of the contact may be accommodated by rate-and-state friction (RSF) law. RSF law ( Although RSF is able to match many of the first- and second-order features in the evolution of friction, it is computationally intensive when implemented in models at contact-level, such as DEM ( A slip event is initiated if the resultant shear stress exceeding the frictional strength of the contact after the contact bond is broken. The evolution of the contact friction depends on the local accumulative shear displacement and the difference between current and previous global shear velocities. During a local slip event (single contact shear), the friction begins to evolve following the red path in We explore the influence of fracture roughness on the evolution of shear strength, slip stability, and permeability of rough fractures during slip events. Specifically, we compare the impacts of (1) RMS height of the asperities (rss1-rss6); (2) Spatial distribution (asperity wavelength) of asperities (rss6-rss9 for We perform direct shear simulations on analog rock coupons with predefined roughness profiles. The simulations are conducted in velocity stepping mode with velocities up- and down-stepped between 1 The virtual rock coupons are sheared to a total relative shear displacement of 25 mm in five velocity steps. The lower coupon is held in place and the upper coupon translates while restrained to deform parallel to the long axis of the fracture. Confining stress is maintained constant at 10 MPa. Shear stress evolution is monitored by the evolution of the friction coefficient of the assembly. The friction coefficient is defined as the ratio of shear stress to confining stress. Since confining stresses are maintained constant during the test, the shear strength scales as friction coefficient. Fracture permeability is controlled by the local contribution to ensemble aperture along fluid channels formed by the interconnected pore network. These effects can be estimated by monitoring the evolution of sample dilatancy (scaled to change in sample thickness during shear) and local porosity along the fracture. In this study, the sample thickness is calculated as the distance between the top and bottom of the analog coupons. Local porosity is measured by averaging five evenly distributed and equally sized sampling windows (spheres) placed along the fracture. The evolutions of sample thickness for tests rss1-rss6 are shown in The evolution of fracture permeability is estimated from the local change in porosity sampled along the fracture ( The evolution of slip stability of the simulated rough fractures is important in understanding the characteristics of the potential for induced seismicity. Stability may be indexed via the parameter RMS asperity height is shown to play an important role in controlling the shear strength, slip stability, and permeability of the fracture. We observe that larger RMS asperity heights result in higher peak shear strengths and a larger threshold displacement for failure with a larger stress drop. A higher RMS asperity height also promotes greater shear dilation, resulting in fracture permeability increase. However, extremely rough fractures exhibit net reduction in post-peak permeability. Natural fractures are complex systems with anisotropy in roughness and asperity strength. We provide a brief discussion of relative roles of asperity wavelength anisotropy, asperity strength, and finally a proposed mechanism for permeability evolution of rough fractures. We have shown that RMS asperity height is closely related to the peak shear strength. The anisotropy of the roughness within the plane of the fracture plays an important role in determining the mechanical and rheological properties. In this study, the anisotropy of roughness is interpreted by varying asperity wavelength parallel to the shear direction ( The evolution of shear strength, permeability, and stability parameters resulting from these profiles are shown in Increasing asperity wavelength perpendicular to the shear direction ( The strength of asperities plays an important role in determining the ensemble mechanical strength of fractures. In this study, we discuss the influence of asperity strength by varying the tensile strength and cohesion for the contacts while keeping other parameters constant. In terms of permeability evolution, increasing tensile strength and cohesion causes permeability enhancement to initiate both earlier and to a higher degree, as shown in Additionally, as shown in The generation of wear products during shearing are commonly observed (e.g. It is typically observed that rough fractures with higher RMS asperity heights produce significantly more wear products (rss6 vs. rss1 in In this study, we investigate the influence of fracture roughness on the shear strength, slip stability, and permeability evolution of fractures by DEM modeling. The rough fracture surfaces are generated based on RMS asperity heights and asperity wavelengths. We have discussed the influence of fracture roughness in the following aspects: RMS asperity heights, anisotropy of asperity wavelength, and strength of asperities. Also, we have analyzed the stability parameters, the relationship between peak shear strength and RMS asperity heights, and proposed mechanisms for the permeability evolution for rough fractures. We summarize the conclusions of this study as follows: Larger RMS asperity height yields higher peak shear strength while requiring more shear displacement to reach the peak strength. The relationship between asperity height and peak shear strength is positively correlated, but in a nonlinear fashion, i.e. under a given asperity strength, there is a limit for the peak shear strength for rough fractures with increasing RMS asperity heights. Increasing the RMS asperity height can alter slip stability of rough fractures from mostly velocity weakening to velocity strengthening. This transformation of slip stability can be related to the generation of wear products. Anisotropy of asperity wavelength can influence the shear strength and permeability evolution of rough fractures. Larger asperity wavelength parallel to the shear direction reduces the peak shear strength of the fracture while increasing the fracture permeability. Larger asperity wavelength perpendicular to shear direction can slightly reduce the peak shear strength, induce more frequent stress drops during failure while delaying, or suppress the permeability enhancement. The strengths of the asperities (bonding strength and cohesion) are crucial to determine the shear strength and permeability evolution of the rough fractures. Lower asperity strength results in lower shear strength and less permeability enhancement. The amount, distribution, and transport of shear-generated wear products can dominate the evolution of shear strength, slip stability, and permeability of rough fractures by localization and clogging effects. Fractures with more wear products exhibit lower shear strength, enhanced slip stability, and lower permeability during dynamic shear. Conclusions drawn above are specifically applicable to the parameters and situations in this study with the potential of upscaling to the field. Future study may consider the deformation and crushing of individual analog particles. Nonetheless, our study provides a straightforward way to study the influence of surface roughness on the mechanical and rheological properties of fractures. The authors wish to confirm that there are no known conflicts of interests associated with this publication and there has been no significant financial support for this work that could have influenced its outcome. This work is a partial result of the support provided by United States The following is the supplementary data to this article: Supplementary data to this article can be found online at