In India, a variety of agricultural products such as bananas, pomegranates, apples, cashew apples, citrus, litchi, mangos, guava, apricots, pineapples, peaches, berries, grapes, watermelons, passion fruit, carrots, amlas, and tomatoes are produced in plenty. As some of the vegetables/fruits are perishable in nature, the improvement of shelf life plays an important role. An alternative strategy adopted for the proper utilization of such fruits/vegetables is juice preparation for appropriate usage of the raw material. In modern fruit juice manufacturing, industrial enzymes are major fundamental components. The functions of enzymes in juice processing are increasing juice yield, clear and visually attractive juice production, debittering of juice, and improvement of the antioxidant and nutritional properties of juice. The use of the enzymes such as pectinase, tannase, carbohydrase, naringinase, and lipase/esterase alone as well as their blends can not only give better juice yield but also help in retaining enhanced nutrition in the juice. In this chapter, the authors will emphasize not only the cost-effective production of industrial enzymes for their selection in appropriate fruit juice production in the pure as well as mixed form, but also accentuate the titer value, shelf life, appropriate enzyme selection, and nutritional upliftment of the final product. A series of enzymes involved in these processes will include laccase, tannase, pectinase, naringinase, carbohydrase, and a few oxido-reductase along with the juice quality and sensory evaluation for maximum wide acceptability of the fruit/vegetable juices.Fruits and vegetables are an imperative source of dietary nutrients such as vitamins, fibers, carbohydrates, pigments, organic acids, etc. These naturally occurring constituents are assumed to provide an extensive range of physiological benefits through their antioxidant, antiallergic, anticarcinogenic, and anti-inflammatory properties. The availability of fruits and vegetables is seasonal throughout their geographical extent so as to access the nutritional benefits, year-round processing and preservation are a prerequisite. Because the moisture content of fresh fruits and vegetables is more than 70% (weight basis) and they are a highly perishable commodity with a short life span, it is estimated that every year nearly 20%–50% of the fruits/vegetables are lost due to environmental conditions, mishandling during transportation, and a lack of preservation and processing practices ( Enzymes have been used by humans since time immemorial, either knowingly or unknowingly. They possess diverse biological, physiochemical, and catalytic properties with defined substrate specificity, which enables raw material biotransformation with low/no inhibitor formation, thus manifesting a better quality of the end product ( Juice processing involves several sets of operational activities such as peeling, extraction, yield recovery, clarification, and bitterness removal. Basically, this process is required to increase the shelf life, improvise the organoleptic properties, and retain or increase the nutritional property of the juices through such processing. The processing technologies widely practiced in the fruit/vegetable processing industries are thermal processing, mechanical scuffing, and the application of chemicals. Mechanical peeling involves the application of abrasive devices, drums, rollers, knives, milling cutters, etc. Chemical treatments such as the addition of sodium hydroxide solution are mostly used to degrade the pulp layer adhered to the cuticular tissue by acting on the thin waxy layer of the skin ( The retainment of phytochemicals and nutrients in fruit and vegetables broadly depends on the processing of the food. Different types of conventional food processing are reported, such as degradation of appearance, texture, phytochemicals, and nutrients of the food products ( The accelerating demand for novel biocatalysts in the juice industry has uplifted the manufacturing of enzymes from various sources. Enzymes are the biological catalysts with high substrate specificity and a high tolerance to a broad range of pH and temperatures. Enzymatic degradation of the biomaterial depends upon the incubation time, temperature, enzyme concentration, agitation, pH, and type of substrate of the reaction system. Cellulose, hemicellulose, pectin, lignin, and proteins are the main components present within the primary cell wall of fruits and vegetables. During the processing of fruits/vegetables, raw materials are hydrolyzed by different enzymes to their respective monomeric units for the preparation of the corresponding finished products. Cellulase, hemicellulases, and pectinases have been widely used as macerating enzymes in the fruit/vegetable juice industries ( Enzymes such as pectinases, cellulase, hemicellulases, naringinase, laccase, tannase, amylases, glucose oxidase, etc., have immense application in the food processing industries. They hydrolyze the cell wall of the fruit/vegetable, releasing all nutrients and therefore facilitating improved juice yields, shortening the processing time, and enhancing the sensory characteristics ( Pectinases are one of the few first groups of hydrolytic enzymes used at the commercial level. This group of enzymes includes a range of biocatalysts that bear the potential to cleave high molecular weight pectic polysaccharides into their respective monomeric galacturonic units. By nature, pectic substances are complex biomolecules present as the major components of middle lamellae and within the primary cell wall in complexation with cellulose microfibril and structural protein to form an insoluble complex biomolecule. This complex structural arrangement is responsible for the formation of “cloud particles.” This molecular representation is mostly due to the presence of a positively charged protein molecule surrounded by pectin molecules that are negatively charged. The viscosity or cloudiness of the juices gets improved upon the addition of pectinases. Because of their negative charge, pectin molecules repel each other and, in the presence of the enzymes, get cleaved while the protein portion gets exposed. As a result, electrostatic repulsion gets reduced between the particles, which finally forces them to form larger particles and settle down at the bottom ( Pectinesterases or pectinmethylesterases (PMEs) (E.C. 3.1.1.11) mostly originate from plants, bacteria, and pathogenic fungi belonging to the CAZy class 8 of carbohydrate esterases. PMEs are biologically active in monomeric form and bear a molecular mass within the range 25–45 Pectin Lyase (E.C.4.2.2.10) is also one of several inducible enzymes, mostly produced by the microbial genus of Pectate lyases or polygalacturonate lyases or pectate transeliminases (E.C. 4.2.2.2.) were first discovered and isolated from the culture of Protopectinase (PPases) or pectinosinase is one of the pectin hydrolases that catalyzes the solubilization of insoluble pectin in the presence of water. The mechanism of action of PPases classifies them into A-type or B-type. The inner site of protopectin containing the polygalacturonic acid is mostly cleaved by A-type PPases whereas the outer site that connects the cell wall components with polgalacturonate are cleaved by B-type PPases. The biological and physicochemical properties of all types of A-type PPases are similar and have a molecular mass of 30 Polygalacturonases (PG), classified into the glycosyl hydrolases family, catalyzes hydrolysis of α-1,4 glycosidic bonds between PGA, generating Cloudy citrus juices are mostly stabilized by pectic enzymes such as polygalacturonases. Pectin from oranges is less methylated in comparison to apple pectin because of the natural presence of pectin esterase, which removes the methyl groups. Thereby, the controlled application of pectinases is very important for increasing the yield and cloud stability. Banana is widely accepted for the aroma of isoamyl acetate. But banana juice is too viscous and pulpy, so the pectinase application helps in clarifying the juice as well as increasing the yield. While considering sparkling clear, haze-free juices, pectinases are added to improve the straining and pressing of juices. Apple juices are mostly prepared as an unclarified and unfiltered juice containing pulpy particles. So, pectinases are the only enzymes that de-polymerize the esterified pectin and aid in the separation of a flocculating precipitate through sedimentation, which finally produces an amber-colored sparkling clear juice. Unicellular products are mostly produced by organized tissue transformation into intact cell suspension. The resulting product acts as the base material of pulpy juices. Maceraces are the enzymes mostly employed to serve the purpose of transformation, a phenomenon known as maceration. Pectic enzymes in combination with cellulase are able to isolate protoplasts or separate intact cells practically from every plant tissue. Alkaline proteases are mostly of bacterial origin and their application is mostly used for wastewater treatment of the juice processing industries, degumming fiber crops, paper making, and coffee processing. These enzymes do not possess any direct application to the juice processing industries ( Cellulase is a complex of three different enzymes: endoglucanase (E.C. 3.2.1.4), exoglucanase (E.C. 3.2.1.91), and β-glucosidase (E.C. 3.2.1.21). In cellulose hydrolysis, endoglucanase (EG) and exoglucanase (CBG) work synergistically to transform cellulose into small cellooligosaccharides and then β-glucosidase (BG) hydrolyzes the cellooligosaccharides into simple sugars (glucose) ( Cellulases are a part of the macerating enzymes complex (cellulase, xylanase, and pectinases) that is highly used for extraction and clarification of fruit/vegetable juices to increase the yield, improve cloud stability, and decrease viscosity of the juices from tropical fruits such as mangoes, peaches, and papayas ( Hemicellulase can be classified as xylanase (E.C. 3.2.1.8) and galactanase (E.C. 3.2.1.89), which hydrolyzes the hemicellulose constituents of fruits and vegetables. These enzymes can be procured from GRAS microorganisms ( Laccase (E.C. 1.10.3.2) is a copper-containing polyphenol oxidase that oxidizes polyphenols, methoxy-substituted phenols, diamines, and other compounds ( Glucose oxidase (E.C. 1.1.3.4), a flavoprotein, belongs to a class of oxidoreductase and catalyzes the oxidation of β- Amylase is an important hydrolase enzyme that has been widely used for many decades and represents one of the most important enzyme groups in the biotechnology field ( Tannase, otherwise known as Tannin acyl hydrolase (E.C. 3.1.1.20), was discovered by Tieghem in 1867 ( Naringinase (E.C. 3.2.1.40) is a hydrolytic enzyme that posses the activity of both α-L-rhamnosidase (E.C. 3.2.1.40) and β- Limonate dehydrogenase is a hydrolysable enzyme used in different citrus juice processing industries for the removal of the bitterness-causing agent. Limonin is the bitterness-causing agent present in citrus juice and causes delayed bitterness. It is a highly oxygenated triterpene derivative in the group of limonoids. In citrus juice, low pH conditions facilitate the conversion of limonoate A-ring lactone to limonin and thus causes delayed bitterness. Not only is this phenomenon a great hindrance to the citrus juice processing industry, but it also affects customer acceptability. This problem can be overcome by either preventing the formation of limonin precursors prior to harvest or by the biotechnological removal of limonin ( Enzymes are widely used in processing aids to improve the final product quality and increase the yield while reducing the overall cost. The integration of this biological catalyst is a well-established method, but there is still scope for further improvement in enzyme production. Researchers are putting in consistent effort to make this application of enzymes more effective and diversified ( As far as the processing of food products is concerned, the use of some conventional processes can alter the quality of the food products by depleting their natural constituents. Thus, there is a requirement for advanced processing mechanisms that can serve products without compromising their natural quality. In this scenario, the use of enzymes in the juice industry has increased significantly because of the specificity of enzyme action, the retainment and enhancement of nutritional property, high yield, and easy handling as well as their cost-effective and environmentally friendly nature. Thus, enzyme-mediated juice processes are gaining more impetus in serving enhanced nutraceutical properties, sensory attributes, and increased shelf life of fruit juice. A degree of care and ingenuity is often required to adapt these sensitive biological catalysts to industrial processes, and the amalgamation of basic biochemical knowledge and modern biotechnology is opening up new areas of application, especially for enzymes of microbial origin. Rigorous and dedicated research efforts are constantly being made to make the application of enzymes in juice processing effective and diversified. Still, advanced and precise research is required for the selection and mixing of enzymes with juice to ensure proper kinetic activities for optimum functionality and productivity.