This paper aims at deriving analytical expressions of mining-induced energy redistribution around rectangular openings that involve local alteration of rock mass properties. As energy combines the effects of strains and stresses simultaneously, this research work is intended to complement existing approaches that rely on stress-based stability criteria. The energy density on the boundaries and its distribution within the domain, obtained analytically through direct derivation, is compared to numerical solutions obtained by Finite Element simulation for a given hypothetical field case. The analytical and numerical solutions show a good agreement and reflect the importance of analytical solutions especially in the vicinity of severe geometrical singularities. Our parametric study shows that the initial stress coefficient and opening span-height ratio have great influence on the variation of strain energy density. We found that the energy density concentrates on the excavation corners and that the energy density concentration index value on the opening side boundary decreases when the span-height ratio decreases. Areas of energy reduction appear on the excavation boundaries, which transform from the top centers to the side centers as the initial stress coefficient increases. Our study indicates that both energy density concentration and reduction areas need to be considered in excavation design. The derived expressions of mining-induced energy redistribution can be considered as a tool to assess the stability of rock masses and predict failure conditions such as rock burst and mine seismicity around non-circular shaped openings.The concept of thermodynamic potentials balance has become instrumental in complex resource engineering modelling. As indicated in Mitri et al. Local analysis of energy redistribution is a new research area that is attracting an increasing interest especially by the tunnelling scientific and engineering community, which explains why most of the contributions focus on circular openings. For instance, Fan et al. Banka et al. In this paper, we propose a novel approach to solve the problem of energy redistribution around a rectangular opening. Unlike existing approaches that use integral formulation, Underground excavation can be perceived as a stress relaxation process that is compensated by a stress concentration at the boundaries, while some of the energy is stored in the surrounding rock. When the stress concentration reaches the rock's strength, rock failure occurs; the stored energy sudden release can cause abrupt responses within the rock mass. To derive the energy expressions before and after excavation, some important assumptions can be made. First of all, the excavation is long enough to consider that plane strain conditions apply in any cross-section. We also assume that the rectangular excavation is initially subjected to a far field compression stress field  Knowing that before excavation the compression stresses, The rock burst and seismicity issues impose tremendous influence both on the workplace safety and the economic viability. The proposed approach that considers energy concentration and sudden release of energy can be instrumental to predict the excavation's disturbed zone, the thickness of fractured zone on longwall faces or cave propagation in mines using sublevel caving or block caving mining methods. The proposed energy expression around openings and its criterion provide insight into mine planning and support design. As discussed in the first section, there is a limited research work on the energy distribution within rock masses undergoing excavation, especially when rectangular shaped openings are considered. In this section, we derive the analytical expression of strain energy distribution using linear elasticity. Once the excavation is created, the shear stress becomes non-zero: The fundamental theories of complex variable and conformal mapping have been introduced by Muskhelishvili When Neumann boundary conditions are applied at the infinite, which means regional stresses due plate tectonics and gravity are taken into account, the expressions of It is difficult to obtain the analytic complex functions, We apply the conformal mapping function that transforms the area of interest in the Therefore, the analytic complex functions, As As for the second term of Eq. The conjugate of It is obvious that the Eq. We now move to the third term of Eq. Now the term on the right hand in Eq. By expanding the first right hand term in Eq. Note that the first two integrands ( Applying the same process on the second term of Eq.  To obtain the analytic function As the same process in solving Therefore, Substituting Eqs. Replacing Therefore, the stress components can be expressed as: In this section, we verify the obtained analytical solution using the general purpose commercial numerical software. According to, The excavation shape we used in Abaqus is based on the mapped opening. We first draw the sketch of the mapped opening based on the conformal mapping function (see in Engineers would usually opt for analytical methods to predict rock burst and/or excavation disturbed zones. This is particularly important when the geometry of the opening is complex (including severe singularities). Our analysis shows ( As the opening has an axial symmetric shape and loading conditions, one-fourth of the opening is analysed. The energy density distribution on the excavation boundary of each sequence is obtained and compared with the proposed analytical solution (see in We also examined the energy density distribution on the analysed domain using a mesh of 22738 elements and depicted the energy contour in There are different parameters that are critical to the design of underground openings that are relevant to the mining industry. In particular, span over height ratios, far field stresses, and material properties are of particular significance. The span-height ratios of rectangular opening in underground mining–defined as We suggest the expression The energy increment ratio (EIR), Furthermore, the energy density on three crucial locations of the excavation top center, side center and corner are analysed for different isometric extensions (see in The value of EDCI on the excavation corner decreases rapidly. It starts from 26.84 on the boundary to a stable value of 1.49 after 10 times of ratio distance. Under the given case ( As the derived energy expression above, the stored energy magnitude after excavation varies linearly with Poisson's ratio, According to scenario ①, the changes on energy density distribution with respect to initial stress coefficient is shown in After excavation, the energy density concentration value varies with location. The energy density is always lower than that of the initial state, while the corresponding location is related to the initial stress state (see in Furthermore, the energy release can trigger instabilities of the surrounding rock. The energy density decreases (the red dash line area shown in Further inspection of the initial stress coefficient on the EDCI is shown in To study the influence of span-height ratio on local energy density redistribution, we consider an initial stress coefficient of 0.5. The energy density distribution on quarter of the opening is shown in Under the given initial stress state condition, the EDCI value on the side boundary is higher than that on the top boundary, regardless of span-height ratios. In addition, the EDCI value decreases when the span-height ratio decreases from 5.37 The initial stress coefficient and span-height ratio have great influence on the strain energy density distribution in rectangular openings. It is concluded that once the excavation of rectangular opening happens, the energy concentrates near the opening corners, while the energy density reduce either on one side of opening boundary or on both boundaries. For the purpose of maintaining a stable opening, the span-height ratio of the opening should increase with the increase of initial stress coefficient. An analytical solution of energy redistribution in the surrounding rock of underground rectangular openings upon excavation has been derived based on complex analysis and conformal mapping. The finite element method has been used to verify the proposed analytical solution. The influence of rectangular excavation on rock strata is analysed by studying the energy increment ratio and energy density degradation. Furthermore, a parametric study is performed to investigate the influence of initial stresses and rectangular opening parameters on the energy density distribution. The following conclusions can be made: Unlike existing rock stability criteria that are based on stress only, a novel rock stability analysis technique is proposed based on energy considerations. The advantage of using energy-based criteria is that strains and stresses are both taken into account to assess rock stability. The proposed analytical solution of energy density distribution on rectangular openings is in a good agreement with the numerical simulations. With finer meshes, the results get closer to the analytical solution despite the high order space dependence of stresses. The primary affected zone around rectangular excavation is about six times of excavation opening, regardless of rectangular opening diameter, initial stress state and elastic mechanical properties of rock masses. The parametric study indicates that the initial stress coefficient and span-height ratio have a great impact on the distribution of energy density. The maximum energy density concentration value is reached when the initial stress coefficient and rectangular opening span-height ratio both equal to one. The maximum energy density concentration area always appears on the excavation corners, where should always be a focus in opening design, excavation and support procedure. It is noticed that the excavation corners are rounded to represent underground openings faithfully. The first author would like to acknowledge financial support provided by the