Herein hydroxyapatite (HA) has been synthesized by the nucleation on the surfaces of reduced graphene oxide/silver nanoparticles (rGO/AgNPs) chemisorbed with thioglycolic acid (TGA). The self-assembled monolayer of TGA formed on rGO/AgNPs was immersed in simplified simulated body fluid under gentle growth conditions, forming rGO/AgNPs/TGA/HA biocomposite. The phase structures and functional groups of biocomposite were analyzed by X-ray diffraction spectroscopy, Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy and Raman spectroscopy. Enhanced Raman spectrum of TGA on prepared rGO/AgNPs was obtained with excitation at 633nm, showing that TGA was chemisorbed on AgNPs through S atom and TGA molecular plane exhibited a tilted orientation with respect to AgNPs. The morphologies of biocomposite were investigated by means of atomic force microscope and transmission electron microscope coupled with energy dispersive spectrum. Analysis shows that the AgNPs uniformly distributed on the rGO nanosheets with the size of about 15–20nm and HA formation initiated through Ca2+-adsorption upon complexation with COO− groups of TGA on AgNPs. The results obtained indicated that the rGO/AgNPs/TGA/HA biocomposite may have immense potential application in bone tissue engineering fields for its outstanding and stable activities.Synthetic hydroxyapatite (HA: Ca Traditional biomedical metallic implants are titanium and its alloys for their favorable corrosion resistance as well as their low toxicity, biocompatibility, and good mechanical properties such as high strength, durability, wear resistance Several studies have pointed out the important role played by the carboxylic terminal group for the nucleation of HA The aim of this research is to synthesize HA biocomposite with favorable antibacterial activity, corrosion stability, biocompatibility and high mechanical strength. Here we report a facile method to prepare graphene oxide (GO) nanosheets using modified Hummers method and ultrasonication. The reduced graphene oxide/AgNPs (rGO/AgNPs) hybrid was synthesized by reduction of silver nitrate (AgNO Graphite powder, potassium permanganate (KMnO Graphite oxide was prepared from powder graphite adopting modified Hummer method The hybrids were synthesized based on a wet chemical method. 6.5 The rGO/AgNPs/TGA hybrid was simply prepared by injecting 0.2 The synthesis of HA/rGO/AgNPs/TGA biocomposite was based on a biomimetic method in simplified SBF. Typical simplified SBF in this study contained 140 Morphological characterizations of rGO/AgNPs and rGO/AgNPs/TGA/HA were performed by transmission electron microscopy (TEM, JEM-2010, JEOL, Japan), high-resolution transmission electron microscopy (HRTEM), energy dispersive spectrum (EDS) operated at 200 The formation process of the rGO/AgNPs/TGA/HA biocomposite is confirmed by the XRD analysis. The XRD patterns in The morphology and the dispersion of rGO/AgNPs are examined by TEM and HRTEM. The HA nanocrystalline formed on rGO/AgNPs after biomimetic treatment in SBF solution is also performed by TEM and HRTEM. The SBF solution, which contains the same concentration of Ca We also perform AFM analysis on our biocomposite, typically observing heterogeneous nucleation of HA onto rGO/AgNPs/TGA hybrids. Analysis of FTIR spectra provide useful information about the fabrication processes of rGO/AgNPs/TGA/HA biocomposite as shown in Raman spectroscopy is a widely used and powerful tool to reveal ordered and disordered crystal structures of carbon based materials. As depicted in Intriguingly, the composites display SERS activity in comparison with this of the original TGA in the same test conditions. It has been demonstrated that rGO nanosheets combined with AgNPs have a strong Raman enhancing effect via electromagnetic fields enhancement of the AgNPs associated with large local fields caused by surface plasmon resonance and charge-transfer between the energy levels of the molecule and Fermi levels of the AgNPs Regarding the molecular orientation and geometry of the TGA molecules, TGA may be adsorbed on the AgNPs through Ag In this study, HA has been synthesized by the biomimetic techniques and nucleation on the surfaces of rGO/AgNPs chemisorbed with TGA in SBF solution. XRD, TEM, AFM, FTIR and Raman have been used to trace the fabrication process of rGO/AgNPs/TGA/HA biocomposite. On the basis of the surface selection rules and SERS Raman dates, the interaction of TGA molecule with AgNPs is chemisorption in titled adsorption configuration through Ag