The aim of this study was to produce novel water-soluble and thermally stable chitosan nanoparticles (NPs) loaded with different levels (1%, 1.2%, 1.4% and 1.5%) of summer savory (Satureja hortensis L.) essential oil (EO) using ionic gelation method and to determine their characteristic properties. NP samples with diameters ranging from 140.25 nm to 237.60 nm were obtained at pH levels of 4.5, 6.0 and 10.0. Zeta potential values of the NPs were found to be negative (−7.54 to −21.12 mV). Encapsulation efficiency (EE) was in the range of 35.07–40.70%. EO loaded NPs exhibited strong antibacterial (against Staphylococcus aureus, Listeria monocytogenes and Escherichia coli O157:H7) and DPPH scavenging activity dependently to the concentration of EO encapsulated. SEM images demonstrated the spherical shapes of the chitosan NPs. In conclusion, summer savory EO loaded chitosan NPs that were highly adapted to excessive environmental factors such as acidic pH and high temperature and with high bioactive properties were successfully fabricated convenient for future food processing and packaging applications.Functional bioactive ingredients have drawn great attention in recent years due to their proven health benefits and increasing negative perception against use of artificial food additives. Essential oils (EO) that are obtained from aromatic plants and spices are liquids potential biological activities of which have been well demonstrated ( It is well known that plant derived volatile EOs are very labile compounds that can be easily decomposed or evaporated at processing conditions when incorporated into food or packaging material with the effect of high temperature, pressure etc. ( In the case of NP production, bioactive compounds are loaded into different polymeric nanocarriers. Protein or polysaccharide based nanocarriers may be prepared from pectin, cellulose, gum, chitosan, starch, gelatin etc. ( Chitosan from crab shells (85% deacylated), sodium tripolyphosphate (STPP, technical grade) and acetic acid (>99.7% purity) was purchased from Sigma–Aldrich (Germany). Tween 80 was provided from Merck (Germany). Dried leaves of summer savory ( EO extraction from summer savory leaves was performed based on the method described by Production of chitosan NPs was performed at two steps, namely preparation of oil-in-water (o/w) emulsion and ionic-gelation of chitosan using STPP based on the method described by After formation of a fine homogenization, 12 mL of STPP solution (0.05%, w:v) was slowly dropped into the chitosan/EO solution under continuous stirring for 30 min. The NPs were collected with centrifugation at 10.000 rpm for 10 min at 25 °C and dispersed in distilled water. They were kept at 4 °C until use. In order to determine the colloidal dispersion stability of the NPs, zeta potential was measured using a zetasizer (Nano ZSP, Malvern Instruments Corp., Worcestershire, UK). The measurements were performed in distilled water as dispersant using a disposable folded capillary cell with electrodes at 25 °C. The results were recorded as average of sequential 10 measurements. Particle size of the EO loaded chitosan NPs was measured using a NP size analyzer (Nano ZSP, Malvern Instruments Corp., Worcestershire, U.K.). The NPs that were finely diluted in distilled water at 173° were analyzed for size determination. Dynamic light scattering (DLS) was used to determine the average particle diameter. Firstly, 100 μL of the chitosan NP loaded with summer savory EO was incorporated with 5 mL of 1 M HCl and kept at boiling water bath for 30 min. Following addition of 1 mL of ethanol into the mixture, it was centrifuged at 9.000 rpm for 1 min at ambient temperature. Then the absorbance of the supernatant was measured at the wavelengths ranging from 250 to 400 nm. Maximum absorption was observed at the wavelength of 289 nm. Following formulation was used to calculate percent encapsulation efficiency (EE) ( Antibacterial activity of the EO loaded chitosan NPs were measured against three bacterial strains ( Antioxidant activity (AOA) of chitosan NPs loaded with summer savory EO was determined based on the method described by Molecular characterization of the chitosan NPs (with or without summer savory EO) was performed by Fourier transform infrared (FTIR) spectroscopy tool (Bruker Tensor 27, Bremen, Germany) equipped with a KBr beam splitter and a DLaTGS detector. The characterization was performed with resolution of 4 cm Morphological properties of the chitosan NPs were analyzed by scanning electron microscopy (SEM LEO 440 Stereoscan). Prior to analyses, the samples were lyophilized and then digital SEM images of the lyophilized samples were obtained. Chitosan NPs enriched with different levels of summer savory EO were analyzed for their thermal properties. Following addition of the NP sample (5–10 mg) into the aluminum coated DSC pan, it was heated to 400 °C from 40 °C at a heating rate of 10ºC/min. The energy (mW) given to the sample was recorded as a function of time and temperature. Statistical differences between the data obtained for chitosan NPs loaded with different levels of EO were evaluated using Windows based SAS 8.2 statistical analysis software (SAS Institute, Cary, North Carolina, USA). Significant difference between means was verified by Tukey's multiple range test with the significance level of 95%. All the analyses were carried out in duplicate. In the present study, size values of the chitosan NPs were measured at different pH values in order to determine the stability/aggregation of the NPs against changing pH conditions of foods. Formation of chitosan NPs depends on the interaction between positively charged chitosan and negatively charged tripolyphosphate (TPP) at ambient conditions ( Encapsulation efficiency (EE) of summer savory EO was calculated by spectrophotometrically. As seen in the results in Antibacterial activity of EO loaded chitosan NPs was tested against three foodborne bacteria, namely In this study, AOA of the bioactive chitosan NPs loaded with the summer savory EO was evaluated by determination of their percent inhibition level for free DPPH radical as indicated in Free radical scavenging activity of pure summer savory EO and other extracts has been reported in the literature ( FTIR studies of chitosan NPs and EO loaded chitosan NPs were performed to make characterization of the NPs. Summer savory EO was also analyzed spectrophotometrically. FTIR spectra of the samples are shown in SEM images can give information about particle structure and morphology of nanoscale samples. Chitosan NPs unloaded or loaded with summer savory EO were evaluated for their thermal behaviors by DSC, as indicated in DSC data is also an indication of the efficiency of encapsulation by the carrier polymer. If there is a good interaction between active substance and the encapsulant polymer, characteristic peaks belonging to encapsulated active material is not observed. However, if the bioactive compound is not effectively incorporated into the polymer, DSC graph consist of individual peaks of each material (active substance and polymer) ( Use of EOs in food industry is limited because of their poor solubility in water. Therefore, encapsulation is an efficient way to increase application potential of EOs by allowing them dispersibility in water. In this study, water soluble chitosan NPs loaded with summer savory EO were fabricated successfully via ionic gelation method using STPP with considerably high encapsulation efficiency. EO loaded NPs showed strong