Accurate characterisation of ore competence through controlled single particle impact can enable improved modelling of comminution process response to ore variability. A simple relationship is presented to relate the energy input and feed particle size to the breakage progeny with two fitting parameters. Previous techniques have focused either on low energy repeated impacts or high energy single impacts and have been applied over relatively small ranges of particle sizes. The method presented builds on previous understanding to unite these two disparate fields on feed particle sizes over more than two orders of magnitude. The method has been tested on 5 ores from 37.5mm to 250μm over energies from 0.02 to 3.5kWh/t. The resultant standard error of 3.3% is lower than other benchmarked models, with considerably fewer fitting parameters and no use of splining functions required. The direct calculation of appearance function for any feed size and input energy renders the proposed model well suited to incorporation in comminution process models. Further testing is required on additional ores, and further interpretation is required to obtain mechanistic explanations for the empirical fits to the model parameters.Rock breakage processes can be described by relating the energy input to the relative progeny size as in (       Using the modified characterisation model shown in Eq. Five ores have been tested using single-sided, single-particle impact breakage with feed sizes from 0.25 to 37.5 The size distributions of the breakage progeny were collected for each of the five ores. The ore-specific t-family of curves has been used to calculate the full appearance function. The t-values are found by dividing the geometric mean of the feed size by a factor ( It can be observed from The existing analysis techniques where conducted to give the relationship between feed particle size, input energy and degree of breakage (see Eq. Since the probability of breakage is simply another t-value like t The shape of the relationship between The model form describes a power function relationship between the feed particle size and the fineness of the progeny ( The model parameters ‘  The     The standard errors of methods 4 and 5 were compared to the approach adopted by A Using this approach, as in Method 4 and 5, because the equations calculated t The quality of the model prediction with Method 5 is shown in   The modified The fitting parameters ( The ‘ At a particular feed size and energy input, a larger The fitting methodology can greatly influence the quality of the model fit and the resulting model parameters. In order to compare the models and methods equally for this paper, the parameters were simply fitted to minimise the un-weighted sum of squared error between the measured and calculated cumulative passing values. The standard errors for each model could be improved by including weighting on different values. However, even without using weighted errors, the model structure and fitting sequence impact the quality of the resultant model. For instance, the standard method required interpolation of the t-values from the size distribution, followed by the construction of the t-family table, then the The resultant relationship between feed particle size and competence is difficult to visualise when the fitting methodology described in this paper is used. Because of the nature of the equations involved, it may not be possible to display all the experimental t-values against the model predicted values except in a parity chart as in The addition of the Ore 4 does not fit the model form as well as the other ores. This is largely due to an irregularity in the cumulative progeny size distributions. Most ores create less The functional form of the size energy relationship is given by Eqs. The standard error of the models has been presented and it has been shown that the new model provides a much improved fit to the experimental data. However, to quantify this reduction in standard error, it should be compared with the variability between repeated experiments. This variability will be a combination of both inherent (epistemic) variability and experimental (aleatoric) error. The closer the standard error is to the difference between repeated experiments, the better the model. If, however, the model predicts a standard error smaller than the reproducibility of the experiments, it is possible that it is too close to the experimental results and is following the natural variability of tests. A model has been developed that accurately predicts the entire size distribution from single sided impact that responds to feed particle sizes and energy levels. Two fields of study have been combined to allow both high and low impact energies to be described. The model has been tested on five ores with different breakage characteristics. The range of feed particle sizes and energy levels tested the analysis at the extremities, from crusher feed to stirred mill feed and low energy repeated impact to high energy single impact. By combining the breakage index To avoid the limitations identified by Analysis of single particle breakage allows accurate measurement of the minimum comminution energy requirements of an ore ( We thank the research group at the Institute of Particle Technology at Erlangen University for their hospitality and the use of the Schönert breakage device. We also thank Andrew Yang, Harrison Hodge and Samuel Dort for assisting with the experimentation at coarse sizes. The work was supported by partial funding across a number of sources and projects, including Australian Commonwealth funding through the Cooperative research Centre for optimized resource extraction (