Present work investigates the effect of various parameters on the optimum dissolution of brominated epoxy resin (BER) from waste printed circuit boards (WPCBs) and separation of its different components (copper foil, glass fiber, solder mask etc.) by using dimethylformamide (DMF). Studies revealed that high temperature, high WPCB:DMF ratio and small size of fed WPCBs results in quicker dissolution of BER leading to efficient delamination and separation of WPCBs. Optimized condition ensuing most effective separation of WPCBs into copper foil, solder mask and glass fiber were- temperature- 135 °C, WPCB:DMF ratio- 300 g/L, WPCB size-1 cm × 1 cm, time- 4h. Under optimized conditions WPCBs of 2 cm × 2 cm and 3 cm × 3 cm were delaminated into copper foil and glass fiber in 180 and 240 min, respectively. Strong hydrogen bond formation affinity of DMF, enhanced vibrations and breakage of internal van der Waals’ bonds of BER at elevated temperature are responsible for hydrogen bonding between BER and DMF, leading to the dissolution of BER. The spent DMF is regenerated by using rotary decompression evaporation and analyzed by nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy, Fourier transform infra-red spectroscopy (FT-IR). The efficiency of regenerated DMF to dissolve BER is similar to unused DMF even after five usage cycles. Scanning electron microscope-energy dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (SEM-EDS) and FT-IR technique have been used for quantitate composition and chemical structure analysis of residue obtained after evaporation. This novel and simple technique possess the capability of sorting of different components of WPCBs, recycling of used DMF, separation of BER and simultaneously reduces the cost of operation, effluent generation leading to cleaner processing of WPCBs.Carbon Nuclear Magnetic Resonance Spectroscopy Proton Nuclear Magnetic Resonance Spectroscopy Brominated Epoxy Resin BisPhenol- A Di-Methyl Formamide Di-Methyl Sulfoxide Fourier Transform Infrared Spectroscopy N,N-Dimethyl Pyrrolidone Nuclear Magnetic Resonance Spectroscopy Printed Circuit Boards Solid-liquid ratio Scanning Electron Microscopy- Energy Dispersive X-ray Spectroscopy Boiling Point Temperature Glass Transition Temperature Waste Printed Circuit Boards The high pace of technological advancement is promoting rejection of old and obsolete gadgets at faster rates thus, making a humongous pile of electronic waste (e-waste) ( The PCBs exhibit complex multilayered metal-woven glass fiber structure which is reinforced by brominated epoxy resin (BER) containing 15–20 wt% of flame retardants ( Various recycling techniques based on thermal processing like pyrolysis ( On the other hand, hydrometallurgical processes which are popular for low energy consumption and simple operation; require additional pre-treatment of WPCBs for efficient metal non-metal separation to ensure maximum exposure of metals encapsulated inside the layers of BER with the reagent and minimize the waste effluent generation. The metal non-metal separation includes combination of techniques like shredding ( A novel technique of dissolution of BER to separate metal – glass fiber matrix and to delaminate the WPCBs by using different solvents above glass transition temperature (T Successful dissolution of BER using ionic solvent 1-ethyl-3-methylimizadolium tetrafluoroborate at 260 °C for 20 min followed by its regeneration has been reported ( Keeping the above facts in mind, present work reports in-depth investigation of dissolution of BER by using relatively cheaper, colorless, aprotic solvent - N,N-dimethyl formamide (DMF) that is readily miscible in water and other organic liquids. Parameters governing the dissolution have also been optimized and that may be used further for mathematical simulations useful for commercialization of process. The chemical structure of DMF is represented in The dissolution of BER in DMF ensures highly economical, efficient and eco-friendly treatment of ‘BER-free WPCBs’ by conventional recycling process as the adverse effects arising due to the presence of BER is abolished, and regeneration of used solvent results negligible effluent generating operation. The WPCBs were collected from local e-scrap vendors and processed mechanically to remove the mounted electronic components like resistor, integrated circuits, capacitor, relay, transformer and ram/processor slot etc. All bare WPCBs were downsized into four batches of 4 cm × 4 cm; 3 cm × 3 cm; 2 cm × 2 cm; 1 cm × 1 cm size pieces by using a simple shear cutter. All chopped WPCBs were well rinsed with distilled water and acetone to remove any dust, grease, chemical, adhesive, smudge etc., dried for 24 h at room temperature and then kept in a desiccator. Various analytical grade reagents used in the present investigation were: dimethyl formamide (Sisco Research Laboratories, India), bisphenol-A (Sisco Research Laboratories, India), pure ethanol (Fisher Scientific, India), chloroform-D (Sigma-Aldrich Corp.), and potassium bromide (Sigma-Aldrich Corp.). Dissolution experiments were carried out in 1 L, three necks, round bottom, detachable head type flask mounted with Graham coiled distillate type condenser ( The amount of BER dissolved in DMF was measured by Ultraviolet–visible spectroscopy (UV-VIS) against the concentration After completion of dissolution, the spent DMF was regenerated by decompression rotary evaporating condenser unit. The proton and carbon nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy ( Standard absorbance curve for pure BPA ( The foray of BER dissolution showed anticipated results and thus, the effect of temperature, solid-liquid ratio, WPCBs size and time on dissolution leading to complete dissolution and separation of components of WPCBs have been studied and discussed. Effect of temperature on the dissolution of BER has been studied in the range of 80–170 °C. The BER acts as a substrate that retains the layers of copper tracks and glass fiber matrix together. Higher dissolution of BER at elevated temperature is also associated with more delamination of WPCBs ( The effect of s/l ratio on the dissolution of BER has been studied at 135 °C, for 4 h using WPCBs of 2 cm × 2 cm size. At 50 g/L, a large proportion of available DMF remains unutilized as the available solute quantity is less. At 300 g/L more BER dissolution is witnessed ( Based on the above study, an s/l ratio of 300 g/L has been maintained to get maximum separation of layers of WPCBs and higher utilization of solvent. Results also revealed that the dissolution of BER is completely governed by the DMF-WPCBs contact area. Study of variation of WPCB size (4 cm × 4 cm – 1 cm × 1 cm) at 135 °C and of 100 g/L shows that lower size results quicker dissolution of BER ( Size reduction below 1 cm × 1 cm is difficult by a simple shear cutter and requires a special type of automated equipment. Thus the optimum fed WPCBs size of 1 cm × 1 cm was maintained for further studies resulting maximum dissolution of BER and economy of the process. To study the effect of time on dissolution, an experiment of 60 h under optimum conditions viz.- 135 °C, s/l - 300 g/L and WPCBs size 1 cm × 1 cm ( After the reaction, DMF appears yellow as a result of the dissolution of BER ( The The FT-IR spectra of unused and regenerated DMF have been found to be similar ( The NMR and FT-IR analysis validate that regenerated liquid is DMF; therefore clean and cost effective operation with negligible effluent generation is ensured. The regenerated DMF has been used to treat WPCBs five times under optimum conditions viz- 135 °C, s/l 300 g/L, size 1 cm × 1 cm and time 4 h; and after each usage it is regenerated. It has been found that capabilities of DMF to dissolve BER after 5 regeneration cycles are equivalent to that of unused DMF ( The SEM analysis of residue and untreated epoxy resin shows slightly different surface morphology due to the non-uniformly distributed and adhered nature of BER particles of untreated WPCBs ( The FT-IR analysis of pure BPA, the residue, and untreated BER shows vibrations corresponding to O-H stretch of alcohol (3354-3250 cm The SEM-EDS and FT-IR studies revealed that morphology, elemental distribution and functional groups of obtained residue is similar to that of untreated epoxy resin. This verifies that recovered residue is BER that was dissolved in DMF. Dissolution and separation of BER make WPCBs free of BER, thus post treatment by conventional thermal process become possible. Availability of 3 hydrogen donor sites makes DMF a good solvent due to the formation of the hydrogen bond with parent compound. Hydrogen of C-H group of DMF is a major hydrogen donor site ( To ensure cleaner and cost effective separation of components of WPCBs, polar solvent DMF was used for dissolution of BER. Studies on the effect of parameters showed that high temperature, solid-liquid ratio and small size of WPCBs are favorable for better dissolution of BER and separation of components. The effect of time on dissolution showed that the rate of dissolution of BER is faster initially and then slowed down. Further after 4 h complete separation of glass fiber matrix, solder mask, and the copper laminate is achieved. Penetration of DMF along cross-sectional area of WPCBs is faster than the facial area and it also results in swelling of WPCBs. Optimum conditions resulting most effective dissolution of BER leading to maximum possible separation of components of WPCBs has been found viz.: temperature− 135 °C, WPCB:DMF ratio− 300 g/L, time− 4 h, WPCBs size− 1 cm × 1 cm. Delamination exposes the metal laminated inside layers of BER thus efficient and eco-friendly post treatment by conventional techniques is possible. The solvent can be reused repeatedly after regeneration because its chemical structure remains unaltered after regeneration. After evaporation, the solute dissolved in DMF is obtained as residue and has been found to be BER and thus it is possible to treat ‘BER-free WPCBs’ by pyrometallurgy route. The presence of hydrogen donor sites of DMF and breakage of van der Waals' bonds result in hydrogen bonding interaction between DMF and BER which is responsible for the dissolution of BER. Authors are thankful to Head, Department of Metallurgical Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology (Banaras Hindu University), Varanasi, India for providing necessary facilities to carry out this research work. Authors are also thankful to Department of Pharmaceutics and Central Instrument Facility of Indian Institute of Technology (Banaras Hindu University), Varanasi for their help in analytical facilities.