Fifth metatarsal avulsion fractures are among the most common fractures seen by foot and ankle surgeons. Studies have centered around classification systems, but debate continues regarding surgical versus conservative treatment modalities. The present study focused on quantifying the time for healing fifth metatarsal base avulsion fractures. Specifically, we compared healing time, displacement, and incidence of nonunion among surgically managed and conservatively managed avulsion fractures. Surgically managed patients underwent either open reduction with internal fixation or closed reduction with percutaneous fixation. Conservatively managed fractures were immobilized with a below-knee cast or pneumatic walking boot. Fifty-one patient records (51 feet) were retrospectively compared for basic demographics, smoking, and diabetes status, presence of peripheral neuropathy, Stewart classification, amount of displacement, rate of nonunion, and radiographic healing time. The groups did not differ significantly based on age, sex, or the remaining clinical characteristics including time to consolidation. However, among the 31 conservatively managed patients, 11 (35.5%) developed an asymptomatic nonunion versus none among the 20 patients treated surgically (p = .004). All patients were asymptomatic at 1 year. This study provides insight into the time required for fifth metatarsal avulsion fractures to heal or become asymptomatic. The surgical management of these fractures helped to eliminate the risk of nonunion and helped ensure a timely return to preinjury activity. We recommend surgical management of any fifth metatarsal avulsion fracture displaced >2 mm. Both patients and physicians should have realistic expectations when making decisions regarding treatment modalities for fifth metatarsal avulsion fractures.The fifth metatarsal is the most commonly fractured bone in the foot ( It was once believed that avulsion fractures were the result of the peroneus brevis tendon contracting and avulsing a fragment of bone from the base of the metatarsal ( Fifth metatarsal avulsion fractures are typically low-energy injuries described as an inversion mechanism on a plantarflexed foot. Avulsion fractures of the proximal fifth metatarsal are the most common type of fifth metatarsal fracture. Historically, physicians have advocated conservative treatment of these fractures. Konkel et al ( Egol et al ( Koslowsky et al ( We performed a retrospective study focused on comparing conservatively managed avulsion fractures with surgically treated avulsion fractures. We believe our findings may help guide the foot and ankle surgeon in determining the appropriate course of action when dealing with avulsion fractures of the fifth metatarsal. Our health system's institutional review board approved this retrospective study of patients treated for fifth metatarsal avulsion fractures between January 2014 and August 2018. For the surgically managed group, healing time was defined as the length of time from the date of surgery until cortical bridging was noted on subsequent radiographs. For the conservatively managed group, healing time was defined as the time from initial immobilization until radiographic union was observed. All radiographs were read by a board-certified radiologist within our health system. The authors (C.V. and L.F.) as well as the board-certified radiologist individually read each radiograph; there were no disagreements among observers. Two different types of fixation were used. The most frequently used technique was tension band wiring with two bicortical 0.062 Kirschner wires and 20-gauge monofilament wire in a figure-8 pattern ( Conservative treatment included ankle joint immobilization with a below-knee cast or pneumatic walking boot. Often, patients were initially immobilized with a posterior splint in the emergency department, and others were not immobilized until they were examined in our office. For this reason, we determined that healing time would begin with the date of confirmed immobilization at the first visit in our clinic. Patients were instructed to remain non-weightbearing on the involved limb. Upon initial examination, patients were transitioned to a pneumatic walking boot. Those who were unable to comply with a pneumatic walking boot were placed in a below-knee cast. Adjunctive therapy often included the application of a gradient compression dressing to help reduce edema. Patients were instructed to remain non-weightbearing for the first 4 weeks. At 4 weeks, they were permitted partial weightbearing. Three standard radiographs (anteroposterior, medial oblique, and lateral) were taken at 2-week intervals. All patients were full weightbearing at 6 weeks in a pneumatic walking boot. If patients were asymptomatic at 6 weeks, radiographs revealed consolidation, and no further displacement or angulation was noted, they were permitted supportive shoe gear and activity as tolerated. If symptoms persisted or there was concern for displacement, patients were instructed to remain immobilized in the pneumatic walking boot. Categorical data from the 2 treatment groups (conservative and surgical) are presented as counts and percentages. Between-group comparisons were made using the chi-square test for independence or Fisher's exact test. Numerical data in which the conditions for parametric analysis could not be assumed are presented as median averages with the corresponding range and compared using the Mann-Whitney Initially, 53 fractures were identified with the use of ICD-10 codes. Two (3.8%) of the 53 patients did not present to subsequent visits after the initial encounter and therefore were not included in the present study; a total of 51 patients (51 feet) were included. Of the 51 fractures studied, 25 (49.0%) occurred in the right foot and 26 (51.0%) in the left. Forty (78.4%) fractures occurred in female patients and 11 (21.6%) occurred in male patients. Thirty-one (60.8%) of the 51 patients were treated with immobilization, and the remaining 20 (39.2%) were treated surgically. The group of conservatively managed patients did not differ significantly from those treated surgically when compared for age, sex, smoking, diabetes status, and presence of neuropathy ( Within the surgical group, 16 (80.0%) patients had Stewart type II injuries, 2 (10.0%) had Stewart type III injuries, and 2 (10.0%) had Stewart type IV injuries. Within the conservatively treated group, 19 (61.3%) patients had Stewart type II injuries, 8 (25.8%) had Stewart type III injuries, 2 (6.5%) had Stewart type IV injuries, and 2 (6.5%) had Stewart type V injuries. Two types of fixation were used in the surgical group, as described previously. Twelve (60.0%) patients received tension band wiring, and 8 (40.0%) received a single intramedullary screw. The surgically managed group required a median average of 7.5 weeks (range 4 to 19) to consolidate. The conservatively managed group required 8.3 weeks (range 6 to 23) to consolidate. The between-group difference was not statistically significant (Mann-Whitney Among the conservatively managed group, 11 (35.5%) patients developed an asymptomatic nonunion ( A major goal of this study was to shed light on the time required to heal fifth metatarsal avulsion fractures when treated surgically compared with nonoperative treatment. Historically, many researchers have advocated conservative management of avulsion fractures. To this day, authors have reported excellent results with conservative treatment alone. Debate still persists on the appropriate treatment modality of these fractures. Our data demonstrated no significant time differences in fracture consolidation across a number of important clinical variables. Baumbach et al ( In a recent study, Wu et al ( The present study compared surgical and nonsurgical groups; a comprehensive process for determining surgical versus nonsurgical candidates has not been universally agreed on and may therefore have introduced a selection bias. Another potential limitation is that we did not study functional outcomes. Although patients in both groups were asymptomatic at 1 year, we did not assess overall satisfaction or quality of life. Patients who develop nonunions may be immobilized for longer periods of time and could potentially have experienced a lower quality of life during recovery. Conversely, patients who underwent surgery may have experienced significant postoperative pain and may have preferred avoiding the procedure, especially in view of a potential asymptomatic nonunion at 1 year. Future investigations should further elucidate variables such as patient satisfaction and quality of life regarding surgically managed avulsion fractures and conservatively treated avulsion fractures. It is suggested that the present research should also be used in the development of future large-scale randomized controlled trials, prospective cohort studies, and meta-analyses that help to further decipher the risks and benefits of surgical intervention. In conclusion, regardless of displacement or type of fixation, appropriate fracture reduction and stabilization leads to earlier bony consolidation. Our study revealed a slight difference (7.5 versus 8.3 weeks) in the time required for bony consolidation in patients treated conservatively as opposed to surgically, but this difference was not statistically significant. However, there was a 35.5% incidence of nonunion among patients treated conservatively as opposed to surgically ( Supplementary material associated with this article can be found in the online version at 