Hyperprolactinemia leads to high bone turnover as a result of enhanced bone formation and resorption. Although its osteopenic effect has long been explained as hyperprolactinemia-induced hypogonadism, identified prolactin (PRL) receptors in osteoblasts suggested a possible direct action of PRL on bone. In the present study, we found that hyperprolactinemia induced by anterior pituitary transplantation (AP), with or without ovariectomy (Ovx), had no detectable effect on bone mineral density and content measured by dual-energy X-ray absorptiometry (DXA). However, histomorphometric studies revealed increases in the osteoblast and osteoclast surfaces in the AP rats, but a decrease in the osteoblast surface in the AP+Ovx rats. The resorptive activity was predominant since bone volume and trabecular number were decreased, and the trabecular separation was increased in both groups. Estrogen supplement (E2) fully reversed the effect of estrogen depletion in the Ovx but not in the AP+Ovx rats. In contrast to the typical Ovx rats, bone formation and resorption became uncoupled in the AP+Ovx rats. Therefore, hyperprolactinemia was likely to have some estrogen-independent and/or direct actions on bone turnover. Osteoblast-expressed PRL receptor transcripts and proteins shown in the present study confirmed our hypothesis. Furthermore, we demonstrated that the osteoblast-like cells, MG-63, directly exposed to PRL exhibited lower expression of alkaline phosphatase and osteocalcin mRNA, and a decrease in alkaline phosphatase activity. The ratios of receptor activator of nuclear factor κB ligand (RANKL) and osteoprotegerin (OPG) proteins were increased, indicating an increase in the osteoclastic bone resorption. The present data thus demonstrated that hyperprolactinemia could act directly on bone to stimulate bone turnover, with more influence on bone resorption than formation. PRL enhanced bone resorption in part by increasing RANKL and decreasing OPG expressions by osteoblasts.Hyperprolactinemia is associated with a number of physiological and pathological conditions, such as pregnancy, lactation, prolactinoma and chronic uses of dopamine-related antipsychotic drugs Accelerated bone turnover is a common feature of physiological and pathological hyperprolactinemia It is known that osteoblasts expressed the receptor activator of nuclear factor Studies of chronic hyperprolactinemia in rats require an induction of highly sustained plasma PRL without the stress-induced PRL release. To achieve this, we used the anterior pituitary (AP) transplantation instead of the more stressful daily PRL injections Therefore, the objectives of the present investigation were ( Female Sprague–Dawley rats (10-week-old, weighing 200–220 g), were obtained from the Animal Centre of Thailand, Salaya, Thailand. They were placed in hanging stainless steel cages, fed standard pellets containing 1% w/w calcium (Perfect Companion Co., Ltd., Bangkok, Thailand) and distilled water ad libitum under 12 h:12 h light:dark cycle. Room temperature was controlled at 23–25 °C, and the relative humidity was about 50–60%. This study was approved in accordance with the principles and guidelines of the Laboratory Animal Ethics Committee of Mahidol University, Bangkok, Thailand. After acclimatization, bone mineral density (BMD) and content (BMC) were measured before surgery (0 week). Osteoblast-like MG-63 cell line (ATCC No. CRL-1427; a kind gift from Dr. Suttatip Kamolmatyakul, Prince of Songkla University, Thailand) or human fetal osteoblast 1.19 (hFOB) cells (ATCC No. CRL-11372) were cultured in 75-cm As for the primary osteoblast culture, two tibiae were removed from a 10-week-old rat by sterile surgical technique. After removing the connective tissues and marrow cells, bones were cut into small dice, and cultured in DMEM supplemented with 15% FBS, 100 U/mL penicillin/streptomycin and 100 μg/mL ascorbate-2-phosphate (Sigma). Cells were incubated at 37 °C with 5% CO The procedure was modified from the methods of Adler et al. Bilateral ovariectomy (Ovx) has been an accepted surgical procedure for inducing estrogen deficiency Both parameters were determined as previously described After sacrifice, the right femur was dissected and cleaned of adhering tissues. Fats and marrow tissues were eluted by 1:1 mixture of 100% ethanol and diethylether. Thereafter, bones were dried at 80 °C for 48 h to obtain a constant dry weight. BMD and BMC of the ex vivo femur were determined. For bone histomorphometry, the right tibia was removed, dehydrated with sequential concentrations of ethanol (70%, 95%, and 100%), and embedded in methyl methacrylate resin. The embedded tibia was cut longitudinally at the thickness of 7 and 12 μm with a RM2255 microtome (Leica, Nussloch, Germany). The 12-μm section was used for determination of dynamic histomorphometric parameters under fluorescent microscope, while the 7-μm section was stained with Goldner-trichrome for determination of the static parameters under light microscope. Bone histomorphometric analysis was modified from the methods of Li et al. and Lotinun et al. At the end of the experiment, the hypophyseal graft was dissected from the perirenal tissues. Paraffin-embedded 4.0-μm sections were used to detect PRL production in the transplanted gland. After blocking endogenous peroxidase activity with 3.0% H MG-63 cells or primary rat osteoblasts cultured on a glass cover slip were fixed with a fixative containing 3% paraformaldehyde and 2% sucrose for 10 min at 25 °C. Cells were permeabilized with 0.5% Triton-X 100 in PBS for 5 min, and blocked with 10% FBS for 20 min at room temperature. Samples were then incubated with 1:300 PRLR polyclonal primary antibody (Santa Cruz Biotechnology, Santa Cruz, CA, USA) overnight at 4 °C, and later with FITC-conjugated goat anti-rabbit secondary antibody (Stratech, Cambridge, UK). Images were captured by an inverted fluorescent microscope (model Eclipse TE2000-U; Nikon, Tokyo, Japan) or a confocal laser-scanning microscope (model FV1000; Olympus, Tokyo, Japan). MG-63 cells were inoculated in a 96-well culture plate (5000 cells/well). After 48-h PRL incubation, the culture medium was replaced by medium containing 10% 3-(4,5-dimethylthiazol-2-yl)-2,5-diphenyltetrazolium bromide (MTT) (Sigma). After a 3-h incubation with MTT at 37 °C, the absorbance of each well was determined at 540 nm by a microplate reader (model Multiscan EX; Thermo Labsystems, Cergy-Pontoise, France), as described previously MG-63 cells were cultured in a 6-well culture plate (100,000 cells/well). Alkaline phosphatase activity was determined by the conversion of The total RNA of MG-63 cells or primary rat osteoblasts were prepared by using the RNeasy mini kit (Qiagen, Valencia, CA, USA). 2.0 μg of the total RNA was reverse-transcribed with the SuperScript III (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA, USA) to cDNA by a thermal cycler (model Minicycler; MJ Research, Watertown, MA, USA). Sense and antisense primers for PRLR, osteocalcin, alkaline phosphatase, RANKL, OPG, and glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase (GAPDH) were shown in MG-63 cells or primary rat osteoblasts were lysed in the lysis buffer (150 mM Tris at pH 7.4, 150 mM NaCl, 2 mM EGTA, 2 mM EDTA, 1 mM DTT, 1 mM NaF, 0.5 mM Na The objectives of this protocol were to demonstrate changes in bone remodeling during chronic hyperprolactinemia, and to elucidate whether hyperprolactinemia had an estrogen-independent effect on bones of adult female rats. Hyperprolactinemia and estrogen deficiency were induced by AP transplantation and Ovx, respectively. Rats were randomly divided into 5 groups, i.e., sham-operated (Sham), AP-grafted (AP), Ovx supplemented with 2.5 μg/kg 17 The objective of this protocol was to elucidate the direct effects of hyperprolactinemia on osteoblast functions. To show that PRL could exert a direct action on bone, expression of rPRLR in rat cultured osteoblasts was demonstrated. Expression of human PRLR (hPRLR) in MG-63 cells was determined in the presence of 0.2% and 10% fetal bovine serum (FBS; controls), 0.1 μM 1,25-(OH) Results were expressed as mean In the present study, estrogen deficiency and hyperprolactinemia were induced by Ovx and AP transplantation, respectively. After a 7-week period of Ovx, the uterine weight was markedly decreased as expected, and 2.5 μg/kg 17 To examine the viability and function of the AP allografts, the grafts were dissected from the perirenal tissues of 4-, 5-, 6-and 7-week AP rats, and analyzed histologically and immunohistochemically. They were highly vascularized reddish tissue with a diameter of ∼ In situ femoral BMD and BMC were determined at 0-, 2-, 5-and 7-week post-surgery to evaluate the effect of Ovx and hyperprolactinemia. In all groups, BMD and BMC gradually increased with age. Ovx rats characteristically showed BMD and BMC that were lower at weeks 5 and 7 ( Although densitometric analyses did not show any change in BMD or BMC of AP rats, histomorphometric analyses revealed high bone turnover in AP rats, as shown in In the Ovx rats, most histomorphometric parameters including BV/TV, Tb.N, Tb.Sp, Tb.Th, Oc.S/BS and ES/BS showed explicit bone resorption, whereas a bone formation parameter, Ob.S/BS, was also increased. Effects of Ovx on bone were completely prevented by estrogen supplementation as indicated by all histomorphometric parameters in the Ovx To investigate if PRL had a direct action on bone, we studied bone formation and resorption parameters in human osteoblast-like cells (MG-63). As shown in Moreover, by using the quantitative real-time PCR, cultured osteoblasts derived from the rat tibiae were shown to express mRNAs of short and long isoforms of rat PRLR (rPRLR) with a predominant short isoform, as well as bone-specific marker, osteocalcin (  Effects of rhPRL exposure on the markers of bone resorption are presented in In primary rat osteoblasts, 1000 ng/mL PRL decreased OPG mRNA expression to 64.21 Physiological hyperprolactinemia occurs during pregnancy and lactation, while pathological hyperprolactinemia is a common presentation in clinical practice. Effects of hyperprolactinemia on bone have been documented in patients and experimental animals In the present investigation, we used Ovx and AP transplantation to induce estrogen deficiency and hyperprolactinemia, respectively, and the differential bone responses in these conditions were evaluated. AP transplantation has two advantages over PRL injection in that, ( Although several investigators suggested that the effects of hyperprolactinemia on bone were produced by prolactin-induced estrogen deficiency An absence of change in the femoral BMD, BMC and bone calcium content during hyperprolactinemia has been reported before By using bone histomorphometry, it was found that hyperprolactinemia in AP and AP Estrogen-independent action of PRL was further demonstrated in the AP Our densitometric and histomorphometric findings corroborated the estrogen-independent effects of PRL, and strengthened the hypothesis of a direct PRL action on bone. However, since the serum estrogen and PRL concentrations were not measured, the presents results provided only a suggestive evidence for the estrogen-independent effects of PRL. Indeed, direct actions of PRL could not be concluded solely from the in vivo findings, since effects of other factors, e.g., changes in the gonadotrophin levels, extraovarian estrogen and dietary calcium, could not be excluded. To show that PRL had a direct action on bone, we studied the in vitro effects of rhPRL on the synthesis of bone formation and bone resorption markers by the osteoblast-like MG-63 and hFOB cells. Even though PRL was known to stimulate cell proliferation and tumorigenesis in mammary epithelial and Nb2 cells Regarding markers of bone resorption, we determined the change in the RANKL/OPG expression ratio in MG-63 cells. A number of studies reported that the age-related osteopenia, eroded bone surface, and high incidence of hip fracture in humans were positively correlated with an increase in RANKL/OPG ratio The concentration of PRL may be a salient determinant of bone loss, because PRL regulated the expression of bone markers, including osteocalcin, alkaline phosphatase, RANKL and OPG, in a dose-response manner. A pathological level of rhPRL (1000 ng/mL) markedly changed all measured parameters of bone turnover, whereas 100 ng/mL rhPRL had less effect on the osteoblastic function. It was also apparent from our previous report that decreases in bone formation and bone mass may be prevented by the concurrent stimulation of the intestinal calcium absorption with ∼ In conclusion, hyperprolactinemia in adult rats resulted in a high bone turnover and bone loss, but its effects on bone resorption were not as prominent as in Ovx rats. High physiological PRL and estrogen deficiency each rendered distinct patterns of bone remodeling, supporting our hypothesis that PRL had some estrogen-independent actions in bone. Further investigation in MG-63 cells confirmed the direct actions of PRL on osteoblasts in which PRL suppressed the osteocalcin expression and alkaline phosphatase activity while increasing the RANKL/OPG ratio. Our results were able to explain the clinical findings of the hyperprolactinemia-induced high bone turnover and osteopenia. The authors declare no conflict of interest. We thank Prof. Vorachai Sirikulchayanonta, Prof. Somnuek Domrongkitchaiporn, and Dr. Sinee Disthabanchong from the Faculty of Medicine, Ramathibodi Hospital, Mahidol University for their technical guidance and helpful comments. We thank Jirawan Thongbunchoo for her excellent technical assistance. This research was supported by grants from the Royal Golden Jubilee Program (to D.S.), the King Prajadhipok and Queen Rambhai Barni Memorial Foundation (to K.Th.), the Thailand Research Fund (TRF) and the National Center for Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology (BIOTEC).