The electric potential (EP) generated during coal rock deformation and fracture reflects coal rock mass stress and damage states. However, identifying the EP signal precursory signs that characterize a coal rock mass tending toward instability and failure is difficult. In this paper, we established an acoustic-electric multiparameter test experimental system, synchronously tested and collected acoustic emission (AE), surface potential (SP), and axial strain (AS) and observed surface crack propagation during the sandstone sample failure process. Meanwhile, by introducing the critical slowing down theory, the EP signal precursory characteristics before the sandstone sample unstable failure were explored. The results showed that EP signal time series autocorrelation coefficients and variances increased abruptly and continuously before the main fracture of the sandstone samples, which could be used as sandstone failure precursory information. Compared with the autocorrelation coefficient, the variance mutation point was easy to identify and was not affected by lag length selection, which was an effective precursory point to predict sandstone sample failure. From the precursory point to the main fracture of the sandstone samples, the AE events gradually gathered at the fracture damage location, high-energy AE events gradually increased, and the crack propagation rate gradually accelerated. Compared with the AE count time series, the variance mutation point (precursory point) of the EP signal time series appeared earlier. The research results were of theoretical significance for the monitoring and early warning of coal rock mass instability and failure and for identifying precursory characteristics using the EP response.Coal and rock dynamic disasters are the processes of rapid, unstable failure of a mine rock mass under the combined action of ground stress and mining stress. With increasing mine exploitation depth, coal and rock dynamic disasters are occurring more frequently, which seriously threatens safe mine production ( Static methods, such as the drill cutting method, are usually adopted in traditional coal and rock dynamic disaster monitoring ( During the dynamic failure process of coal and rock, there are free charge generation and transfer due to the piezoelectric effect, electrokinetic effect, motion of charged dislocations, crack propagation and other mechanisms ( Most previous studies have focused on the characteristics and regularity of EP in the process of coal and rock instability and failure under different experimental conditions, but the validity of EP as a precursory signal of coal and rock instability and failure has not been verified. The general sequence signals of EP cannot directly reflect the precursors of failure, so the precursory characteristics of the EP signal of coal rock failure requires further study. Recently, the critical slowing down theory has shown great potential in revealing whether a complex, dynamic system tends toward a critical catastrophe ( The critical slowing phenomenon of complex, dynamic systems has attracted widespread attention in different disciplines and has shown great potential in explaining sudden catastrophic events and determining precursory information before catastrophic events ( As the main component of engineering excavated rock masses, sandstone usually exhibits sufficient brittleness and similarity under external forces and is one of the brittle materials commonly used in basic experimental research ( The acoustic and electric multiparameter test experimental system includes a load control system, an EP data acquisition system, an AS data acquisition system, an AE data acquisition system, and a high-speed camera system (see The sandstone samples used in this experiment were processed in the laboratory into standard cubic specimens of 100 mm × 100 mm × 100 mm, and the surface of the specimens was smoothed with fine sandpaper to attain a flatness error of less than 0.02 mm. The sandstone samples were wiped with alcohol and then placed indoors to dry naturally. Sandstone samples with no apparent defects in appearance were selected for testing. The strain gauges, copper electrode slices and AE probes were arranged on the specimens with conductive paint, adhesive tape and hot melt adhesive (the positions and coordinates of the measuring points are shown in After the experimental system was arranged and debugged normally, the load control system was started. The press was raised to the upper press head just touching the upper end of the sample. The gaskets were insulated on both ends, at the top and bottom of the sample, and the electromagnetic shielding net was arranged around the press. Simultaneously, the loading control system, LB-IV multichannel EP data acquisition system, AS data acquisition system and AE data acquisition system were started to collect the stress, strain, EP and AE data during the sandstone sample loading process, and the sandstone sample failure process under loading was simultaneously recorded by an industrial camera. After the complete destruction of the sandstone samples, loading and data acquisition were stopped, and the failure characteristics of the samples were recorded. Then, the experiment was finished. In this experiment, 8 sample groups were loaded for successive fracturing by displacement controlled loading of 0.01 mm/min. The results of the EP and AE responses of four representative specimen groups are shown in We selected sandstone sample 1 for analysis. The entire loading process for sample 1 can be divided into five stages: compaction stage, linear elastic stage, damage stable development stage, accelerated damage development stage and post-peak stage. At the initial stage of loading, all kinds of original cracks and defects in the sandstone samples gradually close, and slip and dislocation occur between particles and cements, resulting in friction electrification ( Through the above analysis, it can be concluded that the change in the EP signal shows a periodic characteristic during the different sandstone failure stages and can better respond to the sandstone specimen fracture. In addition, the EP signal trend corresponds well with the AE counts and AS changes. Therefore, the EP signal can be effectively used to study the damage evolution and instability failure process of materials and to evaluate the damage and stress state of rock specimens ( However, during the loading process, the entire EP signal fluctuates sharply and is subject to many external disturbances. It is inaccurate to consider the sudden change in EP signal to be precursory information when predicting the unstable failure of sandstone samples. Further analysis and processing of the EP signal is needed to find the precursory point that can truly predict the impending unstable failure of sandstones. Critical slowing is a concept in statistical physics. This concept refers to the fluctuation phenomenon that is favorable for the formation of new phases when the dynamic system approaches the critical point (especially at the critical point) before changing from one phase to another. This kind of fluctuation shows not only the increase in amplitude but also the prolongation of fluctuation duration, the slowing of the disturbed recovery rate, and the lesser ability to restore the old phase. When the scale involved in the fluctuation extends to the whole system, the new phase of the entire phase transition can no longer be restored to the old phase ( For the failure process of sandstone under load, the load accumulation before the main fracture can be understood as the old phase, and the stress unloading during the instability failure can be regarded as the phase transformation. At the initial stage of loading, the sandstone specimen is in the elastic deformation stage. The strain of the sandstone gradually increases at a stable rate and presents a good periodic change. Although the strain will change slightly due to some local ruptures during loading, due to the fast recovery rate of sandstone specimens subjected to small amplitude disturbance, the system will return to the original loading state for a short time, and the load and strain continue to increase at the original rate ( Theoretically, when the sandstone samples tend toward the critical point of instability failure, the ability of the sandstone to be restored to its original state will tend toward zero. The sandstones' internal crack propagation and penetration rate will be accelerated, and the transfer and accumulation of free charge per unit time will increase sharply. The EP signals measured on the surface of the sandstone samples should also show a series of critical slowing down characteristics, such as the increased fluctuation, prolonged duration in unit time and reduction in the ability to be restored to the original state. Therefore, the critical slowing down principle can be applied to the analysis of EP signal characteristics during the process of coal instability and failure. Variance is a characteristic quantity that describes the data degree of deviation from the mean in a dataset. Variance is calculated by taking the differences between each number in the set and the mean, squaring the differences (to make them positive) and dividing the sum of the squares by the number of values in the set. The calculation formulas are as follows: The autocorrelation coefficient is a statistic describing the data correlation at different moments for the same variable. The autocorrelation coefficient of variable It is assumed that the stated variable has a forced perturbation with a period of Among the variables, the autocorrelation coefficient is When the system approaches the critical point, the recovery rate of small amplitude disturbance will be increasingly slower. The recovery rate will approach zero, the autocorrelation coefficient will approach 1, and the variance will approach infinity. Therefore, the increase in the variance and autocorrelation coefficient can be regarded as the precursor signal of the system approaching the critical point ( Window length refers to the selected sequence containing a specific amount of data, and the lag step refers to the lag length from the sequence containing a specific amount of data to another new sequence containing the same amount of data. For example, there is a data sequence with 100,000 data volumes, the window length is 5000, and the lag length is 7500, indicating that a sequence of 5000 data is taken from the first data of the total data sequence, and then a new sequence of 5000 data is taken from the 7501 data (shown in In the analysis of a complex dynamic system based on the critical slowing down theory, it is very important to choose the appropriate window length and lag length. We analyzed variances and autocorrelation coefficients of the EP signal by a 2000 window length and 6000 lag length based on the amount of collected EP signal data.  When the EP signal time series is analyzed by the critical slowing down theory, the choice of window lengths and lag lengths will affect the stability of the analysis results. The larger the selected window length, the better the stability of the autocorrelation coefficients and variances, and the smaller the fluctuation. The lag lengths should be selected according to the selected window length.   The critical slowing down theory is applicable to EP signal processing during the failure process of sandstone specimens. When the sandstone sample tends to break, the EP signal variance and autocorrelation coefficient increase suddenly and continuously in advance, which can be used as the precursor information to predict the failure process of the sandstone sample. Among the two parameters used to characterize the critical slowing of potential signals, the variances produce fewer pseudo signals than the autocorrelation coefficients, and the change trend is more intuitive and obvious. The precursory points are easier to identify and do not change with lag length selection. Therefore, the sudden variance increase point is more suitable as a precursor point to predict the unstable failure of sandstone samples when the critical slowing theory is used to analyze the EP signal, which may be because the detection of increased autocorrelation may require a long time series ( The temporal variation of AE parameters (pulse number, energy, etc.) represents the evolution characteristics and internal damage severity at different loading stages ( As shown in  Generally, the AE event accumulation area corresponds well with the fracture location of sandstone samples. From the precursor point of sudden variance increase at 222.7 s to the final instability failure of sandstone samples, AE events gradually increased, and high-energy AE events gradually increased and accumulated in the serious damage development position. The crack propagation rate and effective penetration gradually increase. For the observation surface, the crack propagation process has experienced the following process. First, the cracks initiate in the upper-left corner. Then, the cracks propagate, penetrate, converge and form local spalling. Next, the cracks with complex shapes expand rapidly, and the crack width expands sharply until the macroscopic fracture surface finally appears. Last, large caving occurs. This process indicates that the damage rate of the sandstone specimen increases gradually under the external load, and sample 1 gradually loses the ability to be restored to the original state, which reflects the critical slowing down principle. As shown in Therefore, compared with the variance mutation of AE count time series and EP signal time series, the two precursory signals also appear in the accelerated development stage of sandstone damage, with a time difference of 7.3 s and a load difference of 5% (see  In different failure stages of sandstone specimens, the EP signal shows a periodic change characteristic, which has a good corresponding relationship with AE counts and AS, and the EP signal responds well to the sandstone specimen failure under load. Throughout the loading process, the sandstone sample shows a critical slowing phenomenon. The autocorrelation coefficients of the potential signal time series increase abruptly at 12.4 s before the main fracture of the sandstone sample and continue increasing until nearly reaching 1. The change in the variance undergoes four stages, which are the basically unchanged stage, slow rising stage, rapid increasing stage and rapid increasing stage. The variance increases sharply and continuously 52.3 s ahead of the main fracture of the sandstone samples. This characteristic can be used as precursory information regarding the unstable failure of sandstone samples. Compared with the autocorrelation coefficient, the variance trend of the EP signal time series is more intuitive, the mutation point (precursory point) is easy to identify, and the occurrence time is not affected by the lag length choices. Thus, the EP signal time series variance trend is more suitable as the precursory point for predicting the failure of sandstone samples. During the process from precursory point to unstable failure, the AE events accumulation area corresponds well with the macrofractures position of the observation surface, high-energy AE location events increase rapidly, and the propagation rate and effective penetration flux of the fracture on the observation surface gradually increase. This finding shows that the sandstone sample damage rate increases gradually. Compared with the EP signal time series, the precursory point of the AE count time series also appears during the accelerated damage development stage of sandstone samples, with a lag time of 7.3 s. In terms of monitoring and early warning, the EP precursory point has more advantages. This work is supported by the General Program of