The inherent microstructural disorder strongly influences the mechanical behaviour of heterogeneous materials such as concrete and rocks. Tensile and compression tests, in fact, evidenced a localization of strain and dissipated energy in the post-peak softening branch, with a consequent scale dependence of the stress–strain response. For this reason, the well-known Cohesive Crack Model and the recently proposed Overlapping Crack Model are useful tools for describing the size effects in tension and compression, respectively. In general, strain localization, damage and fracture, which are phenomena affecting the failure of concrete, are not rigorously interpretable in the framework of continuum mechanics. On the other hand, since the flaw and the aggregate distributions in quasibrittle materials are often self-similar (i.e. they look the same at different magnification levels), the microstructure may be correctly modelled by fractal sets. In this paper, the approach based on fractal geometry, that has profitably been applied for the tensile behaviour, is applied to obtain a fractal overlapping law from uniaxial compression tests. According to this approach, it is assumed that energy dissipation, stress and strain are not defined with respect to the canonical physical dimensions, though on fractal sets presenting noninteger physical dimensions. As a consequence, these classical parameters should be substituted by fractal quantities, which become the true material properties.The compression behaviour of concrete, and in particular the ultimate strength and the post-peak branch, have a predominant role in the design of concrete and concrete-based structures. Structural design, in fact, is usually conducted by comparing an action with a resistance evaluated on the basis of the ultimate strength. On the other hand, the post-peak behaviour is fundamental for a correct evaluation of the structural ductility, e.g., the ultimate axial deformation of columns or the rotational capacity of reinforced concrete beams. In this context, the size-scale effects play an important role, since the characteristic parameters of concrete are measured on specimens at the laboratory scale, that is far from the dimension of a real structure. The problem of the size-effect on the compression strength was deeply investigated in the literature The size-effects also influence the post-peak softening branch of the stress–strain diagram. Experimental tests evidenced that, in the softening regime, ductility (in terms of stress and strain) is a decreasing function of the size-scale and the slenderness, whereas it increases by increasing the friction The stress–strain relationships usually assumed for calculation consider an energy dissipation within a volume and they are absolutely ineffective in the description of the size-scale effects. On the contrary, a close observation of the stress vs. post-peak deformation curves shows that a strong localization of deformations occurs in the softening regime, independently of the loading system, confirming the earlier results by van Mier It is worth noting that the assumption of an energy dissipation over a surface is an effective idealization of a more complex mechanism characterized by diffused macrocracks after the coalescence of initial microcracks. This means that, globally, the energy dissipation is a surface-dominated phenomenon. An accurate description of such a reality cannot be done on the basis of the classical continuum mechanics. In the case of materials with heterogeneous microstructures, as, for example, concrete and rocks, singularities and inhomogeneities play in fact a fundamental role in the definition of the physical properties. For this reason, the classical mechanical parameters relying on regularity properties of the medium, as the nominal stress, the energy dissipation per unit volume and the nominal strain, become meaningless. In this context, Carpinteri The present paper represents an attempt to obtain a material constitutive law for concrete in compression independent of the size-scale and slenderness of the specimen, by adopting approaches that are unusual for solid mechanics. Firstly, the effective applications of the fractal concepts to the tensile behaviour, proposed by Carpinteri et al. In this section, the results of the fractal analysis of damage domains performed by Carpinteri Let us assume that the maximum tensile load The exponent of the power law, A similar argument holds for the fracture energy. The work necessary to break a concrete specimen of cross-section Finally, similar remarks can be pointed out with regard to the deformation inside the damage zone. Fractal strain distributions, in fact, are rather common in material science. For instance, in some metals, the so-called slip-lines develop with typical fractal patterns Finally, it is worth noting that the exponents of the three scaling laws in Eqs. An experimental confirmation that the fractal mechanical parameters are the true scale-independent material properties is given in In structural design, the most frequently adopted constitutive laws for concrete in compression describe the material behaviour in terms of stress and strain (elastic–perfectly plastic, parabolic–perfectly plastic, Sargin’s parabola, etc.). This approach, which implies an energy dissipation within a volume, does not permit to correctly describe the mechanical behaviour by varying the structural size. On the contrary, size-scale effects are due to strain localization within one or more transversal inclined bands Several authors experimentally evidenced that, from a global point of view, without going into the details of the actual failure mechanism of the specimen, the localized shortening of the specimen at failure may be considered as a material property in the post-peak regime The area below the stress–overlapping displacement curve of The the relationship between stress and total shortening of the specimen, the  where As a result of such operation, the experimental stress–displacement curves shown in According to the The specimen behaves elastically without any damage or localization zones,  After reaching the ultimate compression strength  When Therefore, when the size-scale and the specimen slenderness are relatively large and the crushing energy relatively low, the global structural behaviour becomes brittle. The single values of parameters The proposed In this section, the fractal approach previously presented for the tensile behaviour, will be used to obtain a scale-independent fractal overlapping law from the experimental tests carried out by Ferrara and Gobbi The exponent of the power law representing the scale-effect on the nominal crushing energy, The behaviour of concrete in compression is strongly characterized by the microstructural disorder, which determines strain and dissipated energy localization in the post-peak softening regime. Based on the macroscale analogies with the tensile behaviour, the On the other hand, fractal geometry permits to give a unified explanation to the size effects on the tensile and compression properties of quasibrittle materials, otherwise impossible to obtain. Both fractal cohesive and fractal overlapping laws shown in Finally, it is worth noting that the proposed fractal approach is valid only in a limited scale range. At larger scales, in fact, the disorder and its influence onto the mechanical properties seem to diminish. While self-similar fractal sets cannot catch this trend, the self-affine fractals can. The scaling laws previously derived (Eqs. The financial support provided by the European Union to the Leonardo da Vinci Project “Innovative Learning and Training on Fracture” (ILTOF) is gratefully acknowledged.