Matrix vesicles (MVs) are cell-derived membranous entities crucial for mineral formation in the extracellular matrix. One of the dominant groups of constitutive proteins present in MVs, recognised as regulators of mineralization in norm and pathology, are annexins. In this report, besides the annexins already described (AnxA2 and AnxA6), we identified AnxA1 and AnxA7, but not AnxA4, to become selectively enriched in MVs of Saos-2 cells upon stimulation for mineralization. Among them, AnxA6 was found to be almost EGTA-non extractable from matrix vesicles. Moreover, our report provides the first evidence of annexin-binding S100 proteins to be present in MVs of mineralizing cells. We observed that S100A10 and S100A6, but not S100A11, were selectively translocated to the MVs of Saos-2 cells upon mineralization. This observation provides the rationale for more detailed studies on the role of annexin-S100 interactions in MV-mediated mineralization.Physiological and pathological mineralization is initiated by matrix vesicles (MVs). MVs are cell-derived vesicular structures, nucleation sites for mineral formation, located within the extracellular matrix (ECM). Annexins are a dominant group of proteins present in MVs Human osteosarcoma Saos-2 cells express the entire osteoblastic differentiation sequence from proliferation to mineralization and spontaneously release MVs S100 proteins represent a large family of small EF-hand Ca Since the involvement of MVs in pathological calcification (vascular smooth muscles or renal calcification) gathers more and more attention, the detailed investigation of annexins and S100s actions in these structures offers a way to uncover the mechanisms involved in these processes. Human osteosarcoma Saos-2 cells (ATCC HTB-85) were cultured in McCoy’s 5A media (ATCC) supplemented with 100 MVs were harvested by different ultracentrifugation steps at 4 The ALP activity of MVs was determined using freshly prepared 10 Electrophoresis was performed in 7.5% (w/v) SDS–PAGE gels under mild-denaturing conditions. Protein samples (15 MVs were suspended in SCL buffer (100 A 10 Samples containing 0.33 The protein concentration of the vesicles fractions were determined using the Bradford method (BioRad Laboratories). Samples (25 Data were expressed as the mean In the present work, we used AA and β-GP simultaneously to intensify Saos-2 cell mineralization. The comparison of MVs isolated from resting and isolated from 7 The comparison of protein patterns for MVs isolated from resting and mineralizing Saos-2 cells allowed us to determine that MVs are enriched with annexins upon mineralization ( EGTA treatment combined with a freeze/thaw procedure was conducted in order to characterize the localization of annexins in ALP-rich MVs. This resulted in the separation of two populations of annexins ( It was previously proposed that the release of ALP-rich MVs by cells correlates with changes in the acto-myosin cytoskeleton Little is known of S100s in MVs. Our findings showed an enrichment of ALP-rich MVs ( Up to now, only AnxA2, AnxA5 and AnxA6 have been investigated for MV function So far, there has been little evidence suggesting the enrichment of annexins in mineralizing MVs compared to non-mineralizing MVs Furthermore, in ALP-rich MVs isolated from mineralizing Saos-2 cells, an almost complete absence of cytoskeletal proteins was evidenced. We suggest that calcium binding proteins, mainly annexins, take the place of cytoskeletal proteins during MV biogenesis. In this way, MVs become an efficient machinery for fast mineralization of the ECM. Involvement of S100 family members in MV-mediated matrix mineralization was occasionally mentioned in literature In conclusion, we highlight new candidates among the annexins family (AnxA1, AnxA7) that might play a role in MV formation and mineralization. Moreover, we provide the first evidence for a differential pattern of S100A10 and S100A11 in MVs isolated from cells at different stages of mineralization and postulate S100A10 to be potential target of mineralization. The understanding of the role of annexins and their potential S100 binding partners in MV function may provide novel insights into the mechanism of physiological mineralization. This work was supported by a grant N N401 140639 from the Polish Ministry of Science and Higher Education and by Polish-Portugal Executive Program for years 2011–2012 (project 760) sponsored by the Polish Ministry of Science and Higher Education and by Portuguese Fundação para a Ciência e a Tecnologia.