The rare earth elements (REEs) such as lanthanum, cerium, praseodymium, and neodymium were successfully recovered from the leaching solutions of phosphate ores through a Supported Liquid Membrane (SLM). The extractant, N,N,N′,N′-tetraoctyl diglycol amide (TODGA), was employed as novel carrier for REEs transport. Permeation rate was observed to be significantly fast and more than 95.0% of REE3+ was collected using 0.10 M TODGA as carrier. The mechanism of transport was investigated by studying various parameters, such as feed HNO3 and NaNO3 concentration, TODGA concentration in the membrane and the stirring rate etc. In view of practical application to the collection of REEs from the phosphate ore leaching liquor, the stability of the membrane was also studied. The result shows that the membrane was highly selective for lanthanides. This research would provide a new environmentally friendly and new sustainable green approach for the recovery of REE with SLM technique.The REEs are the 15 lanthanide elements along with scandium and yttrium. The rising demand of REEs in high technology devices over the past eras has caused emphasis to develop new strategy to ensure adequate supply ( Extraction as separation process is based on partitioning between two immiscible phases with achievement of equilibrium. In systems with liquid membrane three phases are involved and transport kinetics determines separation. The term widely used for such process is pertraction ( The research about selective separation of the mixture (yttrium-neodymium-dysprosium) by bis (2-ethylhexyl) hydrogen phosphate (D2EHPA) as an extractants has been investigated by flat sheet SLM. The previous work is the development of techniques that can be employed to test various extractants and determine optimal conditions to achieve various components of a multicomponent mixture of REEs in high purity ( Sinharoy et al. reported the parting and transport of Eu (III) from Sr (II) through SLM using TEHDGA as a carrier in HNO In view of the advantages of SLM, it is of practical significance to use it to recover rare earth from phosphate leaching liquid containing trace rare earth. N,N,N′,N′-tetraoctyl diglycolamide (TODGA) revealed excellent extraction performance with relatively fast kinetics, high loading capacity for various lanthanides without formation of third phase, and easy stripping of the extracted metal ions ( The stability of membrane depends on certain variables such as the nature of solutes & solvents and their concentrations, extractants molecular structure, type of membrane, pore structure and size, surface characteristics, and material of membranes ( Porous poly (vinylidene fluoride) (PVDF) membranes (average pore size 0.22 μm) used in this study were provided by Shanghai Xingya Purification Material Factory, China. PVDF membrane was chosen as the supporting substrate due to the well-known thermal stability, chemical stability and mechanical stability. The extractant TODGA with purity (>96%) was prepared in our lab according to the established procedure ( Firstly, the PVDF membranes were put into a vacuum for over 1 h to remove air and trace water from the pores, thus allowing easier immersion of the TODGA into the membrane pores. Then the supported liquid membrane was prepared by immersing the PVDF membrane in The microscopic morphology of the PVDF membrane and the distribution of TODGA within the TODGA-SLMs were observed by the scanning electron microscopy (SEM; QUANTA FEG-250). The membrane was analyzed by observing the change in the morphology before and after immersing. The FTIR of SLM was also characterized with the Attenuated Total internal Reflectance Fourier Transform Infrared spectroscopy (ATR-FTIR). The SLMs device used for the separation of REEs was designed in our lab and its schematic diagram was shown in The samples were obtained by sampling (1 mL) from each phase at regular time intervals. The extraction efficiency of the TODGA-based supported liquid membrane system was obtained by the following Eq., The cumulative percent transport (T %) at a given time is determined by the following Eq., Stirring speed is an essential factor in promoting the transport of metal ions. To attain fast transport, the feed phase and stripping phase require continuous stirring to keep the ions suspended. The promoted transport of metal ions on the SLM occurs through a diffusion mechanism, where the thickness in the feed-membrane interface has a great influence on the transport rate ( The effect of acid concentrations on the transport of REEs through SLM was studied using 0.10 M TODGA in The mechanism of extraction of REEs and HNO An obvious proof that the acid has been extracted and transported is that the acidity of the stripping phase is increasing with the time. The acidity value increases from 0.02 M for 2.0 M HNO These results indicate a competition between REE and H The specific amount of carrier via membrane phase is also the main factor that affects the separation and purification process. So the initial concentration of TODGA ranging from 0.02 M to 0.15 M was also investigated. As can be seen from  Operation time also played an important role in the transfer process and had also been studied at constant experimental conditions as given above. The result was listed in During the dissolution of the associated rare earth phosphate ore, a large amount of impurity ions also enter the leachate. It is generally expected that these impurity ions are not extracted or rarely extracted. Ca The SLMs morphological feature were analyzed by scanning electron microscope (SEM) and the obtained micrographs were given in As given in The successful make of SLM was further confirmed by the characterizations of SLM with the Attenuated Total internal Reflectance Fourier Transform Infrared spectroscopy (ATR-FTIR) ( In order to examine the stability of membrane, the reuse of TODGA-based SLMs was also explored. After one cycle, the feed liquid and the stripping solution were taken out, and the new feed liquid and the new stripping solution were refilled to measure the transport efficiency of the rare earth ions. It can be seen from Supported Liquid Membrane based on TODGA and PVDF has proved to be effective for the transport of REE This study was supported by