The synergistic extraction of uranium from phosphoric acid solutions with di-nonyl phenyl phosphoric acid (DNPPA) and bidentate n-octyl (phenyl)-N,N-di-isobutyl carbamoyl methyl phosphine oxide (CMPO) in n-dodecane has been investigated and effect of varying concentrations of phosphoric acid, phosphate ions, DNPPA and CMPO on the extraction of uranium were determined. The results demonstrated that synergistic combination of DNPPA with bidentate CMPO significantly enhances the extraction efficiency when compared to monodentate extractant TOPO (tri-n-octyl phosphine oxide). Stoichiometry of complex obtained by slope analysis method indicated the formation of neutral species of the type [UO2(HA2)2
                     ·CMPO], where (HA)2 is the dimer form of DNPPA. Extraction reaction was found to be exothermic with enthalpy change (ΔH) of 43.3kJ/mol. A mole ratio of DNPPA/CMPO=2 was found to be suitable for effective extraction of uranium. Under comparable condition, the extraction of uranium from phosphoric acid with various synergistic reagents followed the order: DNPPA/CMPO>DNPPA/TOPO>DIDPA (di-isodecyl phosphoric acid)/CMPO>DIDPA/TOPO>D2EHPA (di-2-ethyl hexyl phosphoric acid)/CMPO>D2EHPA/TOPO. The loading capacity of DNPPA/CMPO was found to be greater than DNPPA/TOPO for both WPPA (wet process phosphoric acid) and MGA (merchant grade phosphoric acid). Stripping of uranium with various reagents was in the order: Na2CO3
                     >H3PO4
                     +Fe>H3PO3
                     >HCOOH. DNPPA and CMPO solvent mixture was found to be stable even after 20cycles of repeated extraction and stripping operations.As primary sources are depleting fast, secondary sources of uranium are looked into with keen interest for recovering uranium. Phosphate rock is an important sustainable secondary source of uranium and its concentration varies in the range of 0.003 to 0.02% U DNPPA and CMPO were synthesized in our laboratory following previously described procedures respectively by DNPPA was purified by the method described elsewhere prior to its use in the present work ( Extraction studies were carried out by equilibrating equal volume of the aqueous and organic phases (25 The synergistic coefficient (S.C.) was calculated using the following equation. The kinetics of uranium extraction has been studied by equilibrating aqueous phase with different grades of phosphoric acid and 0.6 The above figure also shows that, the D for extraction of uranium from different grades of phosphoric acid followed the order: technical grade phosphoric acid Preliminary extraction tests were carried out for extraction of uranium from technical grade phosphoric acid with 0.6 After optimizing the mole ratio, experimental test runs were conducted for uranium extraction from WPPA and MGA with different types of organophosphorus acids in the presence of neutral donor TOPO or CMPO at a fixed mole ratio of TOPO or CMPO to extractants of 0.5. The results are shown in  The linear relationship with negative slope of ~ The effect of DNPPA concentration on uranium extraction was studied from a feed containing 5.5 In order to evaluate the dependency of CMPO on uranium extraction, additional experimental test runs were carried by varying the CMPO concentration in the organic phase by keeping DNPPA concentration fixed at 0.6 Based on the dependency of concentrations of phosphoric acid in the aqueous phase, DNPPA and CMPO in the organic phase, a plausible extraction equilibrium, ignoring the complexation by phosphate ions UO To substantiate the results of slope analysis technique, additional experiments were carried out to study the effect of phosphate ion (0 to 1.0 Repeated contact method till saturation of the solvent was adopted to find out the loading capacity of the solvents both for WPPA and MGA. After each contact, the aqueous phase was analyzed for its uranium content. The amount of uranium transferred into organic phase in each contact was calculated by mass balance and cumulative concentration building up in the organic phase was determined after each contact. The loading capacity plot of contact number vs. concentration of uranium in organic phase is shown in Mostly the temperature of phosphoric acid obtained directly from fertilizer plant will be in the range of 50–60 The extraction of uranium is driven by a large and negative enthalpy change opposed by a negative entropy change. The large negative enthalpy change is due to the strong complex formation between UO The enthalpy change of uranium extraction using synergistic mixture of DNPPA and CMPO was found to be more negative compared to D2EHPA–TBP (− The free energy change (ΔG) of the extraction was evaluated using Eq. Free energy change (ΔG) calculated at 303 The uranium-loaded composite organic phase comprising of 0.6 The stability of DNPPA and CMPO synergistic mixture was evaluated by giving successive extraction and stripping tests for both WPPA and MGA containing 290 Additionally, the periodic stability of the synergistic mixture was also evaluated by allowing the extractant mixture (0.6 Synergistic mixture of DNPPA and CMPO is efficient for the extraction of uranium from technical, WPPA and MGA grade phosphoric acids and scores above the use of mono-dentate TOPO. The extraction of uranium was found to decrease with increase in phosphoric acid concentration and temperature, and increased with DNPPA and CMPO concentration. The extraction reaction was exothermic in nature and the extracted species in the organic phase was found to be [UO