A new contact oxidation filtration separation integrated bioreactor (CFBR) was used to treat municipal wastewater. The CFBR was made up of a biofilm reactor (the upper part of the CFBR) and a gravitational filtration bed (the lower part of the CFBR). Polyacrylonitrile balls (50mm diameter, 237m2/m3 specific surface, 90% porosity, and 50.2% packing rate) were filled into the biofilm reactor as biofilm attaching materials and anthracite coal (particle size 1–2mm, packing density 0.947g/cm3, non-uniform coefficient (K80
                     =d80/d10)<2.0) was placed into the gravitational filtration bed as filter media. At an organic volumetric loading rate of 2.4kg COD/(m3
                     d) and an initial filtration velocity of 5m/h in the CFBR, the average removal efficiencies of COD, ammonia nitrogen, total nitrogen and turbidity were 90.6%, 81.4%, 64.6% and 96.7% respectively, but the treatment process seemed not to be effective in phosphorus removal. The average removal efficiency of total phosphorus was 60.1%. Additionally, the power consumption of the CFBR was less than 0.15kWh/m3 of wastewater treated, and less than 1.5kWh/kg BOD5 removal.Traditional wastewater treatment processes are usually equipped with different treatment units that have a variety of functions to achieve acceptable treatment performance ( In comparison with those traditional wastewater treatment processes, biofilm systems have low land requirement and flexible operation ( To help overcome these issues, a new contact oxidation filtration separation integrated bioreactor (CFBR) was developed, which was composed of a Biofilm reactor (the upper part of CFBR) and a gravitational filtration bed (the lower part of CFBR). The idea relies on BAF (BAF is a submerged media wastewater treatment unit that combines aerobic biological treatment and biomass separation by depth filtration) prototype ( In this study, CFBR was operated in a batch mode to treat a municipal wastewater. Meanwhile, the Biofilm reactor was packed with porous polyacrylonitrile balls and the gravitational filtration bed was filled with anthracite coal. The polyacrylonitrile ball is a potential packing for biofilm reactor. It is a nonmetallic polypropylene with the characteristics of high porosity and large specific surface area. Also, the anthracite coal is a perfect filter media for slow and cake filtration. It has some advantages over other filter media, which are lightweight, surface roughness and powerful decontamination ability. Furthermore, CFBR system first allows the upper layer to degrade organic matter, which can lighten the treatment loadings of the anthracite coal layer. The anthracite coal layer is mainly used to intercept SS in order to ensure that the CFBR effluent can satisfy the reuse demand. Hence, the saturation of anthracite coal layer does not take into account. There is also no need to regenerate during the test. The objective of this study was to evaluate the performance of CFBR (the removal efficiency of COD, ammonia nitrogen (NH Experiment facilities are shown in The feed water was primary sedimentation tank effluent collected from a municipal wastewater treatment plant (WWTP) in Wuhan, China. The characteristics of feed wastewater are listed in CFBR was operated with filling, aerobic reaction, and filtration phase. Backwashing of the entire unit was carried out to maintain efficient hydraulic performance and avoid filter clogging because of the accumulated SS and the excess biomass. The average CFBR operation before a backwash was 7 CFBR was inoculated with activated sludge taken from the aeration pond in Wuhan Shahu WWTP. About 20 Samples were collected every day, refrigerated at 4 The organic volumetric loading rates of biofilm reactor in CFBR were 4.0 COD levels at each section during the experiment are shown in  The time course of NH The data shown in  The efficiencies of TP removal in biofilm layer and filtration bed layer during the experiment are shown in Available methods to improve phosphorus removal of the CFBR are to introduce as following: (1) Installing bagger and mud valve. The bagger and mud valve are installed according to the lowest water lever ( In the final effluent of CFBR, SS is not always detected due to the high SS removal during the experiment. Also, in view of wastewater reuse, turbidity is recognized as the measure of relative clarity of experimental samples. Similarly, it is obvious that the turbidity of CFBR effluent remained at a fairly stable level even though there was a significant turbidity fluctuation in the influent during the experiment. These results confirm that the whole system shows a stronger resistance to influent shock load. In addition, the peak of turbidity removal (97.5%) occurred at organic volumetric loading rate of 2.4 CFBR could be operated consistently for 7 In developing countries such as China, which a trade-off between environmental protection and economical operation has to be made based on the local socioeconomic situation, cost is more important than other factors when choosing a process. Construction and operation cost are two important factors in evaluating a wastewater treatment process ( As CFBR described, its construction cost is low due to a single reactor of the whole system. And electrical power consumption of CFBR system was 0.13–0.15 A new contact oxidation filtration separation integrated bioreactor (CFBR) was developed, which was composed of a Biofilm reactor (the upper part of CFBR) and a gravitational filtration bed (the lower part of CFBR). The upper layer was filled with porous media as a biofilm reactor, the lower layer with anthracite coal as a gravitational filtration bed. CFBR showed high-efficient removal of COD, nitrogen and turbidity in a single reactor. The optimal operation parameters of CFBR were determined as follows: aeration time of 60 Good performance of CFBR was achieved under optimal operation parameters. The total efficiencies of COD, NH The authors wish to thank the National Hi-Tech Research and Development Program (863) of China (2005AA601010-01) for support of this study.