An approximate solution is presented for predicting the convergence of lined circular tunnels in elasto-plastic rock masses with anisotropic in situ stresses. The basic idea which led to derivation of the solution is function approximation using Artificial Neural Networks (ANNs). A suitable data base including 2500 convergence values is prepared by innovative combination of Design of Experiments technique and Finite Difference Method. Then, an ANN with optimum architecture and appropriate training algorithm is used to learn the underlying phenomena involved in the problem from the data. The explicit form of the solution for calculation of convergence is elicited from the trained ANN. Subsequently, the ANN-based solution is validated against analytical and numerical solutions. Finally, the limitations associated with the solution are discussed.The amount of convergence is of prime importance in both serviceability and stability of tunnels so that their satisfactory performance is usually defined in terms of the values of boundary displacement ( The idea of the present study is to derive an explicit solution for the convergence of lined circular tunnels in elasto-plastic media with anisotropic in situ stresses based on the results of numerical methods and using powerful function approximation tools such as Artificial Neural Networks (ANNs). Similar to analytical solutions, this method is computationally inexpensive and easy to implement; however, it can be used in more general and realistic conditions. It also addresses the recognized need for such an explicit solution to the tunnel problem in reliability analyses, where it is required to use the solution for too many iterations ( The problem under consideration in this study is shown in   ANNs may be defined as structures comprised of densely interconnected adaptive simple processing elements that are capable of performing massively parallel computations for data processing and knowledge representation ( Two or more neurons can be combined in a layer, and a particular network could contain one or more such layers. The layers of a multilayer network play different roles. A layer that produces the network outputs is called output layer, while all other layers are called hidden layers ( The outputs of a typical two-layer FFNN with In the learning process, the network is presented with a pair of training data including input values and corresponding target values. The network computes its own outputs using its initial weights and biases. Then, weights and biases are adjusted based on a comparison of the output values and the target values, until the network outputs match the targets. Sum of squared errors is the typical performance function used as an error index in the training phase, and back-propagation is one of the most popular algorithms for minimizing it ( Generalization is a very important aspect of ANN learning, because it is a measure of how well the network interpolates to points not used during training. Over-fitting of training data occurs when the ANN memorizes the training data, and consequently loses the ability to generalize. An ANN is expected to over-fit when it has too many free parameters (weights and biases), and optimizing the network architecture is a remedy for over-fitting ( There are two other methods for improving generalization during training the network. Early stopping is the common technique which is based on dividing data into three subsets of training, validation and test, and monitoring the error on the validation set. Regularization is another method that does not require separating a validation data set, and is based on the modification of the performance function. When the network is training for function approximation, regularization provides better generalization performance than early stopping ( As mentioned before, the explicit solution developed in this study is based on the function approximation technique. As in classical curve fitting methods, the accuracy and the range of applicability of the final model is governed by the quality of data which are used in the process. A successful function approximation process requires that the expected ranges of all independent variables be covered in the data base. In addition, sufficient number of data points have to be appropriately distributed in the space of independent variables. These two conditions were tried to be best satisfied in the derivation of the solution. The problem under consideration in this study can be defined with 11 parameters: tunnel radius ( The number of data required for a regular distribution of data points in the space of independent variables, assuming four levels for each parameter, is 4 However, the problem can be innovatively solved using Design of Experiments (DOE) technique. DOE refers to the process of planning, designing and analyzing the experiment so that valid and objective conclusions can be drawn effectively and efficiently ( In this study, Taguchi design ( The next step after generation of independent variables data points is calculation of the corresponding values of dependent variables. Numerical analysis of the tunnel problem for 2500 times was obviously tedious. However, it was the expense that must be paid for development of an accurate explicit solution. This iterative process was facilitated using the programming ability of FLAC. The expected ranges of independent variables derived from literature (e.g. In this study, ANNs were used as function approximation tools for prediction of the dependent variables presented in Optimization of network size is a very important task to prevent over-fitting. It has been observed that two-layer FFNNs may be suitable for most of the problems ( Levenberg–Marquardt back-propagation algorithm combined with Bayesian regularization ( The data were randomly divided into two sets, training and test set, that include 80% and 20% of the data, respectively. MATLAB software was implemented for random selection of training set and training the networks. Results of many trial and errors with two-layer FFNNs revealed that nine hidden neurons are sufficient for the problem, and no significant improvement could be made in the network performance by using more hidden neurons. This architecture corresponds to 128 free parameters that is below the least value proposed by heuristics. Hence, the network cannot be suspicious of over-fitting. Although the two-layer network described above showed acceptable accuracy, it was possible to improve the performance of the network using one more hidden layer. It is recognized that three-layer FFNNs have higher capabilities and better performance for more complex problems ( In order to avoid this risk, only three-layer FFNNs with less than 310 free parameters were tested to obtain an optimum architecture and high generalization capability. It was observed that a three-layer FFNN with seven neurons in the first hidden layer and four neurons in the second hidden layer gives satisfactory results. The accuracy of the three-layer network was higher than the two-layer network, however, it has just 126 free parameters that is even less than the corresponding number for the two-layer network. Hence, using one more hidden layer resulted in higher accuracy without loss of generalization. The final architecture of the network used in this study for analysis of lined circular tunnels and involved scaling processes are shown in The trained ANN described in the preceding section uses an explicit formulation to calculate the values of convergence at the two reference points. However, the formulation is not short, and it can be best presented and implemented using a step-by-step procedure. In addition to the steps involved in calculation of the ANN outputs, an extra step is required to obtain the whole profile of convergence along the tunnel boundary. In this section, the steps involved in calculation of the convergence profile are presented. Step 1 – Scaling the input vector of the ANN The value of  Step 2 – Calculating the scaled output vector of the ANN The vector of scaled outputs of the network,  Step 3 – Inverse-scaling of the output vector of the ANN The value of  Step 4 – Calculation of the complete convergence profile The complete profile of convergence along the tunnel boundary can be approximated from the convergence values at the two reference points ( Although following these steps might seem tedious at first glance, it is absolutely easy and straight-forward. All the calculations can be automatically performed using spreadsheet software or writing a short computer code. The procedure is computationally inexpensive and the results can be obtained instantaneously. The values of For both data sets, the outputs of the ANN are not exactly the same as target values. The more the outputs are close to target values, the more the network has been successful in learning and generalization. Hence, the accuracy of the ANN-based solution can be examined by comparison of its predicted values with target values. This comparison is made in In order to check the generalization of the network, the plots of predicted vs. target values for test data set, which includes the values of convergence in 500 new cases, are shown in In addition to the visual inspection of the figures, the agreement between predicted and target values can be quantitatively described in terms of the values of coefficient of determination ( In the preceding section, the derived solution was validated using the results of a numerical code. However, the numerical solutions are not exact, and there is an amount of error in their results. Hence, the ANN-based solution must also be validated against exact analytical solutions. In addition, the previous section just considered the values of convergence at the two reference points. However, the complete profile of convergence along the tunnel boundary is considered in the current section. In order to validate the derived solution against analytical solution, two examples with conditions consistent with the assumption of the analytical solutions were considered. In the first example, in situ stress field is anisotropic while the rock mass is strong enough to remain elastic. Hence, the compressibility and flexibility method is applicable. In the second example, in situ stresses are isotropic and high enough to induce plastic deformations in the rock mass. Thus, the convergence–confinement method can be applied. The values of input and output parameters for the examples are given in It can be observed that the results of the ANN-based solution are also in good agreement with those of the analytical solutions. For the first example, the derived solution shows 0.6% and 2.9% errors at points A and B respectively, while the corresponding values for the second example are 1.9% and 2.0%. However, all the error values are less than 3% which is quite acceptable considering the accuracy that one can get in determination of the input parameters. After describing the data base preparation procedure, function approximation process, and verification of the derived solution, the limitations and scope of applicability of the solution must be considered. ANNs, as function approximation tools, do not impose any limitation on the final solution; all limitations come from the data that have been used in training them. The utilized data base of this study was prepared using the results of numerical analyses. Hence, the assumptions made in the construction of the numerical models should be considered. The models were representative of lined circular tunnels excavated in pre-stressed media. The general condition of anisotropic in situ stress field was considered in the analyses. The initial stresses were assumed to be constant throughout the model. Although neglecting the gravitational gradient of stresses is not reasonable in analysis of shallow tunnels, it is justified for deep tunnels with depth to radius ratios greater than six ( It was assumed that the rock mass surrounding the tunnel is an elastic-perfectly plastic material. However, this simplifying assumption may not be valid for some rock masses, especially high quality rock masses, where brittle behavior is expected ( The lining was considered as an elastic material. This assumption makes it possible to determine the values of elastic structural loads in the lining, assuming constant anisotropic distributed loading ( The numerical models were two-dimensional and under plane strain condition. Hence, the three-dimensional effect of stress relief before activation of lining was not considered in the analyses. However, some methods have been developed for applying these effects into two-dimensional models. Stress reduction approach ( In addition to the mentioned limitations, that were the results of assumptions made in the numerical analyses, there are other limitations that are related to the range of parameters. The derived solution is valid for the range of parameters that were used in the development of the solution. Hence, in the derivation process, it was tried to adopt ranges which cover the expected ranges of the parameters for actual problems. The range and constraints associated with the parameters are presented in An approximate solution is presented in this paper for convergence assessment of lined circular tunnels in elasto-plastic rock masses with anisotropic in situ stresses. While analytical approaches have failed in derivation of an explicit solution to the problem, function approximation technique was used in development of the solution. The required data base to be used in function approximation process was prepared by innovative combination of Design of Experiments techniques and Finite Difference Method. Suitable ranges were selected for input parameters defining the problem. Consequently, 2500 data points were optimally distributed in the input parameter space using three experimental design techniques. Subsequently, Finite Difference Method was used to produce the output parameters (convergence at two reference points) for each input data set. ANNs were adopted as powerful function approximation tools. After many trial and errors, the optimum architecture of the network was obtained. The network has 11 inputs, 7 neuron in the first hidden layer, 4 neurons in the second hidden layer and 2 neurons in the output layer. Considering the proposed heuristics for architecture of ANNs and the regularization method used in the training phase, the network was not suspicious of over-fitting. After describing the procedure of developing the ANN for analysis for tunnels, the explicit formulation used in calculation of the complete profile of convergence along the tunnel boundary was presented. Comparison of the network outputs and target values for training and test data sets revealed the satisfactory performance of the network. In addition, the ANN-based solution was verified against the analytical solutions using two examples. In both cases, the encountered prediction error was less than 3%. Finally, the limitations of the developed solution were discussed. Although some simplifying assumptions were made in derivation of the solution, it can be used in preliminary stages of design. The explicit form of the solution makes it ideal for parametric studies and reliability analyses, because the values of convergence in different conditions can be obtained very easily and quickly. The promising results of the methodology used in this study can be encouraging in development of more refined solutions using more realistic assumptions. The authors wish to acknowledge the encouragement and guidance provided by Dr. Evert Hoek.