Bubble loading is a macroscopic measure which includes the micro sub-processes of true flotation. In this paper, new instrument for measuring the bubble loading in flotation column with the ability to generate the uniform size bubbles is introduced. This ability (generation of uniform size bubbles with mean diameter of 2mm and standard deviation of 0.3mm) make it possible to study the effect of bubble size on bubble loading. Laden bubbles sampling system consists of riser with diameter of 20mm and height of 720mm made of glass and collection chamber with diameter of 54mm and height of 150mm made of transparent Perspex installed directly on top of the riser. Applying the flotation column with low mixing (vessel dispersion number of 0.32 and axial mixing coefficient of 0.003m2/s) and direct entry of bubbles from the riser to collection chamber caused the experiments to be reproducible by nearly 15g (5% of total feed) of solid samples loaded by bubbles. Measured bubble loading was validated by comparing the recovery obtained based on bubble loading data and the recovery calculated from macroscopic mass flow rates of concentrate and feed. Results showed discrepancies less than 3%, confirming the reliability of bubble loading measurements by the developed instrument.In collection zone of flotation, a compromise between gravity and buoyancy forces related to bubble–particle aggregates leads to the flotation of particles. Formation of such aggregate is a function of collision, attachment and detachment probabilities between particles and bubbles ( The measurement of the overall bubble loading covers all these sub-processes ( As an early study, a single bubble methodology was applied to measure the bubble loading ( As mentioned above previous works on bubble loading deal with froth recovery and entrainment, so bubble loading was measured in Hollimond tube or mechanical cells. But these instruments work in batch operation and mechanical cells work in turbulent regime due to the high extent of mixing. This research tries to introduce new instrument for measuring the bubble loading in flotation column in steady state conditions. Bubble generator (sparger) has the ability to generate uniform size bubbles that make it possible to study the effect of bubble–particle size ratio on bubble loading. All the experiments are run in continuous steady state conditions and the bubble loading measurement results have been validated by macroscopic mass recovery. Flotation column used in this research has to work in laminar regime with the least mixing and also it should be small in size and accessible. Designing such a column was performed based on relations between flotation hydrodynamic and column geometry. Axial dispersion and Drift flux models were used in this approach ( Residence time distribution (RTD) curve was obtained by impulse injection of KCl solution and measurement of conductivity. According to RTD curve, vessel dispersion number ( The sparger has to generate the different mono size bubbles in every test. The designed sparger has been shown in But orifice sparger can produce uniform size bubbles; however, the smallest orifice which was technically available to the authors (diameter of 0.5 Needle like an orifice can prepare smaller uniform bubbles. Needles have been used in bubble column reactors ( The bubble size distribution (BSD) was analyzed by image processing techniques. Images were taken by microscopic camera (Dino-Lite Digital Microscope AM-7013M) with the magnification of Designing the riser is to determine the diameter and height. Riser diameter determines the mass of solids that are collected during the tests, moreover affects directly the axial mixing intensity that specify the flow regime in the riser ( Collection chamber that was installed directly on top of the riser was a light cylindrical chamber with internal diameter of 54 Laden bubbles entered the collection chamber via riser directly, where they burst and left the solid particles. So bubble’s air accumulated in the upper part of the collection chamber, while solid particles fell and were collected in the lower part of the collection chamber. Water displaced by total volume of bubbles was sucked out of the collection chamber by peristaltic pump based on positive displacement and after filtration, was recycled to the riser at the point of displaced water entrance, as shown in Total volume of collected bubbles in collection chamber is calculated as follow: Pure Quartz was used for bubble loading experiments and therefore it was assumed that all particles have the same floatability. Therefore, the recovery is equal to yield of Quartz as given in Eq. The recovery could also be measured by the bubble loading data, if it is assumed that no entrainment exists. In this second method, the concentrate mass flow rate ( Regarding the fact that less than 15 The pure quartz (SiO The histogram of BSD is shown in The predicted bubble diameter based on model in Eq. Measured bubble loading related to bubble size, particle size fraction and collector dosage tabulated in To obtain the macroscopic recovery, the solid percentage was measured at the flotation underflow during the experiments and recovery based on solid mass have been calculated and mentioned in As an example, the details of calculation procedure for test No. 2 in The results show small discrepancies between two recoveries obtained from two different methods, validating the reliability of bubble loading measurements. The small differences between results of two methods could be attributed to stocking of some solids in the wall surfaces of the column and the pipes, beside to all kind of experimental errors. Bubble loading was measured in flotation column in continuous steady state condition. The new needle sparger for flotation column, made it possible to study the effect of bubble size on bubble loading. Bubble loading was measured for two different size fractions and different collector dosages. Due to the low extent of mixing and absence of the entrainment, experiments are reproducible with 15 Validation was done by comparison of two recoveries based on mass flow rates and bubble loading. Such comparison showed that results of bubble loading measurements obtained by the developed methodology stand close to macroscopic recovery with a relative error less than 3%. Therefore, minimizing the effects of detachment and entrainment in the constructed column allows us to study the sub-processes of collection zone with direct macroscopic measurement of recoveries in a device. Based on experimental condition in According to Eqs.