Hydrometallurgical processing of ilmenite concentrate separated from Egyptian black sands is attained through leaching with sodium hydroxide of mechanically activated ilmenite concentrate under relatively high temperature (200 °C) in the presence of oxygen pressure (6 bar). The effects of temperature, sodium hydroxide concentration, grinding time and oxygen partial pressure on titanium extraction were studied as well as the kinetics of the leaching process.The importance of ilmenite is due to its major abundance in the beach sands, besides the other economic minerals. The Egyptian beach sands bearing ilmenite, especially those of East Rosetta, have been subjected to many studies especially in the field of mineralogy. Originally the black sand deposits contain different mineral assemblages of economic and gangue minerals. The economic ones are magnetite, ilmenite, hematite, monazite, zircon, rutile and garnet. The general average of the minerals content is given in An isodynamic separator is used twice to concentrate all the heavy minerals in the magnetic fraction and to separate ilmenite from this fraction. The behaviour of ilmenite in a Frantz isodynamic separator (slope 20°, tilt 4°) shows that 97.6% recovery of ilmenite is separated at current intensity of 0.20 A (weakly magnetic). The calculation of ilmenite reserves revealed the presence of about 3 million dry tons as a proven reserve for the upper 1 m of beach sands. Ilmenite concentrate can be used directly to make pigment or prepare titanium metal, but it is usually preferred to process it to an intermediate product low in iron to minimize reagents consumption and waste disposal problems. Two methods are used industrially for this purpose, namely: Pyrometallurgical method, which includes partial reduction of ilmenite with anthracite in an electric furnace to get cast iron and a slag rich in titanium Hydrometallurgical methods, which include leaching of ilmenite with hydrochloric acid Mechanical activation, usually done via energetic milling, has been demonstrated to accelerate the leaching process for sulphide This investigation is carried out on ilmenite concentrate separated from Egyptian black sands where the distribution of ilmenite minerals in the East Rosetta beach sands is illustrated in The mineralogical analysis was carried out using polarizing microscope and chemical analysis of studied ilmenite concentrate is given in A stirred ball mill with a vertical attritor (PE 0.75, Netzsch, Selb) was used. Grinding was carried out in sodium hydroxide solution. The steel balls in the attritor had a diameter of 2.0 mm. The rotation speed was maintained at 1200 min The pulp from the attritor was charged into the autoclave and agitated by an impeller at 1200 min The reaction of ilmenite with caustic soda solution led to the formation of sodium titanate and iron oxide. For the determination of the degree of ilmenite leaching, the FeTi cake was dissolved in HCl. Dissolution takes place according to the following reaction: After the complete dissolution of the cake, the chloride solution was filtered off and analysed for its titanium content, and then the extent of leaching was calculated. The effects of the following factors upon the alkali leaching of ilmenite concentrate were studied as follows: The results shown in The dependence of the extraction of titanium on grinding time is presented in The effect of oxygen partial pressure on titanium extraction is presented in The rate of titanium extracted against time plots for various particle size fractions at 180 °C can easily be derived from The reaction of ilmenite with sodium hydroxide under oxygen pressure is given as follows: For determination of the rate of the reaction, the following formulas are used: The Langmuir–Hinshelwood type expression equation may be used to evaluate C: Substituting The data of The surface reaction model was applied to determine the activation energy. The data presented in The dependence of reaction rate constant on grinding time is illustrated in The alkali pressure leaching of ilmenite under oxygen partial pressure is considered to follow the steps listed below. Dissolution of oxygen gas in the leach solution is assumed to follow Henry's law The aqueous oxygen is transported through connection and diffusion to the surface of ilmenite grains. The oxygen molecules dissociate to oxygen ions at the surface of ilmenite. Oxygen ions and electrons are transported through the surface of the ilmenite to the reacting boundary layer. TiO The dependence of reaction rate constant on oxygen partial pressure is given in The phases of the different products of ilmenite leaching were identified both microscopically and with X-ray analysis. The microscopic examination of the products of the leaching experiments shows a few grains in the FeTi cake obtained in experiments carried out at leaching temperature 200 °C indicating incomplete leaching. Considerable amounts of silicate minerals such as zircon, amphiboles, pyroxenes, feldspars and garnet were observed in the cake. This contributed to the difficulty of these minerals to be leached under the above-mentioned conditions. The X-ray diffraction pattern of the products obtained at 150, 170 and 200 °C during 13–120 min The separation of titanium is carried out through the following stages: Dilution: carried out at 107 °C, and the time of hydrolysis 2 h at pH 0.6. Seeding: addition of titanium hydrate to the solution at 107 °C and pH 2 for 1 h. The produced sodium titanate was filtered, washed and leached with 30% HCl for 30 min. The separation of titanium was carried out by dilution and leaching at 107 °C at pH 0.6. The X-ray diffraction pattern of titanium cake shows the formation of anatase as illustrated in The titanium cake separated by acid hydrolysis was ignited at 800–900 °C for production of titanium dioxide. By ignition of the titanium cake at 800 °C, both anatase and rutile have been detected in the X-ray diffraction patterns Systematic laboratory studies were aimed to extract titanium from ilmenite concentrate from Egyptian black sands with a new technique using mechanical alkaline treatment in an attritor followed by oxidative leaching in an autoclave. Results of the present investigation reveal that even a short processing time (30 min) led to extraction ≥90% of titanium in the form of sodium titanate in only one leaching stage, after 90 min leaching at 200 °C with an oxygen partial pressure of 10 bar. The leaching process appears to be chemically rate-controlled as indicated from reaction mechanism and calculated value of apparent activation energy.