Objectives
                  The purpose of this study is to analyze posteromedial fragment morphology using two-dimensional computed tomography fracture mapping and to compare posteromedial fragment morphology in various Schatzker type tibial plateau fractures.
               
                  Materials & methods
                  One hundred twenty-seven consecutive AO/OTA B- and C-type tibial plateau fractures were retrospectively analyzed using 2DCT fracture mapping. The posteromedial articular fracture angle and articular surface areas of all fractures with posteromedial fragments were calculated. Based on biomechanical studies, posteromedial fragments with coronal fracture angles >68° were considered amenable for anterolateral stabilization with standardized plating. Kruskall-Wallis non-parametric test was used for statistical comparison of morphological features of posteromedial fragments between the various Schatzker types.
               
                  Results
                  Forty-seven out of 127 tibial plateau fractures included a posteromedial fragment. The mean posteromedial articular fracture angle was 44° (range: 2°-90o, standard deviation: 23°). Forty fragments (85%) had a fracture angle of <68°, increasing the risk for insufficient stabilization with standardized anterolateral plating. The mean articular surface area was 34% of the entire tibial plateau (range: 7%–53%, SD: 12%). There were no significant differences in posteromedial fragment morphology between Schatzker type IV, V, and VI fractures.
               
                  Discussion and conclusion
                  Posteromedial fragments commonly occur not only in Schatzker type V and VI, but also in Schatzker type IV tibial plateau fractures. Eighty-five percent of tibial plateau fractures with a posteromedial fragment may benefit from non-standard customized lateral plating, or may require an additional medial or posterior surgical approach for fracture-specific fixation to optimize screw purchase and biomechanical stability.Tibial plateau fractures (TPFs) are one of the most challenging traumatic fractures to treat. Inadequate treatment may result in knee instability or deformity and early-onset osteoarthritis [ In general, a lateral surgical approach with a locking plate/screw device is preferred for fragment fixation in TPFs, as this surgical technique is considered relatively uncomplicated and carries a low risk for iatrogenic damage to nerves and blood vessels [ In 1967, Hohl was the first to publish a study on the posteromedial fragment and found it to occur in the majority of bicondylar TPFs [ We recently presented a study on 2DCT fracture mapping of the tibial plateau [ The purpose of this study is to analyze posteromedial fragment morphology using 2DCT fracture mapping and to compare posteromedial fragment morphology in the various Schatzker type TPFs. We hypothesize that posteromedial fragments are common in Schatzker type IV, V, and VI fractures and that a substantial proportion of these fragments is at increased risk for insufficient stabilization with standardized anterolateral plating. A retrospective search was performed for imaging data of patients with an AO/OTA B- or C-type TPF [ 2DCT fracture mapping of the 127 TPFs resulted in the previously published tibial plateau fracture map [ The fracture lines of the posteromedial fragments in the original tibial plateau fracture map were converted to coordinates in Rhinoceros 5 software (McNeel, Seattle, WA) for analysis ( Anterolateral plates for the fixation of TPFs are designed to have the subchondral screws in the coronal plane. Biomechanical studies have suggested that screws should not be positioned at >20° from perpendicular to the fracture line – corresponding to posteromedial coronal fracture angles <68° – and recent data suggest that interference strength and stiffness are best when locking screws are inserted perpendicular to the plate ( For each subject, the articular surface of the posteromedial fragment was determined and calculated as the percentage of the entire tibial plateau and the medial tibial plateau. The lateral border of the medial tibial plateau was defined as a sagittal line passing through the tibial spine. The percentage of articular surface on the posteromedial fragment relative to the remainder of the tibial plateau was obtained by dividing the surface area of the posteromedial fragment by the entire tibial plateau surface area. A similar calculation was performed to obtain the percentage of articular surface of the posteromedial fragment relative to the medial plateau and the percentage of the articular fragment surface on the medial and lateral side of the tibial plateau. Matlab’s statistics toolbox (version 2015b) was used for statistical analysis. Kruskall-Wallis non-parametric tests were used for statistical comparison of morphological features (i.e., PMAFA, fragment surface area) of posteromedial fragments between various Schatzker types. Linear regression analysis was performed to examine the statistical association between PMAFA and fragment surface area. Forty-seven out of 127 TPFs were found to include a posteromedial fragment. These fragments were observed in the majority of Schatzker type IV, V, and VI fractures (see The selection of the posteromedial fragments from the tibial plateau fracture map and subsequent tracing, drawing, and superimposing of the fracture lines resulted in the posteromedial fragment fracture map ( Across the subjects, the mean PMAFA was found to be 44° (range: 2° to 90°, standard deviation (SD): 23°). The mean fragment surface area was 34% of the entire plateau (range: 7%–53%, SD: 12%) and 59% of the medial plateau (range: 12%–97%, SD: 23%)( The primary purpose of our study was to quantify the morphology of the posteromedial fragment in TPFs using 2DCT fracture mapping. The MAFA – as coined by Barei et al. [ We found that posteromedial fragments are common in both Schatzker type IV and Schatzker type V and VI fractures. There we no statistically significant differences in fracture morphology between posteromedial fragments originating from Schatzker type IV, V, and VI fractures in terms of size or coronal fracture line orientation. In previous literature, the posteromedial fragment is examined in cohorts of Schatzker type V and VI fractures only [ After virtual reduction of the posteromedial fragment (fracture mapping) and calculation of the PMAFA, the majority of posteromedial fragments present with a medio-lateral fracture line orientation (PMAFA <68°) that may predispose to inadequate stabilization with screws inserted through an anterolateral plate ( In previous studies, the MAFA has been used as a measure of the posteromedial fragment angle [ The fragment surface areas found in this study are fairly consistent with the results of the morphological studies by Barei et al. and Higgins et al. [ Several limitations of this study must be considered. Although our sample size is comparable to previous studies on this subject, the study sample is relatively small in terms of statistical power for the comparison between different Schatzker types. In addition, we were able to calculate fragment surface areas in terms of percentages, but not actual mm [ In conclusion, our study shows that posteromedial fragments commonly occur not only in Schatzker type V and VI, but also in Schatzker type IV TPFs. We find that the morphology of these fragments is heterogeneous, but not significantly different among Schatzker types. The vast majority of posteromedial fragments (85%) presents with a fragment orientation smaller than 68°, and may therefore benefit from an additional medial or posterior surgical approach for fixation. Future analysis of posteromedial tibial plateau fragments with the use of quantitative three-dimensional computed tomography (Q3DCT) [ JND received an unrestricted research grant from the Marti-Keuning-Eckhardt foundation. For the remaining authors none were declared. Supplementary material related to this article can be found, in the online version, at doi: The following are Supplementary data to this article: