Copper cyanocomplexes have been recognized as competitors for the adsorption sites of activated carbon during gold adsorption. In this paper, the effects of practical parameters (excess free cyanide, calcium ions and aeration conditions) on the selective adsorption of Au over Cu cyanocomplexes on activated carbon samples from different sources are discussed. In addition to the adsorption experiments, the aqueous and solid phases were characterized by Raman spectroscopy in an attempt to elucidate the observed trends. Four solid samples with different structures as regards the relative amount of graphitic planes and density of surface functional groups were selected. The results indicated the highest adsorption of Au and the lowest adsorption of Cu on the sample with the lowest density of surface groups and relative higher crystalline character. In contrast, the highest adsorption of Cu and the lowest adsorption of Au were obtained using the sample with the highest density of surface groups and relative lower crystalline character. These findings support the industrial application of activated carbons with low density of surface functional groups for gold recovery, such as the product obtained from coconut shell, and are consistent with the hypothesis of different preferential sites for the adsorption of Au and Cu. The results also indicate that if there is an excess of free cyanide in the solution, a higher Au/Cu selectivity is observed, but the Au loading on the activated carbon samples declines. In the presence of Ca2+ ions in the cyanide solution, positive effects on Au adsorption and negative effects on Cu adsorption were demonstrated for a CN/Cu molar ratio above 4 (i.e., Cu(CN)4
                     3− as the predominant species), and these behaviors resulted in a higher Au/Cu selectivity. A previous adsorption of Ca2+ ions on the activated carbon surface creates new sites for Au(CN)2
                     − adsorption, in addition to the graphene layers. From aerated solutions, the adsorption experiments revealed a positive effect on Cu adsorption, and negative impact on Au adsorption, thus affecting the Au/Cu selectivity. The aeration of the solution results in a decrease of the cyanide concentration, which reduces the CN/Cu molar ratio. Therefore, the addition of Ca2+ ions in the process solution and an optimal concentration of free cyanide, which should take into account the loss of cyanide by oxidation and volatilization, may help to improve Au/Cu selectivity.In nature, gold is generally found in association with other metals, mostly silver, iron, and copper. The occurrence of copper phases in gold deposits may affect the leaching process due to a high and fast solubility of some minerals in the cyanide media ( In this context, the purpose of the present work was to evaluate the effects of typical, practical parameters on the selective adsorption of Au over Cu on activated carbon samples from different sources. The parameters investigated in the current work are the physicochemical properties of the adsorbent material, excess free cyanide (CN Activated carbon remains the main industrial adsorbent for gold, and even with the consolidation of the CIP and CIL process, the adsorption mechanism of this metal is not fully understood. Among the proposals, some may be cited: gold adsorption as [M Regarding the adsorption of copper cyanocomplexes on activated carbon, few works focused on this interaction under practical, industrial conditions are available in the literature. It has been assumed that the adsorption is strongly affected by metal speciation, which depends on the pH solution and free cyanide concentration. Results by Regardless of the contributions that previous works have provided, the effects of pH and free cyanide concentration on the physicochemical properties of the adsorbent material has not been evaluated and, thus, the adsorption mechanism of copper cyanocomplexes has been discussed only on the basis of metal speciation. In light of the above brief review, it is evident that the efforts to comprehend and improve the selectivity of Au adsorption on activated carbon from Cu-containing cyanide solutions should take into account not only the effects of operating parameters, but also the effects of these parameters on physicochemical properties of the adsorbent and metal speciation. In this paper, the selectivity of gold adsorption was investigated considering the effects of aeration, excess free cyanide, Ca In this work, four types of activated carbon from different source materials were used: Samples produced from coconut shell (C), The activated carbon samples were characterized by the following physicochemical properties: specific surface area (SSA); ash content (A); density of surface functional groups (DSFG); and point of zero charge (PZC). The analytical methods and procedures used for determining the above properties are described in previous publication ( The adsorption experiments were carried out at 25 Regarding the experimental procedure, 1 The metal adsorption density (AD) on the activated carbon samples, the amount of Au and Cu adsorbed per unit area (μmol·g The identification of Au and Cu cyanocomplexes in cyanide solutions was carried out by means of Raman spectroscopy, using a Horiba Jobin Yvon (Labram HR 800) spectrograph equipped with a 633 The physical aspect and physicochemical properties of the activated carbon samples are shown in The characterization of the activated carbon samples by DSFG values revealed that sample C has the lowest total density: 1.2 Finally, In addition to the main functional groups available on the surface of the activated carbon samples, the structure of the adsorbents was also evaluated in this work. Raman spectroscopy and peak-deconvolution technique of the spectra by means of Gaussian line shapes were applied, as well discussed by  The Raman spectra of KAu(CN) The Raman spectra obtained from solution containing Ca In conclusion, the formation of Cu(CN) The effects of the surface properties of the activated carbon on the adsorption densities (AD) of Au and Cu are presented. Following, the AD values obtained from the (i) main solution (i.e., 250 As already indicated, four samples with different total DSFG values were selected for the adsorption experiments: Sample C, 1.2 According to the results shown in The trends reported in the present paper on the effects of the surface properties of the activated carbon on metal adsorption are supported by other works. According to The affinity of Au(CN) In conclusion, the findings obtained by this experimental approach support the existence of distinct adsorption sites for Au (basal plane) and Cu (surface edges) on the activated carbon. Under certain experimental conditions, a competition between the Au(CN)  Regarding the addition of 0.25 From the aerated solution, the adsorption of Au decreased for both samples ( The following section discusses the distinct behaviors exhibited during Au and Cu adsorption on the activated carbon samples C and W in the presence of excess free cyanide and calcium ions and air sparging of the solution, taking into account the particular properties of each adsorbent, metal speciation and industry practices. As earlier mentioned, the separation factor (Eq.  The addition of excess free CN The increase in the β value for both samples is related to the predominance of the Cu(CN) On the other hand, the excess of free CN The addition of 0.25 At pH Regarding the negative impact of Ca The air sparging of the main solution decreased selectivity as a result of a positive effect on Cu adsorption combined with a negative impact on Au adsorption on both activated carbon samples ( At CN/Cu In an attempt to investigate the oxidation of CN On the other hand, It is relevant to add that the activated carbon may also catalyze the oxidation of free cyanide ( In summary, the aeration of the solution results in a decrease of the cyanide concentration, which reduces the CN/Cu molar ratio and, consequently, the Au/Cu selectivity. This experimental result may be ascribed to the higher stability and increased adsorption of the Cu(CN) The effects of typical, practical parameters (excess of free cyanide, Ca The addition of excess free cyanide to the solution enhanced the selective adsorption of Au over Cu for both activated carbon samples. However, a significant drop in the Au adsorption on activated carbon C, for the CN/Cu molar ratios above 4 has been observed. Therefore, an optimal ratio should be selected to maximize selectivity without decreasing the gold loading. The addition of Ca Air sparging resulted in a positive effect on Cu adsorption and negative impact on Au adsorption on both activated carbons, thus decreasing Au/Cu selectivity. The aeration favors cyanide oxidation and, as a result, the higher stability of the Cu(CN) The financial support from the Brazilian agencies (