The adsorption of Zn(II), Cd(II) and Cr(VI) from single, bi- and tri-metal systems was studied with respect to varying metal and biomass concentration, pH and agitation time on Eichhornia crassipes dead biomass. The maximum adsorption of Cd(II) and Zn(II) was observed at pH 5 and 6 respectively, whereas that of Cr at pH 2.0. An enhanced metal adsorption on 0.5g of biomass with an agitation time of 120min for Zn(II) and Cd(VI) and 180min for Cr was recorded. Maximum adsorption of Cd(II) (12.4mg g−1), obtained from initial concentration (40mgl−1), followed by Zn(II) (9.3mgg−1) and Cr (5.6mgg−1) at optimal conditions. Cd adsorption capacity increased in the bi-metal system whereas that of Zn and Cr reduced in both bi- and tri-metal systems. After elution, higher metal recovery was recorded from a single metal system than a trimetal system. E. crassipes dead biomass retained the metal adsorption capacity up to two cycles, indicating its prospects for the wastewater treatment and metal recovery.Application of microbial or plant biomass could be an effective, low cost and ecofriendly means for removal and/or recovery of toxic metals from contaminated wastewater and industrial effluents (  Stock solutions (1000 Metal adsorption experiment was performed in triplicate in batch manner by adding 0.5 Adsorption behaviour of each metal ion was also studied in triplicate at varying pH (i.e. 2 to 7), biomass concentration (i.e. 0.2, 0.3, 0.4, 0.5, 0.6 and 0.7 The single and tri-metal laden biomasses were separately treated with HNO The maximum metal adsorption recorded from 40 Adsorption capacity for Cd and Zn was maximum at pH 5 and 6 respectively ( The profiles of Zn and Cd adsorption capacity were very similar, showed a rapid increase initially and reached equilibrium within 120 In general, the metal adsorption decreased in both bi- and tri-metal systems at each concentration level except Cd, which showed an increase in bi-metal systems ( The metal recovery was higher in a single metal system than a trimetal system ( The study clearly showed that removal of Cd(II), Zn(II) and Cr(VI) from single, bi- and tri-metal systems by Research facilities received from G. B. Pant University of Agriculture & Technology, Pantnagar is gratefully acknowledged.