Scheelite mineral which includes CaWO4 as a main compound is one of the most important raw materials used for the industrial production of W. Scheelite concentrate used in this study included CaMoO4 and the oxides of Fe, Ca, Si, P, Al, Mn, S, Zn, Mg, Ba, K, Ti and Sr as gangue materials. CaWO4 reacts with oxalic acid (H2C2O4) to form water-soluble hydrogen aqua oxalato tungstate (H2[WO3(C2O4)H2O]) and insoluble calcium oxalate monohydrate (CaC2O4H2O). Additionally, the dissolution behavior of gangue materials during the leaching of the scheelite concentrate in H2C2O4 solution must be known for the designing of the purification process applied in the industrial production of pure W. The aim of this study was to investigate the effects of temperature and H2C2O4 concentration on the dissolution of gangue materials in the scheelite concentrate. It was found that while the oxides of Si, P, Al, S, Zn, Ba, K, Ti and Sr were not dissolved in H2C2O4 solution, the oxides of Ca, Mo, Fe and Mn were dissolved forming complex oxalate ions. MgC2O4 which was formed from MgO in the scheelite concentrate was also dissolved due to its high solubility.Tungsten and its alloys have wide application areas in industry such as high temperature technology, lighting, X-ray technology, machine and engine construction, chemical industry and laser technology owing to its low vapor pressure, high melting point, good electrical and thermal conductivities, high density, high elastic modulus, high wear resistance and good X-ray performance. They are also used in military applications as weapon projectiles and in aerospace industry as rocket nozzle ( Scheelite and wolframite, which are the main tungsten deposits, contain some tenths of percent WO In the modern method, alkali digestion is applied to the scheelite and wolframite concentrates and to the soft and hard tungsten scraps. Filtration, silica precipitation and molybdenum precipitation steps follow the alkali digestion step and purified sodium polytungstate solution is obtained. The isopolytungstate species are extracted from the acidified sodium polytungstate solution by solvent extraction or by ion exchange method using resins. Re-extraction is performed with aqueous ammonia solution which gives ammonium polytungstate solution. Ammonium paratungstate hydrate (APT) is obtained by crystallization. WO In the classical method, acid digestion is applied for the scheelite concentrate, while alkaline digestion is performed for the wolframite concentrate. In both cases tungstic acid is the intermediate product, which is contaminated with the impurities present in the solution ( In recent years, alternative methods have been suggested for the dissolution of the scheelite concentrate without formation of tungstic acids. There are no studies in the literature about the dissolution behavior of the gangue materials in the scheelite concentrate in H Crushed, ground, roasted and flotation-enriched scheelite concentrate obtained from Bursa/Turkey was used in the dissolution experiments. FeS H Details of the experimental set up used in this work were given elsewhere ( Phase analysis of the scheelite concentrate was performed with Cu-Kα (λ XRF quantitative analysis results and XRD diagram of the scheelite concentrate were shown in The dissolution mechanism of synthetically prepared CaWO It was also found that the dissolution reaction ceased due to the formation of CaC The experimental conditions in which synthetic CaWO The amounts of reacted CaWO4 were calculated using ICP-OES analyses results of W in samples taken during the dissolution experiments at certain time intervals. The fractional conversions at certain times were calculated by putting the calculated analyses results into Eq. The dissolution of CaWO ICP-OES analyses showed that calcium existed in the leach solution. Calcium can be present in the leach solution either from the dissociation of CaC When acid dissociation constants of Reactions By replacing the The pH value of 1 C In our previous study ( According to the proposed mechanism, CaMoO XRF analysis ( The scheelite concentrate includes molybdenum in the CaMoO It is clear that CaMoO Dissolved iron was detected by ICP-OES in the samples taken from the leach solution at certain times. This indicated that Fe H  Using the diagrams given in It is clear that from each 100 Manganese was determined from the samples taken from the reactor during dissolution experiments of the scheelite concentrate by ICP-OES analysis. This finding indicated that manganese containing gangue material dissolved in H MnO reacts in H Since the MnO content of the scheelite concentrate was 1.33% (wt.), maximum Mn concentration in the leach solution was calculated as 8.4 Using However, obtaining a conversion of 15% in 3 Considering the content of MnO in the scheelite concentrate was 1.33 Another element determined in the leach solution by ICP-OES quantitative analysis was Mg. C MgO present in the scheelite concentrate as gangue material dissolved in H  The scheelite concentrate contained 0.5 It can be seen from the diagrams ( When C XRF quantitative analysis showed that Si, P, Al, S, Zn, Ba, K, Ti and Sr containing oxides were existed as gangue materials in the scheelite concentrate. By using ICP-OES quantitative analysis any amounts of Si, P, Al, S, Zn, Ba, K, Ti and Sr were not detected in the samples taken from the reactor. These results showed that all oxides that contained Si, P, Al, S, Zn, Ba, K, Ti and Sr existed in the scheelite concentrate as unreactive compounds in H The morphological analyses of leach residues formed during the dissolution of the scheelite concentrate performed using SEM analysis and results were shown in Experiments were carried out to investigate the production of molybdenum free WO The solutions were held on the steam bath at the boiling point of the water. While H During the heating of the leach solution obtained from the dissolution of CaMoO The results of experiments carried out using synthetic CaWO The leach solution obtained during the first filtration contained mainly H  The reaction of CaWO The reaction of CaMoO Oxides of iron and manganese in the scheelite concentrate were dissolved in H Magnesium compound in the scheelite concentrate formed MgC Oxides of Si, P, Al, S, Zn, Ba, K, Ti and Sr, which existed in the scheelite concentrate as impurities, were not dissolved in H The calcium and magnesium present in the leach solution were exchanged by protons passing the solution through strong acidic resin (Amberlyst-15). The hydrogen chelate compounds of tungsten and molybdenum present in the leach solution behave differently during heating of the leach solutions to the boiling point. While H Pure WO  concentration of i species initial concentration of H equilibrium constant acid dissociation constants solubility product of CaC solubility product of MgC solubility product of MnC mole of i species in the scheelite concentrate at any reaction time initial mole of i species in the scheelite concentrate time wavelength fractional conversion of i species This work was supported by the