The thin film pressure balance technique was used to determine the overall magnitude of the surface forces in foam films stabilized by flotation reagents such as sodium dodecyl sulfate and polypropylene glycol at high NaCl concentrations. The Stefan–Reynolds lubrication approximation was used to estimate the forces from measured film thinning rates while the capillary wave model of Valkovska, Danov and Ivanov was used to calculate the forces from measured critical rupture thicknesses. It was found that at very low surfactant concentrations commensurate with typical flotation reagent dosage, the overall forces were attractive and up to one order of magnitude stronger than the Lifshitz–van der Waals forces. The forces became smaller with increasing surfactant concentration. It was also found that the forces obtained from the capillary wave theory were indifferent to changes in film radii and surface mobility, in contrast to the Reynolds lubrication approximation. For comparison, other film drainage models considering film surface mobility and hydrodynamic corrugation were used to fit the present experimental thinning curves obtained at very low surfactant concentrations. They also showed that the overall attraction forces were several times stronger than the Lifshitz–van der Waals forces.Control of froth stability plays an important role in determining the product grade, throughput and recovery achieved from a flotation operation ( Flotation froth is often generated using very low concentrations (< In this communication, we studied the drainage and rupture of single foam films containing sodium dodecyl sulfate in the presence of 0.3 Specially pure sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS) was obtained from Fluka and recrystallized from ethanol. The polypropylene glycol (PPG) with an average molecular weight of 400 was also obtained from Fluka. Sodium chloride (99.5%, Sigma Aldrich, USA) was purified by roasting at 700 The static surface tension isotherm was measured at 22 The TFPB technique developed by The reflected light intensities ( When a single horizontal foam film is formed in the Scheludko Cell (see As the film thickness ( The classical Derjaguin–Landau–Verwey–Overbeek (DLVO) theory is commonly used to explain the stability of foams and foam films with varying degrees of success. It consists of the electrostatic double layer force (Π Eq. In the present work, we measured film thinning rates and rupture thicknesses at high electrolyte concentrations (i.e., 0.1 or 0.3 With considering the electromagnetic retardation and electrolyte screening effects, the Hamaker constants were calculated on the basis of the Lifshitz–Hamaker theory using the following equation ( We fitted the experimental film thinning data to the film drainage model of Scheludko, namely the Stefan–Reynolds lubrication approximation ( By separating the variables of Eq.  Also shown in  As the thickness of a foam film is reduced by drainage, the film ruptures catastrophically when the thickness reaches a critical thickness ( Recently,  It is relatively easy, however, to use Eq. In using the capillary wave theory, we followed Angarska et al. to assume that the film surfaces are tangentially immobile. In addition, The simplification in calculating the integrals in Eqs. ( The effect of surface mobility on Further comparison was made for the In Note that the The film drainage model of Note that in Eq. With surface mobility taken into account, according to The  If film radii are larger than this transition radius, the drainage of the films should follow the MTR equation: Eqs. Eq. The results presented in The results presented hitherto strongly support that the overall inter-bubble attractions (represented by Eq. A non-DLVO attraction force is present in foam films at low surfactant concentrations. Hydrophobic interactions appear to universally exist between hydrophobic surfaces in aqueous media ( Only the van der Waals force exists in the foam films at very low surfactant concentrations. If this is the case, the Lifshitz–Hamaker constants might have been underestimated so Both an enhanced van der Waals force and a non-DLVO attraction force of different nature exist. Recent molecular simulation of thin free films of pure water conducted by These arguments and conjectures point to the need for more work to examine how the surface forces in foam films could be affected by other factors which have not been considered in the framework of DLVO theory. For instance, considerable amount of dissolved gas molecules is present in foam films, but their impact on surface forces in thin liquid films is not clear ( The thin film pressure balance (TFPB) technique was used to measure the thickness of very small foam films stabilized with sodium dodecyl sulfate and polypropylene glycol at high NaCl concentrations. The film radii were controlled primarily in the range of 28 to 33 The effect of film radii and film surface mobility on the fitted By assuming that MIBC and PPG films are tangentially mobile, we started with a tentative value of Solve the following equation Choose a tentative value of Solve the following equation By using the values of This value was then used as the tentative value of Adjust We also examined the effect of surface mobility on Solve the following equation Choose a tentative value of Solve the following equation By using the values of The Adjust Financial support for this study, provided by a Discovery Grant from the