The technology for extraction and recovery of the thorium from its source is one of the significant areas of research Present investigation deals on development of a process for extraction of thorium and its separation from the uranium and rare earths contained Korean monazite leach liquor. In the preliminary study, sulfuric acid treatment of monazite concentrate followed by water leaching was carried out. Furthermore double salt precipitation and acid leaching lead to produce thorium rich leach liquor. Various commercial extractants accomplishing D2EHPA, PC88A, Amine and Primene JM-T were tested and optimized for selective separation of thorium. The effective extraction behavior of thorium followed the order as; Primene JM-T>D2EHPA>PC88A and high separation factor was resulted at high acidity (2.5mol/L) of leach liquor, ensuring on high selectivity of Primene JM-T towards loading of Th. The co-extraction of cerium was prevented by changing thorium oxidation state using Fe2+ and H2O2 and reported. The co-extraction of other associated rare earths was scrubbed with sulfuric acid solutions. Subsequently, stripping studies were carryout with two different types of mineral acids and it was quantitative using high acid concentration (5mol/L).Monazite mineral is the one of the major sources for thorium including the rare earth elements (REEs) and uranium. The extraction and possible separation of thorium from other associated elements (rare earth elements (REEs) and uranium) are essentially needed exclusively in nuclear industry processes. Thorium deposit is comparatively higher than uranium in the natural resources. Presently, most of the global nuclear reactors are being run by uranium, and the future prospective mainly is focused on thorium reactors. The projected worldwide thorium resources by International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA), the total amount is ∼6,355,300 to 6,372,300 tonns (in situ) The demand of thorium is increasingly high in these days. However, its extraction process mainly for its separation from associated metals such as uranium and rare earths is again a challengeable task for the metallurgists. Hydrometallurgy is the most promising in metal extraction process which not only imparts on development of sustainable technology but also address the environmental concern while treating radioactive element(s) deposit in the earth up to significant extent. Environmental pollution and remediation is most noteworthy subject Four well-known developed flowsheets were extensively discussed in which the process has been adopted based upon hydrometallurgical methods for recovering REEs from concern ore concentrates. Usually, thorium has the chance to be obtained as by-product in these processes. Bayan Obo concentrate A process flow sheet was developed for Kvanefjeld rare earth concentrate (Bastnasite) having ∼14% of REO. In a first step leaching was carried out with weak acid (pH 1.9) to separate the U, Th content along with other and heavy rare earths (HREs) metals in the leach liquor. The remaining residue was further treated with strong acid leaching (110 A systematic flow sheet for processing of the Nolans rare earth concentrate was developed and reported In downstream stages, separation and purification of Th was investigated by solvent extraction (SX) method. As of now, in most SX based separation processes, various nitrogen based extractants such as amine (and quaternary ammonium salt have been utilized for extraction of thorium. In summary of a SX study, Th extraction using Primene JM-T), stripping with base reagents such as sodium chloride (or) sodium carbonates followed by recovery study was described and reported High nitric acid (4 The other hydrometallurgical methods like adsorption have also been applied for thorium removal from aqueous solutions using magnetic nanoparticles It is well known that, selectivity is a key and significant parameter in liquid-liquid extraction (solvent extraction) processing. Selectivity is mainly depending upon nature of the extractant, speciation of the metal ion at studied pH range and periodic chemical properties of the element In the above literature survey mostly the thorium recovery from its ores was based on hydrometallurgical routes, however the major issues was encountered as its high purity separation and recovery from the corresponding leach solution. Therefore, this paper was intended to develop a suitable thorium extraction process from Korean monazite ore leach liquors using three different reagents such as Primene JM-T, D2EHPA and PC-88A and reported. The possible separation of the thorium from rare earths (REEs) were calculated by measuring of separation factors and subsequently, the recovery of thorium from loaded organic of Primene JM-T, D2EHPA and PC-88A was established. The significant role of these solvent reagents as well as stripping reagents for recovery of thorium were systematically investigated and described. The thorium and other rare earth elements content in aqueous solution(s) were analysed by ICP-OES (iCAP 6000 Series, Thermo Scientific, USA). The commercial-grade amine-based extractant; Primene JM-T amine (mixture of highly-branched C16 to C22 tertiary alkyl primary amine isomers) was supplied by The DOW Chemical Company (Rohm and Hass) and was used without further purification. The diluent A150 (commercial name) used for preparation of different extractant concentration was supplied by Samsung, Korea. The other reagent like D2EHPA ( To determine the distribution ratio, equal volumes of aqueous and organic phases were equilibrated in a glass-stoppered separating funnel for 5 Korean monazite concentrate was pretreated by several experimental steps such as sulphation by sulfuric acid, followed by water leaching, then double salt precipitation, caustic conversion and acid leaching (HCl). The detailed pretreatment procedure was given in Phosphorous based extractants such as D2EHPA and PC-88A as well as nitrogen based extractants such as Primene JM-T, Alamine 336 and Aliquat 336 were used for primary test of thorium extraction and possible separation behavior from associated REEs. The results obtained data were presented in From the above experimental studies, the separation factors (SFs) were determined and presented in the The sulfuric acid effect was tested in the range of 0.5–2.5 The co-extraction of all these REEs was significantly decreased while increasing acidity of solution with either of extractants. Especially in the PC-88A system, other REEs were not extracted entire study range of acidity except cerium and in case of D2EHPA system, both cerium and neodymium were co-extracted and other REEs extractions were not reported. From this study, it was noticed that the Primene JM-T seems less selective exclusively at mild acidic range (0.5 The concentration extractant is one of the important factors on in this study while estimating the loading ability of the respective extractant towards the extraction of Th. In this study the three extractants such as D2EHPA, PC-88A and Primene JM-T concentrations were increased from 0.05 to 0.2 To minimize (or) or to prevent the co-extraction of cerium with thorium to the reduction of cerium oxidation state i.e. from +4 to +3 was investigated. This study was carried using Fe After extraction the resulted loaded organic (LO) for corresponding three extractants were subjected to the scrubbing using sulfuric acid. Two different (low and high) concentrations of acid i.e 1.0 The REEs free LO of respective organic extractants (D2EHPA, PC88A and Prmene JM-T) was utilized for stripping study using hydrochloric acid and H The experimental outcome of the present investigation has been consistent with earlier reported works [ The present research paper was drawn following conclusions. Korean monazite was processed using hydrometallurgical techniques such as water leaching, sulphation, double salt precipitation by using Na The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. The research was supported by the Basic Research Project (GP2017-025) of the Korea Institute of Geoscience and Mineral Resources (KIGAM), funded by the