Our recent studies revealed that the ground sulphide minerals in contact with water generate H2O2 but its effect on the oxidation of pulp components and hence in deteriorating the concentrate grade and recovery in flotation has not been explored yet. In this study, the effect of depressant and collector additions during grinding on the formation of H2O2 by metal sulphides and its influence on complex ore flotation was investigated. The results showed a decrease in the generation of H2O2 with the addition of depressants during grinding while the addition of depressant and collector together increased H2O2 formation in the flotation pulp liquid. The flotation results showed that pyrite is effectively depressed when the depressant and collector are added together during grinding, corresponding to a condition of higher amounts of H2O2 in the pulp liquid thereby causing the oxidation of pyrite surface and depression in flotation. The best results of metal sulphides grade and recovery achieved also correspond to the same flotation conditions.The use of NaHSO  Zinc sulphate has been also used as a depressant, mainly to depress sphalerite flotation ( Our recent studies have illustrated the formation of hydrogen peroxide (H Fe (III) can also generate H Also Zn However, participation of these oxidising H The addition of collector and depressant during grinding is expected to change the pulp chemistry of sulphides but no detailed investigations are reported in the literature on the effect of sulphides flotation. In this study, the effect of depressant and collector addition during grinding on the formation of H The sulphide ore was from Renström mine from Boliden area owned by New Boliden AB (Sweden) Company. It is a Cu, Pb and Zn sulfide ore and contains mainly pyrite and silicates as gang materials. A bulk ore sample was received in a drum in wet condition and it was dried and crushed in three stages to < The pH, Eh (pulp potential), and dissolved oxygen (DO) were measured before and after grinding of the complex sulphide ore. The Eh was measured at room temperature in all experiments using a platinum electrode and KCl (3 1 The procedure followed for flotation tests is a standard optimised method at Boliden laboratory in the treatment of complex sulphide ores. For each flotation test, 1 Experiments were performed at room temperature of approximately 22 X-ray fluorescence (XRF) equipment at the Boliden AB company in Skellefteå was used to analyze the flotation products. The samples were analysed by PANalytical AXIOS XRF Spectrometer. The samples were ground in a laboratory mill kind Herzog in 45     The Cu-Pb concentrate results in  The Zn concentrate results in       The following conclusions can be derived based on the results presented in this paper: The addition of depressants during sulphide ore grinding decreases the formation of H The addition of collector during sulphide ore grinding increases the formation H The addition of collector and depressant during sulphide ore grinding increases the formation H The use of reagents during grinding has beneficial effects on flotation grade and recovery of metal sulphides. Financial support from the