Oral processing of food is complex and involves deformation and the pleasant experience of consuming foods. The mechanical and rheological properties have been applied to describe in-mouth flow properties and to understand the associated sensory perception. As the oral processing continues and food particle size reduces, rheology is no longer effective in explaining the textural and mouthfeel properties of food, but the lubrication between oral surfaces becomes a dominating mechanism in relation to food texture and mouthfeel. Tribology is emerging as a new discipline to understand the oral processing of food and improve the understanding of the relationship between food structure, texture, and mouthfeel. The tribological measurements have emerged as an important tool to understand sensory profiles and oral processing in food sensory perception from both an industry perspective and research analysis is increasing. A potential exists for a range of tribological systems to be produced and utilized for various food systems, whether custom-made or by use of attachment tools for rheometers. Food oral processing is an essential daily dynamic activity that includes all muscle activities, jaw movements, and tongue movements that contribute to preparing food for swallowing ( The perception of the texture of the food is crucial in determining its acceptance and preference by the consumers. Traditionally texture is evaluated by a sensory panel that is subjective and time-consuming. Furthermore, sensory evaluation data has several fallacies. Therefore, there is always a growing interest among food professionals in an instrumental method that can provide an objective measure of texture. Once in the mouth, the food is manipulated by the tongue, teeth, inside of the cheeks, and lips at different speeds and pressures ( Tribology is the science of interacting surfaces in relative motion. Analysis of the design, wear, lubrication, and friction between surfaces in motion is achieved by a tribometer. It is known as a surface contacting technique, as it requires a flat substrate or probe to come in close contact with the material surface of a sample. It has been used in studying the role of surface adhesive properties and lubricity. Therefore, a tribometer was first developed for determining the roughness of engineering materials ( As mentioned in the previous section, tribology is a field of study in friction between two interacting surfaces A and B ( The lubrication behavior of food samples can be understood with a well-known Stribeck curve ( The Stribeck curve is determined by shearing two surfaces in relative motion over one another at various speeds while simultaneously measuring the friction force. Often a lubricant is present to reduce the friction. A Stribeck curve has a characteristic shape that can be typically divided into three lubrication regimes: the boundary regime, the mixed regime, and the hydrodynamic regime, representing three very different friction scenarios and, in the case of oral processing, different amounts of food samples between the tongue and palate as shown in    As shown by the Stribeck curve in Tribology of foods relates to the study and measurement of friction and lubrication properties of food systems. Developing a reliable, low-cost, and easy-to-use tribometer applicable to a wide variety of food products is still a big challenge to researchers. A wide range of methods has been applied to measure friction during oral processing of food including the linear friction sled, the pin- or ball-on-disk tribometer as well as rheometers with specific friction attachments. The friction tester ( The friction tester is simple and easy to use and the key frictional properties of a fluid product can be reliably measured. Some of the crucial drawbacks include the restricted use of rubber and metal materials on the two surfaces which fails to draw resemblance to the human oral palate–mouth, the surface-to-surface interaction, defined and well-controlled sliding speed, and lack of well-controlled temperature ( A commercial texture analyzer (Stable Microsystems, Surrey, UK) was employed with a few additional simple fittings and attachments ( The design adopts a ball-on-disk arrangement with one-direction dragging movement resulting in pure sliding friction similar to what happens when the tongue moves against the static hard palate. The set-up is capable of conducting friction/lubrication measurements over a wide range of sliding speeds (0.01–40 Optical tribological configuration (OTC) consists of two interacting surfaces and a confocal scanning light microscopy (CLSM) ( The main disadvantage of the set-up is the two interacting surfaces—the glass interacting surface, which is not an ideal material to imitate mouth-like conditions unlike polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS), and the delicateness of the other interacting surface (pig’s tongue) that restricts the load as well as the speed that can be applied. Also, the natural variation in the physical surface of the tongue causes low repeatability. In their study on emulsions using OTC,  Pasteurized milk (fat contents from 0.1% to 5.9%) and cream cheeses (fat contents: 0.5%, 5.5%, 11.6%) were chosen as representative dairy products and their friction coefficients were measured as a function of the entrainment speed of the tribometer. The friction coefficients of the samples at low entrainment speed generating low shear rate (similar to the shear rate in  The friction data collected on Newtonian fluids—water and different concentrations of corn syrup with different viscosities show different regimes of lubrication under a range of speed and normal load conditions. The Stribeck curve using the tribology cell normalized against viscosity at a constant load (3 This study suggests the investigation of confined rubbing conditions may be possible under various loading conditions, such as with the use of a speed ramp, load ramp, or gap ramp without the need for specific tribological equipment. However, validation of the capability of the instrument for non-Newtonian fluids is still required. A mounted tribological device (MTD) is primarily a rheometer with a unique geometry attachment designed for tribology measurements ( For tribological measurements of food samples elastomers are used as the bottom plates ( The main limitation with the MTD is the extreme sensitivity of the set-up that requires an even distribution of load on all three friction contact points between the ball and the plates. The ball is fixated to the stationary shaft, therefore precise positioning of the 3-plates fixture is hugely critical. Any slight uneven distribution of contact points would result in the inaccuracy of friction coefficient measurement. A specific tongue–palate tribological system was used by The results suggest that the frictional behavior of the investigated model tribosystem is strongly affected by the topographical structure of the contacting surfaces. Under dry conditions, the coefficient of friction decreases while lubricated surfaces yield a higher friction coefficient. Further, it was observed that a minimal wetting of at least one contacting surface is essential for establishing effective lubrication, thereby contributing to the oral perception of the food. The study suggests well-defined topographical, mechanical, and physicochemical conditions corresponding as close as possible to the in-mouth situation are absolutely critical for studies on oral food perception. The use of molded silicone surfaces appears to be interesting to mimic tongue properties. Frictional and lubricating properties of food can be measured using the mini-traction machine (MTM) that is based on a ball-on-disk principle, with a sample conveniently placed on the disk surface ( The MTM is very sensitive and designed to give accurate frictional results over a wide range of sliding speeds from 1 to 2400 Food texture is the sensory and functional manifestation of the structural, mechanical, and surface properties of foods detected through the senses of vision, hearing, touch, and kinaesthetics ( The rheometer has a well-defined geometry and deformation process that leads to fundamental physical parameters (such as stress, strain, strain rate, storage and loss moduli, etc.) for quantitative description of the mechanical nature of the food materials ( A texture analyzer could provide more imitative measurements of textural features and results from a texture analyzer could be linked directly to the sensation of a particular texture feature. However, one should be aware that the rheometer and texture analyzer measurements only constitute a part of the textural perception of food during the early stage of oral processing when it deforms under the forces applied by the teeth or the tongue. As food continues to be chewed and masticated, it keeps changing with reduced particle size, increased moisture absorption, and softness. The perception of food texture at a late stage of oral processing is probably dominated by a combination of fluid flow and surface properties; hence rheology properties become less relevant but surface friction and lubrication turn to be dominating for texture sensation and perception. For this reason, food oral tribology is now emerging as a new experimental technique alongside food rheology in understanding the relationship between food structure, texture, and mouthfeel. Thus texture or our perception of food structure can now be described Since the advent of tribology, there has not been much progress from a food perspective, due to the complicated tribological scenario inside the human mouth, the typical oral physiological factors, as well as the food factors ( The The two most critical factors taken into account in the design of a tribometer to mimic oral processing involve (1) the control of the sliding and or rotating between the two surfaces and (2) the surface properties of the substrate materials. Research has shown that the characteristics of the surface Frictional and sensory property comparisons show that thin-film tribology may play an important role in contributing to sensory attributes, such as smoothness, fattiness, slipperiness, creaminess, and astringency ( The creaminess is a complex sensation related to the amount of fat present in a product and is associated with one or a combination of attributes like viscosity, taste, aroma, smoothness, and thickness by researchers ( In their study,  The effect of surface texture and wetting ability on frictional behavior of two Newtonian fluids was studied by The effect of saliva on the lubrication properties of two types of neutral polysaccharides, cross-linked starch and locust bean gum, both of which are commonly used as food thickeners was studied by The Quartz Crystal Microbalance with dissipation monitoring (QCM-D) is an analytical tool to measure mass and viscosity in processes occurring at surfaces, or within thin films. Recently, the QCM-D has been employed to understand lubrication in tribological analysis. Such mechanistic knowledge will advance knowledge of lubrication properties of food materials. Although numerous studies have been reported on liquid and semisolid food, limited work has been conducted to examine relationships between sensory properties and friction coefficients in solid foods. Oral processing is complex dynamic processing. Rheology alone has a limited extent of understanding the food texture. Particularly, in the study of the texture of fluid and semifluid food, where the thin fluid rheology is dominated rather than bulk rheology, rheological measurement cannot provide a better understanding of the perception of the products. Lubrication/tribological studies on food systems in the past were scarce due to the limitation of the