The brittleness is a fundamental rock property and effective in drilling and rock excavation. Knowing the relations between the drillability and the brittleness will help the rock engineers. For this reason, to investigate the relations between the drilling rate index (DRI) and the different brittleness values, 32 different rock types were tested in the laboratory. Uniaxial compressive strength and tensile strength were determined for the brittleness calculations. The brittleness of B
                     3 (the ratio of compressive strength minus tensile strength to compressive strength plus tensile strength), and the brittleness of B
                     8 (the half of the product of compressive strength and tensile strength) were calculated from the test results. In addition, Sievers’ J-miniature drill test and the brittleness test were carried out and DRI values were calculated. Then, B
                     3 and B
                     8 
                     were correlated with DRI values. A good correlation between DRI and the brittleness of B
                     3 could not be found. However, a strong exponential relation between DRI and the brittleness of B
                     8 was found. Comparing the results with the literature showed that there was an agreement between this study and previous studies. It can be concluded that B
                     8 can be used for the assessment of rock drillability.Numerous factors affect the drillability of rocks. These factors can be divided into two parts: the first is the controllable parameters and the second is the uncontrollable parameters. Bit type and diameter, rotational speed, thrust, blow frequency and flushing are the controllable parameters. On the other hand the parameters such as rock properties and geological conditions are the uncontrollable parameters. Rotary and percussive drills have been extensively used in open pits, quarries and construction sites. The prediction of penetration rate of drilling machines is very important for the cost estimation and the planning of the rock excavation projects. Rock drillability is defined as the penetration rate of a drill bit into the rock. It is a property that cannot be accurately defined by a single mechanical property of the rock, such as compressive or tensile strength. It is a function of several rock properties such as mineral composition, texture, grain size, and degree of weathering. Thus several empirical methods have been developed for predicting drilling performance in different rocks ( Drilling rate index (DRI) was originally developed for the prediction of penetration rate of percussive drills. It was developed in 1950s and has been applied also for tunnel boring since 1972. The DRI is not a direct indicator of drilling rate in the field, but it is a relative measure of penetration rate and it is therefore not an absolute value of the drilling rate in the site. It may also be viewed as a parameter for the maximum resistance of the rock to drilling. Brittleness is one of the most important mechanical properties of rocks. Some researchers have investigated the relation between brittleness and drilling rates. However, there is no available published material on the relation between the brittleness and the DRI. In this study, the correlations between the different brittleness values and the DRI were analyzed using the regression analysis.    As result of research carried out at 96 different locations of 16 mines of Turkish Coal Enterprises,    It is clear from the literature review that most of the researchers have correlated the penetration rate of drills with a single rock property and found good correlations, but their study was mostly for limited rock or drill types. Rock drilling is a complex phenomenon. A single rock property does not completely define the rock drillability for the different rock types. Brittleness is a combined rock property. Therefore, it may be significant for the drillability analysis. The DRI was developed at the Engineering Geology Laboratory of the Norwegian Institute of Technology (NTNU) of the University of Trondheim in the 1960s for evaluating the drillability of rocks by percussive drilling ( The issue of prediction and cost estimation of hard rock TBM has been discussed and many performance prediction methods has been developed by many researchers ( Although the brittleness is one of the most important mechanical properties of rocks, there is no agreement between different authors as to definition, concept or measurement of brittleness. Different researchers mean, express and use it differently.   Recently, Rock blocks were collected from natural outcrops, tunnel constructions and mining sites in Turkey and Norway for the laboratory testing. Block samples were inspected for macroscopic defects to provide test specimens free from fractures, partings or alteration zones. A total of 32 different rock types were sampled. Uniaxial compression tests were performed on trimmed core samples, which had a length-to-diameter ratio of 2.0–2.5. The stress rate was 1.0 Brazilian tensile strength tests were conducted on core samples having a thickness to diameter ratio of 0.5. A loading rate of 200 The Sievers’ miniature drill test is a measure for the surface hardness (or the resistance to indentation) of the rock. The test method was developed by H. Sievers in the 1950s. The test is performed on a pre-cut rock sample. The basic principle of the test is shown in NX core samples which are perpendicular to the foliation of the rock were prepared with a diamond rock saw. The lengths of the samples were selected as 300 The brittleness test gives a good measure for the ability of the rock to resist crushing by repeated impacts. The test method was developed in Sweden by Matern and Hjelmer in 1943 ( Dry density for each sample was calculated by dividing the mass (measured on an electronic balance to a precision of 0.01 The diagram in UCS, tensile strength, and the brittleness values ( The result were analysed using the method of least squares regression. DRI values were correlated with the corresponding brittleness values. The equation of the best-fit line, and the correlation coefficient were determined for each regression. There is no significant correlation between the DRI value and the brittleness As shown above, the correlation coefficients of the Eq. The significance of The significance of regressions was determined by analysis of variance. In this test, a 95% level of confidence was chosen. If the computed The values of brittleness Thirty-two different rock types were tested in the laboratory for the investigation of the relations between the DRI and the different brittleness values. The brittleness of The results of this study were compared with the results previously obtained by different researchers. It was seen that there was an agreement between this study and previous studies. Concluding remark is that This study was supported by TUBITAK under the project number of 104M437. The authors gratefully acknowledge Prof. Dr. Nuh Bilgin (Mining Engineering Department of Istanbul Technical University, Turkey), Prof. Dr. Bjorn Nilsen (NTNU, Norway), Filip Dahl (SINTEF, Norway) and Prof. Dr. Amund Bruland (NTNU, Norway).