This research investigated three grinding technologies to reduce the size of maize, wheat and full fat soybeans to a course particle. To correct for the different mechanisms of particle size reduction between the different mills, the relationship between specific mechanical energy (SME) and its resulting mean particle size was expressed per ton of ground product. Analysis of co-variance was used to estimate differences between the treatment means after correction for energy consumption.
                  Experimental results, obtained under pilot scale grinding tests, showed that type and conditions used for the three mill types affected size reduction ratios for maize, soybeans and wheat. The RR of particles was smallest for the roller mill and multicracker device and largest for the hammer mill for all feed materials studied and varied between 1.60 (roller mill, wheat) and 5.95 (hammer mill, maize). The mean particle size was smallest when grinding using a hammer mill with a 5 mm screen.
                  The efficiency of energy use was calculated as effective SME (kJ/kg). Total energy use was shown to be the highest for the hammer mill. Soybeans required the largest amount of energy for grinding, with maize the smallest. The constant for Kick’s law (Ck values, kJ/kg) per grinding device was calculated to relate particle sizes and energy demand: both roller mill and multicracker device showed lower Ck values, indicating a better grinding efficiency of these devices.
                  For coarse grinding, the roller mill was shown to be the most energy efficient device followed by the multicracker device and the hammer mill was the least efficient. For feed manufacturers it is important to use/combine these devices to ensure an efficient milling operation and to match the grinding device with its specific grinding objective (fine, coarse or with a specific particle size distribution). Tasks are different per animal species and were discussed.In many cases, diet ingredients are routinely ground prior to their inclusion in animal feeds ( Particle size is an important characteristic of a feed as it affects voluntary feed intake and the development of the gastro-intestinal tract in avian species ( Hammer mills are used to a large extent for grinding a mixture of feed ingredients for livestock and have achieved merit as these mills are easy to operate and are able to finely grind a variety of diet ingredients compared to other devices ( The objective of this study was to compare three feed ingredient size reduction devices (hammer mill, roller mill, multicracker device) by examining the relationship between particle size characteristics and the specific mechanical energy (SME) required during the size reduction of maize, wheat and full fat soybeans to produce ingredients for coarse diets. Whole seeds of wheat and maize were obtained from Bongers Agro BV (Wilbertoord, The Netherlands) and full fat soybeans were obtained from Schouten Ceralco BV (Rotterdam, The Netherlands). The analysed chemical and physical characteristics of the ingredients are provided by All the equipment used in the current study was properly maintained. The seeds were ground by a hammer mill, roller mill and a multicracker device with each process set at two settings. The hammer mill (Fransen, Sine loco, The Netherlands) used contained 64 (4 rows of 16) hammers [160 × 50 mm] and was run at a fixed speed of 1475 rpm. The mill engine power was 45 kW and that of the extractor fan 7.5 kW. Sieves of 5 mm (39 holes; 317 rows) or 8 mm (44 holes; 121 rows) were used. The extractor fan was used to ensure the material passed the 5 mm (0.24 m The roller mill (Skiold SM4000, Sœby, Denmark) was fitted with one pair of rolls. The roll dimensions were Ø 240 mm by 350 mm. The roll surfaces had a smooth riffle with 4 riffles/cm, riffle height was 1.3 mm. The roller mill engine power was 7.5 kW. The fixed speed of the two rolls was 405 and 505 rpm, respectively with the distance between the roll set at either 0.4 or 1.0 mm. For the multicracker device (PTW Technologies, Lollar, Germany), two contra-revolving rows of discs were used with the speed of each row of discs being regulated separately. The multicracker engine power was 2 × 18.5 kW. The used discs were either ceramic or steel where the gap between the discs was varied (0.11 or 1.04 mm). The associated capacity at these two gaps was 3.4 and 6.7 ton per hour at discs speed of 2650 or 3800 rpm, respectively. Detailed information pertaining to the multicracker (MC) research has been described previously by The ingredient temperature before and after grinding was measured in triplicate by sampling the materials in a Dewar flask and measuring the temperature with a digital thermometer. Engine power (W) and energy use (Wh) was logged for each individual electric motor using a Janitza (UGM 96S). With the help of its software, energy use per run was calculated. Electricity consumption was measured before and after a run without feed material being ground, the mean of these two runs considered as the idle load of the device. The idle load was subtracted from the total load during grinding for that specific run to calculate an effective energy consumption: the effective SME is the total SME corrected for the idle load energy consumption. The total quantity of raw material ground (∼500 kg per run/per type of mill) divided by the amount of kWh used in that run was used to determine the total SME (kJ/kg) requirements. The energy consumption of the extractor fan was included in the total SME of the hammer mill. Big-bags filled with 500 kg (±0.5 kg) of a single ingredient were used for the actual experiments. One experimental unit (run) was the grinding of 500 kg feed material using a HM or RM. The discharge after grinding was collected in a first container located on a scale with the outflow able to be redirected to a second container. The emptying of the first container into the second was used to sample ingredients during the HM (sampling after each 50 kg) and RM trial (sampling after each 25 kg). In this way, 10 (HM) and 20 (RM) samples of 5 kg of each ingredient were collected and pooled. Samples of ground ingredients were first split using a multi-slot divider (Mooij-Agro, Hegelsom, the Netherlands) and finally a laboratory rotary divider (Retsch, Haan, Germany) to obtain representative subsamples of approximately 3 × 100 g for laboratory dry sieve analysis. For the MC system, 10 samples were taken from the ingredient stream at high capacity runs (every 0.5 min) or low capacity runs (every 1 min). Subsamples were pooled, divided to have identical samples and used for chemical and particle size analysis. A Retsch AS-200 sieve system (Retsch, Haan, Germany) was used, equipped with the following sieve sizes: 0 (pan), 71, 150, 300, 630, 1250, 2500, 5000, 7100 and 10,000 μm. Sieving time was 10 min with an amplitude of 2 mm and an interval time of 6 s. Rubber balls were included on the sieves with opening 1250 μm (1 ball), 630 μm (2 balls), 315 μm and smaller (5 balls) to prevent clogging of the sieves. Mean particle size and cumulative undersize particle distribution and its mean width. The field of statistics gives several calculations to describe the width of distributions and we used the standard deviation of the normal distribution, calculated from the weight distribution obtained from the sieve analysis. Sieving tests were conducted in triplicate to determine the mean particle size and width of distribution and to calculate the reduction ratio (RR): the latter was calculated as the mean particle size of the initial whole ingredient (d The temperature of the ingredients was measured before and after grinding. For this reason, random samples were taken and temperature was measured using a Dewar flask and a laboratory thermometer. To compare the three grinding methods, the authors note that the smallest opening for the HM is different from that of the RM or MC and all three mill types do have a different mechanism for particle size reduction. To compare the performance of the different mills, mean particle size was regressed onto both total and effective energy consumption. To deal with different reduction mechanisms, the different mill types were evaluated on the basis of their efficiency at a certain mean energy use. Comparisons between mills and between feed ingredients were conducted at the total and effective specific mechanical energy content. To calculate the mean total and effective energy use, the energy use of the hammer mill (n = 12), of the roller mill (n = 12) and of the multicracker (n = 25) was summed and divided by the number of trial runs (n = 49). In this way, the average total energy included the idle load of the engine. In the case of the HM trials, the energy for the extractor fan was also included. For the three grinding mills it was calculated as 14.11 kJ/kg product and the effective energy used was calculated as 9.22 kJ/kg product). Analysis of covariance was used to compare between different ingredients (I: i = 1…3, wheat, maize, soybeans) and to compare settings between HM, RM and MC (M: j = 1…3), as a function of the energy input (x, with k = 1…49). The comparison of the slopes was done at the mean value (x¯) of either total or effective SME. The same model was used to evaluate either total SME or effective SME. Interactions between these factors and energy consumption, accounting for different intercepts and slopes were tested. Non-significant interactions (P > 0.1) were excluded from the model and are not given in this paper. The model used was: Kick’s constant (C The data on particle size reduction using the hammer mill ( In  For the mean particle size, the model as a function of effective SME resulted in parallel lines for the three ingredients maize, soybeans and wheat ( All slopes were negative, indicating that when more effective SME is added, the mean particle size of the ingredients will decrease. Comparing the MC device and the HM, the slopes are significant different (P < 0.001) with a slope of −0.107 and −0.034 (mm/kJ kg The C The observed differences in temperature ( In this study, a comparison was made between three different types of milling devices, in which these devices were used to obtain rather coarse particles, applying a process of so-called ‘structure grinding’. It is not possible to compare different mill types just on the basis of mechanical differences. A RM roll distance of 6 mm differs from the use of a HM sieve opening of 6 mm. This makes it difficult to directly compare devices with their different designs or operational parameters. Therefore, the grinding devices under investigation were compared by examining the relationship between the (effective) energy (SME) use per quantity of ground ingredient (wheat, soybeans, maize) and its resulting mean particle size/standard deviation. Size reduction of feed ingredients generally allows an improvement of nutrient utilization and facilitates processes such as mixing and agglomeration down-stream in compound feed manufacturing. For size reduction, however, mechanical energy is required to break feed ingredients, to distribute particles and to overcome friction between the moving parts of the grinding device ( The principle of the RM is a typical comminution by compression in which the deformation of the particles induces strain to the extent of breakage. Depending of the specific design of the rolls (sharp to sharp; dull to dull or combinations), shearing and cutting of particles is introduced. Further variables to affect the RM grinding results are roll distance, speed and differential speed of the rolls and the use of double or triple pairs of rolls. Roller mills are particularly used for coarse grinding of non-fibrous materials. The principle of the MC device is the use of its interlocking discs and differential shaft speeds ( The choice in this study was the manufacturing of an end product with a particle size typically used for a mash type, coarse diet. The range of mean particle size for all devices showed a relative coarse spectrum: 1.29–2.44 mm. The coarse particle size distribution in this study best fitted a normal distribution instead of the often used log-normal distribution. This is not always observed in milling studies but is in line with the results of The order for use of energy to grind maize, wheat or soybeans was similar for every mill type where in all cases, soybeans required the largest quantity of energy and maize the smallest. Solid feed materials differ in their inherent physical properties and both these properties and the equipment used for size reduction determine the final particle sizes. As for the feed materials, maize is known to be a brittle material whereas soybeans and wheat show a more ductile behaviour upon grinding, and therefore these materials differ in particle sizes and size reduction ratios. As for the mill types, both the size of the forces that are applied and the time that the feed materials are subjected to it are decisive factors in size reduction ( The relative performance of the mills (size reduction ratio) differed between the three mill types investigated. The reduction ratios all were below 8 and for these small size reduction ratios, Kick’s law of comminution is often used to relate energy expenditure to degree of grind ( Earlier studies have related material properties such as moisture level, initial particle size with particle size after milling and SME ( For the RM, the roll gap had the largest effect on the ground material properties and the energy requirement. For the HM this was the chosen screen size which was also reported by The design of and choice for a certain grinding device is a decisive factor for the possibilities available to control the energy demand or the feed structure in terms of particle sizes. In the HM, the extent of size reduction is dependent on the chosen sieve size, so that repeated movements in the mill are necessary to further reduce particle size. So, for the HM, the energy use can be changed by adapting sieve sizes or the revelations of the speed of the hammers. Changes in the design of a HM to improve the efficiency of grinding cereals are proposed using a new design of the mill rotor and using hammers with a different shape or angle. A relevant reduction in the fine and very fine fractions was found in ground triticale with the largest effects obtained by the screen hole diameters, hammer angle, the hammer end speed and, finally, the hammer gap ( In addition to SME costs, there are cost associated with the wear of parts, depreciation and maintenance of equipment. Once a choice has been made for a certain device, however, grinding leads to almost similar differences between ingredients in milling behaviour as a result of a change of SME ( For ingredients in animal diets, improving its nutrient digestibility and/or utilization by processing is an efficient method in feed manufacturing. Reducing particle size increases the total surface area of the materials available increasing the effectiveness of digestive enzymes. Moreover, it leads to an increased number of contact points for interparticle bonding in agglomeration processes such as pelleting ( When mash feeds have to be further processed into pellets, the granulometry of feeds is consequently affected by the pelleting process ( The optimization of the particle size distribution is a challenge that differs when coarsely ground or mash-type laying hen diets and finely ground/pelleted broiler diets are to be compared. Particle size in poultry has been proven to be an important factor in the gizzard development and nutrient reflux in the bird’s gut ( In coarse mash diets for laying hens it was found that the amount of fines or dust negatively influences feed intake as fines are difficult to be picked up by the beak of the bird. They also may form a pasty substance in the beak and may lead to an increased uptake of water ( Since a large part of the pig’s diets is in a pelleted form, particle size in pig feeds is determined by the grinding process as well as the conditioning/pelleting process of the mixed feed ingredients. Coarse grinding does not permit an optimal utilization of nutrients ( Research efforts should, therefore, focus on the role of fine, medium and coarse feed particles (see Size reduction ratios for maize, soybeans and wheat were largely affected by the type and operational variables of three mill types (HM, RM, MC). The reduction ratio of particles was largest for the HM for all feed materials. Energy requirements for grinding, however, calculated as effective SME (kJ/kg) were the highest for the HM. Both RM and MC device showed lower C In feed mill manufacturing diagrams we observe a more complex overall design. Nowadays, we also observe a large diversity in each different unit operations, including grinding operations. Different milling devices are present in one feed mill and this requires insight into the possibilities for particles size reduction. This study aimed to examine coarse particles obtained by the hammer mill, roller mill or multicracker. It shows a way to unambiguously compare different grinding devices just on the basis on their energy input. We note that current used feed manufacturing diagrams involve pre-sieving and post-sieving actions to further optimization of the size distributions in animal feeds. The authors state that there is no conflict of interest. The authors thank Jos de Riet of ForFarmers, Heijen, The Netherlands, for his assistance in the technological treatments.