A special thermocouple configuration was developed to measure the temperature upon the contact surface between a point-attack pick and the rock material. The transient temperature at the hot spot was successfully measured when the rock advanced against the pick. The effects of the cutting parameters including depth of cut (DOC), spacing and cutting speed on pick temperature were investigated. It was found that the pick tip temperature increased significantly with the increased DOC and cutting speed. The effect of spacing on the pick tip temperature was smaller than that of the DOC and cutting speed, particularly when the spacing was greater than that required to change from unrelieved to relieved cutting. For all cutting conditions used, the pick tip temperature varied from 313 °C to 1100 °C. The highest temperature was obtained as about 1100 °C with cutting speed of 2.5 m/s, DOC of 10 mm and spacing of 50 mm. Reddish and black discontinuous banding chips were found in the cutting grooves under this cutting condition.The occurrence of frictional ignition of methane is a significant hazard in coal mining safety, and has resulted in a number of fatal mining incidents in Australia and overseas. In order to assess the risk of frictional ignition of a pick striking a rock stratum in a given condition, it is critical to determine the heat (or thermal energy) generated in the striking process. Although the heat cannot be measured directly, any thermal effects during rock cutting can be detected as changes in temperature at the rock-pick interface-referred to as the ‘hot spot’. It is suggested that the ignition potential is remarkably affected by the size and temperature of the hot spot. Some attempts have been made to study the problem of frictional heating in coal mining industry. A series of ignition tests were performed at the US Bureau of Mines. It was concluded that ignition events could be reduced by decreasing bit tip velocity. It was further concluded that locked in picks are more liable to increase the incidence of frictional ignition (sometimes described as being more ‘incendive’, than those that are free to rotate). Over the years, great efforts were made towards the theoretical, empirical and numerical investigation of the interaction between cutting tools and rock in terms of cutting forces and specific energy. To date, a few of analytical studies have been proposed to predict the interface temperature during rock cutting. Despite of the efforts of these earlier studies, numerous difficulties and limitation still exist for the determination of pick cutting temperature during rock cutting process. In this study, a temperature measurement system will be developed to measure the interface temperature between rock blocks and pick tip. Firstly, an embedded thermocouple technique is employed to investigate the influence of typical cutting parameters such as cutting speed, depth of cut (DOC) and spacing on pick cutting temperature. Then, the thermal response of pick and rock to frictional heating that occurs during linear rock cutting experimentation is further analyzed. In metal machining process, several measurement techniques have been developed to measure the temperature at the tool-chip interface. Generally, from the various methods used - including tool-work (dynamic) thermocouples, embedded thermocouples, single wire thermocouples, thin-film thermocouples, radiation pyrometers, infrared cameras - it is possible to classify them into direct conduction and indirect radiation. Among these methods, some can measure the temperature at a given point or the mean temperature over a certain area, while others can be used to investigate the temperature distribution near the cutting zone. Thermocouple techniques are the most extensively used methods for temperature measurement in metal machining process. Embedded thermocouple is another commonly used method to estimate temperature in various machining process. Korkut et al. The single-pole grindable thermocouple was developed by Rowe et al. The radiation techniques, such as radiation pyrometers and infrared cameras, are non-invasive methods to determine the thermodynamic temperature of a body based on the thermal radiation it emits. The radiation technique offers many advantages such as non-intrusive measurement, fast response, no physical contact as well as being able to provide thermal fields compared to the thermo-electric technique. Lin et al. A number of other methods have also been proposed to determine the temperature distribution at the tool-workpiece interface including micro thin film thermocouples (μ-TFTCs), Although the modern infrared photographic technology provides a high capture speed, fast response time and non-intrusive way to determine the temperature distribution at the pick-rock interface, the measurement may not be accurate enough as the flying chips and dust strongly affect the measurement. It is hard to detect the “real” temperature at the hotspot. Therefore, a special thermocouple configuration has been developed to measure the temperature upon the contact surface. The influences of the cutting parameters including DOC, spacing and cutting speed on pick cutting temperature were investigated. A schematic view of CSIRO's (Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial Research Organisation) rock cutting planer used in this study was shown in The cutting tool was adjusted both laterally and vertically, which allowed the cutting tool to be set to its required position relatively to the rock block. The setting of the cutting tool was manually driven by turning a handle (gears and screw system). Once the desired DOC (penetration) was achieved, the tool was secured into position using heavy screw threads and stops. An accuracy of 0.05 mm of penetration was achieved using a laser displacement sensor attached to the cutter assembly. A tri-axial dynamometer was bolted to the crosshead to record the cutter forces. The temperature of the thermocouple, displacement of the rock cutting planer as well as the pick forces in three directions ( As shown in During cutting, the thermocouple wires and WC plugs are pushed in a direction opposite to the cutting direction. The glue and the insulation around the thermocouple wires most likely melt due to the high frictional heat generated during the rock cutting. Thus the thermocouple wires would be forced into contact and hence form the hot junction required to make the temperature measurements at the cutting interface between the rock and the WC cutting element. The rock cutting tests were carried out on a block of Helidon Sandstone with a dimension of 450 mm × 450 mm × 1700 mm, which was collected from a local mining quarry near Brisbane Australia. The uniaxial compressive strength (UCS) and Brazilian tensile strength (BTS), Young's modulus, density and Poisson's ratio of this rock are shown in The aim of the experiments was to measure the pick-rock interface temperature through a special thermocouple configuration, and to investigate the influence of cutting parameters on the pick cutting temperature. A total number of 16 series of tests were conducted and each test was repeated at least three times. The constant conditions throughout the testing program include the attack angle of 55°, the skew and tilt angles of 0°. The controlled variables during the tests were DOC, spacing and cutting speed. The experimental layout for these process variables are list in  As shown in Temperature measurements were performed for rock cutting tests in the cutting velocity range 0.5 m/s to 2.5 m/s. The DOC, cutting spacing and attack angle were set as 10 mm, 50 mm and 55° respectively. The evolution of the temperatures according the cutting speeds is presented in  DOC is a significant factor affecting the pick cutting performance. In this section, a wide range of cutting depth from 3 mm to 18 mm was selected to investigate the influence of cutting depth on pick cutting temperature, in which the cutting speed, cutting spacing and attack angle were 1.5 m/s, 50 mm and 55° respectively. The effect of DOC on mean cutting and normal forces were presented in When the DOC was fixed at 10 mm, other factors like cutting speed and attack angle were still 1.5 m/s and 55°. The influence of spacing between adjacent cuts on cutting temperature was examined in the spacing range of 20–60 mm. The temperature profiles and maximum temperatures at various spacing are shown in Spacing, which is a key parameter in cutterhead design, is another important factor influencing the cutting efficiency. The effect of spacing on mean cutting and normal forces were presented in Among all the tests in this study, the highest temperature was obtained as 1100 °C with cutting speed of 2.5 m/s, cutting depth of 10 mm and spacing of 50 mm. The temperature was much higher than the maximum temperature (860 °C) around the cutting area of the same type of tungsten carbide (WC) pick measured by a high speed thermal camera under similar cutting conditions when cutting a much harder sandstone block with UCS of 120 MPa. The heat (or thermal energy) generated at the point-attack pick and rock interface, along rock fracture surfaces, and internal to rock chips that undergo shear deformation can lead to significant temperature rises during pick striking or sliding process. The theoretical cutting power at the cutter-rock interface can be expressed by the following equation, as a function of the cutting force Assuming that all the dissipated energy is fully converted to heat, the energy flux According to the above equation, temperature rise in the cutter-rock contact area is proportional to the energy flux The total energy The possible remedies for preventing the picks from friction ignition or spark and high cutting temperature include the replacement of WC picks with better thermal conductive and wear resistant diamond composite picks, the aid of high pressure water jet, and the operation of rock excavation machine with relative low cutting speed and small depth of cut when cutting hard rock. A special thermocouple configuration was applied to measure the temperature at the tip of point-attack pick during rock cutting process. The effects of depth of cut, spacing and cutting speed on pick temperature were investigated. The cutting temperature at the point-attack-pick tip ranged from 313 °C to 1100 °C. The increase in either depth of cut or cutting speed resulted in a significant increase of cutting force and cutting temperature. While the spacing effect on pick tip temperature was not as obvious as that of depth of cut and cutting speed, especially when the spacing was greater than that required to change from relieved to unrelieved cutting. A linear relationship between the frictional heat at cutting area and cutting temperature was observed. A slight deviation of the frictional heat data from this linear relation was found when the cutting temperature was relatively higher at higher cutting speed or larger DOC. This might be attributed to the slight change of thermal properties such as thermal conductivity and thermal diffusivity at high cutting temperatures. The results and temperature measurement system developed in this study might be crucial in rock cutting for cutterhead/drum designers, operators of rock excavation machine and government officers, who are interested in monitoring the cutting behavior of point-attack picks and improving safety in the mining and rock excavation industries. The authors gratefully acknowledge the support of the