Biomass as a renewable fuel compared to fossil fuels usually contains high moisture content and volatile release. Hydrogen production by large particle biomass gasification is a promising technology for utilizing high moisture content biomass particle in the high temperature fluidized bed reactor. In the present work, simulation of large particles biomass gasification investigated at high temperature by using the discrete phase model (DPM). Combustible gases with homogeneous gas phase reactions, drying process with a heterogeneous reaction, primary and secondary pyrolysis with independent parallel-reaction by using two-competing-rate model to control a high and low temperature were used. During the thermochemical process of biomass, gaseous products containing of H2, H2O, CH4, CO and CO2 was obtained. The effects of concentration, mole and mass fraction and hydrodynamics effects on gaseous production during gasification were studied. The results showed that hydrodynamic effect of hot bed is different from cold bed. Concentration and molar fraction of CO and H2 production by continually and stably state and small amount of CO2, H2O, and CH4 was obtained. The hydrodynamic of bed plays the significant role on the rate of gaseous products.Hydrogen be developed to be one of the most promising energy vectors as it is considered to be environmentally benign and sustainable fuel. Hydrogen is an energy carrier since it is one of the most efficient, cleanest and lightest fuels; however it is not found naturally and must be produced by a different of processes from primary energy sources. This processes including electrolysis, steam methane reforming (SMR), supercritical water partial oxidation, biological processes, coal gasification, biomass gasification and thermochemical processes. Fossil fuels and renewable energy sources such as biomass as to the primary energy-supply system used for implement hydrogen economy and energy production The aim of this work is to simulate gaseous products from large biomass particles with DPM approach in high temperatures fluidized bed similar to a real combustion chamber. Also different of hydrodynamic in cold bed and hot bed and effective on gaseous production is investigated. The effect of concentration and hydrodynamics is investigated with varying temperature. Drying and pyrolysis process are simulated with model by high accuracy. In this study, particles model are coupled in a CFD simulation solved with equation of mass, momentum, energy and turbulence of the gas phase. The gas-phase continuity equation and momentum balance equations are: The gas-phase heat balance equation is: Gaseous species can be obtained from the following equation: One of the most well-known models is the The hydrodynamics of gas–solid flow in fluidized beds is expressed by the stochastic Euler–Lagrange model. Particle transport modeling is a type of multiphase model, where particulates are tracked through the continuous flow in a Lagrangian approach. The full particulate phase is modeled by a sample of individual particles. The tracking is carried out by forming a set of ordinary differential equations in time for each particle, consisting of equations for position, velocity, temperature, and masses of species. Particle velocity is calculated using the analytical solution to the particle momentum equation: F The drag force is given as follows: The Schiller Naumann drag force on a spherical particle is given as follows The buoyancy force is given as follows: The rotation force is given as follows: Due to the Stochastic particle-particle and particle-wall collision model by Oesterle and Petitjean The collision probability function is depended on the concentration and Instantaneous velocity of particles. The collision dynamics of two different sphere particle of masses m The required parameters in this simulation are presented in The studied woody biomass is beech wood, and its proximate and ultimate properties are listed in The biomass particles which are made from beech wood are used in the high temperature fluidized bed. The bed is heated by the hot air entering from one side and leaving from the other side after interacting with the biomass particles. Biomass particles temperature changes due to the hot air inlet flow by convection and radiation heat transfer through endothermic and exothermic processes. Due to the complexity of the chemical reactions, kinetics of gaseous species during the pyrolysis process is not yet clearly understood, however, models and various chemical reactions of biomass combustion for analysis is presented. First, moisture and gases in the particle are released when reaching the reaction temperature and the drying processes and pyrolysis start in the particles. The amount of gases released during the pyrolysis process depends on the type of the fuel and hydrocarbon gas content in the particles. The non-oxidative decomposition of biomass called pyrolysis, is that the two part contain primary pyrolysis at low temperature and secondary pyrolysis at high-temperature. The solid phase decomposes into tar, char and some gases such as (CO  Reactive gas species are produced during drying and pyrolysis process of biomass which react with each other or with primary-air oxygen. Light gas typically consists of H The relationship of rate expression kinetics can be written as follows: K stands for Arrhenius expression, A and B reactants, C concentration, x and y order of reaction. In Due to the moisture content of the particles, the drying process begins and the moisture evaporates when the particle's temperature reaches the reaction temperature. The rate of evaporation of the moisture can be calculated by: In the above equation, During the primary pyrolysis the solid phase decomposes into tar, char and gases which can be expressed as follows Relative yields of the primary pyrolysis products is listed in After the primary pyrolysis, tar cracking of biomass which is called secondary pyrolysis can be expressed as follows Relative yields of the secondary pyrolysis products is listed in To control the minimum and maximum temperature during the pyrolysis process and increase the accuracy of calculation, Kobayashi model Based on morphological analysis, biomass pyrolysis process may swell initially, then its diameter decreases over time, which depends on the chemical composition of fuel and environmental conditions surrounding the bed particle. Due to the high volatile content of biomass, the diameter of a particle may change during devolatilization based on the swelling coefficient which is calculated from: The second term of the right hand side of the equation represents the ratio of the mass that has been devolatilized to the total volatile mass of the particle. In this simulation the behavior of large particle biomass in gas-solid fluidized bed reactor is investigated. The governing equations of mass, momentum, energy, gaseous species and turbulence for gas phase and chemical reactions contain drying, primary and secondary pyrolysis for solid phases solved. The geometry was meshed by structured hexahedral mesh using the Gambit 2.4.6, and the generated mesh was then read into ANSYS CFX 15 for numerical simulation. ANSYS CFX 15 is used for discretizing the governing equation using the finite element shape functions method. High Resolution scheme is applied for solving the advection terms. Coupling of velocity and pressure is performed by SIMPLE algorithm. Transient term is solved by using the First Order Backward Euler scheme. The convergence criteria for all variables set as 10 When the biomass particle is heated in a high temperature bed, the particle's surface temperature changes due to the heat flux caused by the convection and radiation. Particle's surface temperature plays an essential role to decomposition of biomass. Particle's initial temperature is equal to the ambient temperature and is 298 K. Hot inert atmosphere with the velocity of 0.1 m/s at the bottom of the bed enters the bed with the laminar flow regime. Bed's walls are at a constant temperature of 1173 K. Over the time, the particle changes due to the inlet inert temperature and under drying and pyrolysis processes. The mass of the particle changes until the volatiles in the biomass leaves the particle. The hydrodynamic effects with changes air inlet temperature without thermochemical process and at different air inlet velocity are investigated. In  Particles at the surface of the bed and hot air inlet absorb heat under radiation and convection phenomena and temperature increases, followed by drying. Drying starts in particles at low temperature due to radiation and convection transport. However, drying rate increases with rise in temperature. When temperature of particles increases more, pyrolysis starts and volatiles are released to the surrounded gas phase and happens homogeneous gas phase reactions combustion. The remaining char heterogeneous in bed at end of the pyrolysis process. Rate of heat and mass transfer is increased by increasing air inlet velocity. A portion of energy is convert to particles kinetic energy, witch consequently leads to decreasing of average particles surface temperature. The pyrolysis process rate is decreased by increasing air inlet temperature. Gas velocity affects heat and mass transfer rate, while drying process starts at low temperature. Therefore, the drying rate increases. Increasing air inlet velocity leads to more drying process of particles. H When particles temperature increases, pyrolysis process starts. Pyrolysis first occurs in the particles at the bottom of the bed and with moving particle, the intensity of pyrolysis shifts toward the middle of the bed. By comparing  Gasification process of large biomass particles is simulated by using a Lagrangian approach (Discrete Phase Model) at high temperatures fluidized bed. The effect of hydrodynamics is investigated by varying temperature during the drying and pyrolysis process consistently over time. Combustible gases with homogeneous gas phase reactions, drying process with a heterogeneous reaction, primary and secondary pyrolysis with independent parallel-reaction by using two-competing-rate model is considered. During the thermochemical process of biomass particles, gaseous products containing of H  Pre-exponential factor in Arrhenius expression (1/s) Swelling factor Specific heat, (J/kg K) Particle diameter, (m) Activation energy (kcal/mol) The fraction of volatiles in the particle The fraction of moisture in the particle Force (N) Devolatilization kinetic rate at low temperature, (kg/m Devolatilization kinetic rate at high temperature, (kg/m Turbulence kinetic energy Particle mass (kg) Initial particle mass of particle (kg) Heat flow (W) Gas constant (J/mol K) Radius Temperature (K) Time (s) Velocity (m/s) Mass & molar fraction Volatile yield factor at low temperatures Volatile yield factor at high temperatures Concentration (kmol/m Angular velocity Density (kg/m Mass specific coefficient (−) Stress tensor (N/m Porosity (voidage) (−) Rate of dissipation  Collision Effective Exponential Spatial coordinate Kinetic Particle Solid Volatile Initial value