Management of periprosthetic fractures around the knee is often difficult because of poor bone quality, comminution, and constraints imposed by the existing prosthesis. Locked condylar plates may provide more reliable fixation for these fractures than traditional methods of fixation. Eleven patients with periprosthetic fractures around the knee were treated with open reduction and internal fixation using a locked condylar plate. All 9 acute fractures and 1 of 2 periprosthetic nonunions healed at an average of 21 weeks, and no patient required additional surgery. Nine fractures healed in anatomical alignment, whereas 1 healed in 5° valgus. The remaining periprosthetic nonunion developed a persistent nonunion with subsequent hardware failure. The average range of motion was 4° to 92°. Locked plating systems are highly effective for the management of complex periprosthetic fractures around the knee. They result in reliable fracture healing and permit early motion in complex fractures.Periprosthetic fractures around the knee are relatively uncommon, occurring in approximately 0.3% to 2.5% of patients with a total knee arthroplasty (TKA) All patients who had a periprosthetic fracture around the distal femur or proximal tibia treated with a locked condylar plate between November 2002 and December 2003 were included in the study. All patients presented to the emergency department or to the orthopedic clinic of the Milton S. Hershey Medical Center (Pennsylvania State University College of Medicine). There were 11 patients included in the study. Ten patients had periprosthetic fractures of the distal femur and one patient had a periprosthetic fracture of the proximal tibia. Nine patients presented with an acute fracture and 2 patients presented with a nonunion of a distal femoral periprosthetic fracture with failed fixation. The average age of the patients at the time of injury was 65 years, and their average weight was 93 kg (range, 64-165 kg). The diagnosis for the index TKA was osteoarthritis in 8 patients, rheumatoid arthritis in 1 patient, and posttraumatic osteoarthritis in 2 patients. Two patients had had a revision before the fracture. Four patients had a cruciate-retaining TKA, 6 patients had a cruciate-substituting TKA, and 1 patient had a hinged prosthesis. Two patients had a femoral component with an intramedullary stem. Three of the index arthroplasties were performed at the authors' institution. The mechanism of injury was a fall in 6 patients, a twisting injury in 1 patient, motor vehicle accident in 2 patients, a stress fracture in 1 patient, and a severe femoral notch in 1 patient. All patients had only mild pain or no pain in the knee before the fracture. The average time from the original TKA until the fracture was 77 weeks (range, 2.5-254 weeks). Anteroposterior and lateral x-rays were obtained on admission and reviewed to confirm the fracture pattern and the stability of the component. All 11 patients had Lewis type 2 distal femur fractures with a well-fixed prosthesis All periprosthetic fractures around the knee were treated with open reduction and internal fixation (ORIF) with a locked condylar plate during this period by 1 of 3 surgeons. No fracture was treated nonoperatively and no knee was treated with immediate revision TKA for periprosthetic fracture. The choice of fixation was at the discretion of the surgeon; however, no periprosthetic fractures around the knee were treated with alternative fixation techniques during this time. Of the 10 patients with a distal femoral fracture, 9 had a standard lateral approach to the femur whereas 1 had an anterior approach through a previous incision. Nine fractures were stabilized with a 4.5-mm locked compression plate condylar plate (Synthes), one was stabilized with a less invasive surgical system (LISS) plate (Synthes) using a limited incision, and another (proximal tibia) was stabilized with a 4.5-mm locked compression plate T plate. The length of the plate and the number of locking screws were determined by the fracture characteristics and the bone quality. An average of 5 locking screws was used in the periarticular segment and 4 locking screws were used in the shaft fragment. Unicortical screws were used for fixation of the plate to the femoral shaft in the patient who was treated with an LISS plate with a limited incision and in one patient treated with a distal femoral condylar locking plate in the most proximal hole. Unicortical locking screws were placed in the distal fragment of distal femoral fractures when dictated by the constraints of the implant. Eight fractures were supplemented with nonstructural allograft bone. Fracture fixation was not supplemented with polymethylmethacrylate in any of the fractures. Postoperatively, 10 patients were advised to limit weight bearing on the affected extremity until the fracture was healed and 1 patient remained non–weight bearing for 8 weeks. Seven patients were treated with a brace postoperatively, and all but one patient began immediate range of motion. The function of the knee arthroplasty before the fracture was assessed based on each patient's recall because most of these arthroplasties were not followed up at our institution before the fracture. This information was limited. Postoperative data were collected in a prospective manner as part of the normal medical care of our patients. The initial postoperative x-rays and serial follow-up radiographs were reviewed for fracture healing, loss of alignment, hardware failure, and loosening of the prosthesis. All patients were followed up until the fracture had healed except for one patient who developed a nonunion. One patient died shortly after the 3-month evaluation. The fracture was healed but her final functional status was not determined. All 9 of the acute fractures and 1 of the 2 periprosthetic nonunions healed at an average of 21 weeks (range, 10-44 weeks) after surgery, and no patient in this group required additional surgery for loss of fixation or revision of the TKA ( Information about the function of the TKA before the injury was available for 7 patients; however, information for 1 patient was incomplete. Two patients suffered the fracture before fully recovering from the index TKA and another 2 patients were unable to provide the information. Before the fracture, 3 patients had no pain in the knee, 3 patients had occasional mild pain in the knee, and 1 patient had pain only with stairs. Three patients used no gait aids, 1 used a cane for long walks, and 3 used a cane or walker full time. Five patients could walk at least 5 to 10 blocks, one patient could walk 1 to 5 blocks, and another patient was housebound. One patient felt that the overall status of the knee before the injury was excellent, 4 felt that it was good, and 1 felt that it was fair. This information was not available for one patient. Functional information was available for 9 of the 11 patients at 12 months of average follow-up (range, 4-16 months). One of the remaining 2 patients died shortly after fracture healing and the other developed a nonunion. At final follow-up, 3 patients had no pain in the knee, 2 patients had mild occasional pain, 3 patients had moderate occasional pain, and 1 patient had moderate continuous pain. Four patients had more pain at final follow-up than before the injury. Three patients had medial-lateral instability at final follow-up. It is not clear if this was present before the injury. Five patients used a cane or walker full time to assist with walking and 2 patients needed more gait assistance at final follow-up than before the injury. One patient could walk more than 10 blocks, 1 patient could walk more than 5 blocks, 5 patients could walk 1 to 5 blocks, 1 patient walked only in her house, and another patient did not walk because of other medical problems. Three patients had more difficulty walking after the injury than before the injury. At final follow-up, 1 patient felt that the status of the knee was excellent, 5 patients felt that it was good, 2 patients felt that it was fair, and 1 patient felt that it was poor. Three patients had a decline in the overall status of the knee at final follow-up as compared with that before the injury. The average range of motion before fracture could not be determined based on each patient's report. The average range of motion at final follow-up was from 4° to 92°. One patient had a 35° extensor lag that was present before the injury. Of the 11 fractures, 10 healed without additional intervention. There were no infections or malunions. One patient who initially presented with a distal femoral nonunion developed persistent nonunion after surgery with hardware failure after 10 months. She awaits additional surgery. One patient required additional surgery in the perioperative period for evacuation of a hematoma. One patient developed a calf pressure ulcer and another patient died shortly after the 3-month follow-up visit of an unrelated cause. Periprosthetic fractures around total knee arthroplasties are complex fractures with complication rates as high as 25% to 75% in some studies Fractures around a well-fixed prosthesis are generally treated with ORIF to achieve satisfactory limb alignment and permit early range of motion. Several techniques have been developed to treat these fractures including plate fixation with blade plates, condylar screw and side plates, and condylar buttress plates. Zehntner and Ganz Other reports have demonstrated less satisfactory outcomes with plate fixation. Failures resulted from loss of fixation, nonunion, and infection Rigid intramedullary rods have also been used to treat these fractures. Advantages of this technique include limited incisions, limited disruption of fracture hematoma and periosteum, rigid fixation, and decreased operative time. Several reports on small numbers of patients have been published. McLaren et al There have been several recent articles addressing periprosthetic fractures treated with the LISS plating system We examined the outcome of complex periprosthetic fractures around the knee managed with locked plate fixation. All of the patients had no pain or mild pain in the knee before the surgery and no patient had evidence for loosening on preoperative radiographs. Consideration should be given for immediate revision of the implants if they are painful, loose, or poorly positioned, although these revisions may be quite difficult because of loss of bone stock. This was not the case for the patients included in this study. Biomechanical studies have demonstrated that fixation with locked plates is superior to that with plates with non-locked screws, particularly in the osteopenic bone All 9 of the acute fractures and 1 of the 2 periprosthetic nonunions in this study healed, and all healed in acceptable alignment. There were no malunions or infections, and none of the patients required additional surgery to aid fracture healing. One patient developed a persistent nonunion after surgery with hardware failure after 10 months. There have been no component revisions. All patients have achieved at least 80° of flexion with an average range of motion from 4° to 92°. Many patients, however, had a limited early functional outcome related to other medical conditions, poor function before the injury, and persistent pain. There are several drawbacks to this study. It does not address the long-term outcome of the knee prosthesis with regard to revision, nor does it accurately address the change in knee function as a result of the fracture and treatment. Unfortunately, we did not have adequate preoperative data to permit such assessment and the follow-up period was too short. Several of the fractures occurred before the patients had fully recovered from the initial TKA, and several patients were not followed up at our institution before the fracture. In addition, the study does not directly compare the outcome of fractures treated with locked plating systems with fractures treated with other types of fixation. In conclusion, we believe that locked plating systems are highly effective for the management of complex periprosthetic fractures around the knee. They result in reliable fracture healing in good alignment and permit early range of motion even in complex fractures. They are applicable to a wide range of fractures and are technically less demanding than other methods of fixation.