Poly(2-hydroxyethyl methacrylate) (pHEMA) has potentially wide biomedical applications: it is biocompatible, allows immobilization of cells or bioactive molecules and has a hardness comparable to bone. We previously reported that immobilization of alkaline phosphatase (AlkP) in pHEMA can initiate mineralization in a manner that mimics the calcification of cartilage and woven bone. Because numerous proteins known to initiate mineralization possess acidic species, we have modified the neutral electrical surface of pHEMA by carboxymethylation (CM). We have studied the effects of these negative groups on the calcification process in vitro. Calibrated pellets of pHEMA were prepared and carboxymethylated by soaking with 0.5
                     m bromoacetic acid in 2
                     m NaOH. Pellets of pHEMA, pHEMA-AlkP and pHEMA-CM were incubated during 5, 10 and 15 days in two types of body fluid: normal (1X) and 1.5X concentration of ions. Nodules of hydroxyapatite developed on pHEMA-AlkP and pHEMA-CM but not on pHEMA. Hydroxyapatite crystals were dissolved in HCl allowing calcium to be dosed. CM significantly increased the amount of deposited Ca by 1.8 folds in the 1X fluid and 15.8 folds in the 1.5X fluid. The presence of AlkP considerably increased the amount of deposited Ca: 25.9 folds in 1X and 23.3 in 1.5X. ROS 17/2.8 osteoblast-like cells were seeded on the materials and examined by confocal microscopy after phalloidin staining. Cells grown on pHEMA alone appeared round, while cells grown on the crystals deposited on the pHEMA-CM or pHEMA-AlkP were flattened. The presence of AlkP favours the mineralization process more than the existence of surface negative groups on the polymer. Cells preferentially adhere to the polymer when hydroxyapatite crystals were developed.Poly(2-hydroxyethyl methacrylate) (pHEMA) has been extensively used as a biomaterial with potentially wide applications such as contact or intraocular lenses, soft-tissue replacement, contraceptive techniques or vascular prostheses (see review in Monthéard et al. Many calcium-phosphate ceramics are now on the market but appear either too brittle to be grafted in load-bearing bones or too hard to be resorbed by the physiological bone remodelling. pHEMA alone or composites of pHEMA and collagen Commercial 2-hydroxyethyl methacrylate was purchased from Sigma-Aldrich Chemical (Illkirsh, France). The monomer is known to contain residual methacrylic acid and ethyleneglycoldimethacrylate, due to the fabrication process. The polymerization inhibitor 4-methoxyphenol (added by the manufacturer before shipping at a concentration of 350 Four millilitres of purified HEMA containing 0.125% (w/v) of benzoyl peroxide was accelerated with N,N-dimethyl- Briefly, the pellets were washed with deionized water (Purelab Plus—USF ELGA) for 30 The success of carboxymethylation was assessed by using a modified Von Kossà method. Pellets were soaked in AgNO Alkaline phosphatase was immobilized into pHEMA by a bulk polymerization process done at 4°C to preserve enzyme activity. The preparation of the pHEMA-AlkP material was extensively described elsewhere A standard synthetic medium (medium-1X) mimicking the lymph fluid was prepared according to Yamada et al. Pellets to be examined by SEM were processed as previously described Thereafter, three types of pellets were used for cell culture: pHEMA, pHEMA-CM and pHEMA-AlkP. Pellets were used either as prepared or after previous incubation for 15 days in the 1X medium. Pellets were rinsed twice in deionized water and transferred in 24-well culture vials containing DMEM medium added with fetal calf serum 10%, penicillin (100 The pellets did not vary in shape or weight under standardized polymerization conditions (mean weight 136±10 Scanning electron microscopic examination of the pellets made of pHEMA alone confirmed the absence of mineral deposition at the surface and depth of the polymer. The X-ray microanalysis was unable to find traces of Ca and P, the only atoms detectable were C and O, corresponding to the polymer itself. On the other hand, a thick layer of mineral nodules developed on the pHEMA-CM and on the pHEMA-AlkP ( The ROS 17/2.8 cells were attached with difficulty on pHEMA-AlkP before incubation in body fluid and on pHEMA (either before or after incubation); they appeared to have a rounded shape. On the pHEMA-CM before incubation, cells were attached and appeared flattened. On the other hand, cells grown on the calcospherites deposited on the pHEMA-CM or pHEMA-AlkP were more flattened and had an increased surface area. They presented short filopodia that anchored them on the polymer, and long pseudopodia that came in direct contact with the mineral nodules ( During the last few decades, numerous works have been concerned with the mechanisms of bone mineralization. Robison was the first to consider the role of alkaline phosphatase During endochondral mineralization, AlkP is present on the surface of matrix vesicles (released by chondroblasts and osteoblasts) and entrapped in the extracellular matrix. The enzyme concentration in the vesicles is 15–20 times the amount in the cells. These vesicles have been recognized as the earliest sites of the mineral deposition in the cartilage and woven bone In the pHEMA-AlkP material, we have shown previously that clusters of enzyme molecules are homogeneously distributed; each cluster of enzymic molecule being surrounded by a 1960 In mature lamellar bone, matrix vesicles have not been identified. AlkP is present at high concentrations in the mineralization fronts of trabecular bone. Numerous non-collagenous proteins have been extracted from the bone matrix In our models, neither cellular interactions nor non-collagenous proteins interfere with the crystal growth. The use of ‘supersaturated’ Ca/P solution in our 1.5X medium is a non-physiologic condition that is associated with a considerable increase in the amount of mineral deposition. As shown in We have previously found that osteoblast-like cells have a poor tendency to adhere onto pHEMA surfaces due to the high amount of hydroxyl residues. When calcospherites have developed onto the polymer, cells preferentially adhere and spread onto them. Calcospherites constitute a specific surface that supports adsorption of the adhesion molecules present in the extracellular fluids. Among them, bone sialoprotein and fibronectin are specific ligands for osteoblast integrins. In the present study, these molecules were not reconsidered, but the spreading of osteoblast-like cells was evidenced by the identification of the actin fibres of the cytoskeleton. Thus, it clearly appears that calcospherites (and the molecules adsorbed on their crystals) constitute the most favourable zone of anchoring an osteoblast. The development of synthetic polymers that promote hydroxyapatite deposition may represent an interesting source of bone biomaterials. Authors thank Mr. Y. Tourmen (Biochimie B, CHU, Angers) to determine the amount of Ca with the Hitachi 917 (Roche, France). This work was made possible by grants from the Contrat de Plan Etat, Région Grand Ouest.