We sheared layers of polymethyl methacrylate (PMMA) by traditional double-direct shear tests, and synchronously measured the acoustic emissions (AE) generated by shear-slip and friction. Laboratory observations of simulated fault by PMMA materials with zigzag-type gouge showing repetitive, shear-slip events that are reminiscent of earthquakes were verified. In addition, the influencing rules of zigzag size and normal force on shear-slip process and intensity, as well as AE were revealed. Especially, prior to final failure of zigzag, the duration among shear-slip events gradually decreases and shows significant steadiness, which may prove the probability of the obvious foreshock effect to a larger earthquake. Maybe, this work can interpret the shear-slip mechanism of earthquakes and even provide warnings of failure and instability of fault.Dynamic slip on a stressed fault – the severe consequences of large earthquakes and the desire to reduce this risk have led, rightly, to major research programs around the world. One of the topics of special interest is the search for a better understanding of how seismic energy releases are initiated and how they progress as slip propagates along the fault plane. Recognizing the impracticability of observing slip initiation and propagation along a major fault, an international team of leading geophysicists has conducted a study of how unstable slip develops along a smaller fault at depth in a deep mine in South Africa when the shear stress induced on the fault is increased to a critical level by mining operations. It is well known that geological faults slip at a wide range of velocities and with significant amounts of gouge. Friction is important in determining the characteristics of seismic/acoustic rupture, for example, rupture mode, stress drop, fault healing rate, shear heating, and fault zone development. Therefore, except in-situ measurements, the laboratory-scale seismic/acoustic waves during gouge slip are very important to interpret the slip mechanism and even provide warnings of the failure and instability of faults. At present, the friction tests of artificial faults implement one of three experimental configurations: the triaxial configuration The characteristics and precursory signs of seismic wave propagated along fault plane accompanied with gouge slip have been investigated fruitfully, for example, the velocities of elastic waves in granular materials can reflect the area and strength of grain contacts, stress, deformation and damage within grains From retrieving related-literature, almost all of friction experiments of artificial faults implement granular materials on sheared planes during slip. Taking fully the nature of ragged fracture of fault planes into account, we elaborately designed and fabricated several types of zigzag gouge arrangements with different-size of simulated faults. Maybe, it is really a breakthrough for understanding the slip and fracture origin of fault planes to shear the zigzag-type gouge. It has been experimentally proved that AE intensity is sensitive to both the application of load, and the formation and propagation of shear surfaces. AE measurements may prove useful as probes of fabric development for fault shear-slip experiments, because the variations in AE intensity and number of events can be linked to the growth and propagation of specific fabric elements. In this way, we attempt to shed light on the AE characteristics during the special zigzag-type gouge slip of simulated faults by performing the conventional double-direct shear tests, to further understand the energy releases and gouge fracture development during shear-slip and even grasp the precursory signs of fault instability. The experimental system mainly includes a RLJW-2000 rock testing machine and PCI-2 digital AE monitoring apparatus, as shown in Samples were manufactured by using polymethyl methacrylate (PMMA) brittle material, and the zigzags with the section of equilateral triangle were elaborately sculptured. In lab, the central blocks with zigzag gouges of upper and lower surfaces were cut to be rectangular parallelepiped with the dimensions of 100 With the exception of zigzag sizes of each sample, consisting of Samp. 1 (side length of zigzag section 1  As with a conventional double-direct shear and friction experiment, samples consisted of zigzag gouge layers sandwiched between forcing blocks arranged in a triple block geometry, as shown in Firstly, the normal force on the layers was maintained constant in load-feedback servo control, and shear force was then applied by driving the horizontal oriented hydraulic ram right and pushing the central forcing block through the zigzag layers in displacement feedback mode. Both normal and shear loads were measured by load cells at a load point external to the pressure vessel. Displacements of the horizontal and vertical hydraulic rams were measured exterior to the pressure vessel using displacement transducers. Once the horizontal ram drives the central block right to create shear load, the AE monitoring system will begin to operate and record the signals. Ultimately, when the assemblage generates unstable failure of last zigzag or the shear displacement of the central block reaches the horizontal stroke of the press machine, the test will be ended. Meanwhile, the AE acquisition is also paused. Our experimental work was designed to explore AE characteristics with the covariation of recurrence and tangential force drop during shearing and failure of artificial fault zigzag. The tests were all performed at room temperature and humidity. The aim is to quantitatively explain some characteristic parameters including tangential force drop, AE energy, and duration of slip events related to zigzag size and arrangement, and normal force. All of the shear-slip events of these samples will undergo measurable interacoustic slip and fracture, and the sequence repeats, resulting in a catalog of AE events whose statistical properties can be studied. Therefore, by comparison of Samps. 1, 2 and 3, the influencing rules of zigzag size from different samples on AE can be revealed. For Samp. 4, the influencing rules of zigzag size from same sample in the process of continuous shear-slip and friction on AE can be further investigated. By comparison of Samps. 1, 5 and 6, the influencing rules of normal force on AE characteristics can be studied. Due to similar observations of two AE sensors by critical discrimination, the sensor on right side of the central block from the front view was selected to analyze AE characteristics during zigzag gouge shear-slip and friction of simulated fault. During zigzag gouge shear-slip and friction, the tangential force and corresponding AE signals were collected. The relationship between tangential force, AE energy and zigzag size was analyzed in detail, and then the variation curves of tangential force, AE energy, and duration of each slip event during zigzag failure stage were drawn. Ultimately, the influencing rules of zigzag size on shear-slip characteristics and AE effects were summarized. In order to fairly analyze the relationship between tangential force, AE energy and zigzag size, two groups of zigzag failure durations from Samps. 1, 2, and 3 were randomly extracted, respectively (as shown in For Samps. 1, 2, and 3, the tangential force and AE energy curves during the complete process of each zigzag shear and failure were drawn, in which the periods for these three samples were 2600–3060 From Tangential force drop, AE energy and duration of micro-fracture events from each zigzag were calculated and listed, respectively and sequentially, and then the variations of tangential force drop, AE energy, and duration with zigzag size were further analyzed, as shown in The following three points can be obtained from To compare the means and dispersions of experimental data of the first group, by using one-way analysis of variance (ANOVA), taking the influencing factor of zigzag height into account, the To verify the universalism of the above-mentioned shear-slip characteristics, the second group of zigzags from Samps. 1, 2, and 3 were selected for further investigating the relationship between tangential force drop, AE energy and zigzag size. The tangential force and AE energy variation curves during zigzag shear and failure were drawn (as shown in The similar manifestations during zigzag shearing were observed based on the tangential force and AE energy analysis of the second group of zigzags. For laboratory-measured micro-fractures of zigzag gouge, all of the slip occurs acoustically, and AE energy peaks periodically appear with the recurrent micro-fracture events. Additionally, the variations of tangential force drop, AE energy, and duration with the zigzag size were further analyzed, as shown in Compared with results of the first group, the same summaries can be clearly presented. In addition, by using one-way ANOVA, taking the influencing factor of zigzag height into account, the To investigate whether the shear-slip rules of different-size zigzags sequentially arranged in a sample is same with that of different-size zigzags separately located in different samples, the Samp. 4 including #1, #2, and #3 zigzags was chosen to reveal the influencing rules of zigzag size on shear-slip and friction characteristics and AE effects. Total five big shear and failure events labeled 1#–5# correspondingly match with five zigzags on Samp. 4. We recorded the shear-slip time period of each zigzag from 1# to 5# until the final failure. Therefore, the slip events 2#, 4# and 5# corresponding to certain geometries can be verified. The slip events 2#, 4#, and 5# representing #1, #2, and #3 zigzags, respectively, were selected to analyze tangential force and AE energy variations (as shown in The variation rules of tangential force drop, AE energy, and duration with zigzag size were further analyzed, as shown in With the exception of agreement with zigzag-size effects from different samples, the following two points were observed: (1) the fluctuation level of tangential force drop prior to final failure of 2# and 3# zigzags does not obviously weaken; and (2) the undulation of AE energy of 2# and 3# zigzags is also so. Possibly, the phenomenon is generated by the local unshaped contact face or flaws/fissures on surface of zigzag, which easily causes local stress concentration. Especially, prior to final failure of zigzag, several macro-fractures can be generated and the failure type shows diversity and complexity. Therefore, the tangential force drop and AE energy associated with the fracture intensity of zigzag obviously fluctuate. In summary, with the increase of zigzag size, the frictional resistance between forcing blocks will rise due to the increasing shear area, and thus the shear-slip does not easily incur (the average tangential force drop, AE energy, and duration of micro-fracture gradually reduce). However, when a zigzag is completely sheared, the total tangential force drop and AE energy obviously increase, which indicates that zigzag-type gouge may be a significant factor in the generation of slow and strong earthquakes and related phenomena compared to granular gouge of faults. Compared with the results of the different-size zigzags, by using one-way ANOVA, taking the influencing factor of zigzag height into account, the With the exception of normal force of each sample, consisting of Samp. 1 (4 The variation rules of tangential force drop, AE energy, and duration for each zigzag shear-slip and failure with normal force were analyzed, as shown in By comparative analysis of Samps. 1, 5, and 6, the observed dispersion degree of experimental results is considerably high. To effectively distinguish and reveal the variations of these parameters from random scattering, by using one-way ANOVA, taking the influencing factor of normal force into account, the Experimental results on shear of different simple geometries presented twice in Similarly, for the different-size zigzags from Samp. 4, the Commonly, the vertical displacement during the experiments can be used as indirect probe for deformation and failure of the protruding structures of zigzag gouge during shear-slip. However, due to the fragility of PMMA material, before a zigzag is sheared, the horizontal slip is not significantly obvious, and the slip distance generated by micro-fracture event of zigzag is even negligible. Once the zigzag is instantaneously sheared with the increase of tangential force, the shear plane is relatively flat although roughness to some extent. Therefore, it can be inferred that the vertical displacement during shear-slip is extremely small. However, accompanied with shear and failure of zigzag, the normal force will generate obvious undulation. The undulations of normal force consistently appear with the tangential force drop generated by shear-slip events, and the number of normal force undulation is strictly equal to micro-fracture events, which verifies that the variation of normal force can be viewed as an effective precursory sign of shear-slip and instability of faults. Due to the continuously changing of contact area and the roughness of shear plane during shear-slip, the real friction coefficient is very difficult to calculate or even is unattainable. In addition, the surface of worn area after shear-slip and friction is extremely irregular and complicated. In future experiments, we will conduct the analysis of shear surface before and after slip and friction for further understanding slip behavior and development of contact area. In this study, the nominal friction coefficient is preliminary discussed. For Samp. 1, the zigzag is relatively difficult to shear due to its processing error, and then the tangential force sharply rises at the initial stage of zigzag shear although the lower normal force. Therefore, the nominal friction coefficient of Samp. 1 is larger than that of Samp. 5 during the whole shear-slip and friction, and the horizontal slip distance is also higher due to sliding inertia once zigzag is sheared. Despite the higher normal force of Samp. 5, the zigzag is relatively easy to shear, and the nominal friction coefficient is lower during shear-slip. Simultaneously, the slip distance is obviously smaller when zigzag is sheared. Therefore, the difficulty level of shearing for zigzag has the significant effect on the nominal friction coefficient.  During shear-slip of zigzag, a large number of micro-fracture events generate reminiscently until final failure, AE energy spikes with each slip event, and the number of AE peaks is consistent with micro-fracture events. Once zigzag failure, the tangential force drop reaches the peak, which may be generated by the effect of strain localization causing the formation of macro-fracture in zigzag. With the increase of zigzag size, the total shear-slip period becomes longer, the number of small micro-fracture events significantly increase, and the average tangential force drop reduces (however, the totality rises). With the approach of final failure of zigzag, the tangential force drop, AE energy and duration gradually decrease and stabilize. The average AE energy reduces with the increasing zigzag size, however, the totality increases. In addition, the average duration significantly reduces with the increasing zigzag size. With the increase of zigzag size, the shear-slip does not easily incur. However, when a zigzag is completely sheared, the totalities of tangential force drop and AE energy obviously increase, which indicates that zigzag-type gouge may be a significant factor in the generation of slow and strong earthquakes compared to granular gouge. Prior to final failure of zigzag, the parameters including tangential force drop, AE energy and duration reach the minimum and maintain relative stabilization, especially, the duration shows significant steadiness, which can verify the foreshock effect as a precursor of earthquake. Actually, the precursor is significantly influenced by local unshaped contact surface or flaws/fissures on zigzag gouge. The difference of variation rules between tangential force drop, AE energy and duration with the increasing size of zigzag is not significant. However, the influencing level of zigzag size on shear-slip process and failure intensity is extremely significant. Normal force can significantly affect duration among slip events instead of shear and failure intensity of zigzag. In addition, the difficulty level of shearing for zigzag has the significant effect on the nominal friction coefficient. We gratefully wish to acknowledge the collaborative funding support from the