The fly ash samples obtained from Kangal Power Plant were prepared for FAAS analysis by a new approach. The trace elements of the fly ash samples were leached with appropriate solvents under suitable conditions. The leaching method is known as an effective technique for substances dissolving very hard and refractory materials. The leaching effects of solvents and their mixtures were investigated on fly ash samples that are used largely in analysis of soil and sediment samples.
                  The fly ashes mainly consist of glassy aluminosilicates. The major components of the samples are SiO2, Al2O3, CaO and Fe2O3. Therefore, decomposition of the silicate lattice of the fly ash is required for liberation of trace elements. The dissolution process can be completed by using a mineral acid such as concentrated HCl. This technique has an advantage that the fly ash can be dissolved without any oxidation at room temperature.
                  Maximum element recoveries were obtained by the procedure of 37% HCl leaching after the samples were treated with 2.0ml of concentrated HF. It was also observed that maximum mass loss occurred in this procedure. The effect of the four leaching reagents, which are HCl, HNO3, HClO4 and HNO3
                     +HClO4, were investigated on fly ash samples that were treated with concentrated HF. An optimum leaching method was determined based on the confidence of analytical results and element recovery rates.Although many samples come to laboratory as solid state, the analytical measurements are generally made in solution of those samples. Yet, the solid sample must be decomposed totally and then dissolved. The main objective is to develop a dissolving method that will be an alternative to conventional acid and heating methods for materials hard to dissolve allowing for reproducible/representative recovery of analyte. There is an increasing interest in the information of trace element composition of fly ashes as the heavy metal transporters. The impossibility of total dissolution of fly ashes and very low level trace element concentrations prevent to reveal an analysis method accepted generally in these areas. The chemical treatments for decomposition and dissolution of biological samples, rocks, ores, sludges, glassy substances etc. are very important and these procedures could be the most critical stage in overall chemical analysis due to time consumption and confidence of analysis results The partial dissolving procedures can be used more than a total dissolving procedure for some geological and especially fly ash samples due to low chemical consumption, minimum contamination risks and speed It is expected that concentrated HF as solvent component will erode the structure of silicate and then the related elements will be leached with other solvent components. There is a growing need to exploit the unique properties of HF to dissolve fly ash samples in strong acid medium. The dissolution procedure is relatively fast when HF is used. The investigation of solvent systems for effective trace elements recoveries from fly ash samples and the optimization of the leaching conditions are aimed in this study. The fly ash samples were taken from of Kangal Power Plant vacuum line. The mineralogical analysis of the samples was performed by using a Rigaku D-Max III C model microprocessor XRD with K ray (35 Metal concentrations of solutions were determined using a Perkin Elmer 2380 Model FAAS. The absorption data obtained as the average of four measurements were evaluated on the basis of the least square regressed calibration graphs. The element concentration of fly ash samples was calculated by following Eq. The analytical-grade reagents were used in all experiments and the solutions prepared with double distilled water. Suitable blanks for each stage of the leaching process were designed and all data were corrected from the blanks results. Not only the physical properties, such as density, solid content, ignition loss and sieve analysis of fly ash, were determined, but also the major components (SiO On the basis of this ratio, ashes were classified as follows: basic: ratio of >2.2; acidic: ratio of <1.1; neutral: ratio of 1.1–2.2. Fly ash samples were dried at 105 The eroding procedure was performed with varied volumes of HF to determine the optimum HF volume. The concentrations of solutions were compared to each other. The HF-eroded samples were washed with 1% HCl and filtered through a Gooch crucible with the aid of peristaltic pump. The filtrates were completed to 100 The eroded samples were washed in a total 6.0 The procedure stated in the previous section was repeated with concentrated HClO Approximately 0.2000 or 0.5000 The physical properties of fly ash sample studied are given in The pH value was calculated to be 4.18 from the results of XRF (X-Ray Flouresance Spectrometer), which indicates basicity according to Van der Sloot et al. The results of sieve analysis for fly ash are also given in X-ray diffractogram of fly ash is shown in It is clear that fly ash contains mainly quartz, lime, anhydride and albite mineral owing to this diffractogram. The Si in fly ash is in the form of quartz and albite, Ca is in the form of anhydrite, albit and lime, and Al is in the form of albite mineral. The major components of fly ash were SiO The mass loss and FAAS results of the samples after treating with different volumes of concentrated HF leached with 1% HCl are given in According to the results in The elements, except Cu, could be recovered at high rates from the eroding samples by using 37% HCl as leach reagents. The maximum mass loss was also observed with this solvent. The mass losses of the samples after treating with 2.0 The fly ash samples were also prepared by total digestion method to test the validity of the proposed sample preparing method for chemical analysis. The results of the total digestion method are given in The “Student The leaching effect of oxidative acids was found to be different from that of nonoxidatives ( The usability of leaching procedure instead of total digestion was investigated as sample preparation technique on fly ash samples. The element leaching recoveries were defined as division of the element concentration obtained from the leaching procedure by the element concentration of total digestion method. The element leaching recoveries are given in It was concluded that the results of the proposed method are comparable with those of similar work studied previously. An alternative leaching method was developed for total digestion procedure of fly ash. Maximum element recovery was obtained after the samples (1.0000 Analyte can be taken from solid samples in a representative and reproducible manner by means of contemporary technologies and can be analyzed correctly, reproducibly and sensitively with valid analytical methods.