This work presents a fast and practical method to determine a characteristic function that predicts a local ground response of vertical ground heat exchangers (GHE) in a short term, which is mandatory when intermittent operation modes are modelled. It expands the use of a Thermal Response Test (TRT) that is recommended previous to the design of a borehole field into a vertical Ground Source Heat Pump (GSHP). These tests are used to provide some ground thermal characteristics, such as ground conductivity or borehole effective thermal resistance. The same device can also be used to measure the undisturbed ground temperature along depth. From the measurements, it has been determined a temperature response factor function that characterizes the ground behavior in a short term as a consequence of a heat pulse. This function is then included into a finite line-source model to simulate the average temperature of the fluid that flows into the borehole pipes along time. In order to validate this method, several additional tests have been performed by the same device used for TRT’s, with intermittent operation modes. For each test, both experimental and simulated average fluid temperatures have been compared. Results present an excellent accuracy; thus, they demonstrate de effectiveness of the method, as well as other advantages: i) fast and accurate; ii) prevents high precomputing times; iii) several uncertainties from measurements disappear when it is used.Constant (°C) of aggregated terms in ILS equation depending on ln(τ) Ground volumetric heat capacity (J·m Exponential integral function (dimensionless) Well depth (m) Slope (°C·s Unitary Heat pulse (W·m Unitary Heat pulse, being Unitary heat pulse injected in a TRT (W·m Heat rate pulse (W) Radius (m) Borehole radius (m) Dimensionless radius, equal to r/H Effective thermal resistance of the borehole (K·m·W Effective thermal resistance of the borehole from data of a TRT (K·m·W Arbitrary temperature (°C) Borehole wall temperature (°C) Average fluid temperature (°C) Average fluid temperature from measurements of a TRT (°C) Average fluid temperature from measurements of a certain test (°C) Average fluid temperature modelled from Ground temperature at radius ‘r’ (°C) Average undisturbed ground temperature (°C) Average undisturbed ground temperature from measurements of a GTT (°C) Ground thermal diffusivity (m Euler’s constant (dimensionless), equal to 0.5772156649 Rise of temperature at borehole wall in relation with Interval time of on–off cycles of heat pulses (s) Deviation error Soil thermal conductivity (W·m Time (s) Dimensionless time, equal to τ/τ Time constant (s) Duct Ground Heat Storage model Electronic Control Unit Finite-line source model Temperature response factor (dimensionless) Ground Heat Exchanger Greenhouse gasses emissions Ground Source Heat Pump Undisturbed Ground Temperature Test Infinite-cylindrical source model Infinite-line source model Long-Term g-function Parameter Estimation Proportional-Integral-Derivative regulation algorithm Pulse-Width Modulation Short-Term g-function Thermal Response Test Variable Frequency Drive Energy consumption in the building sector represents 40% of the global demands, being also responsible for, at least, on-third of the worldwide greenhouse gasses emissions (GHG) It is well known that the performance of vertical GHEs is reduced over time due to the accumulation of heat in the ground surrounding the borehole. Research in recent last years has demonstrated (in both numerical and experimental ways) that intermittent heat transfer for short-term operation in this kind of elements has a considerable influence on system effectiveness, especially with short cycles. When operation mode becomes discontinuous in reduced periods of time, this partly relieves heat accumulation, improving its performance consequently Detailed information about vertical GHE models and software can be reviewed However, the intermittent behavior of a GSHP presents significant differences that cannot be evaluated with long-term models Depending on the source, the most significant transient effects occur during the first 3–12 h Although satisfactory results have been got, the researchers agree that the validity of the simulations should be verified, requiring greater development than results in a short-term GHE model that might be reliable, friendly and fast. In addition, its integration into a design or control procedure requires a previous preprocessing work to result in the different functions that will be used later. Thus, the computational load associated with this first step is usually high. In any case, it is mandatory the knowledge of several ground and borehole thermal characteristics, which are unknown a priori for the design of a GSHP system at a particular location. In this sense, an accepted and widespread method for determining ground properties consists of an in-situ test into one vertical GHE: Thermal Response Test (TRT) Several uncertainties appear associated with the test running and parameter estimation (PE), due to characteristics of the different elements of the experimental device as well as ambient conditions From this background, several points can be highlighted: i) the determination of soil characteristics from a TRT can use the ILS model with high reliability, which infers the average temperature of the fluid With all these premises in mind, it is possible to launch the hypothesis that a TRT can be used to supply a local STGF that serves to model the behavior of a GHE in the short term, especially with intermittent heat rate cycles. Until now, The aim of this work is to evaluate the goodness of the use of a local STGF based on experiments, to simulate the behavior of a vertical GHE in short intervals of time, with high reliability. Its determination also needs a low computing charge. For this purpose, both an undisturbed ground temperature test (GTT) and a thermal response test (TRT) have been carried out in a single vertical borehole, determining first the thermal characteristics associated with it. These ones, together with the real evolution of the average fluid temperature All the contributions of this work will serve to promote the use of experimental data from a TRT to provide that local STGF curve. It contains all the information about a GHE characterization for design and optimization purposes, avoiding the use of a precomputed previous one in other ways that not always could assure enough accuracy.  The electronic control unit (ECU) drives both the pump and resistance, in order to reach both the pre-defined volumetric flow rate and inlet temperature to the tube (to assure a constant heat pulse) that the corresponding test requires, also using security switches if it is necessary. A variable frequency drive (VFD) is connected to the pump, varying the volumetric flow rate according to test specifications. Moreover, a solid-state relay acts over the tank resistance by means of pulse-width modulation (PWM). Both actuators are directed by PID (proportional-integral-derivative) regulation algorithms, implemented in the ECU. Apart from the ability to carry out the conventional tests (TRT and GTT), changing heat pulses, periods and volumetric flow rate, the flexibility of the designed device allows defining other ones, such as intermittent cycles. A single borehole located at the University of Jaén completes this set-up: a single U-tube (36 mm inner diameter, 2 mm thickness, polyethylene PE 100 SNR11 PN-16) is immersed into a vertical well of 130 m deep, 150 mm diameter, filled with bentonite. The first test measures the unaltered ground temperature in depth (GTT): with the device off, the circuit is connected and filled with the transfer fluid. Later, it is necessary to wait a few days to stabilize its temperature that reaches the same value as the ground. Then, the pump starts circulating the fluid into a laminar regime to avoid heat losses during its path. The temperature of the fluid at every moment is measured in the inlet sensor of the device (tube outlet), which corresponds to a particular ground temperature associated with a certain depth. In this test, the resistance remains off Later, for the TRT For a given unitary heat pulse The method for It is important to remark that the procedure neglects the major of the data in order to find the slope With the finite line-source model (FLS), the temperature response to a step heating Yavuzturk and Spitler As a consequence, Eqs. As a result of this, a time interval, both profiles are the same. When Eqs. It implies that the Another point of view can be applied as a result of accommodating Eqs. There is an initial transient behavior into the grout that this method seems to ignore, appearing an implicit mistake associated both terms Into the bargain, As a result of this, it can be observed that for a given heat step pulse, the model practically reproduces A TRT presents several similarities to use its data as a basis for providing a local STGF: i) it includes a calorific flow step to set The principle of superimposition in space is employed to consider the temperature responses for multiple boreholes. In a GHE with Additionally, the sequential temporal superimposition in time also serves to evaluate the temperature response to any arbitrary heat rate, which can be decomposed into a set of All these features were firstly developed for LTGF, where interactions between the different components into a borehole field are significant. For shorter periods (a few hours) those interplays don’t exist. If an intermittent heat transfer is wanted to be evaluated into a borehole from a starting time From Eqs.  After finishing the GTT, the TRT will be performed specifying both the volumetric flow and the heat rate. Average fluid temperature evaluated from measurements will serve to determine First, the undisturbed ground temperature test along depth was done (GTT, as well as the thermal response test of the ground (TRT), for mean values of 15 l/min (2.5 · 10 In addition, results of fluid flow metering and heat rate present discrete probability density functions, as Once considered last tasks, results for both tests can be seen in The average soil temperature The next step consists of determining the STGF profile by solving Eq. Some interesting points can be observed: i) as the thermal characteristics have been extracted from the infinite line-source model, and later, the STGF have been derived using them, both STGF curves the experimentally and exponential integral based, have the same slope and similar values in that period at the end of the TRT; ii) an initial negative error appears in a first interval of that curve. While To validate the usefulness of this STGF, a set of additional tests have been carried out, whose main characteristics are presented in Each experimental intermittent heat load has been applied by means of heat pulses with different duration, but for two tests, where it was variable. In any case, these loads have been precomputed for the model as a sequence of several heat steps. In all of them, “off” periods of heat pulses also imply that the fluid does not circulate. With the new STGF (see  In In the following proof (case 3, see It can be observed the similar tendency that model provides for Up to this point, volumetric flow rate was the same as for the TRT. Following the In these last cases, a very little change appears in In order to show the accuracy of all these results, some stochastic terms of the estimation error of Previous experiences validate their results based on: i) synthetic data, including several heat pulses along time; ii) experimental data, but for single heating pulses, without jumps in them. Thus, mean errors between 0,025 °C to 0,1°C have been reported The excellent approach presented in Figs All the procedure has been repeated taking into account a p-linear average for determining Thus, for a vertical GHE design procedure, it must be realized of the designer’s experience and the local market about drillings and materials, in order to a previous establishment of the dimensions of a single borehole, and its inner configuration: the STGF has a local effect, and will serve to evaluate the behavior of any borehole with the same characteristics to that tested: i) well diameter and material of filling (such as bentonite, preparing the mixing in the same way as the tested borehole); ii) tubes: material, diameter, thickness and type of tube (single U-tube, double U-tube, and so on); iii) transfer fluid: being water, mixes water-glycol with known proportions, and so on. Over this basic composition, boreholes depth, heat pulses and volumetric flows can be changed for an optimal design into a certain GHE configuration of several boreholes. Some limitations do not allow generalizing this STGF, because it represents the local behavior of the soil and borehole where it is tested. Thus, it cannot be applied to: i) another different configuration than of that tested single borehole (e.g. another filling material); ii) other places with different thermal characteristics, even with the same borehole characteristics (material, geometries, and so on). The main conclusion that this study shows is the robustness of the proposed method, providing a reliable local STGF based on measurements from a TRT. It can also be concluded: The low deviation errors associated with the model validation from such extreme experiments ensure the reliability of the proposed method. The experimentally obtained temperature response factor characterizes the thermal behavior in a single well, although it can be easily extended to a complete field with any configuration. The STGF curve shows sufficient precision, as it contains intrinsic information about local terrain conditions and backfill materials. Even assuming certain errors in the initial thermal characterization, these are minimized when executing the model. The accurate results presented in this work (see This strictly local application limits its use to the place where the TRT is performed, so the results cannot be generalized. It can only be applied to a set of perforations with the same characteristics as the ones tested: dimensions, materials in the well and transfer fluid. In any case, this should not be a problem, as a prior TRT is always recommended before designing a GHE. The high reliability of the function allows studies with intermittent operation, variable heat rates, fluid flow rates and operating intervals, allowing an optimal design of any GSHP. This function can be obtained easily and quickly, with a very low computational load. It represents an additional advantage over the previous methods. The method extends the application of data measured by a TRT, giving it a greater impact. The last moment of the TRT corresponds to the connection point between this experimentally based STGF and an analytical LTGF (widely validated), where both values ​​match. It involves having a full temperature response factor function that includes short and long-term behavior, to be used at the design stage of any GHE configuration in a GSHP system In a future study, it may be interesting to search a function to depicts a variable borehole resistance, which must reach, by an asymptotic way, the constant value of The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. This work has been supported by a research contract at the Supplementary data to this article can be found online at The following are the Supplementary data to this article: