Calcium carbonate exists in three allotropic forms: vaterite, aragonite and calcite. Metastable vaterite can be easily transformed into calcite and/or aragonite via different routes. We report how dry vaterite particles transform into aragonite and calcite when they are immersed into DeIonized water (DI) or tap water without additives at different temperature (22, 40 and 60 °C) with and without stirring. We show that the transformation rate of vaterite into more stable crystallographic forms is influenced not only by temperature but also by stirring and water purity. Low temperature, absence of stirring and absence of ions in water significantly slow down the kinetics of transformation of vaterite. Additionally, water purity influences the nature of the allotropic phase obtained after transformation. High temperatures and DI water favor the transformation of vaterite into single crystalline nanowires of aragonite, while tap water yields the transformation of vaterite into calcite. The absence of aragonite in tap water at high temperature can be explained by the presence of sulfate ions, which inhibit the formation of this phase. On the contrary, Mg2+ ions tend to stabilize vaterite.Calcium carbonate is one of the most employed materials in the world. It is used in many industrial applications, e.g. either as a filler in paper industry The transformation of vaterite is driven by the minimization of its Gibbs energy. Despite their high free energy, vaterite dry particles are stable in normal conditions and their transformation needs to be activated. The activation energy can be supplied either by a thermal treatment or by immersion into aqueous media. In water, the dissolution-recrystallization process proceeds with an activation energy between 24 and 55 kJ/mol The influence of external parameters during the phase transformation has been already reported in the literature. Among the parameters are the saturation of the solution In the present work, we have adopted another strategy that consisted in immersing dry vaterite particles, having similar shape and size, either in tap or deionized (DI) water without polymer additives. Usually when dry vaterite particles are added in aqueous solution they transform into calcite except if inhibitors of the calcite structure are present This work evidences that by tuning the stirring rate, the temperature and the purity of water one can influence not only the transformation rate but also the allotropic forms, favoring either rhombohedral calcite or nanowires of aragonite. Note that previous studies have shown that nanowires of aragonite were obtained when using additives The vaterite phase transformation was monitored by quantitative X-ray powder diffraction. Pristine and immersed-in-tap-water particles were also studied by Coherent X-ray Diffraction Imaging (CXDI). CXDI provides a 3D image of particles that reveals how their morphology evolves when vaterite transforms into calcite. The precipitation of vaterite particles was performed by rapidly mixing equal volumes (100 ml) of calcium chloride (0.5 M, CaCl To study the vaterite transformation, 0.2 g of dried powder was added to the 20 ml of tap or DI water with (730 rpm) or without magnetic stirring at 22 °C, 40 °C and 60 °C. After a certain time, the immersed particles were filtered, washed with ethanol and dried again in an oven at 50 °C. The reproducibility of all the preparation steps was carefully monitored, resulting in a variability in the phase content within 10%, as measured by X-ray diffraction. Experiments at room temperature were performed in a closed vial. In the experiments at 40 and 60 °C vials were opened for the on-line temperature checking. To monitor the influence of ions, 400 mg/l of sodium sulfate (Na The polymorphism of calcium carbonate particles was analyzed by X-ray powder diffraction using a Panalytical Empyrean diffractometer equipped with a copper anode (λ = 1.54 Å) working at 40 kV and 30 mA and a Pixel 3D detector. X-ray diffraction patterns were recorded between 20° and 38° in scattering angle 2θ. The diffraction patterns were then refined using the MAUD software The morphology of different allotropic phases was studied by a JEOL JSM 6510 LV microscope at 5 kV acceleration using 10 mm working distance and the secondary electron mode of detection. To prevent charging, the samples were metalized with gold. The particles analyzed by CXDI technique were imaged by the JEOL 6310F microscope at 3 kV, 10 mm working distance, using the secondary electron mode of detection. The samples were metalized after the CXDI measurements. The aragonite particles were analyzed by JEOL, JEM2100 HR transmission microscope at an acceleration voltage of 200 kV and with selected area electron diffraction (SAED). The samples were prepared by dispersing them ultrasonically in ethanol, then a drop of suspension was placed onto a copper grid coated with amorphous carbon films. The SAED patterns were indexed as orthorhombic aragonite CXDI is an imaging technique based on numerically phasing an oversampled speckle pattern Particles for this experiment were dispersed on the surface of a Si CXDI is based on high-resolution measurements of speckle patterns allowing the numerical finding of the missing phases. Once the scattering pattern is phased by the phase retrieval algorithm, the real space image (electron density) of the object is derived by an inverse Fourier transform applied to the measured scattering pattern The pristine vaterite particles prepared by the aforementioned method exhibit a spheroidal morphology with an average size of 4.3 ± 0.6 µm. Quantitative Rietveld analysis of the X-ray diffraction patterns revealed that the powder contained mainly vaterite (96.6%) and a small fraction of rhombohedral calcite (3.4%) ( Precipitated particles are generally in contact one with another to form aggregates. An aggregate of two vaterite microspheres ( The stability and the kinetics of dissolution of vaterite and recrystallization into calcite or aragonite have been successively explored. The procedure consisted in re-immersing vaterite particles in water for a certain period of time, filtering the suspension and drying the filtrate again to probe the possible transformation. As mentioned in the introduction, vaterite can be easily transformed into calcite when left in prolonged contact with water. As the bulk solubility constant of vaterite (K The partial transformation of vaterite into calcite with the coexistence of these two polymorphs in a single object are shown in The rate of this transformation strongly depends on experimental conditions. On can indeed accelerate or slow down the transformation of vaterite by modifying the stirring, the temperature and the purity of water used for particles immersion. It is well known that stirring is one of the important parameters that can influence the size and the shape of crystals during the precipitation of polycrystalline structures. On the other hand, it is not clear how it modifies the behavior of pristine (vaterite) particles when re-immersed in water. In this study, we explore how vaterite transforms at room temperature (22 °C) with or without magnetic stirring. As shown at The influence of stirring on vaterite transformation is opposite in the case of the ‘one-pot’ synthesis (by one-pot we mean here the direct precipitation vaterite in solution in opposition to immersing dry vaterite particles in water as done in this study) as decreasing the stirring rate increases the transformation rate from vaterite to calcite We note that independent of the stirring rate, the transformation of vaterite has two kinetic stages. These kinetic stages can be explained by the nucleation and crystal growth rate of calcite. The first stage corresponds to the nucleation phase, where clusters are forming and only a few calcite particles grow. After a certain time, the number of clusters progressively increases and reaches the critical size, starting the second stage where a faster growth of calcite takes place. Additionally, The role of temperature on the phase transformation of dry vaterite immersed in water was examined at 22, 40 and 60 °C in tap and DI water under magnetic stirring. The influence of temperature on the transformed phase fraction as a function of immersion time is shown in Whatever the temperature, the existence of two kinetic stages is again observed with a slow onset of the transformation followed by a very fast rate. Again we also notice that the transformation is faster in tap water than in DI water at 22 and 40 °C. Yet at 60 °C a marked change appears as vaterite not only transforms into calcite but also into aragonite when DI water is used. The formation of aragonite at temperature between 60 and 70 °C in DI water has been already reported in literature TEM measurements performed on the two types of aragonite reveal that their crystallinity clearly differs. In the case of direct precipitation, one observes that the aggregates are made of bundles of aragonite crystallites having different orientation from one to another. This is confirmed by selected area electron diffraction (SAED) patterns consisting in incomplete powder rings. On the other hand, SAED patterns made on aragonite produced by immersion of dry particles of vaterite in DI water consist of very sharp spots characteristic of a single crystalline structure ( Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at TEM measurements performed on the two types of aragonite reveal that their crystallinity clearly differs. In the case of direct precipitation, one observes that the aggregates are made of bundles of aragonite crystallites having different orientation from one to another. This is confirmed by selected area electron diffraction (SAED) patterns consisting in incomplete powder rings. On the other hand, SAED patterns made on aragonite produced by immersion of dry particles of vaterite in DI water consist of very sharp spots characteristic of a single crystalline structure ( These differences suggest that the mechanism of aragonite precipitation is different for each case. For direct precipitation, no calcite germ is formed as the transformation is kinetically favorable to aragonite and therefore the formation of aragonite nuclei from ACC is followed by their simultaneous growth in a very rapid way as the precipitation occurs in a few minutes   In order to evidence that the presence of specific ions could prevent the formation of aragonite wires at 60 °C in DI water we have selectively added some of the ions present in the tap water of our institute in DI water. The aim was to approach the composition of tap water of our institute but in no cases to provide a thorough investigation of the role of additional ions to the phase transformation. Thus, magnesium, sulfate or nitrate ions were added in solutions of DI water containing dry particles of vaterite at 60 °C under magnetic stirring at 730 rpm during 2 h. After filtering and drying, X-ray diffraction patterns of obtained powders were collected (see We found that specific ions deeply influenced the transformation pathway. In pure DI water after 2 h at 60 °C, 76% of vaterite was transformed in 62% of aragonite and 14% of calcite. When adding Na We have investigated how the polymorphism of CaCO In addition, we studied the effect of stirring, temperature and water purity on the kinetics of transformation of vaterite. Stirring, (high) temperature and impurity accelerate the transformation kinetics of the new phase. Additionally, ions found in tap water can influence the obtained phase of calcium carbonate after the transformation. In particular, though in DI water at 60 °C vaterite was transformed into single crystalline resistant nanowires of aragonite, sulfate ions were favoring the calcite phase in tap water. More interestingly, we found that magnesium ions were delaying the formation of aragonite and calcite when added to DI water at 60 °C. To further evidence the effect of these ions, experiments were performed at room temperature. We evidence that vaterite can stay stable for 24 h in this case with very little transformation into calcite. This means that magnesium ions can stabilize the vaterite phase, opening the door to many interesting applications with these highly porous particles. The overall outcome of the present work points towards the possibility to control the mineralization process of CaCO The authors declare no competing financial interests. The authors are particularly grateful to ESRF for access to the ID10 beamline. We thank Jerome Kieffer and Pierre Paleo for improving the performance of the reconstruction software. We thank Romain Mallet Molecular graphics and analyses were performed with the UCSF Chimera package. Chimera is developed by the Resource for Biocomputing, Visualization, and Informatics at the University of California, San Francisco (supported by NIGMS P41-GM103311). The authors are grateful to the trainee Yann Oyono Atomo for preliminary studies.