A study to develop a fault diagnosis system in the pneumatic injection of copper concentrate into a Teniente Converter at Caletones Smelter, Chile, is presented. The availability of the injection system must be improved at least in 2% to satisfy the actual production demands. The most frequent operating failures were pump pressurisation and pump overcharge. However, most of the problems were due to disturbances propagation either from the reactor or silo operation. A preliminary diagnosis of the whole system was made in terms of identifying the main constraints to develop and implement a supervisory system. This system must coordinate the local control loops, avoid the main operating problems and provide guidance to operators to handle specific situations, in order to increase the availability of the injection system and to improve the concentrate tonnage control.Fault diagnosis systems ( Caletones Smelter is located at the Andes Cordillera, 42 km from Rancagua, at 1556 m over sea level, in Chile. In Caletones, two products are produced: anodic copper (99.6% copper) and fired raffinated copper (99.92% copper), which in total represents a production of 380,000 tons of copper per year. To obtain this tonnage about 1,250,000 tpy of dried concentrate is smelted. 3700 tpd of copper concentrate, are dried from 8 to 0.2% moisture in two fluid bed dryers and smelted in two Teniente Converters (TC). White metal (75% copper as sulphur compounds) and slag (8% copper) are obtained in each TC. The white metal is then processed in four Pierce Smith Converters (PSC), obtaining blister copper (99.3%) which is transformed into anodes in one Anode Furnace and into fired raffinated copper in one FRF furnace. The slag from TCs is processed in four Slag Cleaning Furnaces (SCFs). In the SCF two products are obtained: the matte (70% copper) that is returned to the CTs or PSCs, and the final slag that is dumped in the slag deposit. All the concentrate is pneumatically injected through 4, 3 or 2 nozzles into each TC. These reactors operate in autogenous regime. The dried concentrate is stored in two The main objective is to satisfy the specific demand of concentrate to be fed at each CT at any time. Failure to provide the right tonnage of concentrate may be due, among others, to: improper selection of a combination of set points associated to the control of the main operating variables; inadequate design or specification of system parts, such as silo geometry, rotator feeding devices, weight meters, pump characteristics, circuit layout; inadequate process supervision leading to odd operating decisions, implemented either by the DCS or operators; software and hardware misuse. The most common failure symptoms are silo and pump pressurisation and motor pump overcharge. Usually a combination of events cause the symptoms to show. Mechanical, electric and external type of failures are usually rapidly identified and remedied, mainly because of the availability of spare equipment. For example, the concentrate tonnage may be interrupted whenever the injection pressure increased over a limit, as a result of trying to control the air flow rate. During 1999 concentrate injection failures were responsible of 20% of the time a TC were down. In 2000, the reverberate furnace was definitively out of service and the operating coordination between furnaces increased. Failures due to the injection system increased to about 30% and a complete study of the origin of the failures was demanded. The first part of this study was focused on how the independent operating variables may increase the system availability and then how to improve the operation to reduce the variability of the concentrate supply. The main operating problems and the relationship among the operating variables were investigated, to propose a supervisory control system with the architecture schematically shown in Data collected either from historical records, that satisfied some given criterion, or from specific experiences, designed to provide inside on a particular situation, were analysed. Studies on tonnage control algorithm, fluidisation pressure setting, differential pressure setting across the pump, flow and pressure controls of injection air, transport properties and characteristics of concentrate, possible modifications in the injection air circuit layout and the geometry and fluidisation silo system were performed ( Before developing a fault diagnosis and a high level supervisory control systems it was necessary to relax some important contraints: The injection air layout and control system have to be modified, introducing a by pass of the air around the pump and a new control philosophy. The air flow required in the pump is usually less than the air flow needed to transport the solids to the TC and this is usually less than the air flow to be used in the nozzles at the TC, specially when three or more nozzles are in operation. Furthermore, when the air pressure is under tight control, the air flow should be floating in a band and better overall behaviour of the injection system is achieved. A study made by a third party recommended a modification of the geometry of the silo and specially of the fluidisation system. Preliminary results on testing the new silo and fluidisation system have shown a decrement in the variability of the tonnage delivered to the pump. The encripted control system should be opened, leading to an expert-type system, and more on-line support should be provided to operators. Different operator training and the creation of a team work in the area of process control are required. The author would like to thank Conicyt (Project Fondecyt 1990859) and Santa Maria University (Project 270122) for their financial support, and to El Teniente for allowing the publication of this work.