The extraction system, Cr(III)–NaOH–quaternary ammonium salt–hydrocarbon diluent–1-decanol, has been studied with respect to the loading capacity of organic phase, volume ratio of phases, and the effect of concentrations of some electrolytes in the aqueous phase. Trioctylmethylammonium chloride (TOMA-Cl) appears to be a much better extractant of Cr(III) from alkaline media than benzyldodecyldimethylammonium bromide (BDDMA-Br) because the loading capacity of organic phase with TOMA-Cl is over four times higher than with BDDMA-Br. The yield of Cr(III) extraction depends on the ionic strength of the aqueous phase and under optimal conditions does not depend on volume ratio of phases ranging from 0.1 to 1.0. The values of separation coefficient of Cr(III) and Al(III) reveal that these metals can be efficiently separated. Cr(III) is easily stripped from the organic phase with sulphuric acid solutions, and the organic phase regenerated with sulphuric acid can be successfully used for further Cr(III) extraction with the yield exceeding 99%. Under optimal conditions, recovery of Cr(III) with TOMA-Cl and/or BDDMA-Br from real industrial spent solution is practically complete.We recently reported The model solutions of Cr(III) were prepared from reagent grade KCr(SO Trioctylmethylammonium chloride (TOMA-Cl) (90% for synthesis, Merck-Schuchardt) and benzyldodecyldimethylammonium bromide (BDDMA-Br) (containing 99.75% BDDMA-Br in dry matter, Polfa-Pabianice, Poland) as well as benzene (OBRPR, Poland, p.a.) and Extraction experiments were carried out at constant volume phase ratio of The distribution of Al(III) in the extraction system was determined by complexometric method The loading capacity of the organic phases was determined for 0.05 M TOMA-Cl in The loading capacity of 0.05 M BDDMA-Br in benzene ranges from 30 to 34.5 mM of Cr(III) The loading capacity of 0.05 M TOMA-Cl solution in The results of the loading capacity of the organic phases reveal that TOMA-Cl is a much better extractant of Cr(III) from alkaline media than BDDMA-Br. Benzene, a solvating diluent, inhibits the improvement of the extraction properties of BDDMA-Br even at greater content of 1-decanol (3%). On the other hand, the extraction properties of TOMA-Cl in The effect of changes on the volume phase ratio was studied for the extraction of Cr(III) from 6 mM solutions in 0.1 M NaOH with 0.05 M TOMA-Cl solution in Extraction experiments were carried out at constant initial concentration of Cr(III) and TOMA-Cl in the aqueous and organic phases, respectively (see The results The observed negative effect of sulphates and nitrates on Cr(III) extraction can be explained in terms of a competition with hydroxochromates(III) anions, while the effect of chlorides is simply justified by the Law of Mass Action and Le Chatelier–Braun's principle. However, it should be noted that the increasing concentrations of added salts and of sodium hydroxide led to significant changes in the ionic strength of the aqueous phases. The effect of the ionic strength on Cr(III) extraction at different initial concentrations of NaOH and at various concentrations of sodium chloride as well as of sodium or potassium sulphates in the aqueous phase is illustrated in Al(III), like Cr(III), forms anionic hydroxocomplexes in alkaline aqueous solutions. Therefore, experiments on Al(III) extraction from alkaline solutions (Al The effect of the initial concentration of Al(III) on Cr(III) extraction was investigated in the following extraction system: KCr(SO  The addition of Al(III) sulphate to the aqueous phase produced an increase in initial concentration of both Al(III) and sulphate ions in solution. Increasing concentration of sodium or potassium sulphate in the aqueous phase reduces the Cr(III) extraction (see Cr(III) was stripped from the loaded organic phases containing about 6 mM of Cr(III) [from the extraction system Cr(III)–0.1 M NaOH–0.05 M TOMA-Cl– Stripping of Cr(III) from the loaded organic phases containing TOMA-Cl with sulphuric acid solutions produced regenerated organic phases in which trioctylmethylammonium sulphate prevails. The regenerated organic phases were then used for extraction of Cr(III) from freshly prepared 0.1 M NaOH solutions and enabled to remove of Cr(III) with yield exceeding 99%. Therefore, it became clear that Cr(III) is efficiently extracted not only with TOMA-Cl but also with trioctylmethylammonium sulphate(VI) which prevails in the regenerated organic phases under these conditions. The optimal conditions of extraction, established for model solutions, have been applied to remove of Cr(III) from spent tanning liquor of the following composition: 6% of sodium chloride, 0.9% of sulphuric acid, 7% of Chromal (chrome tannin), 5.11 g/dm Under optimal conditions It has been demonstrated that the yield of Cr(III) extraction with TOMA-Cl from alkaline solutions (Cr(III)–NaOH–TOMA-Cl– The possibility of the use of quaternary ammonium salts for the removal of Cr(III) from spent industrial solutions was indicated. The TOMA-Cl (Aliquat 336) appeared to be a better extractant of Cr(III) from alkaline solutions than BDDMA-Br. Under optimal conditions, the extraction of Cr(III) with TOMA-Cl is quick and does not depend on volume phase ratio within the range from 0.1 to 1.0 with extraction efficiencies exceeding 99%. The large loading capacity of the organic phase containing TOMA-Cl as well as the efficient and fast stripping of Cr(III) from the loaded organic phase with 0.5 M sulphuric acid gave good grounds to industrial application of this extractant in removing Cr(III). This is reinforced by the results of removal of Cr(III) from spent tanning liquor. Under optimal conditions, Cr(III) can be completely extracted from this spent solution with quaternary ammonium salts. Professor Witold Charewicz is gratefully acknowledged for critical evaluation of the text.