Incorporation of ceramics in hybrid armor systems has resulted in significant weight reductions. They are an excellent prospect for the next-generation energy absorbing systems for vehicular protection. In this paper, it is demonstrated that the ballistic efficiency of ceramic tiles can be vastly improved by judiciously restraining them with membranes of polymeric composites or metal sheets. Experiments have been conducted to study the ballistic performance and failure of armor grade 
                        
                           
                              Al
                           
                           
                              2
                           
                        
                        
                           
                              O
                           
                           
                              3
                           
                        
                      and SiC tiles. The comparative effects of restraint by materials such as E-glass/epoxy, carbon-fiber/epoxy and Ti-3%Al-2.5%V alloy and their varying thicknesses have been studied. WHA (tungsten heavy alloy) was used as the penetrator material at an impact velocity of 
                        900
                        
                        
                           
                              ms
                           
                           
                              -
                              1
                           
                        
                     . It was observed that by restraining the impact-face of ceramic tiles with a membrane of suitable tensile strength, the ballistic efficiency can be improved by nearly 25% for a mere 2.5% increase in areal density. High-speed photography, flash radiography and microscopy provide insight into the failure mechanisms that underpin this improvement.Over the past two decades, a substantial insight has been gained into the dynamic mechanical response of ceramics such as Depth-of-penetration tests are often performed to study the characteristics of ballistic penetration in thick ceramic tiles The performance of ceramic armor is heavily dependent on the configuration of the system. Increased efficiency is possible by lengthening the duration of the initial shattering phase of the penetration process and by increasing the efficiency of the erosion process by pulverized/comminuted ceramic material. Hauver et al. When projectiles impact ceramic targets, a pulverized zone is formed ahead of the projectile head due to the wave interactions that produce intense shear stresses. Understanding of the failure mechanisms that result in this pulverization is important for developing improved models and designing better armor systems. Curran et al. Microscopy provides insight into the micro-mechanisms of failure and helps the development of constitutive models. McGinn et al. Previously at UCSD, it was observed that the defeat capability of ceramic tiles can be significantly improved by wrapping the tiles in a thin flexible membrane such as glass fiber tape. Following these experiments, a systematic series of tests have been performed to study the ballistic failure of bare and membrane restrained The perforation tests on The Hadland Imacon 200 image acquisition system was used to study the ultra high-speed phenomenon of ballistic penetration. The sixteen-channel camera was programmed to record a sequence of separate images at prescribed time intervals. Images were acquired from a point of view normal to the path of the projectile. The camera was geometrically calibrated for parallax and alignment to achieve the most accurate results. The camera was indirectly triggered by the velocity sensors, through a digital delay generator. The camera in turn triggered the flash strobes. The high-speed camera was housed in a metal enclosure to prevent damage due to flying debris. Ballistic efficiency tests are based on the quantification of the kinetic energy (K.E.) that is absorbed by the armor and/or the extent to which the projectile is defeated. Perforation tests were conducted on ceramic tiles and the absorbed kinetic energy was used as a measure of penetration resistance. An aluminum sabot carried the projectile through the barrel. Prior to impact, the sabot was stripped by means of a maraging steel stripper. High-speed photographs showed that the stripping process was very consistent and the projectiles did not carry any significant amounts of parasitic sabot mass. After penetration, the projectile erodes and its velocity reduces. The residual velocity was measured by means of two magnetic coil residual velocity sensors, which are comprised of conducting coils wound along annular magnets. The projectile was slightly magnetic due to the iron content in its composition. The passing of the residual projectile induced an electromagnetic disturbance in the coils which was captured by a digital oscilloscope. The stripping process resulted in the melting of most of the aluminum sabot and its deposition on the stripper. However, at times, minute amounts of sabot debris passed through the stripper along with the projectile and interfered with the high-speed photography. Hence, tests were also conducted without the stripper and the residual velocity sensors. This configuration provides immaculate imagery of the initial stages of the impact phenomenon and helps the study of ejecta characteristics. However, the time window of data acquisition was limited to the time interval before the sabot interferes with the penetration process. During ceramic penetration, fine pulverized ceramic powder is ejected from the front and the rear surface of the tile. This ejecta obscures the view of the projectile-target interaction and the flow of eroded rod particles. X-rays help to understand the projectile-target interaction. An experimental setup for flash radiography provides dynamic, real time images of the projectile penetrating the ceramic tile. Two 150 Alumina (Coors The penetrator material was tungsten heavy alloy (WHA), manufactured by Hogen industries, which had iron and nickel as its predominant alloying elements (93%W,   Commercially available Scotch 893 glass fiber tape was used to hand-wrap the ceramic tiles. Scotch fiber tape has a tensile strength of 525  Ti-3/2.5 alloy sheets of 5  E-glass/epoxy pre-preg (BT-250E-1) manufactured by Bryte technologies Inc. was used. The E-glass reinforcement has a cross weave and the overall tensile strength is 434 MPa (layer thickness   Carbon-fiber/epoxy pre-preg (BT-250E-1), also manufactured by Bryte technologies was used. The carbon (graphite) reinforcement also has a cross weave and the overall tensile strength is 669 The WHA projectiles were impacted onto     Back face displacement: The projectile's travel velocity and the rate of its erosion govern its penetration rate. The back-face displacement gives a good indication of the penetration rate.  The inclined X-rays provide an interior view of the projectile-target interaction. The projectiles were recovered from the paper stacks, acting as momentum dumps. Tests conducted with the stripped sabot configuration help to understand the effect of an impact-face restraint on the ballistic performance. As can be seen in      Tests were also performed on SiC samples to evaluate the effect of membrane restraint on their ballistic efficiency.  Experiments were also done by wrapping the front face of Experiments were done to study the effect of sandwich structuring on the ballistic efficiency. Two To confirm the effect of the ratio of the projectile diameter to the sample thickness, a test was performed on two   Ceramic tiles when impacted by WHA projectiles fail through a combination of processes that include fragmentation and formation of radial and circumferential macro-cracks, pulverization of the ceramic into fine powder, and ejection of the fine powder from front and rear surfaces. The WHA projectile undergoes deformation and erosion. The projectile blunts, forming a mushroom head and erodes during penetration as the pulverized ceramic flows against and around the projectile at high velocities. Penetration resistance is closely related to the pulverization mechanism and the distribution of kinetic energy into various failure mechanisms. Present studies indicate that thin membrane restraint can help confine and restrict the flow of pulverized ceramic debris, in a manner that can be utilized to further increase resistance to penetration. High-speed photographs display that the alteration of the flow of the ejected pulverized ceramic results mainly from front-face restraint of ceramic tiles. The front-face ejecta from a bare tile is radially dispersed and conical. For a restrained tile the ejecta flow is more acute and cylindrical. Also the ejecta velocity for a restrained tile is nearly 40% higher during the initial stages of impact. Flash radiography exhibits that restraining the ceramic tile results in a much greater mushrooming and erosion of the projectile. The greater erosion and reduced velocity of the projectile are also manifested in the form of a significant delay in the back-face displacement of the ceramic tile. Experiments indicate that impact-face restraint by a fiber-reinforced polymer results in a substantial improvement in the ballistic efficiency. The comparative effects of restraint by various materials such as E-glass/epoxy, carbon-fiber/epoxy and Ti-3/2.5 have been studied. The ballistic efficiency can be improved by nearly 25% for an increase in areal density of 3%. It is expected that after a certain critical thickness of the front-face membrane is reached, there will be minimal further increase in improvement due to the restraint effect. It is observed that this critical thickness is nominally around 3 layers, providing most of the improvement, with little or no increase in ballistic efficiency with additional layers. No correlation has yet been found between material properties such as stiffness, elongation/ductility of the membrane and the resulting improvement in ballistic performance. It is also observed that with increasing layers of the front-face restraint, there is less damage in the composite fabric around the edge of the perforation caused by the projectile. The improvement due to the restraint effect is a result of the exploitation of the formation of the pulverized zone and an effective alteration of failure modes. The characteristics of the pulverized zone and the interaction volume (portion of ceramic that actively interacts with the projectile) are dependent on the stress distribution, which is further dependent on the length/diameter ratio of the projectile. Hence it is essential that the effect of the L/D ratio be studied in detail to gain a complete understanding of the restraint effect. Under the extreme states of stress reached during high-velocity impact, pulverization results in the formation of extremely fine sub-grain sized fragments. The length scale at which the material heterogeneities interact with each other leading to possible micro-cracking is dependent on the magnitude of the shock compression The authors thank David W Lischer for his help with the setup of flash radiography equipment. The US Army Research Office supported this project under contract No. ARO DAAH04-96-1-0376, to the University of California at San Diego.