Conformal magnetite nanoparticles are successfully prepared by one-step reduction method in the autoclave with controlled reduction conditions. The x-ray diffraction pattern indicates pure phase of Fe3O4 nanoparticles with high crystallinity were obtained. TEM analysis shows the presence of spherical nanoparticles with homogeneous size distribution of ∼20 nm. The obtained Fe3O4 nanoparticles have high saturation magnetization Ms of 75.3 emu·g−1. The inverse spinel Fe3O4 phase displays a distinct ferrimagnetic anisotropy. The Verwey metal-insulator transition of magnetite nanoparticles usually takes place at the blocking temperature of 120 K. The one-step reduction method in the autoclave of magnetite with well-controlled phase and high saturation magnetization in this work provides a promising opportunity for the synthesis of magnetic nano-materials to be used in wastewater treatment, catalyst, lithium-ion battery, contrast imaging, and especially in bio-applications.Iron is fourth-most abundant element in the earth's crust and exists in various oxidation states. Ferrous Fe(Ⅱ) and ferric Fe(Ⅲ) iron are occurred naturally and form three main oxidation, for instance FeO, Fe More researches have been devoted to the synthesis of magnetic nanoparticles during the last few years. To date, many technologies of synthesis, such as microemulsion In previous work, Fe 80 g Fe(NO The crystal structure of the samples was analyzed using x-ray diffraction (D8, Buber, Germany) with CuKα radiation (λ = 1.5418 Å, 40 kV, 30 mA). The morphology of the black powders was characterized by transmission electron microscopy (M3000, Fischione, USA). The magnetic properties of the samples were investigated by vibrating sample magnetometer (MPMS, Quantum Design, USA). The one-step reduction reaction in the autoclave can be represented by schematic synthesis as shown in   Since the XRD patterns of magnetite (Fe The calculated values ( To study magnetic properties of synthesized nanoparticles, magnetic measurements were carried out using a vibrating sample magnetometer at room temperature. It was found that the sample has strong magnetic responses to a varying magnetic field, as indicated in In order to find out the influence of the temperature on the magnetic properties of the Fe  Magnetite nanoparticles with controlled phase and high magnetic response are fabricated by one-step reduction method in the autoclave. With fine control of the growth conditions and the reduction level, Fe This work is supported by the