Conventional methods for the determination of past soil erosion provide only average rates of erosion of the sediment's source areas and are unable to determine the rate of at-a-site soil loss. In this study, we report in-situ produced cosmogenic 10Be, and 14C measurements from erratic boulders and two depth-profiles from Younger Dryas moraines in Scotland, and assess the extent to which these data allow the quantification of the amount and timing of site-specific Holocene soil erosion at these sites. The study focuses on two sites located on end moraines of the Loch Lomond Readvance (LLR): Wester Cameron and Inchie Farm, both near Glasgow. The site near Wester Cameron does not show any visible signs of soil disturbance and was selected in order to test (i) whether a cosmogenic nuclide depth profile in a sediment body of Holocene age can be reconstructed, and (ii) whether in situ 
                     10Be and 14C yield concordant results. Field evidence suggests that the site at Inchie Farm has undergone soil erosion and this site was selected to explore whether the technique can be applied to determine the broad timing of soil loss. The results of the cosmogenic 10Be and 14C analyses at Wester Cameron confirm that the cosmogenic nuclide depth-profile to be expected from a sediment body of Holocene age can be reconstructed. Moreover, the agreement between the total cosmogenic 10Be inventories in the erratics and the Wester Cameron soil/till samples indicate that there has been no erosion at the sample site since the deposition of the till/moraine. Further, the Wester Cameron depth profiles show minimal signs of homogenisation, as a result of bioturbation, and minimal cosmogenic nuclide inheritance from previous exposure periods. The results of the cosmogenic 10Be and 14C analyses at Inchie Farm show a clear departure from the zero-erosion cosmogenic nuclide depth profiles, suggesting that the soil/till at this site has undergone erosion since its stabilisation. The LLR moraine at the Inchie Farm site is characterised by the presence of a sharp break in slope, suggesting that the missing soil material was removed instantaneously by an erosion event rather than slowly by continuous erosion. The results of numerical simulations carried out to constrain the magnitude and timing of this erosion event suggest that the event was relatively recent and relatively shallow, resulting in the removal of circa 20–50 cm of soil at a maximum of ∼2000 years BP. Our analyses also show that the predicted magnitude and timing of the Inchie Farm erosion event are highly sensitive to the assumptions that are made about the background rate of continuous soil erosion at the site, the stabilisation age of the till, and the density of the sedimentary deposit. All three parameters can be independently determined a priori and so do not impede future applications to other localities. The results of the sensitivity analyses further show that the predicted erosion event magnitude and timing is very sensitive to the 14C production rate used and to assumptions about the contribution of muons to the total production rate of this nuclide. Thus, advances in this regard need to be made for the method presented in this study to be applicable with confidence to scenarios similar to the one presented here.The economic costs of soil erosion are clear ( Despite the role of soils and soil erosion in the dynamics of the Earth's surface, current numerical models of long-term landscape evolution treat the former in a very simplistic way ( Furthermore, soil is an important component of the global carbon cycle ( Although age-controlled process-rates data related to soils are still sparse ( In this study, we report in-situ produced cosmogenic Different cosmogenic nuclides have different production pathways, and the production rates for these different production pathways attenuate differently with depth ( The examples presented above are all based on the work of The degree to which surficial erosion of a sediment body of known age will be discernible in the cosmogenic nuclide depth-profiles depends on the timing of that erosion (e.g., ancient vs. recent) and its nature (e.g., continuous erosion vs. instantaneous erosional The study was conducted at two sites: Wester Cameron Farm, near Glasgow, and Inchie Farm, near Lake of Menteith ( Scotland's landscape is dominated by glacial landforms that have been mostly preserved from the Last Glacial Maximum, which had maximum extent between ∼17–18 kyr ( Prominent end moraines mark the limit of the LLR at several localities north of Glasgow, including our study sites ( The Wester Cameron Farm study site is located approximately 20 km northwest of Glasgow in the vicinity of Croftamie (56.01° N, 4.47° W; The Inchie Farm study site is located approximately 23 km west-northwest of Stirling on the shore of Lake of Menteith (56.18° N, 4.27° W; Photographs of the moraines at the two sites and detailed stratigraphic descriptions of the sampled pits are provided as part of the online In-situ cosmogenic Samples were wet-sieved and the 250–500 μm fraction was separated and labelled as CPA-F and LM-F, for Wester Cameron and Inchie Farm, respectively. The remaining sample material was separated in two size fractions: a coarse fraction (>2 mm) labelled CPA-P and LM-P, and one with grains between 0.5 mm and 2 mm labelled CPA-M and LM-M, respectively. These coarse (P) and medium (M) size fraction samples were then crushed using a jaw crusher, washed and dried. Quartz was isolated and cleaned following Aliquots of 20–30 g from each sample were digested in concentrated HF, and Be was extracted using ion chromatography. The samples collected from Wester Cameron were prepared at the NERC Cosmogenic Isotope Analysis Facility at the Scottish Universities Environmental Research Centre (SUERC), and the samples collected from Inchie Farm were prepared at the Glasgow University Cosmogenic Isotope Analysis Facility, also based at SUERC. The two labs follow slightly different Be chemistry procedures, and these are described in detail by The In-situ Accelerator mass spectrometry measurements were carried out at SUERC using both the 5 MV NEC Pelletron AMS and the NEC 250 kV single stage AMS ( AMS results were reduced according to the procedures set out by Given that the attenuation of cosmic rays in a material depends on the density of that material ( The sampled pit walls were scanned using a TLS before and after sampling so that a high-resolution DEM of the two surfaces can be constructed. During measurement, the instrument was held fixed on a tripod 2–3 m from the scanned wall, yielding a 1 mm resolution point cloud. The scans were registered together, geo-referenced, and exported into an ASCII format. The point clouds were reduced to 25% of the initial size so that they can be handled by ArcGIS. Using ArcGIS, the point clouds were triangulated and the resulting triangulated irregular networks (TIN) converted into regular grids. Triangulating first and then converting into a regular grid was preferred to directly interpolating the point cloud, as none of the interpolating techniques available in ArcGIS produced satisfactory results. The obtained regular grids (surfaces) were filtered to remove obvious artefacts (e.g., measuring tape present in some of the scans), and then used to calculate the volume of material removed by sampling (per individual pixel) by subtracting the pre-sampling grid from the post-sampling grid. Given that the TLS was held fixed on a tripod, a difference between the pre- and post-sampling grids only occurs for pixels where material was removed by sampling (i.e., for pixels were no material was sampled, the difference between the two surfaces will be zero). The per-pixel volume grids were then cut into 15 cm bands (as each sample was collected at contiguous 15 cm depth intervals) and the values summed for each band to yield the total volume removed from that band (= the total volume of each sample). Samples were weighed before and after drying in an oven and the sample masses and sample volumes were then used to calculate both an average dry and an average wet density for each 15 cm band. The 21 × 27 × 15 cm peat monolith was collected from around one metre to the east of the cosmogenic nuclide depth-profile sample site at Wester Cameron Farm, and was located on the top of the moraine. The monolith sample was taken with a shovel and was wrapped in aluminium foil and kept in cold storage until sampling was undertaken. Prior to sampling, the monolith was split into two. One half was sampled for AMS radiocarbon analyses and the other half was sampled for particle size distribution, water content, organic matter content, and density. The latter analyses were aimed at characterising the peat and at assessing whether this has incorporated any moraine material. Each of the eight AMS radiocarbon aliquots collected comprised of at least 40 g of sediment and was >1 cm thick. The aliquots were washed and all recognisable plant remains were removed. Peat is commonly used in radiocarbon dating, but complexity of biota can contribute to dating anomalies, usually there being discrepancies between the radiocarbon ages determined from the humin and humic fractions. In this study the humic acid (alkali soluble, acid insoluble) fraction was used for dating, and this can provide younger ages as it is mobile and may incorporate rootlets ( Following an acid-alkali-acid (AAA) pre-treatment, all aliquots were combusted and converted to CO The accumulation of cosmogenic nuclides in a mineral grain buried beneath an eroding or non-eroding surface is accurately described by the following equation ( We use equation We construct a numerical model that works as follows. After stabilisation of the moraine, For any cosmogenic nuclide depth-profile corresponding to a single erosional event with a given timing and magnitude, one can minimise the difference between the measured When used as a goodness-of-fit indicator, The model was implemented in the R statistical language ( The results of the cosmogenic The Blanket peats formed throughout the Holocene due to the cool and wet temperate climate, and occupy an extensive area of Scotland. Blanked peat is formed as a result of slow decomposition of organic matter, mainly sphagnum moss ( The obtained radiocarbon ages ( The cosmogenic nuclide depth-profiles show declining On soils that have not been disturbed by vertical movement and homogenisation of material, erosion removes the high cosmogenic nuclide concentration surface material, reducing the total cosmogenic nuclide inventory while not affecting the exponential shape of the depth-profile. Homogenisation of the upper part of a cosmogenic nuclide depth-profile, either by bioturbation or cryoturbation, will result in migration of low nuclide concentration sediment upward. Erosion of a homogenised soil layer, therefore, creates a mismatch between the integral of the concentration in the homogenised layer and the integral of the exponential There is generally little differentiation in Glacial settings are susceptible to the issue of inheritance in exposure dating ( The low nuclide inheritance in clasts in the Wester Cameron LLR moraine is likely to reflect several factors. Firstly, the Younger Dryas Loch Lomond valley glacier was not cold-based and hence was able to erode its bed and remove much of the upper ∼2 m of ground surface that was exposed during the preceding ice-free Windermere Interstadial. Secondly, the Windermere Interstadial was of relatively short duration, meaning that the clasts in the LLR moraine sampled here had relatively short duration of exposure to cosmic radiation, hence minimising the in-growth of cosmogenic Unlike the results for the Wester Cameron site, the The LLR moraine at the Inchie Farm site is characterised by a sharp apparently erosional break-in-slope on its inner flank (see online We constrain the likely magnitude and timing of the erosional event using a bootstrapping approach based on equations The results of our analyses suggest that the erosion event at Inchie Farm occurred in the last 1.5 kyr, with a best fit at 300 years BP. Given that we only have one site, and therefore have only one estimate of the timing of the erosion event that removed the soil from this site, we can only speculate as to what the geomorphological meaning of this erosion event timing estimate is, if at all there is one. Studies employing a range of tools, including pollen, potassium, magnetic susceptibility, and radiocarbon analyses, have observed throughout Scotland's lakes, increases in sedimentation attributed to agricultural activity during the mid Holocene at 5, 4, 3, 1.5, and in some cases also at 0.3 kyr BP. ( Our analyses so far have assumed no (or negligible) continuous soil erosion but the possibility that the LLR moraine at Inchie Farm experienced continuous erosion cannot be completely ruled out. We repeat our analyses for continuous background erosion rates ranging between 5 and 100 mm kyr As for the >10 mm kyr The sensitivity analyses clearly show that for the magnitude and timing of an erosional event to be determined with confidence, the continuous background erosion rate should first be constrained. The latter can be achieved by measuring cosmogenic nuclide depth-profiles on those parts of the same moraine that do not show obvious signs of erosion (e.g., the stable crest of the moraine). Alternatively, erosion rates estimated elsewhere may be assumed to apply. The relatively few studies of soil erosion rates in Scotland generally report negligible or relatively low rates. For example, All model results presented so far were obtained taking the Wester Cameron erratic boulder's mean Assuming 13.5 kyr BP as the age of till stabilisation predicts an erosional event that is deeper and occurs somewhat earlier than the one obtained for 10.5 kyr ( The density of till at both the Wester Cameron and Inchie Farm sites was determined at high resolution as described above. However, the density of glacial deposits is highly variable both from deposit to deposit and within an individual profile, and so a sensitivity analysis provides useful insights regarding future applications of this method to sites where such high-resolution data on till density are not available. For the purposes of the sensitivity analysis, till/soil density was allowed to vary at 0.1 g cm The results of the sensitivity analysis are shown in The results of age or denudation rate calculations involving cosmogenic nuclides depend highly on the sea level high latitude (SLHL) production rates that are used. The quality (or To assess the effect that these production rate uncertainties have on our results, the SLHL production rate of in-situ In this study we explore the extent to which in-situ cosmogenic The conclusions concerning the amount and timing of soil erosion at the Wester Cameron and Inchie Farm sites are as follows: The results of the in-situ cosmogenic The results of the in-situ cosmogenic The conclusions concerning the broader implications of the sensitivity analyses are as follows: The results of the sensitivity analyses show that the predicted magnitude and timing of the Inchie Farm erosion event are highly sensitive to (i) assumptions about the background rate of continuous soil erosion at the site and (ii) the stabilisation age of the till. The results further indicate that the density of the sedimentary deposit (iii) will also affect the magnitude and timing of the predicted erosional event. All three parameters can be independently determined a priori and so despite the fact that the method presented here is sensitive to variations in these parameters, they do not impede future applications of the method. The results of the sensitivity analyses also show that the predicted magnitude and timing of the erosional event are very sensitive to the in-situ cosmogenic This research was funded by a The following is the supplementary data related to this article: Supplementary data related to this article can be found at