The optimal locating of additional boreholes is complicated and very time consuming. Some methods such as metaheuristic algorithms, calculation parallelism, and reducing the time of objective function calculation could be used to increase the calculation speed; among these methods, the latter is preferred due to its extensive influence on the optimization of time. The main reasons that make the objective function calculation cumbersome are mentioned hereafter, and according to their priority: (1) excessive quantity of blocks in the geological block model, and (2) inverting the matrix of average semivariogram between samples is a time consuming operation. The present study aims to decrease the calculation time by reducing the number of blocks without considering their size increment that affects accuracy. To achieve this purpose, the objective function is calculated according to the block model of uncertainty zone, which is defined by using the recently introduced distance function to investigate uncertainty in mineralized domain boundaries. In order to evaluate the performance of the present approach on reducing the calculation time as well as the precision in locating additional boreholes, the results from particle swarm optimization as a metaheuristic algorithm are compared by considering two different scenarios of combined variance reduction on the basis of a three-dimensional geological block model and an uncertainty block model. The comparative results show that using the uncertainty block model reduces the calculation time by one-third, and the proposed locations of the boreholes are more consistent to the study’s aim, which is to reduce the boundary’s uncertainty.The 3D geological block model is utilized as a tool to illustrate the information collected from mineral deposits, and it is one of the main input parameters for various operations in mining projects such as feasibility study, planning, scheduling, etc. Mineral deposits are usually relatively heterogeneous mediums, and so their geological block models should be constructed based on the grade spatial continuity and by considering geological features such as their petrology, mineralogy and metamorphism The grade reduction in deposit boundaries follows a gentle trend that makes the exact delineation of boundaries impossible Uncertainty reduction obligates increment of data quantity, which means additional drilling. Increasing the number of samples does not always lead to reduction in uncertainty, and it depends to a great extent on the locations of new samples The distance function is known as a proper method for defining both the boundary locations and the boundary’s uncertainty zone due to its simplicity and flexibility In the following steps, linear estimators (such as inverse distance weighing, kriging, etc.) could be used for the interpolation of the value of distance function in a regular grid The problems with applying the distance function method are that it requires a great amount of data as well as its disability to directly determine the uncertainty The calibration of  In most of the proposed algorithms for optimal locating of additional samples, the objective function is defined on the basis of the minimization of the mean kriging variance  Local variance is defined as a weighted average of the squared difference between the estimated value in the center of the block ( In order to consider the importance of local variability around the deposit boundaries in locating additional boreholes, the objective function is defined in the following form based on the minimization of the block model total combined variance: After the addition of new boreholes, their sample values are required to update the objective function for each iteration of the algorithm, but acquiring such information is impossible before exploratory drilling and sample analysis. Thus, during the computation of the objective function, the local variance is calculated only once based on the existing initial information, while the kriging variance could be updated according to the proposed locations of boreholes in each iteration. In other words, the local variance is used as a weighting factor in the objective function. The utilization of this weighting factor will result in the reduction of the kriging variance so as to be more effective in the decrease of the objective function in blocks with greater local variance. The greater the local variance, the larger is the local variability, which means the objective function suggests locations for additional boreholes in areas where local variability is greater. The increase of problem extension alongside increasing the number of variables means that using conventional methods to find the optimal solution is computably impossible due to the vast extent of the problem and the complexity of calculations. For such a situation, using metaheuristic algorithms that approach faster towards the optimized solution by surveying a limited number of feasible configurations seems to be appropriate. In these algorithms, despite the exact methods of optimization, the aim is to find points as close as possible to the global optimized pattern that properly satisfies decision makers. Many metaheuristic methods have been proposed so far on the basis of the existing orders originating from natural organisms; among these methods, genetic algorithm, simulated annealing, Tabu Search and PSO are reported to be widely used PSO is a stochastic evolutionary computation technique that is used for optimization problems  In order to monitor the performance of the proposed algorithm, a case study of locating additional boreholes in Angouran mineral deposits has been investigated. Angouran is one of the most important carbonate-sulfide zinc and lead deposits that is located in northwest Iran ( The input parameters of the proposed algorithm for locating additional boreholes to minimize the uncertainty in boundaries are: (1) the positions of initial boreholes and their samples values, (2) the threshold grade, (3) the parameters of the indicator variogram model, (4) the 3D block model of the deposits, (5) the 3D block model of the uncertainty zone, (6) the key parameters of the PSO algorithm, and (7) the number of additional boreholes. All the additional boreholes are designed to be vertical considering the topographical conditions and the 3D extension of the ore body. From 42 initial exploratory boreholes, a total core length of 4120 m was sampled. The distribution map of the initial boreholes is presented in The 3D geological model was produced according to 12 vertical sections with a scale of 1:500, a topographical map with a scale of 1:1000, and data derived from the sampling of 42 initial boreholes, which were then converted into a 3D block model, including 1662 blocks with dimensions of 20 The spatial stratified heterogeneity of data was measured by Step 1: Since the sample was not distributed normally, the grade data was transformed by normal score transformation Step 2: The Step 3: Step 4: Since   The PSO parameters were determined on the basis of the Clerc and Kennedy methods  The two main steps in designing the additional boreholes are: (1) the determination of the required number of samples to achieve the predefined goals, and (2) locating additional samples    The 3D geological model produced on the basis of the collected samples was basically fraught with uncertainties, and so the attempt was to enhance the level of our knowledge and information about deposits, in other words, to reduce the uncertainties as much as possible by drilling additional boreholes. It is known that the boundary between the mineralized and the surrounding waste rocks is the most probable area in which uncertainty occurs. The amount of effects exerted by additional boreholes depends to a great extent on their locations, so the locating process must be optimized. The optimal locating of additional boreholes is a very complex and time consuming process. Besides using metaheuristic algorithms, one solution is to shrink the target population of the calculation and try to detect it more carefully, in other words, reach the answer with less amount of calculations. In order to select the most influential blocks for the calculation process, a precise and scientific solution should be used. In the present paper, the concept of distance function was utilized to detect the uncertainty zone in deposit boundaries or in other words, reduce the quantity of blocks. In case of using the distance function, a problem is that uncertainty cannot be determined directly. Thus, by introducing the parameter In order to address the two main challenges of additional drilling, after variography studies and defining the objective function, the optimization calculations were carried out based on the PSO algorithm in two steps by using the data collected from the Angouran deposits. In the first step, the changes caused by adding a number of boreholes from 0 to 30 for blocks at an elevation of 2940 m were investigated with regard to the drilling cost, the objective function value, and the objective function reduction till 100 iterations, and then the optimum number of additional boreholes was calculated to be 15. The second step of the optimization calculations was carried out according to two different scenarios of the 3D block model of the deposits and the uncertainty block model. The results revealed that the second scenario showed a better performance with respect to the algorithm’s performance:  Instead of the 3D block model of the deposits, applying the block model of uncertainty reduced the calculation time to less than one-third. The proposed locations for boreholes were compared to the boundary’s uncertainty zone, and although both scenarios proposed the same locations for a number of additional boreholes, the results of the second scenario were more consistent with expert opinion. The effects of the proposed boreholes on the total combined variance of the block model of the deposits and the uncertainty zone were investigated, and it was found that when the calculations of the objective function were carried out according to the 3D block model of the deposits, a portion of the reduction of uncertainty zone was located in the interior or the exterior blocks of the mineralized domain. Spatial autocorrelation has been the only matter of concern in all the studies concerning the locating of additional boreholes, while spatial heterogeneity This work was supported by the