Tibial plateau fractures have a broad spectrum of presentations, depending on the mechanism and energy of the trauma. Many classification systems are currently available to describe these injuries. In 1974, Schatzker proposed a classification based on a two-dimensional representation of the fracture. His classification with the six-principles types became one of the most utilized classification systems for tibial plateau fractures. More than four decades after this original publication, we are revisiting each fracture type in the light of information made available by computed tomography, which today comprises a standard tool in assessing articular fractures. The classification we are proposing relies on the fact that the tibial plateau has two anatomical columns, lateral and medial. We are introducing a virtual equator which splits the articular surface in the coronal plane. The equator divides each column into two quadrants, the anterior (A) and the posterior (P). Unicondylar fracture types (I to IV) have now additional modifiers A (anterior) and P (posterior) to describe the exact spatial location of the primary fracture plane. Bicondylar fracture types (V and VI) have the modifiers (A and P) of the main fracture plane for each column, and lateral (L) and medial (M) to denote the column. We are introducing the concept of the main fracture plane. Recognition of the exact location of the principal fracture plane is essential for preoperative planning of patient positioning, surgical approach and for determining where to apply the hardware to achieve stable fixation. The new three-dimensional classification is based on the template of the original Schatzker classification. It covers the mechanism of the injury, the energy of the trauma, the morphologic characteristics of the fracture and its location in three dimensions.Tibial plateau fractures are articular injuries which have a broad spectrum of clinical presentations and are frequently associated with long term complications [ The complete understanding of the personality of these fractures is the key element in the decision-making process when choosing the best possible treatment [ The Schatzker classification was based on a two-dimensional representation of the fracture. The fracture types in his classification were organized according to their essence; namely, age of the patient, the bone quality, the morphologic architecture of the fracture, and the energy of the trauma. The types I to III are fractures of the lateral tibial plateau. For Schatzker, the indication for surgery was joint instability and not the degree of depression, which was a criterion for surgery in other publications. Schatzker recommended that if a surgeon was in doubt whether the joint was stable or not, an examination under anesthesia was indicated. In 1979, Schatzker et al. published their experience with the management of 94 tibial plateau fractures [ The AO classification system for long bone fractures was introduced later and was based on an alphanumeric representation. The tibial plateau fractures were described as partial articular, when compromising one of the tibial condyles, and complete articular, when compromising both tibial condyles [ The first available classification systems for tibial plateau fractures placed a great of emphasis on the antero-posterior radiograph and relied on the sagittally oriented fracture patterns [ The aim of this article is to revisit the Schatzker classification, four decades after its description and to examine each fracture type in the light of information made available by CAT scan, which today comprises a standard and essential tool in assessing articular fractures. Further we aim also to incorporate the new information made available by CAT and present the six fracture types of Schatzker with a new notation which allows a three-dimensional representation of the architecture of the fractures. We are proposing to extend the Schatzker classification to encompass the third dimension. The purpose of a classification system Audigé et al. listed the criteria that should apply to a classification system; namely, it should lead to an improvement in the understanding, communication, documentation, and decision making about a set of fracture categories [ The advent of CAT, a tridimensional imaging modality, has set a new standard for the understanding of articular fractures. Brunner et al. demonstrated that computed tomography improves the intra- and inter-observer reliability of Schatzker and AO/OTA classification systems [ Luo et al. utilizing computed tomography divided the surface of the tibial plateau into three columns, while emphasizing the relevance of coronal plane oriented fractures [ The proximal epiphysis of the tibia has two axial columns, a medial and a lateral column. Each column supports a corresponding condyle with its horizontally oriented articular surface. The two anatomical columns are completely different in terms of their architecture. The medial one is denser in terms of bone trabeculae and is stronger when subjected to forces. Thus, fractures compromising the medial column of the tibial plateau are in general associated with higher energy. The proximal tibia articulates with the fibular head. This articulation is located posteriorly to the medial - lateral axis of the tibia. The fibular head is pyramidal in shape and has three anatomical areas, the articular surface for the tibia, the fibular styloid and the lateral tubercle. The lateral tubercle of the fibular head is the site of the attachment of the fibular collateral ligament [ In the last two decades, we have seen an increase in the recognition of fractures in the coronal plane of the tibial plateau. Yang et al. in a series of 525 tibial plateau fractures, reported the compromise of the posterior rim of the tibia in 28.8% of the cases [ These landmarks may be determined with computed tomography or MRI and are therefore reproducible ( The virtual equator does not split the tibial plateau into two symmetrical halves, since the posterior one is significantly smaller. Since the tibial plateau has two anatomical columns, the virtual equator splits the proximal tibia into four articular quadrants ( Each of the four quadrants has peculiar anatomical characteristics and may be accessed through dedicated surgical approaches, while preserving the integrity of the collateral ligaments of the knee and the neurovascular structures around the joint. Crist et al. published our concept of virtual equator in their book chapter dedicated to the management of tibial plateau fractures [ The advent of computed tomography allows for three-dimensional imaging of the proximal tibia together with the characterization of anatomical landmarks which delineate the four anatomical quadrants. This has made it possible to determine the architecture of the fracture and its spatial topography within the tibial plateau. We revisited the Schatzker classification applying the results of three-dimensional imaging. The six principle fracture types of Schatzker remain the same. We are adding a new set of modifiers “A” (anterior) and “P” (posterior) to denote the quadrants involved in the six principle types. These modifiers are denoted in upper cases. In order to arrive at a three-dimensional localization of the fracture the surgeon must identify the main plane of the fracture and the place where the plane bisects the articular rim of the tibial plateau. Split wedge fractures of the tibial plateau will disrupt the articular rim at two points and will exit the metaphysis distally to the joint, at the apex of the wedge. The points where the wedge bisects the rim are identified by lowercase letters which denote the location or the points in relationship to the virtual equator, namely anterior (“a”) or posterior (“p”). The third point where the fracture exits at the metaphyseal area is denoted as “x”. This metaphyseal exit point could be anterior (a Sagittally oriented fractures will typically bisect the rim in two points one being anterior and the other one posterior. Therefore, the rim compromise will have in its description the letters “a” and “p”. Coronally oriented fractures, fractures in the frontal plane, will have an orientation mostly parallel to the virtual equator. They may bisect the tibial plateau rim twice anteriorly (“a” and “a”) or twice posteriorly (“p” and “p”). For example, the typical posteromedial fragment of a bicondylar tibial plateau fractures normally intersects the rim twice posteriorly. The rim compromise is described as “p” and “p” and the metaphyseal exit point is located posteriorly (p In the decision making the special orientation of the main fracture plane determines where to place the hardware and therefore the surgical approach. Split wedge fractures are inherently unstable under axial load. As a principle, the fracture should be anatomically reduced, and the wedge should be buttressed and thus contained. A buttress plate may be used for this purpose and ideally, it should be placed parallel to the main fracture plane ( Although the virtual equator is helpful in determining the anterior and posterior halves of the tibial plateau, fracture lines do not necessarily respect anatomical landmarks. It is not rare that in a unicondylar fracture more than one quadrant of the tibial plateau is compromised. In these cases, we have more than one split wedge component and we must ideally determine where each fracture plane is located ( In case of bicondylar fractures types, one has to pay attention to each column of the tibial plateau, medial and lateral, and determine which quadrants are compromised in each column. The new denotation of the fracture includes the Roman numerals (V or VI), and the spatial location of the main fracture plane noted with an upper-case letter (A and/or P) in each of the two anatomical columns, lateral (L) and medial (M) ( A split wedge may be separate as an entity or it may also be associated with comminution and depression of the articular surface. The goals in the management of tibial plateau fractures are the restoration of joint stability and this involves the anatomical reduction of the articular surface, the reconstruction of rim stability and the restoration of the mechanical axis of the lower limb [ Most of the times, the surgical approach used to reduce the split component of the fracture allows for direct or indirect reduction of the depressed fragments of the articular surface. In a typical The Type III of Schatzker is described as a pure depression of the lateral tibial plateau. There is no wedge component which would allow an “open book” type exposure of the depressed fragments. The anatomical classification may be applied considering the location of the depressed area. Most commonly one will identify a A situation which requires particular attention is the pure depression fracture which compromises the articular rim. A typical situation happens when axial load is applied with the knee in varus alignment and hyperextension. In this scenario, an association between posterolateral corner ligament injury and anteromedial tibial plateau rim depression may take place. Axial loading applied to the knee positioned in valgus alignment and flexion may result in posterolateral crush of the rim. In cases where the rim has been compromised, besides reducing the depression, the shattered cortex below the rim should be reduced and supported by a horizontally oriented rim plate [ The posterolateral quadrant of the tibial plateau is unique due to its associated anatomical characteristics. Fractures or surgical approaches in this area may compromise neurovascular structures. We must consider the peroneal nerve and the trifurcation of the popliteal tibial artery. A number of surgical approaches have been described to address fractures located in this quadrant of the tibial plateau [ The following elements and rules have been introduced with the three-dimensional anatomical classification of tibial plateau fractures: Plane determined by joining the insertion of the fibular collateral ligament on the lateral tubercle of the fibular head and the posterior aspect of the insertion of the superficial medial collateral ligament, which is distal to the joint in the metaphyseal area and coincides with the posterior tibial crest. There are two tibial plateau condyles, the lateral and the medial. Each one contains the corresponding articular surface of the two anatomical columns of the upper tibia. The lateral tibial plateau is designed by a capital “L”. The medial tibial plateau is designed by a capital “M”. The virtual equator divides the tibial plateau condyles into two halves. The anterior one is designated by a capital “A”, and the posterior one is designated by a capital “P”. The tibial plateau has two columns, each one supporting its corresponding articular surface. The articular surfaces are separated by the extra-articular tibial spines. Since there are two columns which are split by a virtual equator, this results in the four anatomical quadrants, as follows: AL- anterolateral; AM – anteromedial; PL – posterolateral; PM – posteromedial. Two elements determine the use of a Roman numeral. The fracture pattern – split wedge; split wedge depression; pure depression – and the column which has been compromised – lateral or medial. Types I, II and III refer to the lateral tibial plateau. Type IV refers to the medial tibial plateau. Types V and VI are bicondylar fractures According to the Schatzker classification these are the types I, II, III (lateral types) and IV (medial type). In the three-dimensional anatomical classification, the main fracture plane may be located anterior and/or posterior to the virtual equator line. The way to denote this is by using the Roman numeral first referring to the column which has been fractured, followed by capital “ The types V and VI do not refer to one of the tibial plateau condyles but to both of them. Therefore, it is important to describe the compromise of each condyle. The letters that refer to each quadrant are written in capital letters. AL: anterolateral; AM: anteromedial; PL: posterolateral; PM: posteromedial. A plus sign is used to describe the additional compromise of another quadrant. As an example, a Type V AL + PM, describes a bicondylar tibial plateau fracture, where there is continuity between the epiphyseal and the diaphyseal segments and where there is a compromise of the tibial plateau, being the compromise of the rim located in the anterolateral and in the posteromedial quadrants. The points where the wedge, defined by the principle fracture plane, disrupts the rim are described in lowercase letters. “a” depicts anterior, “p” describes posterior. The point where the fractures exits the metaphyseal bone is also “a” or “p” but to differentiate, it gets the addition of an “x”. All letters are written in lower case. In the 1950’s the classification systems for tibial plateau fractures spoke of simple types as depression and split [ Luo et al. introduced the three-column concept with particular attention to the compromise of the posterior aspect of the tibial plateau. Luo’s system enhanced the awareness about the compromise of the posterior rim of the tibial plateau, but it does not differentiate between the posterolateral and posteromedial aspects of the rim and does not highlight differences between split and depression types of fracture [ The new system for the three-dimensional classification of tibial plateau fractures is based on the template of the original Schatzker classification, to which we add information obtained from computed tomography. Our goal was to revisit the Schatzker classification four decades after its description and to extend it to include the orientation of the injury in the third dimension. The spatial localization of the fracture should help the surgeon when carrying out the pre-operative plan to determine with precision the surgical approach and fixation methods. We acknowledge that our current manuscript has some limitations. First, we are focused on the anatomical description of the bony injury, with no mention of soft tissues envelope. Soft tissues are key elements in the management of the tibial plateau fractures. We assumed that the reader who is familiar with the Schatzker classification understands the differences and the implications or each type when considering the severity of the soft tissue injury and the nuances between the simple fractures – types I to III – and the fracture dislocations – types IV to VI. This study does not make references to the injuries of the tibial spines and of the anterior tubercle, since these are extra-articular structures. We foresee and what is true of all classifications, that some fractures will not be easy to classify, considering their comminution and atypical patterns. We also recognize that by adding more details to the classification we make it more cumbersome and, therefore, more prone to lack of reproducibility. Our goal is to provide a three-dimensional orientation of the fracture and to facilitate the decision making in the most typical types regarding to the surgical approach and fixation method. Future studies, taking into consideration inter- and intra-observers’ evaluations, are needed to validate the current classification which places emphasis on the three dimensional localization of the fracture elements and the resultant joint instability. We have introduced some new concepts like the virtual equator, the main fracture plane, the containment of rim support in cases of cortical comminution as well as the importance of rim integrity for the stability of the joint. We have also pointed out that buttress plates must be parallel to the main fracture plane. The advantage of this three dimensional extension of the original Schatzker classification is that it makes use of a widely used and accepted classification system. In addition, it provides a simple method based on computed tomography morphology of the injury to localize the fracture and to provide a simple method of notation of the details of the injury. It also provides clear guides to preoperative planning which should hopefully help to avoid surgical mistakes and improve the outcomes of treatment. The authors would like to thank Stacy Turpin Cheavens, MS, CMI, Certified Medical Illustrator University of Missouri, Department of Orthopedic Surgery for the illustrations in Figs. 1, 2, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10g, 11f and 12b. None of the authors received payments or services, either directly or indirectly (i.e., via his or her institution), from a third party in support of any aspect of this work. None of the authors, or their institution(s), have had any financial relationship, in the thirty-six months prior to submission of this work, with any entity in the biomedical arena that could be perceived to influence or have the potential to influence what is written in this work. Also, no author has had any other relationships, or has engaged in any other activities, that could be perceived to influence or have the potential to influence what is written in this work.