Chalcopyrite dissolution was evaluated by bioleaching and electrochemical experiments with Leptospirillum ferriphilum. The bioleaching of chalcopyrite was stepwise: it was reduced to chalcocite at a lower redox potential locating at initial 8 days of bioleaching process, but no reduced product was detected at a high level of redox potential about 550mV (vs. SCE). Compared to the latter stage, the bioleaching rate was fast in the initial 8 days of bioleaching when the redox potential was low. The reduction reaction was beneficial to the dissolution of chalcopyrite. The formation of jarosite occurred during the later stage of chalcopyrite bioleaching, but it was porous and loose. Therefore, it cannot be an effective component of a passivation layer to block continuous copper extraction.The refractory nature of chalcopyrite (CuFeS It has been reported that the formation of passivating chalcopyrite surface layers is responsible for unexpectedly slow rates of leaching and results in hindering diffusion of reactants to chalcopyrite surface The redox potential of the leaching medium strongly affects chalcopyrite leaching kinetics. It has been shown that chalcopyrite is dissolved at much higher rates at redox potential lower than the critical value of about 450 So in this paper, the evolution of redox potential during chalcopyrite bioleaching by All bioleaching tests were performed with chalcopyrite mineral (approximately 90% CuFeS The electrodes of chalcopyrite were prepared from high-purity chalcopyrite samples. To fit specially designed electrode sets and expose only one side, all electrodes were cut into about Φ12  All bioleaching tests were performed in 250 Periodically, water evaporation was restored, pH and redox potential were recorded and a 2 In addition, five chalcopyrite working electrodes with the same size and mineral composition were used for the open circuit potential measurements and SEM/EDS detection. The first one was used for measurement without undergoing bioleaching. While the other four were immersed in the same batch bioleaching flasks and bioleached for 5, 10, 15 and 21 days, respectively. The leaching residues were filtered and air dried for XRD and SEM characterization. The chalcopyrite electrodes were subjected to SEM/EDS analysis. XRD tests were conducted using an X-ray diffractometer (Model D/Max2500PC) with Cu Kα radiation ( Electrochemical measurements were performed using a three-electrode system with the following three electrodes: the working electrode (chalcopyrite), the counter electrode (graphite) and the reference electrode (Ag/AgCl), which was provided with a Lug-gin capillary tip and placed as close as possible to the working electrode. The three electrodes and the electrolyte were placed in water thermostat system providing constant temperature. The electrolyte solution, consisting of (NH For open circuit potentials (OCP) tests, the bioleached chalcopyrite electrodes samples were measured at 0, 5, 10, 15 and 21 days. The electrolyte solution here was the bioleaching medium. The variation of copper, redox potential and pH during bioleaching are shown in For redox potential corresponding to the ratio of Fe It is noticeable that the bioleaching efficiency has a close connection with the redox potential. From the 3rd day to the 7th day, the redox potential was between 375 and 550 The pH value in the bioleaching process increased slowly at the initial 4 days, then rose quickly and reached about 3.0 after 15 days (Eqs.  From Eq. From our study, it can be confirmed that although chalcopyrite biological leaching, on the whole, was an oxidation process, it also contained some reduction process in the initial stage of bioleaching under the relative low redox potential. In addition, small peaks corresponding to element sulfur were also detected in From In addition, sulfur and some jarosite were detected on the15th day and at the end of bioleaching by The SEM study of the bioleaching residue ( As mentioned in the experimental section, the electrodes were stable before starting each electrochemical test. In order to elucidate the surface activity of the electrode after 15 Cyclic voltammograms of massive chalcopyrite electrodes in the medium containing Distinct differences in cyclic voltammograms can be found between positive and negative scanning routes. It was evident that two tiny anodic peaks A1 and A2 appeared from OCP to 1000 It can be seen that in the negative direction, a cathodic reduction peak C2 appeared from 100 to −100 However, for the positive direction scanning, a weaker anodic oxidation peak A1 appeared at 650 The open circuit potentials (OCP) of the chalcopyrite electrodes bioleached by However, the OCP increased rapidly to about 700 The morphology and elemental composition of chalcopyrite electrodes after bioleaching are shown in After 21 days bioleaching, EDS investigation on the surface of electrode was employed after some products dropped off from the surface of chalcopyrite ( Chalcopyrite bioleaced by The low copper extraction rate is not due to the formation of jarosite. The reason for this is that the loose and porous jarosite cannot be the component of a passivation layer blocking continuous copper extraction. This work was supported by the