Hydraulic slotting in a gas drainage borehole is an effective method of enhancing gas drainage performance. However, it frequently occurs that a large amount of slotting products (mainly the coal slurry and gas) intensely spurt out of the borehole during the slotting, which adversely affects the slotting efficiency. Despite extensive previous investigations on the mechanism and prevention-device design of the spurt during ordinary borehole drilling, a very few studies has focused on the spurt in the slotting process. The slotting spurt is mainly caused by two reasons: the coal and gas outburst in the borehole and the borehole deslagging blockage. This paper focuses on the second reason, and investigates the hydraulic deslagging flow patterns in the annular space between the drill pipe and borehole wall. Results show that there are six deslagging flow patterns when the drill pipe is still: pure slurry flow, pure gas flow, bubble flow, intermittent flow, layering flow and annular flow. When the drill pipe rotates, each of those six flow patterns changes due to the Taylor vortex effect. Outcomes of this study could help to better understand the slotting-spurt mechanism and provide guidance on the anti-spurt strategies through eliminating the borehole deslagging blockage.Borehole gas drainage should normally be conducted prior to mining the coal with high gas content and low permeability, to prevent gas-related incidents (e.g. coal and gas outburst, gas accumulation and gas explosion) and decrease the ventilation costs However, when the hydraulic slotting is conducted in the coal seam with high gas content, low permeability and high in-situ stress, the coal and gas outburst in the borehole is very likely to happen. This results in a large amount of slotting products (mainly the coal slurry and gas) intensely spurt out from the borehole during the slotting process ( It should be noted that as high-pressure water jet is adopted in the slotting process, there are many new characteristics for the hydraulic-slotting spurt compared with the borehole-drilling spurt, and the former is normally more intense. Therefore, the spurt phenomenon in the hydraulic-slotting process will be the objective of this study. This spurt is mainly induced by two issues: the coal and gas outburst around borehole and the borehole deslagging blockage (the deslagging represents that the slotting products including coal slurry and gas getting out of the borehole), the spurt always occurs when the deslagging-blocked borehole reopens. As the coal and gas outburst has been put forward and extensively investigated for many years, this study focuses on the borehole deslagging blockage during slotting. The hydraulic deslagging flow patterns in the annular space between the drill pipe and borehole wall will be analysed, as well as some flow patterns’ characteristics. Research outcomes could help to better understand the mechanism of slotting spurt and provide guidance for prevention strategies, guaranteeing the safe and effective hydraulic slotting. During the hydraulic slotting, the slotting products (mainly the coal slurry and gas) are continuously discharged through the annular space between the drill pipe and borehole wall as shown in When Eq. The flow rate in this deslagging path could be expressed as In coal mines, the borehole diameter ( As mentioned above, high pressure water jet is adopted to conduct slotting work. The water plays a significant role in the slotting products and flow patterns, as it mixes with the pulverized coal, forming the coal slurry. Based on the on-site observations and relevant theoretical analysis, there are three spurt phenomena at the opening of borehole: (1) a large quantity of gas spurts out of the borehole, and sometimes in the form of white smoke when gas amount is extremely high; (2) large quantity of coal slurry flows out of the borehole and there is almost no gas; and (3) the shallow black coal slurry mixed with the gas spurt out. Sometimes, a hissing sound may be heard due to the intense interaction between the coal slurry and gas. Among above three phenomena, the third one most commonly occurs ( According to the difference in continuous phase, there are mainly two deslagging flow patterns during hydraulic slotting: the coal slurry as the continuous phase and the gas as the continuous phase. Pure slurry flow and pure gas flow: During a certain time of hydraulic slotting, it can be seen that only the coal slurry or the gas spurt out from the borehole, which verifies the existence of flow patterns of the pure slurry flow and pure gas flow. When the slotting being conducted in the coal with very low gas content, the coal slurry is the main spurt product. In contrast, when the slotting encounters an area of coal with high gas content, a large amount of high-pressure gas will be discharged within a short period of time, then in the deslagging path, the rapidly expanded gas will push the coal slurry away and exclusively occupy a space, forming the pure gas flow. Bubble flow: In this flow pattern, the gas is in the form of dispersed bubbles and is distributed in the continuous coal slurry. Meanwhile, the gas is mostly in the upper part of the annular deslagging channel due to the buoyancy effect. In the process of flowing out the borehole, the bubbles are generated and broken up continuously and are in the dynamic balance. Generally, the bubble flow always occurs in boreholes with large inclination angle (i.e., Intermittent flow: This flow pattern is similar to the bubble flow. One of the most significant differences is that the gas bubbles of intermittent flow are larger, even being the gas mass. The intermittent flow is more likely to occur in boreholes with large inclination angle and high gas content. Because the large inclination angle could increase the gravitational acceleration effect, the velocity of the coal slurry and the gas are both greater. Large number of gas bubbles in the coal slurry will catch up with each other and combine to make larger bubbles, then large bubbles further combine with each other, forming large volume of gas. In such a way, the bubble flow becomes the intermittent flow. Based on the gas content on the cross section of the coal slurry, the intermittent flow could be divided into three sub flows: the slug flow, long columnar flow and mass flow. The slug flow is a representative one of the intermittent flow, the elongated bubbles and liquid slugs are two symbolic characteristics of this flow pattern Layering flow and annular flow: These two are typical flow patterns with gas being in the continuous phase. And they are likely to occur in boreholes with small inclination angle and large gas content. As in such boreholes, the gas volume in the borehole is large while coal slurry flow rate is small. Thus the gas turbulence force plays a significant role in the deslagging process. The gas flows in the middle of the deslagging channel in the form of gas nucleus, while the coal slurry flows close to the borehole wall in the form of liquid film, and the liquid film in the lower part of borehole is much thicker than that in the upper part due to the gravitational effect. The interface wave occurs at the interface of the gas and coal slurry. The gas turbulence force increases with the increase in the gas flow rate. This would thoroughly squeeze the thin liquid film in the upper part of the borehole to the lower part. As a result, the annular flow becomes the layering flow. In Section 2.1, the deslagging flow patterns around the stationary drill pipe were analysed. In fact, to help the slotting products discharge smoothly, the drill pipe mostly rotates in the deslagging process. Therefore, it is of significance to discuss the deslagging flow patterns taking the effect of drill-pipe rotation into account. When the drill pipe rotates, the flow in the annular deslagging channel is centrifugally instable. Taylor number is the ratio of the rotational centrifugal force to the viscous force, which could be used to indicate the instability of the deslagging flow around the rotating drill pipe. When the rotation speed of the drill pipe is high enough, the phenomenon of centrifugal instability will occur, and there will be an annular Taylor vortex around the drill pipe In this paper, the deslagging flow patterns in the annular space between the drill pipe and borehole wall during hydraulic slotting are concentrated on, and their characteristic parameters are investigated. Following conclusions could be drawn: There are six deslagging flow patterns when the drill pipe is stationary: pure slurry flow, bubble flow, intermittent flow, pure gas flow, layering flow and annular flow, among which, the continuous phase of the first three is the coal slurry while that of the latter three is the gas. The flow in the annular deslagging channel is centrifugally instable when the drill pipe rotates. Each of above six flow patterns experiences following changes because of the Taylor vortex effect around the drill pipe: the original flow pattern, the original flow pattern plus vortex, the turbulent flow plus vortex and the turbulent flow. Based on related field parameters, the deslagging flow rate is about 0.085 m/s, and the total deslagging time is 4 min approximately. Therefore, the borehole is probably blocked, if there is no slotting products flowing out of the borehole within this time. Above research results could assist us to better understand the spurt mechanism during slotting, and provide guidance on how to prevent the borehole deslagging blockage and the spurt, improving the hydraulic-slotting efficiency. This study is financially supported by the