Antimony flotation is a complicated industrial process with an unknown system structure. Manual manipulation is still widely used by observing the froth appearance, which relies on operators’ experience. Therefore, this paper proposes a reagent predictive control strategy for the antimony flotation process based on machine vision, which is an optional replacement of manual control. Froth image is a good indicator to reflect the working conditions of the process. A shape-weighted bubble size distribution (SWBSD) is developed to characterize the froth image feature. The SWBSD combines the bubble size and bubble shape, which differs from the separate use of froth features. Since lots of the froth images can be obtained, a random selection of an image from a froth video as the indicator of the working conditions is not advisable. A typical froth image selection method is proposed to choose the froth image which can best characterize the current working conditions. Due to the unknown system model, multi-output least square support vector regressor (LS-SVR) is used to predict the future image feature according to the current image feature and reagent dosages. Based on the above methods, predictive control technique is employed to calculate the optimal control inputs of the reagents. Simulations using the real-world production data verify the effectiveness of the proposed control strategy. In further, industrial experiments in the antimony flotation plant of China demonstrate that our control strategy improved the tracking performance and decreased the tailing grade, compared with the manual manipulation.Froth flotation is a complex physical and chemical separation process which is influenced by multiple operational variables such as the inlet air flow rate, froth depth and reagent dosages [ In addition, due to the instability of the bubble, the froth appearance changes quickly. Flotation processes are complicated industrial process with complex mechanism, strong nonlinearity, and time-delay. It is widely accepted that establishing a first principle model for flotation processes is difficult [ This paper aims to design an efficient control strategy to address the above three main issues arisen in the antimony flotation process. Firstly, to describe the working conditions more accurately, we propose a shape-weighted bubble size distribution (SWBSD), which combines the bubble size and bubble shape distribution. The SWBSD is approximated using B-spline. Then, a typical froth image selection method is proposed to choose a froth image which can best represent the current working conditions. Thirdly, a reagent predictive controller is constructed to calculate the optimal control inputs of the reagents. In the predictive control, the least square support vector regressor (LS-SVR) is used to predict the future froth image features. Simulations are carried out to verify the performance of the proposed control strategy. Then, our control method is applied to control a real-world antimony flotation process. The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Section Flotation is a three-phase physic-chemical separation technique, used for separating valuable minerals from worthless gangue. By adding specific reagents, the valuable minerals enable to attach on the surface of the bubbles. In this study, we focus on the antimony flotation process in a real-world plant located in Hunan province of China, as shown in To achieve desired concentrate grade, three types of reagents are added to the antimony rougher banks. Foaming agent (2# oil) is used to form and stabilize foams; activator (copper sulfate and lead nitrate) makes the specific minerals attach to the surface of bubbles; collector (black powder and xanthate) changes the hydrophobicity of the mineral surface. We found that after the adjustment of reagents, with the ascending of froth grade, the bubble size will be larger. However, when the froth grade reaches a critical value, the bubble size is no longer increase, but decrease. Therefore, this non-linear relationship makes it incomplete for single bubble size character to describe the bubble structure. Bubble shape is closely related to the number of particles attached to the bubbles and effectively reflects the froth grade. If we use the bubble size and bubble shape to characterize the froth surfaces simultaneously, a more adequate description of the working conditions can be obtained to realize model predictive control. It was reported that the bubble shape will deform with the flotation working condition and bubble size changing. And both the bubble size and bubble shape can reflect the working condition of flotation processes. A froth image includes a variety of bubble size and bubble shape. Usually, the probability density function is used to character the bubble size distribution. Using the watershed algorithm [ As shown in Eq. Using a set of base functions Finally, the problem to obtain the SWBSD can be transformed to determine the combination weights, which is easier implement than Eq. In froth flotation plants, an industrial camera is used to record the froth video. Then, the froth image is selected from the video to extract features. In most of current research, the froth image used to monitor or control the flotation process is one frame captured from the froth video at a fixed sampling instant. However, some fluctuations caused by bubble collapse, coalescence, and other disturbance exist in the flotation process, and they are inevitable. Randomly selecting a froth image will make the representation of froth image feature unreliable. Therefore, we proposed a method to select a typical froth image from a 30-s froth video. In the practical plants, operators often observe the froth appearance for a period of time, then manipulate the process. Compared to the traditional image sampling method, our method can obtain the typical image with more reliable and accurate working condition representation. In our study, at each control cycle, a 30-s video is sampled to select the typical froth image. The sampling period is 0.14s so that we have 214 froth images, from which we select the typical one. Using the B-spline approximation method, 214 SWBSD curves can be obtained, defined as Step 1. For any two curves Step 2. Calculate the similarity of every two curves. The similarity of two SWBSD curves is calculated by: Step 3. Calculate the cumulative similarity for each SWBSD curve Then, we obtain a cumulative similarity sequence Step 4. Find the biggest To obtain the satisfactory control performance, predictive control is utilized to design the control strategy for the antimony flotation process. Predictive control is a powerful technique for the control of industrial processes, and one of the essential issue of the predictive control is obtaining the sufficiently accurate system model [ It is widely accepted that flotation process is a complicated system due to chaotic nature of the process [ Based on the data-driven model, the optimal control laws of the reagents are calculated by minimizing the following objective function: Therefore, the overall reagent predictive control framework is shown in In the antimony flotation plant, our research team had established the measurement and monitoring platform. An industrial RGB camera was used to record the froth appearance video. The videos were delivered to an industrial computer through optical fiber, and then were processed and analyzed. The operators monitor the process using the analysis data. The computer connects the DCS through the object linking and embedding for process control. To demonstrate the effectiveness and superiority of the proposed control strategy, simulations were first conducted using the production data, and then experiments were carried out in the antimony flotation plant in China. The simulations and experiments were carried out in the industrial computer programmed by MATLAB and Microsoft Visual C++. In this section, we first test the performance of the multi-output LS-SVR. According to the production data, we obtain the current control inputs, current SWBSD, and the next SWBSD, which compose one group of data. 800 groups of data are used to train the LS-SVR. As mentioned above, the outputs of the LS-SVR are the eight weights of the B-spline method. One of the prediction results of the LS-SVR is Secondly, the performance of the proposed predictive control is tested by simulations. The parameters in the reagent predictive control problem are set as: The statistical data from The above simulations showed that our proposed control strategy achieved a satisfactory control performance. Then, the proposed control strategy is applied to control the real-world plant. Currently, the antimony flotation plant is mainly manipulated by operators according to the experience of the experts. Hence, the manual control results are used to make comparisons. During the experiments, the feed grades of the antimony flotation process are shown in In this paper, we developed a reagent predictive control strategy for the antimony process. In this strategy, the SWBSD is proposed to extract the froth visual feature. The SWBSD is approximated by the B-spline method, which reduced the computation complexity. Then, the typical froth image selection method is designed to select the image which can indicate the current working conditions accurately. The reagent predictive controller is constructed to calculate the optimal control inputs of the reagents based on the multi-output LS-SVR. Finally, simulations are firstly conducted using the real-world production data. The LS-SVR and the control performance of the control strategy are verified to be effectiveness, compared with other three control methods. Then, our control strategy is applied to control the antimony process. The industrial experiments demonstrate that our control strategy improved the tracking performance and decreased the tailing grade. This work was financially supported by