Predictions on the lifetime of phosphate (Pi) reserves usually take into account only the need for crop production. A recent report predicts the global need of chemical Pi fertilizer for sustaining productivity in cropland and grassland. Here we discuss the implications of these predictions for the lifetime of Pi reserves.The development of crop varieties with increased Pi utilization efficiencies, i.e., crops (e.g., grain, fruit) that can produce more desirable biomass per gram of Pi absorbed. Systems that increase the capacity of the plant to extract immobile Pi from the soil. This can be achieved by producing microbial inoculants that solubilize Pi and promote plant growth. The development of alternative P-fertilizer formulations that solve the problems associated with the chemical properties of orthophosphate. Providing phosphorus (P) to every living being is critical for their survival and reproduction, as P is an essential component of nucleic acids, membrane phospholipids and many energy-dependent metabolic processes. Therefore, application of P in the form of P-fertilizers to cultivated crop plants, which represent the food source of humanity, is essential to ensure high yield agriculture. However, plants absorb and assimilate P from the soil as inorganic orthophosphate (Pi), a chemical form with low availability and mobility in most soils. In fact, due to precipitation and mineralization processes, Pi availability is commonly suboptimal for vegetative growth and crop productivity for approximately 70% of arable land. The abundance and diversity of soil microorganisms also affect Pi nutrition in a complex manner. Although some organisms (arbuscular mycorrhizal fungi and plant growth–promoting rhizobacteria) may enhance plant Pi acquisition, other microbial species compete with plant roots for Pi uptake and convert it into organic forms that are not readily available for plant uptake. All these factors have considerable negative impact on P use efficiency, as crops assimilate only between 20 to 30% of applied Pi. In addition, Pi is rapidly fixed in the soil due to its high reactivity with cations such as calcium and magnesium in calcareous soils or aluminum and iron in acidic soils. Several reviews have reported a potential P crisis because future sustainability of crop yields will be challenged, as global P resources are finite and rapidly diminishing. Depending on the source, high quality, economically viable phosphate rock reserves, which the U.S. Geological Survey estimated totaled 69 billion tons this year, will last only 50 to 200 years, if current levels of use are maintained or increased The P crisis is further complicated by proposals suggesting that organic agriculture, using manure as a main external source of nutrients, is an effective alternative that can reduce the need for chemical Pi fertilizer. However, the proponents of organic farming do not take into account that nutrients present in manure were removed from grassland by livestock ( Organic fertilizer (i.e., manure) is an attractive alternative because it can instantly increase the availability of Pi in the soil, reducing the requirement for chemical Pi fertilizer. However, because organic Pi fertilizer was previously removed from the soil in one way or another and the P contained in manure will eventually also be fixated in the soil, more integral and radical strategies are needed to reduce the amount of chemical fertilizer required for secure food production. To date, several studies have addressed this issue, such as breeding programs and a variety of fertilizer formulations (e.g. slow release and complexes with organic compounds) (see In terms of fertilizer formulations, many versions of P-fertilizer are available in which Pi forms complexes with organic acids, such as citrate, malate or humic acids The need for Pi fertilizers could also be significantly reduced if the large percentage of Pi present in soil in chemical forms that are not readily available for plant uptake is converted into Pi that is available for plant assimilation. Recently, plant nutrition studies have focused on identifying the microbes present in the rhizosphere or those present as endophytes that can increase biomass production with the same or lower amounts of fertilizer Sattari et al.