In the present study, the effects of Sr and Mg were investigated on mechanical and biological properties of 58S bioactive glass (BG). SiO2-P2O5-CaO BG with different contents of Sr and Mg were synthesized via the sol-gel method and immersed in simulated body fluid (SBF) for several days to explore their biocompatibility. Precise analyses of the BG using X-ray powder diffraction, scanning electron microscopy, and transmission electron microscopy showed that the Mg-doped BG containing 8 wt % MgO possessed better biocompatibility. It was also found that mechanical properties of the BG could be improved by increasing the amounts of MgO and SrO. Both 5Sr-BG and 8Mg-BG samples did not exhibit any cytotoxicity while showing high alkaline phosphatase activity in comparison with control specimens. However, the Sr-doped BG sample including 5 wt % SrO demonstrated enhanced bioactivity and biocompatibility.Bioactive glasses (BGs) are promising materials that have been extensively studied during the last decades [ BGs are generally obtained through melting a dried batch of starting materials at high temperatures in their early stage of development. However, the sol-gel method has recently attracted considerable attention for the preparation of BGs [ Several investigations have been fulfilled to improve the bioactivity and clinical applicability of BGs, i.e. the addition of metals and ions to the composition of BGs [ It is worth mentioning that Sr is a vital element in human body. The Sr amount in the skeleton is ~0.335% of Ca content [ MgO is also considered as a substituent for CaO in BG composition for their biological feature enhancement and mechanical properties [ In the present work, the effects of Mg and Sr were investigated on the properties of BGs. SiO The following chemicals were used for the synthesis of BGs: strontium nitrate (Sr(NO Sr-doped BG (Sr-BG) was synthesized through the sol-gel process. First, 0.1 M nitric acid solution was prepared as the catalyst. Then, 50.22-52.11 ml of TEOS was poured into a nitric acid solution and magnetically stirred at 25 °C for 45 min. Next, 5.11-5.3 ml of TEP, 23.05-28.34 g of calcium nitrate terahydrate, and 4.12-7.93 g of strontium nitrate were added to the The same procedure was applied for the stoichiometric synthesis of Mg-doped BGs (Mg-BG). The formation susceptibility of HA on the BG disks was studied by immersing them in SBF for various periods. All samples were grinded and pressed to prepare disks (~0.6 g weight, 14 mm in diameter, and 3 mm in height) by compacting the glass powder at 10 MPa AC. The volume of the SBF for the BG dicks was 13.2 ml to investigate the formation of HA. Each measurement was repeated three times for accuracy. The SBF was prepared by dissolving reagent grades KCl, NaHCO The presence of functional groups in BGs (before and after immersion in SBF) was confirmed by the Fourier-transform infrared spectroscopy (FTIR) using a Bomem MB 100 spectrometer. Fine powders were mixed with KBr powder by a ratio of 1:300 and transparent homogenous discs were pelletized by pressing the mixture. Then, the infrared spectra were measured in a wavenumber range of 400–4000 cm Biological characteristics of Sr-BG and Mg-BG samples were verified using G292 osteoblastic cells. The cell proliferation on the surface of the prepared samples was measured using the (3-(4,5-dimethylthiazol-2-yl)-2,5-diphenyltetrazolium bro-mide) (MTT) assay. After 7 days, the cultured cells were seeded into 96-well plates with a cell/well density of 2 × 10 Proliferation and separation of osteoblasts were analyzed through ALP activity using the p-nitrophenyl substrate for 1, 3, and 7 days [ Vickers Microhardness was measured based on the ASTM C 1327-99 standard, with an indentation load of 9.8 N (square-based pyramidal-shaped) through the following equation. Moreover, bending test was performed according to the ASTMC1161 procedure using a computerized universal testing appliance with tests at a speed of 0.5 mm/min. The three-point bending strength was performed using Eq. According to the ASTM C 1161, the dimensions of the specimens were 2 × 1.5 × 25 mm  It has been reported that more HA can be formed by increasing the immersion time of BGs in SBF [ The formation of apatite on the 8Mg-BG and 5Sr-BG soaked in SBF for different days is shown in  The peak at 873 cm As indicated in the XRD analysis, 5Sr-BG and 8Mg-BG showed better HA formation rates than the other samples.  The SEM images of 8Mg-BG and 5Sr-BG with their corresponding EDX analysis after soaking in SBF for 21 days are presented in  The viability test results during 7 days are illustrated in Proliferation and differentiation of osteoblast cells were investigated via ALP expression. The ALP activity of the samples for 1, 3, and 7 days is depicted in Hesaraki et al. [ In another study, Naruphontjirakul et al. [  Increasing both MgO and SrO contents led to increased Vickers hardness and elastic modulus. The Vickers hardness was in the range of 430-450 HV for Mg-doped BGs and 460-485 HV for Sr-doped BGs. Bellucci et al. [ On the other hand, the elastic modulus of the Mg- or Sr-doped BGs has an increasing trend, with values of 90-112 and 85-94 GPa for Mg- and Sr-doped BGs, respectively. Thus, the presence of MgO in the BGs leads to a higher elastic modulus than that of SrO-containing BGs. Bellucci et al. [ The sol-gel method was successfully employed to prepare SiO The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper.