This study presents an application of fracture mechanics to determine mixed-mode fracture properties of rock using the numerical and experimental methods. The modified version of Arcan specimen test was, in association with a special loading device, an appropriate apparatus for experimental mixed-mode fracture analysis. Using the finite-element results, correction factors were applied to the specimens and a polynomial fit was proposed to evaluate the stress-intensity factors of a modified version of Arcan specimen with a crack subjected to mixed mode loading. The finite element analyses of specimens were also studied for various materials, different thickness and crack length. The mixed-mod fracture-toughness tests were carried out by using the modified Arcan test specimens over a wide range of loading angles. Using the finite element results, non-dimensional stress-intensity factors applied to the fracture specimen. By employing experimentally measured critical loads and the aid of the finite element method, mixed-mode fracture toughness for rock under consideration determined. The fracture surfaces under different mixed-mode loading conditions were examined by optical and scanning electron microscopy (SEM) to gain insight into the failure surfaces.crack length modulus of elasticity geometrical factor or non-dimensional stress-intensity factor mode-I non-dimensional stress-intensity factor mode-II non-dimensional stress-intensity factor strain energy release rate mode-I or opening-mode strain energy release rate mode-II or shearing-mode strain energy release rate total strain energy release rate critical strain energy release rate mode-I critical strain energy release rate mode-II critical strain energy release rate total critical strain energy release rate fracture toughness in terms of strain energy release rate mode-I fracture toughness in terms of strain energy release rate mode-II fracture toughness in terms of strain energy release rate total fracture toughness in terms of strain energy release rate  interaction stress-intensity factor mode-I or opening-mode stress-intensity factor mode-II or shearing-mode stress-intensity factor critical stress-intensity factor mode-I critical stress-intensity factor mode-II critical stress-intensity factor fracture toughness in terms of stress-intensity factor mode-I fracture toughness in terms of stress-intensity factor mode-II fracture toughness in terms of stress-intensity factor applied load critical load unit vector specimen thickness specimen width contour integral loading angle on Arcan loading device Poisson's ratio stress tensor components scanning electron microscopy The literature on fracture mechanics-based analysis of crack in two-dimensions is extensive. Fracture mechanics can be divided into linear elastic fracture mechanics (LEFM) and elasto-plastic fracture mechanics (EPFM). LEFM gives excellent results for brittle elastic materials and is a primary requirement for brittle rock material analysis. For a given defect, crack propagation may be accomplished in opening-mode (mode-I), shearing-mode (mode-II), and tearing-mode (mode-III) ( Fracture mechanics can be applied to many engineering fields including civil and mining engineering, where drilling, excavation, explosion and cutting of rocks are closely related to the strength, stability and fracture of rock materials and structures. The principles, methods and techniques of fracture mechanics can play an important role in the analysis, design and construction of many rock engineering structures and have been investigated by many researchers In many situations of rock engineering interest, complex stress states predominate in structures and a potential defect may be shaped in arbitrary orientation of cracks relative to the loading directions, so that the failure cannot be resolved by uniaxial stress fields. Therefore, many rock fracture researchers have been investigated the fracture of rocks under mixed mode-I/II loading. The semi-circular specimen However, for these test methods there are problems to create a wide range of mixed-mode ratios which limit their usefulness. Also, different type of specimens would be required in order to obtain reliable results for fracture toughness in pure mode-I, pure mode-II, and mixed-mode loading conditions. It is therefore necessary to develop other test methods to evaluate the mixed-mode fracture toughness under all in-plane loading conditions starting from pure mode-I to pure mode-II. In this study, a modified version of the Arcan specimen was made for the mixed-mode fracture test of rock specimens, which allows mode-I, mode-II, and almost any combination of mode-I and mode-II loading to be tested with the same test specimen configuration. Therefore, disadvantages presented in the previous mixed-mode toughness test methods can be avoided This investigation seeks to extend understanding of the rock fracture behavior under mixed-mode loading conditions through numerical and experimental analysis. Using finite element results, correction factors were applied to the rock specimen and a third-order polynomial fit was proposed to evaluate the stress-intensity factors of a modified version of the Arcan specimen with a crack subjected to mixed-mode loading conditions. The main objective of this study was to determine the fracture toughness LEFM has been found a useful tool for investigation of cracks in rock materials. The purpose of fracture-toughness testing is to determine the value of the critical stress-intensity factor, or plane-strain fracture toughness The stress-intensity factors ahead of the crack tip for a modified version of Arcan specimen were calculated by using the following equations From the load–displacement curve, a fracture load Also energy release rate for isotropic material with edge crack can be calculated from the following relationships: The method used to calculate the stress-intensity factor was an interaction Numerical analyses were carried out using the interaction In this study, a modified version of the Arcan specimen was made for the mixed-mode fracture test of rock specimens, which allows mode-I, mode-II, and almost any combination of mode-I and mode-II loading to be tested with the same test specimen configuration ( The test specimens were cut from blocks in both the longitudinal and transverse directions to the dimensions of 90×60×10 The examined rock is from a quarry near Khoramabad, Lorestan, Iran, where the majority of oil reservoirs located there. Also, it has been used widely as a building stone. The values of Young's modulus, The stress-intensity factors ahead of the crack tip for a modified version of Arcan specimen were calculated by using Eqs. Since the Arcan specimen developed by Arcan et al. In order to assess geometrical factors or non-dimensional stress-intensity factors The relationship between the non-dimensional stress-intensity factor and the loading angle is shown in The strain energy release rates were calculated using Eq. In Fracture tests were carried out using universal tension testing machine (UTM). All tests were conducted by controlling the constant displacement rate of 0.5 Rock fracture toughness was determined experimentally with the modified version of the Arcan specimen under different mixed-mode loading conditions. Pure mode-I, pure-mode-II and five mixed-mode loading conditions were used as shown in A review of fracture-toughness studies conducted by some researchers on different rock samples suggests that the fracture-toughness ratio The calculated critical strain energy release rate values ( In brittle materials, such as rocks, the crack propagation typically is transgranular (between the grains or along the grain boundaries) SEM micrographs of mixed-mode loading conditions ( The observations of the mode-II fracture surfaces were carried out with SEM. SEM of fracture surfaces of the mode-II specimens are shown in In this paper the mixed-mode fracture behavior of rock specimens was investigated based on experimental and numerical analyses. A modified version of the Arcan specimen was employed to conduct a mixed-mode test using the special test loading device. The full range of mixed-mode loading conditions including pure mode-I and pure mode-II loading can be created and tested. It is a simple test procedure, clamping/unclamping the specimens is easy to achieve and only one type of specimen is required to generate all loading conditions. The finite element results indicate that for loading angles close to pure mode-II loading, a high ratio of mode-II to mode-I fracture is dominant and there is an opposite trend for loading angles close to pure mode-I loading. It confirms that by varying the loading angle of Arcan specimen pure mode-I, pure mode-II and a wide range of mixed-mode loading conditions can be created and tested. Also, numerical results confirm that the increase of the mode-II loading contribution leads to an increase of fracture resistance in the rock (i.e., a reduction in the total strain energy release rate) and the increase of the crack length leads to a reduction of fracture resistance in the rock (i.e., an increase in the total strain energy release rate). The fracture toughness was determined experimentally with the modified version of the Arcan specimen under different mixed-mode loading conditions. The results indicated that the cracked specimen is weaker in shear loading conditions and tougher in tensile loading condition. The SEM fracture surfaces observations showed that the mode-I transgranular fracture surface is indicative of a brittle failure with relatively smooth and flat surface. As mode-II loading contribution is added, the fracture surfaces become rougher. Also at pure mode-II loading, due to the large relative motion between the grains, the fracture surface was rough and more voids, troughs and hackles have appeared.