Phytochelatins (PC) are (γ-Glu–Cys)
                        n
                     Gly peptides involved in the cellular detoxification mechanism of plants, algae and yeasts for their capability to form stable metal–PC complexes. Phaeodactylum tricornutum exposed to Cd forms Cd–PC complexes in which sulfide ions (S2−) can be incorporated to stabilize PC-coated CdS nanocrystallites. Native CdS particles exhibited differences in their particle size, sulfide content and optical spectroscopic properties. The λ
                     max of the UV transition ranged from 290 to 260 nm. The radii were predicted to vary from 9 to 11 Å. The sulfide/Cd molar ratio ranged from 0.89 to 0.26. Low sulfide particles showed propensity to in vitro sulfide mediated accretion. Characterization of these complexes showed that CdS nanoparticles were mainly coated with γ-glutamyl peptides with n value from 3 to 5. The PC2 oligopeptide was not found as coating peptide. CdS particles were stable in the pH range from 8 to 6 and showed half-dissociation at pH 4.9. In vitro reaction with S2− easily converted native, sulfide-free Cd–PC complexes to PC-coated CdS nanocrystallites, but was less effective to restrict particles accretion.A widespread detoxification mechanism developed by plants, algae and fungi to avoid heavy metal poisoning involves intracellular sequestration of metal ions by means of glutathione-related peptides. These inducible peptides, named phytochelatins (PC), are synthesized by the enzyme PC-synthase, which is activated by the metal ions and uses glutathione as substrate. The structure of PC involves a repeating sequence of γ-glutamyl–cysteine pairs to give polypeptides of general formula (γ-Glu–Cys) Two main groups of Cd–PC complexes have been resolved by size-exclusion chromatography (SEC) in several plants and yeasts: a low molecular weight (LMW) form, in which Cd is bound to thiol groups, and a high molecular weight (HMW) form, in which inorganic sulfide ions (S Most of the literature on PC synthesis in phytoplanktonic algae in response to Cd regards the induction of these chelating peptides The aim of the present study was to investigate in detail the composition, the properties and the stability of native PC-coated CdS complexes accumulated in this diatom in response to Cd exposure. The ability of native, sulfide-free Cd-complexes to act as nucleating agents for in vitro formation of CdS nanocrystallites was also investigated. SEC coupled with reverse-phase high performance liquid chromatography was used to isolate and characterize PC-coated CdS complexes. All reagents were analytical grade: tris (2-carboxyethyl) phosphine (TCEP) was from Molecular Probes; diethylenetriaminepentacetic acid (DTPA), glutathione (GSH), cysteine and The chromatographic system consisted of a Pharmacia Biotech Pump P-500, a Rheodyne model IV-7 injection valve and an UV detector (Uvicord SD, Pharmacia LKB) set at 254 nm. SEC was carried out on Hi-Load Superdex 30 and Superdex Peptide HR columns (Pharmacia Biotech) eluted with 25 mM HEPES buffer pH 7.5 at a flow rate of 1.0 and 0.5 ml×min γ-Glutamyl peptides (PC) were determined by HPLC after derivatization with the fluorescent probe mBrB Acid labile sulfide was determined by the methylene blue method Stock cultures of the marine microalga Native Cd–PC complexes were isolated from 2-liters cultures of A dried sample containing PC-coated CdS nanocrystallites was diluted in 10 ml of 25 mM HEPES pH 8. One-milliliter subsamples were adjusted to pH from 8 to 3 using HCl. The samples were let to react overnight and then applied to a Superdex Peptide HR column equilibrated with HEPES to the same pH of the sample. pH-induced changes were investigated by collecting and assaying for Cd, PC and sulfide the eluted fractions. In vitro synthesis of PC-coated CdS nanocrystallites was studied by adding sodium sulfide to native sulfide-free Cd–PC complexes at sulfide/Cd molar ratio of 1. The samples were incubated at room temperature for 1 h. After degassing with nitrogen (30 min) to remove un-reacted free sulfide, the samples were applied to a Superdex Peptide HR column in order to resolve the products of the reaction. Size exclusion chromatograms of crude extracts of cells of The properties of PC-coated CdS nanocrystallites were investigated on a concentrated and purified sample of the peak A. This sample was obtained from six Cd-treated cultures. In the last step of purification, the size-fractionated sample was subjected to quantitative analysis. PC chromatograms, obtained from off-line reverse-phase HPLC determination of non protein thiols on each 1-ml fraction of the SEC column eluate, show that γ-glutamyl peptides with pH-Induced lability of native PC-coated CdS nanocrystallites was investigated in the pH range from 8.0 to 3.0 ( The ability of native, sulfide-free, Cd–PC complexes to act as matrix for in vitro synthesis of PC-coated CdS nanocrystallites was investigated by reacting Na The marine diatom Native PC-coated CdS crystallites from For their characteristics, PC-coated CdS crystallites from Our results on the in vitro formation of CdS nanocrystallites showed that addition of sulfide ions to native Cd–PC complexes, differing for their Compared with native PC-coated CdS crystallites, the in vitro synthesized particles showed a higher sulfide/peptide thiol ratio, indicative of the presence of a lower amount of coating material, as well as showed red shift of the UV transition, indicative of the formation of particles with a larger size. These results agree with the finding that samples of glutathione-coated CdS particles with less coating material are larger than samples with more capping material As Cd, Pb ions also induce phytochelatin formation in cells of