Kazakhstan is a major producer of non-ferrous metals. The production of heavy metals is generally based on pyrometallurgical processes resulting in the generation of by-products which contain rare metals, in particular rhenium. The base mineral raw materials for recovery of rhenium are solid and liquid by-products of copper, lead and uranium production.
                  In pyrometallurgical processing of sulfide copper concentrates containing rhenium, this metal is concentrated in metallurgical gases. During the purification of the gas phase, rhenium is distributed between dusts, slime and wash sulfuric acid. Dusts are sent to lead smelters, and rhenium is recovered from wash sulfuric acid of copper production.
                  Solutions obtained during underground leaching of uranium ore could be a new source for commercial production of rhenium despite low concentration.
                  In the paper presented technological flowcharts for recovery of rhenium from by-products of copper, lead and uranium production with application of leaching, ion exchange, solvent extraction and electrodialysis.The unique properties of rhenium have predetermined its widespread use in today's rapidly developing fields of technology (nuclear, aerospace, missile, petrochemicals, etc.). In the 21st century, the main consumers of this metal are petrochemistry, aviation, and space. According to analysts, the world may face a significant lack of rhenium in the market that will be associated with the production of planes and fighters and a new generation of engines for them ( Currently the basic resources in the world for rhenium recovery are acid solutions formed during the wet purification of dust-gas-mixture produced at pyrometallurgical processing of molybdenite and copper concentrates. From molybdenite concentrates rhenium is recovered in Chile, USA, Germany ( From wash sulfuric acid solutions of copper smelters rhenium recovered in Kazakhstan and Poland. Initial concentrations of rhenium in kazakhstani solutions is more than 200 The apparent trend of growing consumption of rhenium increases its cost. In recent years, its world market price varies between 6000–10000 USD ( Results on the recovery of rhenium from by-products of Kazakhstan copper, lead and uranium production is summarized in this report. In the work Ambersep 920 и Amberlite IRA910 (further IRA910) of the DOW chemical Company (strong basic anion exchangers, polymerization type, macroporous, type II) and triisooktylamine (Hostarex A324, content of tertiary amine — 95%) were tried. Rhenium was analyzed by chemical and spectral methods based on techniques adapted to the by-products of metallurgical and uranium production ( In Kazakhstan there are a number of deposits belonging to the richest rhenium-bearing areas of the world: copper and molybdenum — Bozshakol, Konyrat, and Aktogai; molybdenum — Koktenkol; cupriferous sandstones — Zhezkazgan, oil shale — Bayhozha and several others ( At processing of Zhezkhazgan ore, the copper concentrate containing up to 30 The rhenium content in the wash sulfuric acid varies from 100 to 250 At the present time wash sulfuric acid containing the basic quantity of rhenium is the only source of its industrial production in Kazakhstan. Recovery of rhenium from the wash sulfuric acid is carried out by solvent extraction technology, shown in Thorough recovery of rhenium from wash sulfuric acid into marketable product — ammonium perrhenate by this technology is 96.85%. Recovery according to the process stages is the following: solvent extraction — 99.5%; solid-phase stripping — 99.36%; 89.1% of which precipitates as a salt of ammonium perrhenate (pulp) and 10.26% remain in the mother liquor; dissolving of the pulp with obtaining of crude ammonium perrhenate — 92.27%; recrystallization of crude ammonium perrhenate with obtaining marketable salt — 99.99%; precipitation of Zn(NH decomposition of complex salt with the transfer of rhenium in a solution and zinc in a deposit — 99.3%; evaporation of rhenium-containing solutions of decomposition of complex salts and crystallization of crude ammonium perrhenate — 89.40%. From a washing sulfuric acid simultaneously with rhenium an isotope osmium-187 and fine-dispersed deposit, containing both metals in concentrations thousand times more, than in an initial concentrate, are recovered ( In copper production in addition to wash sulfuric acid there are slimes and dusts, containing according to ( The uniform technology is developed for both products with obtaining from slimes compounds of lead, rhenium and isotope Os-187, from dusts - compounds of lead, rhenium, copper, zinc and metal cadmium ( Rhenium is extracted by TAA from mother liquors after lead sulfate deposition from integrated solutions of leaching. Considering, that in mother liquors after PbSO Mother liquors after PbSO Later on this technology was improved ( Secondly, rhenium from preliminarily neutralized by sulfuric acid to pH Involving into the production of rhenium solid by-products of copper industry — dusts, slimes and fine dispersed deposit will allow increase in ammonium perrhenate production in Kazakhstan for 22% from existing. As it has been noted above, the dusts of copper production containing up to 60% (wt.) of Pb, from 0.008 to 0.05 Re, small amounts of Cd, Bi and several trace elements are sent to a lead factory, where they are processed together with the lead concentrates and circulating plant materials. The charge is oxidatively roasted into sinters with their further reduction smelting into crude lead in the shaft furnaces. During this process dusts containing, % (wt.): 66.02 Pb; 0.58 Zn; 6.15 Cd; 0.09 Re; 0.10 Se; 0.042 Te; 0.23 Tl; 0.0015 In; 0.56 Fe; 0.72 Cu; 5.37 CI; 0.814 As; 0.024 Hg; 8.90 S are formed. This dust is the main source of rhenium, thallium and cadmium in lead production process. The method of dust leaching by solutions of sulfuric acid in a mix with the manganese concentrates produced in Kazakhstan is proposed for dust processing. Composition of manganese concentrate is the following, % (wt.): 63.20 Mn, 8.20 Fe, 2.18 Al, 0.3 Na, 0.34 Pb, 3.6 Zn, and 0.3 Ba. Based on laboratory studies of dust leaching the optimum conditions allowing to recovery 91% rhenium, 88% cadmium, 92% zinc into solution has been chosen. Solutions from dust leaching contain, g/dm A high concentration of chlorine (up to 35 It is found that cadmium and zinc are extracted in the form of chloride anions. The basic amount of Zn is removed from an extract by water; more than 50% of Cd remains in an extract. Stripping of metals from the extract (especially at high O:A ratios) by ammonia solution proceeds with the formation of the residue consisting of Cd(NH Two methods to obtain ammonium perrhenate from the residues containing ammonium perrhenate and various cadmium compounds have been developed. According to the first method, the residues were leached with water at boiling point and high ratios of S:L. Under these conditions cadmium is precipitated as hydroxide, rhenium passes into a solution. Rhenium-containing solutions were processed either by electrodialysis with obtaining rhenium acid and ammonium perrhenate, or by evaporation of solutions to a concentration of rhenium of 50–60 According to the second method, the residues were leached with sulfuric acid solutions. The 98% of rhenium is precipitated in the form of ammonium perrhenate, cadmium passes into a solution as soluble cadmium sulfate at certain concentration of sulfuric acid and S:L of 1:3. The technology of recovery of rhenium from the dusts of lead production is shown in Direct recovery of rhenium into the perrhenate ammonium was 77% of the content in dust. Indium, cadmium, zinc and thallium are extracted from raffinate by technologies operating at lead plants. It is known that uranium ores of different deposits contain rhenium ( Processing of uranium ores is carried out by the method in situ leaching (ISL). Solutions of sulfuric acid, carbonates and sodium or ammonium bicarbonates are used as the leaching reagents, depending on mineralogical composition of ores ( Therefore, they can be considered as a potential raw material for the production of rhenium. The behavior of rhenium in the technology of uranium recovery from ISL solutions with obtaining a concentrate of natural uranium has been studied at one of the enterprises in Kazakhstan. The analysis of data has shown, that: rhenium concentration in the solutions incoming on sorption varies from 0.56 to 0.88 rhenium is partially sorbed together with uranium, both at sorption operation, and at operation of additional saturation. Content of rhenium in additional-saturated anionite is practically constant — 840 rhenium is partially eluated together with uranium. This is confirmed by the presence of rhenium in the poor and rich eluates and also on anionites. The average content of rhenium in them is 2.5 and 3 presence of rhenium in eluent (2.5–8.75 presence of rhenium in the solution-precipitant (4–5.6 Based on the conducted work, the following industrial products have been identified, which can be considered as potential sources of raw materials for recovery of rhenium in the uranium industry: ISL solutions, Uranium sorption filtrates, Anionite after uranium elution, Mother liquors from uranium precipitation.  In this paper uranium sorption filtrates — solutions after recovery of uranium — was selected as the subject of studies. For the technological solutions of the uranium industry, characterized by low concentration of rhenium (0.4–8 From filtrates of uranium sorption processing, rhenium was adsorbed on the Ambersep 920 and Amberlite IRA910 anionites. These anionites are currently applied in the uranium technology. Experiments on sorption were carried out in dynamic conditions in columns with a fixed bed of anionites in chloride form, volume of anionite — 20 Rhenium full dynamic exchange capacity (FDEC) of these anionites is practically identical: 1 From saturated anionites rhenium is desorbed by eluent applied in uranium technology: sulfuric solution of ammonium nitrate at 40 Thus, concentrating of rhenium in ~ We found that rhenium sorption from acidic solutions with high content of nitrate-ions is impossible ( The solutions after desorption contain in g/dm The influence of Hostarex A324 concentration in extractant (1–40% (vol.)), ratio of organic and water phases (1:5  As seen from  Analysis of results led to the following conclusion: if rhenium content in the solution is up to 40  Rhenium four-stage extraction process has been modeled at O:A Taking into account the authors’ experience in the development and implementation of rhenium recovery technologies, rhenium back extraction has been carried out by an ammonia water solution (3 Is carried out in 4 steps at O:A Is conducted in one step by 8 Based on data the technological flowsheet ( The main source of rhenium in Kazakhstan is Zhezkazgan sulphide copper ore deposit. The most part of rhenium at the processing of copper concentrate passes into the wash sulfuric acid. Technological flowsheets of rhenium recovery from various by-products of copper concentrate processing are proposed. It is shown that dusts of oxidizing agglomerating roasting of lead charge are a real source for rhenium recovery in lead industry. The 91% of rhenium, 85.2% of cadmium, 92.3% of zinc and 90.7% of manganese are recovered into a solution during leaching of dusts by sulfuric acid solutions with use of a manganous concentrate as an oxidizer. For recovery of rhenium from these solutions solvent extraction technology is developed and introduced. Recovery of rhenium from the dusts into marketable products was 77%. The results of studies on the development of technology for production ammonium perrhenate from solutions after underground leaching of uranium ores have been presented. The basic stages of rhenium recovery are sorption on anionites, and desorption with the subsequent concentrating by a method of solvent extraction. The technology of rhenium recovery from filtrates after uranium sorption has been proposed. This work was financially supported by the