Norfloxacin is employed as in veterinary and human medicine against gram-positive and gram-negative bacteria. Due to the ineffective treatment at the wastewater treatment plants it becomes an emergent pollutant. Electro-oxidation appears as an alternative to its effective mineralization. This work compares Norfloxacin electro-oxidation on different anodic materials: two ceramic electrodes (both based on SnO2 + Sb2O3 with and without CuO, named as CuO and BCE, respectively) and a boron doped diamond (BDD). First, the anodes were characterized by cyclic voltammetry, revealing that NOR direct oxidation occurred at 1.30 V vs. Ag/AgCl. The higher the scan rate the higher both the current density and the anodic potential of the peak. This behavior was analyzed using the Randles–Sevcik equation to calculate the Norfloxacin diffusion coefficient in aqueous media, giving a value of D = 7.80 × 10−6 cm2 s−1 at 25 °C), which is close to the predicted value obtained using the Wilke-Chang correlation.
                  The electrolysis experiments showed that both NOR and TOC decay increased with the applied current density, presenting a pseudo-first order kinetic. All the anodes tested achieved more than 90% NOR degradation at each current density. The CuO is not a good alternative to BCE because although it acts as a catalyst during the first use, it is lost from the anode surface in the subsequent uses. According to their oxidizing power, the anodes employed are ordered as follows: BDD > BCE > CuO.Norfloxacin (NOR), whose molecular structure is presented in The main antibiotic discharge points into the wastewater network are pharmaceutical industries, hospitals and populated areas ( Electrochemical advanced oxidation processes appear as an interesting alternative to treat these effluents. Their main advantages over other techniques are their high versatility, no addition of chemical products is needed and low energy consumption ( However, although BDD presents a high chemical stability, high oxygen overpotential and a wide working anode potential ( In this sense, the present work will study the electrochemical behaviour of ceramic electrodes based on tin oxide doped with Sb The supporting electrolytes were prepared using analytical grade reagents and distilled water. NaCl and the Norfloxacin employed to make standard solutions were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich. All the standard solutions were made using ultrapure water HPLC gradient grade from Fisher Chemical. The solutions employed at the experiments consisted of 1.64 g L All these experiments were performed in a conventional three-electrode cell employing 50 mL of solution. An Ag/AgCl (saturated KCl) electrode was employed as reference electrode (RE), and all the potentials reported herein are referred to it. The counter electrode was a Pt foil with 1 cm The cyclic voltammetry, CV, experiments were carried out using a computer controlled by an Autolab PGSTAT302 N (Methrom) potentiostat/galvanostat. Previously to each CV, the WE was polarized at 2 V vs. Ag/AgCl for 30 s in order to clean the anode surface and assure the complete oxidation of the metal oxides present at the ceramic electrodes. The scan rate ranged from 10 to 100 mV s The electrochemical reactor was a Pyrex glass of 250 cm Electro-oxidation experiments were carried out under galvanostatic conditions at three different current densities (76, 114, 189 mA cm The mineralization current efficiency, was determined as follows (  When the CVs obtained in presence of NOR for the different electrode materials are compared with those obtained with only the supporting electrolyte, From In order to determine the limiting step of the direct oxidation of NOR, its current peak intensity (I The relationship between I Therefore, the NOR diffusion coefficient in aqueous media was calculated using the linear fitting of the experimental data presented in  A deeper sigh into the UV diagram ( Regarding TOC decay evolution with time for all the applied current densities and electrodes ( From the comparison of The mineralization current efficiency (  From The presence of copper in solution has been experimentally confirmed by atomic absorption spectroscopy. During the successive uses of this anode, the results are getting worse, reaching lower TOC values than those obtained using the basic ceramic electrode of SnO Summarizing the data obtained previously in terms of degree of mineralization and degradation, it is concluded that the BDD presents the best percentages of both parameters, and the CuO does not represent a good alternative to the basic ceramic anode as the loss of copper worsens its behaviour. Although the ceramic electrodes presented lower values of NOR removal than the BDD, the values obtained are similar or higher than those obtained by another anodes also formed by metallic oxides, as observed in the Table presented at the supplementary material ( The generation of fluoride, together with nitrogen ionic compounds and short-chain organic acids are expected from NOR oxidation. In addition, the chloride ions provided by the supporting electrolyte were also measured as they can be oxidized to some active species, which may also be involved in NOR oxidation. Concerning the main nitrogen ionic compound generated during NOR electro-oxidation, a high controversy exists since some authors present the ammonium as main compound ( Regarding the organic ions detected (supplementary  This work is focused on the study of the electrochemical oxidation of NOR in a common electrolyte, NaCl, using three different electrodes: a commercial BDD, a ceramic electrode based on SnO From the voltammetric analysis obtained for the different electrode materials an anodic peak at 1.30 V vs. Ag/AgCl was observed, which was attributed to NOR oxidation. Additionally, another anodic wave at 1.7 V vs. Ag/AgCl was also detected, related to the contribution of two processes: the oxidation of an intermediate compound generated during NOR oxidation together with the onset of the oxygen electrochemical reaction. NOR oxidation was classified as an irreversible process and controlled not only by diffusion. The diffusion coefficient for NOR in aqueous media was calculated as 7.80 × 10 The higher mineralization and degradation degrees were obtained for the BDD, followed by the BCE and, finally, using the CuO anode. The apparent kinetic constants for NOR removal assuming a pseudo-first order kinetics reaction were calculated as a function of the anode material, presenting the following tendency: BDD > BCE > CuO. The CuO electrode presented a considerable different oxidizing power from its first use in relation to the following ones because the copper present at the anode is dissolved into the solution acting as a catalyst for the oxidation of the organic compounds. After this process, although the composition of the CuO anode becomes similar to that of the BCE, its lower active surface worsens the process. From the results obtained in this study, it is inferred that the BDD presents the best results. The CuO does not represent a good alternative to the basic ceramic anode as the loss of copper worsens its behaviour. Although the ceramic electrodes presented lower values of NOR removal than the BDD, the values obtained are similar or higher than those obtained by other anodes also formed by metallic oxides.  The authors want to express their gratitude to the Ministerio de Economía y Competitividad (Spain) and the The following is the Supplementary data to this article: Supplementary data to this article can be found online at