Objective
                  To determine the incidence of rotational malalignment in distal femoral and proximal tibial fractures using computed tomography (CT) scanograms following indirect reduction and internal fixation with the minimally invasive percutaneous osteosynthesis (MIPO) technique.
               
                  Design
                  Prospective Cohort.
               
                  Setting
                  Level I Trauma Centre.
               
                  Patients/Participants
                  A total of 27 consecutive subjects, and 14 proximal tibia and distal femur fractures.
               
                  Intervention
                  All patients underwent indirect reduction and internal fixation with a MIPO plating system. A CT scanogram to measure rotational malalignment between the injured and non-injured extremity was then undertaken.
               
                  Main outcome measure(s)
                  Femoral anteversion angles and tibial rotation angles between the injured and non-injured extremities were compared. Malrotation was defined as a side-to-side difference of >10°.
               
                  Results
                  A total of 14 postoperative tibias and 13 femurs underwent CT scanograms. Three females and 11 males with an average age of 38.1 years sustained proximal tibia fractures and six females and seven males with an average age of 55.8 years sustained distal femur fractures. The difference between tibial rotation in the injured and the non-injured limbs ranged from 2.7 to 40.0° with a mean difference of 16.2° (p
                     =0.656, paired T-test). Fifty percent of the tibias fixed with MIPO plates were malrotated >10° from the uninjured limbs. The difference between femoral anteversion in the injured and non-injured limbs ranged from 2.0 to 31.3° with a mean difference of 11.5° (p
                     =0.005, paired T-test). A total of 38.5% of the distal femurs fixed with MIPO plates were malrotated >10° from the uninjured limb.
               
                  Conclusions
                  Following fixation of distal femoral and proximal tibial fractures, the incidence of malrotation was 38.5% and 50%, respectively. The difference of the mean measures was significant for femoral malrotation; however, statistical significance could not be demonstrated for tibial malrotation. The incidence of malrotation following MIPO plating in this study is much higher than that quoted in previous studies.With the popularity of biological fixation, minimally invasive percutaneous plating is now being used more frequently at trauma centres around the world. Published reports have shown good outcomes, including shorter healing time and lower re-operation rates. Several large studies looking at tibial intramedullary (IM) nails showed that the incidence of malrotation ranged anywhere from 0% to 6% when measured clinically. The primary objective of this study was to determine the incidence of lower extremity malrotation in a prospective cohort of patients with distal femoral and proximal tibial fractures treated with the L.I.S.S. plating system using a standard lower extremity postoperative CT scanogram protocol. Scientific and ethical approval to proceed with this prospective study was obtained from the Conjoint Health Research Ethics Board. The study design was a prospective cohort based at the local Level 1 Trauma Center. A consecutive series of 38 eligible patients with either distal femoral or proximal tibial fractures treated with L.I.S.S. plate fixation were approached to be enrolled in the study. A total of 27 patients consented to enter the study. As many as 11 patients declined entry or were unreachable. All patients, who had L.I.S.S. stabilisation for distal femoral and proximal tibial fractures, were considered for enrolment in this study. Inclusion criteria consisted of both closed and open fractures, periprosthetic fractures and intra-articular and extra-articular metaphyseal fractures. Only unilateral fractures were included. Pregnant females, patients with claustrophobia to the CT scanner and patients with other fractures, fixation or revision of previous fixation in either the ipsilateral or the contralateral femur or tibia were excluded from the study. The decision to proceed with MIPO plate fixation of a distal femoral or proximal tibial fracture was made by the attending staff surgeon. The attending staff surgeon was, each time, a senior attending staff surgeon and was present for all of the surgery that was provided to the patients. All patients underwent treatment of their injury based on the surgeon's standard treatment protocols. Poly-traumatised patients were treated in conjunction with the trauma and intensive care services until when they were appropriately stabilised and ready for the operating room. The standard operating room set-up for MIPO plating with a fracture table and intra-operative fluoroscopy was used in each case. Standard principles for treating open fractures were followed, although no application of external fixators or staged reconstructions was necessary. Strict adherence to definitive AO fracture treatment principles included open reduction of any intra-articular fractures, indirect reduction of metaphyseal and metadiaphyseal fractures and minimally invasive plate application and fixation using fluoroscopic guidance. All 38 patients who had L.I.S.S. fixation in our institution during the study period were approached to enrol in the study postoperatively and 27 patients consented to participate. Chart notes were studied for demographics, mechanism of injury and type of fracture. All preoperative X-rays were reviewed and classified using the AO/Orthopaedic Trauma Association (AO/OTA) classification system. Prior to hospital discharge, a CT scan of both lower extremities was conducted based on a standard protocol for assessing femoral version angle and tibial rotation. Each measurement was taken on three different occasions by a fellowship-trained radiologist, and the mean calculated to reduce intra-observer variability. Negative angles denote internal tibial torsion and femoral retroversion while positive angles indicate external tibial torsion and femoral anteversion. Measurements for the injured and non-injured extremity were recorded and the side-to-side difference was calculated. The mean rotational difference between limbs was then calculated for the femurs and tibias and a range of rotational differences was recorded along with the standard deviation. A side-to side difference in tibial torsion and femoral version angles >10° were considered a significant degree of malrotation based on previous references. The incidence of malrotation for the femurs and tibias was calculated along with a paired Of the 27 patients enrolled in the study, 13 had distal femoral fractures and 14 had proximal tibial fractures. Injuries included both high- and low-energy mechanisms from simple falls, falls from a height, motor vehicle crashes and one-blast injury. In the femur fracture population, six patients were female and seven were male at an average age of 55.8 years. Using the AO/OTA classification, six 33.A1, four 33.A2, one 33.A3, one 33.C1 and one 33.C2 fractures were identified. No femur fractures were open. The proximal tibial fracture population included three females and 11 males at an average age of 38.1 years. The number of fractures was classified as three 41.A2, four 41.A3, four 41.C1, one 41.C2 and two 41.C3. Three Gustillo-Anderson Grade II open fractures occurred. All were AO/OTA type A fractures. For the 14 tibia fractures, the postoperative rotational difference between the injured and non-injured extremities ranged from 2.7 to 40 ( Similarly for the femur fractures, postoperative rotational difference between the injured and non-injured extremities ranged from 2.0 to 31.3 ( One patient (41.A1) was lost to follow-up after the initial operation. Apart from that patient, no tibial or femoral fractures required revision fixation for rotational malalignment for 2 years after surgery. Two tibial fractures (41.A3 and 41.C2) required hardware removal after fracture healing for hardware prominence. One tibial fracture (41.C1) required conversion to an IM tibial nail for nonunion of the diaphyseal extension of the fracture. One femoral fracture (33.A1) required revision plate fixation for coronal plane malalignment not rotational malalignment. Fractures around the knee are quite common and account for approximately 1–2% of all fractures. Typically, they occur bimodally, either as a result of high-energy trauma in the younger population or due to trivial falls in elderly people with osteoporotic bones. Distal femoral and proximal tibial periprosthetic fractures around total knee replacements are now a common phenomenon, with a reported incidence of 2–3%. Minimally invasive osteosynthesis is now a common technique, designed to provide stable internal fixation through a minimally invasive surgical technique. As the fracture site is not exposed directly, this technique conceptually counters all the disadvantages of direct open reduction. The ‘L.I.S.S.’ is a prototype of the minimally invasive systems. This implant system consists of anatomically precontoured plates and locking screws designed to provide angular stability at the plate–screw junction. The load transmission across the fracture occurs through the screw–plate junction without depending upon the frictional force between bone and plate. Tight apposition of plate to bone is not required, which spares the circumferential vascularity. While the principles of intra-articular fracture reduction and fixation are adhered to using the MIPO systems, fixation of the metaphyseal block to the shaft is done by indirect methods. Early results of the L.I.S.S. system are encouraging with reported high union rates and a much lower complication rate. Correct restoration of limb alignment, particularly rotational alignment, is technically difficult when resorting to indirect reduction techniques with the aid of intra-operative fluoroscopy. The only sure way to restore the normal anatomy is to ‘key in’ the various fracture fragments under direct vision. Depending on the degree of comminution of the metadiaphysis, even this can be extremely difficult. Draping of most of the limb and limited field of projection of the image intensifiers used for these closed procedures adds to the technical difficulty of accurate assessment of limb rotation intra-operatively. CT scanning has become the gold standard for assessing limb rotational alignment. Using CT, our study demonstrated a significantly higher incidence of femoral and tibial malrotation >10 of 38.5% and 50%, respectively, following L.I.S.S. plating. This incidence of malrotation is much higher than previously quoted in L.I.S.S. outcome studies to date. Of note, the type A femur fractures appeared to have a more significant degree of malrotation than the more comminuted type C fractures and the type C tibial fractures were more malrotated than the type A fractures. This seems counterintuitive and contradictory. Type A femur fractures are extra-articular whereas the type C fractures are intra-articular with a higher degree of comminution. Using intra-articular fracture reduction and fixation principles, open reduction and visualisation of the articular surface prior to fixation of the metaphyseal block to the diaphyseal segment would have allowed a wider anatomical view of the fracture. This wider anatomical view and dissection, compared with a standard minimally invasive approach without the need for articular reduction and fixation, may have allowed for a better assessment of the reduction in all planes. Furthermore, the more comminuted fractures may have responded to traction and ligamentotaxis in a more favourable manner, allowing the soft tissues to re-align the fracture fragments closer to their anatomic positions. Type A fractures with larger extra-articular fracture fragments can be more difficult to reduce with a minimally invasive approach depending strictly on ligamentotaxis, as the fracture fragments can sometimes get ‘caught up’ in the surrounding soft tissues and prevent accurate reduction. Regarding the tibial fractures, unfortunately, no conclusions can be drawn from this group as the difference between the mean measures of rotation was insignificant, indicating the group was underpowered. Three of the type A and none of the type C tibial fractures were grade II open fractures. Treating these fractures with irrigation, debridement and then fixation using the L.I.S.S. system may have contributed to the lesser degree of malrotation seen in this group. Also, the generally smaller soft-tissue envelope around the tibia, combined with the ability to use more of the extremity for judging alignment, may have made reduction of the type A fractures more successful. Intra-operative assessment of limb alignment can be extremely difficult, particularly because there can be a wide range of tibial rotation and femoral version between patients. Based on our study results, improved techniques to assess rotation intra-operatively need to be developed. Fluoroscopy provides some assistance, particularly with coronal and sagittal alignment, using antero-posterior (AP) and lateral images. However, the field of view is limited. Rotational alignment is the most difficult to assess. The other limb, if uninjured, is needed as a comparison to base rotational measurements upon. Previous studies using CT scans looking at uninjured lower limbs for rotation and length show an average side-to-side difference in rotation of only 3–4°. Our study had several limitations and shortcomings. A larger patient population from multiple centres would make the results more generalisable and relevant. No consistent record was kept of adjuncts to fracture reduction and fixation used for each case. Manual traction, traction boot, pins or temporary K-wire fixation are a few examples of adjuncts that may influence quality of reduction. Although it can be assumed that the clinical assessment of limb rotation was deemed acceptable intra-operatively, this study would have been stronger if we would have correlated clinical rotational assessment to postoperative CT assessment. Despite the fact that none of our patients required revision of their fracture fixation for reasons of clinical malrotation, clinical correlation was not made between the malrotated limbs and postoperative patient satisfaction using any outcome scores. Although the purpose of this study was mainly to assess limb rotation radiographically, clinical correlation and functional limitations related to the degree of malrotation would highlight the importance of accurate rotational alignment. Finally, the sub-population of tibia fractures was underpowered. Tibial torsion and femoral version rotational malalignment is under-appreciated in the literature when distal femoral and proximal tibial fractures are assessed clinically by an examining surgeon. CT scanning identified rotational malalignment in 38.5% of distal femur fractures and 50% of proximal tibial fractures in our study. Certain injury patterns appear to be more prone to malreduction with indirect methods than others. Work needs to be done to develop a consistent, reliable and convenient method of assessing intra-operative rotational fracture alignment and reduction. Long-term outcome studies looking at malrotated limbs and the development of corresponding joint disease should be performed. All authors disclose that they have no conflict of interests that could inappropriately influence this work. This study was self-funded. Self-funded. We wish to thank Dr. James Powell for the inclusion of patients in this study.