In this paper, oxygen transfer in the ferrous iron biooxidation process in a packed-bed reactor is studied. The reactor consists of a polymethyl methacrylate column randomly packed with siliceous stone particles with inlets for liquid medium and air at the bottom from where they flood the reactor. The aim of this work is to determine the parameters that influence the oxygen transfer from air bubbles to the liquid medium, and to characterize the oxygen transport through the bulk liquid medium.Ferric iron can be used as oxidising agent in hydrometallurgical leaching operations The highest ferric iron productivity found in the literature Oxygen transfer is the key to aerobic biological processes, especially at high cell densities when cell growth is likely to be limited by availability of oxygen in medium; therefore, the understanding of the phenomena implied in the oxygen transfer is essential for the design of these reactors. The present work studies the parameters that influence the oxygen transfer from air bubbles to the liquid medium and the characterization of the oxygen transport through the bulk liquid medium in a packed-bed reactor, in which the geometrical design details, operating conditions and liquid medium composition were similar, as far as possible, to those of the bioreactor studied by The reactor was similar to that used by The reactor consisted of a 1249-mm-high and 84-mm-diameter polymethyl methacrylate column randomly packed with siliceous stone particles of 6–7 mm in size. The reactor was divided into four zones, named zero, first, second and third floor. First, second and third floors were packed beds each 280 mm high, in which the porosity was 0.42. A 45-mm high empty space separated each bed floor from the next one. The packing of each floor was supported by plastic screens. The air diffuser was placed at the bottom of the column, inside the zero floor. Zero floor was a space without support particles. The air diffuser was a wood prism (4.3×1.5×1.5 cm) from whose pores emerged the air bubbles. Air was supplied under pressure (0.5 bar) by a compressor. The liquid medium was fed at the bottom of the column by a peristaltic pump and went out by a hole (by overflow) placed above the third floor. The reactor was placed in a thermostatically controlled room, the temperature of which was maintained at 31 °C. The liquid medium was a ferrous sulphate acid solution with 8 g/L ferrous iron and pH 1.25 adjusted with sulphuric acid. The air bubble size distribution was experimentally studied for packed-bed heights ( The volume of gas inside the reactor ( In a bubble size distribution, each bubble size, characterized by the bubble diameter The total interfacial area for oxygen transfer is the gas–liquid interfacial area, which is a function of the total volume of gas in the system as well as of the bubble size distribution. The gas–liquid interfacial area in a given section of the column between heights The specific interfacial area at a height The general expression for the gas–liquid transfer rate of a component A can be simplified for systems in which most of the resistance lies in the liquid phase film: if A is poorly soluble in the liquid, e.g., oxygen in aqueous solution, the liquid phase mass transfer resistance dominates and the gas–liquid oxygen transfer rate, The rate of oxygen transfer is influenced by several physical and chemical factors that change either the value of Titanium (III) is a powerful reducing agent and reacts instantaneously with the oxygen dissolved in the liquid medium according to the equation: The gas–liquid oxygen transfer rate for a section of reactor between heights From The residence time distribution (RTD) was experimentally studied at packed-bed heights of 0–84 cm. Air and liquid flow rates were 1.1 L/min and 2.4 L/h, respectively. Copper ion was used as a tracer. At a specific time ( Ferrous iron concentration was determined by end point automatic titration with 0.0083 M K The bioreactor studied by Steady state selected  air flow rate=1095 mL/min liquid flow rate=2374 mL/h Ferrous iron concentration in the inlet solution=8.08 g/L (pH=1.28) Ferric iron productivity  zero floor=1.14 g/h first floor=7.31 g/h second floor=4.89 g/h third floor=2.90 g/h whole reactor=16.24 g/h.     The stream of gas in the form of small bubbles leaving the diffuser was the main source of agitation in the reactor. Therefore, as a section of the reactor was closer to the air diffuser, its degree of liquid axial mixing must be higher; hence, the liquid flow pattern approaches that of the ideal CSTR. From The limitations of the methodology applied to the study of the oxygen transfer lie in the fact that an abiotic system is involved, which may differ from conditions present in a bioreactor with a biofilm on the support particles. Therefore, the application of absolute values of the parameters experimentally determined in this study to the bioreactor developed by ⋅ In spite of the fact that both systems are geometrically similar and have the same type of solid particles forming the packed bed, passageways for gas and liquid in the bed will be different in size and shape (more or less tortuous) mainly due to the presence or absence of biofilm. This implies a liquid–bubble mixing pattern different in each system. ⋅ In accordance with the methodology employed for the liquid flow model study, this is related to the bed height instead of to the vertical position in the whole reactor (including zero, first, second and third floors). In the whole reactor, at a certain vertical position ⋅ Owing to the presence of biomass in the bioreactor, fluid characteristics (density, viscosity, surface tension, etc.) might be different from those of the liquid used in this work. It is known that oxygen transfer is influenced by the presence of cells in fermentation broths Taking into account the abovementioned statements, it can be concluded that the relationships between the The gas–liquid interfacial area of the first floor is higher than that of the second and third floors, these two being similar. The liquid axial mixing extent depends on the vertical location in the column, increasing as the proximity to the air diffuser increases. The By considering these results, a hypothesis is made to address how gas–liquid oxygen transfer contributes to explain the differences in the ferric iron productivity found in each floor of the bioreactor (1) The oxygen transferred by bubbles housed in bed floors is almost totally consumed by the biomass living there, since the dissolved oxygen was the limiting agent of the biooxidation process in the steady state considered. (2) The oxygen transferred by bubbles housed in zero floor is not totally consumed by the biomass living there as there are good conditions for oxygen transfer (the highest gas–liquid interfacial area and the highest value of (3) The spare dissolved oxygen in zero floor is transported by the liquid moving upwards to other sections of the bioreactor where it is consumed by the biomass housed in the biofilm. (4) The amount of oxygen transported by the liquid moving upwards from zero floor to other sections of the bioreactor is proportional to the liquid axial mixing extent in them. Axial mixing allows, in its turn, that liquid moving downwards and passing through zero floor increases its dissolved oxygen concentration. Now, ferric iron productivity differences can be understood. The highest ferric iron productivity was obtained in the first floor due to its high gas–liquid interfacial area and to its high liquid axial mixing extent. The ferric iron productivity of the second floor was higher than that of third one due to the fact that, in spite of both floors having similar gas–liquid interfacial areas, the second floor has a liquid axial mixing extent higher than that of the third floor. In a packed-bed reactor for ferrous iron biooxidation, the gas–liquid interfacial area per unit of bed height is not constant along the reactor, being higher in sections closer to the air diffuser. In spite of being a tubular reactor, there are deviations from the plug-flow model that are higher as the reactor section is closer to the air diffuser. When the dissolved oxygen is the limiting agent for the biooxidation process, the ferric iron productivity in a section of the reactor depends on the gas–liquid interfacial area and on the axial mixing extent of the section. The authors wish to acknowledge the financial support of CICYT (Cominsión Interministerial de Ciencia y Tecnologı́a, Spain), Project BIO95 0482.