Objectives
                  The purpose of this study was to determine if shear bond resistance of orthodontic brackets bonded to enamel is associated with genes implicated in the enamel mineralization process.
               
                  Methods
                  Ninety-two permanent, caries-free premolars extracted for orthodontic purposes and their associated saliva samples were obtained. Eighteen single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) were studied for association with shear bond resistance. The genes of interest in this study were those previously associated with dental caries by our group. All tooth samples were bonded on the buccal surface with metallic lower lateral brackets, and then subjected to physical debonding. The force required to debond the bracket was recorded in Newtons (N) and converted to a shear bond resistance value in Megapascals (N/mm2). The data were analyzed for statistical significance as compared with the mean shear bond resistance value via PLINK whole genome analysis software.
               
                  Results
                  Associations were found between the SNPs for tuftelin (rs7526319, P = 0.004) and amelogenin (rs17878486, P = 0.04) and a higher shear bond resistance.
               
                  Conclusion
                  The collected data support the proposed hypothesis that genes involved in the mineralization process affect the bonding of orthodontic brackets, and such an association is of value for the field of orthodontics, particularly in evaluating the efficacy of enamel-resin bond strength for patients receiving treatment.The strength of the bond between a bracket and the enamel surface is a key consideration when evaluating the efficacy of orthodontic treatment. This bond strength is highly dependent on a number of physical factors, including the hardness, tensile strength, and fracture toughness of the bracket that is bound to enamel [ Of particular importance to this physical bonding phenomenon is the composition and surface topography of the enamel surface. There is considerable variation in enamel proteins among the human population, and variation in genes encoding these proteins has been associated with enamel microhardness variation [ The process of enamel formation, or amelogenesis, is highly regulated at the genetic level. Amelogenesis comprises the differentiation of inner enamel epithelium cells to functional pre-secretory and secretory ameloblast cells, those that secrete the mineralized hydroxyapatite structure as well as key proteins that regulate this mineralization process. Enamel matrix proteins, secreted by ameloblasts and found in secretory enamel, regulate both the formation and organization of nascent mineral particles, and these proteins include amelogenin, ameloblastin, enamelin, tuftelin, and tuftelin interacting protein [ Tuftelin is a glycoprotein coded by the Variations at the DNA level may exist for the expression of these proteins in the form of single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs). Because of their role in the formation and organization of enamel, differential expression of enamel proteins may lead to a significant consequence on the surface characteristics of enamel and subsequent bonding ability to an adhesive resin. Regarding the measure of shear bond resistance of orthodontic brackets and genetic variation in enamel, we hypothesized that SNPs in the genes coding for enamel-matrix proteins could result in stronger or weaker bond strength. The purpose of this study was to determine if shear bond resistance of orthodontic brackets bonded to enamel is associated with genes implicated in the enamel mineralization process. This cross-sectional study was composed of 92 patients of Turkish descent, consisting of 37 male and 55 female patients with an average age of 17 years who presented to the Department of Orthodontics, Faculty of Dentistry, Istanbul University, during the period of September 2011 to November 2012. Subjects were examined by one of the authors (M.B.) and the sum of decayed, missing due to caries, and filled teeth (DMFT) was calculated for each subject. Dental photographs and panoramic radiographs were taken of each participant, and one first bicuspid, extracted for orthodontic purposes, was obtained from each participant as a source of enamel samples. During this time period, all patients diagnosed with needing upper and lower premolars extracted for orthodontic purposes were used. The study was approved by the Ethics committee of the Istanbul University, Medical Faculty, Istanbul, Turkey, and the University of Pittsburgh Institutional Review Board (IRB #11070236). Informed consent was obtained from all participating individuals and parents/legal guardians. Extracted premolar samples were first cleaned of tissue remnants, and then stored in a 10% buffered formalin solution at a pH of 7. Crowns were then separated from the roots bucco-lingually and mesio-distally to obtain sectioned enamel surfaces. Teeth were then sanded with abrasive paper at 320, 400, and 600 grit for 1 minute and polished using a diamond suspension to produce a uniform flat surface for testing. For the purpose of this experiment, the buccal surfaces of the premolars were used, and all teeth samples were stored in de-ionized water before use. Before performing the bonding of the orthodontic bracket, the enamel was etched to condition the surface. Reliance (Itasca, IL 60143) 37% phosphoric acid gel etchant solution was dabbed for 30 seconds on the buccal surfaces of each tooth sample via cotton pledget according to the manufacturer's instructions to prepare the surfaces for bonding. After application of the etching gel, the surface was washed in de-ionized water to clear the enamel of any residue. The tooth was then dried with oil and moisture-free air. After etching, an Orthos Ormco (Orange, CA) metallic lower lateral bracket (0.022 slot, −5 torque, +4 angulation, and cross-sectional area of 10.7415 mm To acquire the shear bond value, the force required to debond the bracket from the sample (measured in N) was divided by the surface area of the bracket to enamel contact (10.7415 mm Unstimulated saliva samples were obtained from all participants and stored in Oragene DNA Self-Collection kits (DNA Genotek, Kanata, ON, Canada) at room temperature until processed. DNA was extracted according to the manufacturer's instructions. Seventeen SNPs were selected for this study ( Shear bond force data were divided into quartiles and terciles based on the recorded shear bond value and analyzed for statistical significance as compared with the mean shear bond value via PLINK whole genome analysis software [ The shear bond force of each of the 92 samples is listed in The aim of this study was to explore the potential of a genetic link between genetic variation in enamel formation genes and a clinically relevant outcome (bond strength of orthodontic brackets). The reported association of amelogenin ( Another relevant clinical scenario of interest to the orthodontist is the risk of caries formation around the brackets (white spot lesions). Dental enamel is a highly mineralized tissue, with 85% of its volume occupied by hydroxyapatite crystals with a structure rigorously controlled in ameloblasts through the interaction of a number of organic matrix molecules. Shimizu et al. [ This study has limitations that include a lack of sample size predetermination. However, to reduce selection bias in this study, all patients needing extractions within that time period were included. Similarly, the population substructure may have gone undetected. In Istanbul, 75% of the population is Turkish with the remainder consisting of Kurdish, Armenian, Jewish, and Greek individuals [ Although concerned about multiple testing, we avoided applying the strict Bonferroni correction and increase type II error. If we had used Bonferroni correction, we would have lowered the alpha to 0.003 (0.05/17 markers) or 0.001 (0.05/17 markers × 3 groupings, terciles, quartile, and mean). We have demonstrated previously [ In summary, genetic variation appears to influence the shear bond force needed to dislodge orthodontic brackets. This is of value for the field of orthodontics, particularly in evaluating the efficacy of enamel-resin bond strength. In addition, molecules that contribute to an enamel more susceptible to demineralization would increase the risk of caries formation around brackets for patients receiving orthodontic treatment.