Ten supracondylar fractures of the femur above a total knee arthroplasty were treated with open reduction and internal fixation using a metal plate and cortical allograft struts. Failure with nonunion of previous operative treatments was seen in 5 patients. The other 5 patients had either severe osteopenia or comminution of the fracture above the knee prosthesis. At an average of 38 months' follow-up, all the fractures healed with an average union time of 17.6 weeks. The postoperative knee alignment averaged 5.1° valgus. Infection occurred in 1 patient, which resulted in a poor outcome. The remaining 9 patients were functioning well at the most recent follow-up examination. The use of cortical allograft struts combined with a compression plate provided satisfactory results for supracondylar fractures above knee prostheses with severe osteopenia or loss of bone stock after initial failure of internal fixation.Supracondylar fracture of the femur above a total knee arthropasty (TKA) is a formidable challenge to an orthopaedic surgeon. The complication rates ranged from 0% to 75% with nonoperative and operative treatments in the reported series (Table 1) From March 1995 to October 1999, 10 patients with ipsilateral fractures of the femur above a TKA were treated with open reduction and internal fixation using compression plates and deep-frozen cortical allograft struts. There were 9 women and 1 man with an average age of 68 years (range, 56–77 years). The initial diagnoses were osteoarthritis in 9 patients and traumatic arthritis in 1 patient. Eight patients had primary TKA, and 2 patients had revision TKA using a stemmed prosthesis. Four patients had insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus. In every knee, the fracture was due to a fall. The fracture occurred 2 to 9 years after the index TKA (average, 4.7 years). Five patients had a previous attempt of open reduction and internal fixation using a compression plate, but all resulted in loss of reduction and nonunion (Figs. 1 and 2). Fractures were classified according to modified Neer classification After adequate exposure of the femoral condyle and distal femur through a standard lateral or anterolateral approach as described by Henry The patients began to use a continuous passive motion machine 48 hours after operation until 90° of knee flexion was achieved. A hinge knee brace or cast brace was applied after suture removal in unstable fractures because of severe comminution or fractures at the distal femur. Protected partial weight bearing was allowed from 6 to 12 weeks. At 12 weeks, the patient was allowed to bear full weight as tolerated if there was radiographic evidence of fracture healing. All patients returned for radiologic examination and clinical evaluation at 6, 12, 16, 20, and 24 weeks, then every 6 months postoperatively. The clinical evaluation was based on the Hospital for Special Surgery knee rating system The average follow-up was 38 months (range, 12–68 months). All fractures had united with an average healing time of 17.6 weeks (range, 12–24 weeks). The postoperative alignment of the knee averaged 5.1° valgus (range, 5° varus to 8° valgus). All patients gained anatomic valgus alignment from 5° to 8° except 1 patient who had 5° varus as a result of a technical error. The average hospital stay was 12.4 days (range, 7–19 days). Complications included 1 deep wound infection, which resulted in knee arthrodesis, and 1 malalignment (5° varus), which was present immediately after open reduction and internal fixation. There were no cases of loss of alignment or nonunion. The postoperative arc of knee motion averaged 90.5° (range, 60–105°) if the knee with arthrodesis is excluded. Three patients had an excellent result, 6 had a good result, and 1 had a poor result. The poor result was due to postoperative infection and osteomyelitis ( The management of ipsilateral supracondylar fracture of the femur after TKA is controversial. Nonoperative treatments include traction, immobilization in a plaster cast, or use of a cast-brace Operative treatment with stabilization of the fracture provides the advantages of anatomic reduction, rigid fixation, and early range of motion. Operative treatments include open reduction and internal fixation with a blade plate, buttress plate, Rush rod, or retrograde intramedullary rod if the prosthesis is stable Retrograde supracondylar interlocking rod fixation has gained popularity in treating these fractures because it is minimally invasive, while providing good axial and rotational stability Chandler et al In the present study, 5 patients had osteopenia with comminution of the fracture and were not suitable for open reduction with condylar plate fixation alone The combination of allograft struts and a compression plate provide satisfactory results for supracondylar fractures above a TKA with severe osteopenia or loss of bone stock and failure of initial open reduction and internal fixation.