Impact oscillator with non-zero bouncing point or shifted impact oscillator is a linear oscillator that only moves above a certain value of displacement. It is the simplest model of non-linear and non-smooth dynamic systems such as drill bit - rock system with long (and soft) drill string or materials with pre-opened internal cracks or delamination surfaces which considerably reduce the material effective moduli when open. Positive bouncing point (displacement shift) reduces the period of free oscillations, while the negative bouncing point increases it as compared to the classical (unshifted) impact oscillator. Furthermore, the ratio of amplitudes (or energies) of the first two harmonics of the free oscillator can be used for the determination of the bouncing point. We found two types of multiple resonances. Type 1 resonances involve the periods of free oscillations. The driving force producing resonances of this type is harmonic (with the frequency equal or multiple to the “eigenfrequency”) with a shift. As the resonance progresses (from cycle to cycle) the period increases such that both the driving frequency and the shift should be adjusted for each driving frequency. Type 2 resonances are based on the period (and “eigenfrequency”) of free oscillations of the unshifted impact oscillator. The driving force creating resonances is also harmonic and with a shift. The resonances coincide with the corresponding resonances of the unshifted impact oscillator after adding the displacement shift. Under step load the shifted impact oscillator shows periodic solutions similar to the free vibrations but with the amplitude and period depending upon the impact amplitude (both positive and negative).A wealth of dynamic phenomena are associated with non-linear oscillators formed by a mass attached to a spring with non-linear relationship between the force and displacement. A special type of highly non-linear oscillators is the so-called bilinear oscillator (e.g., Bilinear oscillator without energy dissipation satisfies the following equation: Here Bilinear oscillators attract attention because they constitute the simplest model of dynamics of strongly non-linear processes characteristic for structures with loose contacts (e.g., Another possible application of shifted bilinear oscillator can be envisaged in creating new methods of monitoring of hydraulic fractures. The fluid in the fracture acts to produce higher stiffness in the process of fracture closure as opposite to its opening. Therefore when the driving amplitude is high and exceeds the magnitude of the normal component of in-situ compressive stress such a system can be modelled as a shifted bilinear oscillator, whose specific dynamic response could in principle be used for hydraulic fracture characterisation. So far, the majority of investigations concentrated on bilinear oscillators with zero transition point Bilinear oscillators with zero transition point mainly require numerical computations for the analysis. The next step in model simplification is to resort to asymptotics of infinite “compressive” stiffness, Here we extend the analysis of impact oscillators by relaxing the condition of zero bouncing point and consider what we term here as impact oscillator with non-zero bouncing point (positive or negative) or After dividing both parts of This equation will be considered together with boundary conditions We start our analysis with the case of free shifted impact oscillator by assuming the absence of the driving force, This solution is sketched in From 0 to The movement is periodic and hence The associated “eigenfrequency” is The period and the “eigenfrequency” are controlled by dimensionless parameter Now the solution of Developing this periodic solution into Fourier series using the interval of periodicity (- It is easy to show that series Series From here the natural frequency This result can be used for instance for estimation of the aperture of internal fractures. In this section we demonstrate two sets of multiple resonances driven by shifted harmonic excitation Assuming Here we impose the condition that the forced trajectory meets This can be regarded as tuning of shift The velocity at the end of the first cycle ( From condition Now we have the second cycle starting with velocity Since It is seen that the tuned shift  For comparison, For this set of resonances we introduce driving force shift After substituting it into This is a classical unshifted impact oscillator with the “eigenfrequency” Obviously, Therefore, at the beginning of each new cycle the velocity will increase by Δ The above two types of resonances differ by Δ Therefore the multiple resonances of the second type (that is inherited from the unshifted impact oscillator) are asymptotically as strong as the type 1 resonances. Some trajectories corresponding to the main resonances of this kind are shown in Consider step load The bouncing time, Velocity at Consider step load with linear rise, The linear solution (for times For For In what follows Then, keeping only terms linear with respect to ɛ displacement and velocity at the end of rise can be obtained in the following form: The displacement and velocity at the constant force stage ( The condition of reaching the bouncing point at This equation has the same form as Now the energy transformation can be investigated, again keeping the terms linear by ɛ. At The work is negative and coincides with the energy reduction at Shifted impact oscillator – a linear oscillator supporting only displacements that exceed a certain value (the displacement shift) is the simplest model of the dynamics of materials with pre-opened internal cracks or delamination surfaces or drill bit - rock systems. Positive displacement shift reduces the period of free oscillations, while the negative displacement shift increases it as compared to the unshifted impact oscillator. Furthermore, the ratio of amplitudes (or energies) of the first two harmonics of the free oscillator allows the determination of the displacement shift. Shifted impact oscillator possesses two types of (multiple) resonances. Type 1 resonances are based on the period of free oscillations. The driving force producing resonances of this type is harmonic (with the frequency equal to or multiple of the “eigenfrequency”) but with a force shift necessary to compensate for the displacement shift. Furthermore, as the resonance progresses (from cycle to cycle) the period increases and the “eigenfrequency” decreases such that both the driving frequency and the shift should be adjusted accordingly. The adjustment also depends upon the order number of harmonic. This is what we call the tuned resonance. Type 2 resonances are based on the period (and “eigenfrequency”) of free oscillations of the unshifted impact oscillator. The driving force producing type 2 resonances is harmonic (with the frequency equal to or multiple of the “eigenfrequency”) and with the shift independent of the harmonic number. The resonances coincide with the corresponding resonances of unshifted impact oscillator after adding the displacement shift. Under step load the shifted impact oscillator shows periodic solutions similar to the free vibrations but with the amplitude and period depending upon the impact amplitude (both positive and negative). Negative force step load with linear rise time shorter than the reaction time of the oscillator leads to temporary energy reduction, whereby the energy of the oscillator at the end of rise is smaller than the initial energy. This energy is shown to be accumulated in the loading device – the one which effects the step load with short rise time. With further loading the energy returns back to the oscillator. The shifted impact oscillator model is a simplification of shifted bilinear oscillators. Yet, it is important as it provides the understanding of basic properties and characteristics necessary for prediction of the behaviour of non-linear and non-smooth dynamic systems and verification of the complex models. None. AVD and EP acknowledge support from the