A new flow injection (FIA) procedure for the preconcentration of cadmium in urine using multiwalled carbon nanotubes (MWCNT) as sorbent and posterior electrothermal atomization atomic absorption spectrometry (ETA-AAS) Cd determination has been developed. Cadmium was retained in a column filled with previously oxidized MWCNTs and it was quantitatively eluted with a nitric acid solution. The parameters influencing the adsorption–elution process such as pH of the sample solution, amount of sorbent and flow rates of sample as well as eluent solutions have been studied. Cd concentration in the eluent was measured by ETA-AAS under the optimized conditions obtained. The results indicated the elimination of urine matrix effect as a consequence of the preconcentration process performed. Total recovery of cadmium from urine at pH 7.2 using a column with 45mg of MWCNTs as sorbent and employing a HNO3 0.5molL−1 solution for elution was attained. The detection limit obtained was 0.010μgL−1 and the preconcentration factor achieved was 3.4. The method showed adequate precision (RSD: 3.4–9.8%) and accuracy (mean recovery: 97.4–100%). The developed method was applied for the determination of cadmium in real urine samples from healthy people (in the range of 0.14–2.94μgL−1) with satisfactory results.Cadmium is a toxic metal without known positive physiological role in the human body, this element has been related to different damages in lung, kidneys and bones, according to the type of exposure Inductively coupled plasma-mass spectrometry (ICP-MS) and electrothermal atomization atomic absorption spectrometry (ETA-AAS) appear as the most common analytical techniques for Cd determination in urine samples. ICP-MS allow detecting cadmium at nanograms per litter levels, however, it presents mass spectral interferences by molybdenum oxide (MoO) generated in hot plasma The extraction of cadmium from urine provides a way to concentrate the metal and simultaneously to remove it from the complex urine matrix, separation techniques for Cd removal include solvent extraction and solid phase extraction Bearing in mind all these considerations and taking into account that no preconcentration method was developed for Cd in urine based on the use of MWCNT, the aim of this work was to develop a FI on-line solvent extraction for the separation and preconcentration of cadmium in a biological sample like urine and its subsequent determination by ETA-AAS. The developed preconcentration method will be comparatively studied with other optimized method for the direct determination of Cd in urine. The applicability of MWCNTs packed into a microcolumn as solid-phase extractant for Cd preconcentration as well as the effectiveness and efficiency of the proposed FIA solvent extraction method will be demonstrated by measuring real urine samples from unexposed people. An atomic absorption spectrometer, Varian-SpectrAA-600 with Zeeman correction, equipped with a Varian GTA-100 electrothermal atomizer linked to an automatic sample dispenser was used for this work. Measurements were performed using a Cd Varian Hollow Cathode Lamp operating at 238.8 A FIA system comprised a Gilson Minipuls-3 peristaltic pump, equipped with Tygon pump tubing of 1.42 Cadmium stock standard solution (1.0 Untreated MWCNTs (purity All sampler containers, autosampler cups and other materials were washed with nitric acid 10% (v/v) for a period of 24 Plackett–Burmann and central composite designs as well as the surface and contour plots used in optimization of ETA-AAS programs were carried out using the statistical software package Different urine samples were collected into acid-washed polypropylene bottles from healthy people. These samples were treated as follows: 100 500 For an aliquot of urine sample treated as indicated in 2.4, the pH was adjusted to 7.2 using the appropriate amounts of NaOH or HCl solutions. 8 The sorption capabilities of metal ions by raw CNTs are very low but they are significantly increased after oxidation by different oxidizing agents, this fact could be explained because the tips of CNTs treated were opened and the fractures took place at the location where defects such as pentagons and heptagons existed after oxidation. Therefore, the oxidation process improves their dispersion and increases a large amount of oxygen-containing functional groups like In the present work, according to our previous experiences and following the literature The preconcentration microcolumn was made from a PTFE tube with a length of 40 After oxidation of carbon nanotubes, some active groups, such as The retention of cadmium on the MWCNTs and the duration of the complete analysis are influenced by the sample flow rate through the column. The effect of sample flow rate on adsorption percentage of Cd was investigated by passing 8 Different mineral acid solutions (such as HNO The preconcentration and analysis of urine samples using a MWCNT column was found to be more complex than in water samples. In order to prevent the column blocked or overpressure in FIA system, it was considered filtering the urine, but problems of recovery were arising. Better results were obtained when the samples were diluted, and when a precolumn with glass fiber to retain solid particulates of the sample was used. Keeping in mind that cadmium in urine sample is present in very low concentrations and with the target to improve the sensitivity of the procedure; the percentage of pure urine in the sample solution was studied. Also, the sample solution volume to be passed through the column to obtain better performance was evaluated. On the other hand, the increase of volume and percentage of urine is directly related to the quantity of MWCNTs packed in the column, higher percentage and volume of urine contain higher ion amounts that need higher mass of sorbent mass to be retained. Then these three factors were evaluated together in the following ranges: the sorbent mass was investigated from 5 to 45 The mass of sorbent was studied for a sample volume of 8 The long-term stability of MWCNTs was examined by passing successively through the column samples of 8 The elimination of organic and inorganic matrix components during the mineralization step present certain difficulties in the cadmium ETA-AAS determination, because Cd is a volatile element that can be lost from the graphite atomizer at temperatures higher than 200 The effect of mineralization and atomization temperatures on the cadmium integrated absorbance for urine sample was studied in the range of 200–1000 Several authors indicated that the matrix effect can be corrected with a supplementation to the sample with a HNO Similar optimization strategy as the previous case was used to optimize the ETA-AAS program for the eluent from preconcentration column and similar results were obtained. The only significant factors influencing the analytical signal were atomization and ash temperatures. Therefore, the effects of the mineralization and atomization temperatures on the determination of cadmium on the eluted sample solutions were investigated. It was observed a significant loss of analyte for mineralization temperatures higher than 400 Interference experiments were carried out under the optimized conditions described in Section Under the optimized conditions described in Section In addition, it is necessary to keep in mind that the most of ETA-AAS Cd determination methods in urine samples need the employment of addition graphs to avoid interference matrix. However, in the proposed method, the preconcentrated samples can be read directly in the calibration graph because no significant differences between the slope of calibration and addition graphs were detected. This matrix effect has been eliminated as a consequence of the preconcentration process performed. This fact can be verified by observing the peak profiles of the cadmium and background for both urine and preconcentrated urine in Detection (LOD) and quantification (LOQ) limits were calculated according to the IUPAC definition The precision of the method assessed as relative standard deviation (RSD) of ten independent preconcentration cycles adding 0.0, 0.25, 0.50, 1.00 and 1.50 The reproducibility for column preparation was studied in order to evaluate if the construction of the column influenced the results. Thus, ten columns with the same dimensions (40 The accuracy of the proposed method was evaluated through recovery test. Different urine samples were supplemented with different quantities of Cd in the range of 0.25–1.50 The entire preconcentration/elution/regeneration cycle for one sample requires 10.5 The analytical figures of merit obtained were comparable to those reported for other Cd determination ETA-AAS methods in urine with different separation and/or preconcentration procedures including microwave-digestion and posterior cloud point extraction In order to demonstrate its applicability in real cases, the preconcentration method developed in this work has been applied for the determination of Cd content of seven urine samples obtained from healthy smoker and non-smoker people. It was demonstrated that the proposed preconcentration procedure achieved enough sensitivity (LOQ In this research, a microcolumn preconcentration system using MWCNT as sorbent material for the ETA-AAS determination of Cd in urine has been developed and its validity for real cases has been demonstrated. Multiwalled carbon nanotubes (MWCNT) were treated previously with H The great potential of multiwalled carbon nanotubes as sorbent for preconcentration and matrix effect elimination in the determination of trace/ultratrace elements by ETA-AAS for complex samples has been demonstrated. Since the presence of carboxyl groups at the MWCNT surface provides an anchor for the attachment of a variety of groups, other applications of this approach with higher sensitivity, selectivity and specificity developing different nanotubes suitable for particular applications are expected in the future.