Priming effects are strong short-term changes in the turnover of soil organic matter caused by comparatively moderate treatments of the soil. In the course of priming effects large amounts of C, N and other nutrients can be released or immobilized in soil in a very short time. These effects have been measured in many field and laboratory experiments; however, only a few of the studies were aimed at an extended investigation of the mechanisms of such phenomena. The aim of this overview is to reveal possible causes and processes leading to priming actions using the references on agricultural ecosystems and model experiments. Multiple mechanisms and sources of released C and N are presented and summarized in Tables for positive and negative real and apparent priming effects induced after the addition of different organic and mineral substances to the soil. Soil microbial biomass plays the key role in the processes leading to the real priming effects. The most important mechanisms for the real priming effects are the acceleration or retardation of soil organic matter turnover due to increased activity or amount of microbial biomass. Isotopic exchange, pool substitution, and different uncontrolled losses of mineralized N from the soil are responsible for the apparent N priming effects. Other multiple mechanisms (predation, competition for nutrients between roots and microorganisms, preferred uptake, inhibition, etc.) in response to addition of different substances are also discussed. These mechanisms can be distinguished from each other by the simultaneous monitoring of C and N release dynamics; its comparison with the course of microbial activity; and by the labelling of different pools with 14C or 13C and 15N. Quantitative methods for describing priming effects and their dynamics using 14C and 15N isotopes, as well as for non-isotopic studies are proposed.In many studies on the transformation of substances added to soil, a side effect can be detected — an increased release of the soil-derived carbon as CO The priming effect was discovered by After the review and theoretical study of priming effects carried out by The aim of this review is to reveal possible causes and processes leading to the priming actions using references on agricultural ecosystems and model experiments. We have tried to classify the mechanisms of changes in C and N mineralization after the addition of different substances to the soil, to suggest some methods for the quantification of priming effects, and to propose approaches for separation of those processes which cause the extra release of nutrients. The term “ In studies on N the following definition is supported in particular: the priming effect is extra soil N which is taken up by plants after addition of mineral N fertilizer, compared with non-N treated plants ( The phenomenon, in fact, is much broader, and deals with a change (mostly an acceleration) in natural mineralization processes through a trigger: e.g. input of an easily decomposable energy source, respectively a limiting factor for microbial biomass. In addition, priming effects were found not only for C and N, but also for P ( Considering the above, the following definition is used in this review: The need to study this phenomenon can be explained by our unsatisfactory knowledge of C and N transformation processes connected with priming effects. Disregarding the priming effect means that the extra mineralization may increase NO The following the priming effect arises either immediately or very shortly after the addition of a specific substance to the soil ( priming effects in soils rich in C and N are larger than those in poor soils ( real priming effects have never been observed under sterile conditions ( the size of the priming effects increases with the amount of the added organic substances ( in general, ammonia causes larger priming effects than NO In many studies on application of N fertilizers in which An extended search for mechanisms and sources of N priming effects (added nitrogen interactions — ANI) caused by adding  Analysis of the tables leads to the conclusion that for an effective study of the priming effects the simultaneous monitoring of the release of C and N is necessary. Labelling different pools with Experiments dealing with causes for priming effects showed that artifacts can arise easily unless the particularities of an application of the labelled substance are not considered adequately. The most frequent causes for these artifacts are a non-uniformly The apparent priming effects can easily be distinguished from the real ones by monitoring CO It is striking that negative priming effects (  A promising approach to clarify the fluxes in priming actions is to quantify the rates of N gross-mineralization ( Published research on the sources of the additionally released C and N are contradictory. The following causes for an increased CO The most common idea is that substances released in additional mineralization are derived from soil Besides co-metabolism, low molecular organic acids released by roots or microorganisms contribute to chemical disruption of organic substances in the soil ( Specific experiments to identify single fractions of the soil organic matter as the source of C and N released by priming effects have not provided clear results ( Despite this finding, studies on the effect of drying–rewetting of soil also indicate that soil organic matter is the dominant source of the N mineralization flush (  An opinion expressed in the literature says that not only microorganisms alone contribute to priming effects ( Both the release of C or N from soil microorganisms and from soil organic matter may be the cause for increased CO Plants increase the microbial activity in the rhizosphere through rhizodeposition and thus can enhance the N mineralization of the soil ( Unless the mineralized N is removed (e.g. by the roots) a rapid N uptake by microorganisms under N limited conditions takes place — competition theory ( Other mechanisms may be responsible for real priming effects after the addition of N fertilizers. An increased salt concentration and microbial N availability may cause real priming effects. In this case, however, C-limited and N-limited conditions have to be distinguished. An increase in microbial activity or growth is not to be expected by improving N availability under C-limited conditions, as the necessary energy source is missing (compare model of  This priming index shows the release or immobilization of C or other nutrients from the soil organic matter per amount of added substance decomposed in soil for each time period. The disadvantage of the priming index is that it is very sensitive at the beginning of the decomposition, because very small amounts are released. In reverse order, it is very insensitive at the end of the decomposition because both variables, The other possibility for the quantification of nutrient release dynamics ( The variables:  Real priming effects are also frequently observed in experiments without labelled substances. In order to describe them quantitatively, two possibilities can be distinguished: The release of CO Because the priming effect is an extra decomposition, we modify The release of CO In the situation with a lag phase, an addition of the priming effect to the maximum amount of the added substrate can provide satisfactory quantitative statements about the size of the priming effect. Fitting of the parameters of An advantage of the recommended A comparison of the dynamics of nutrient release or immobilization with the dynamics of biomass amount and activity can help interpret the mechanisms of the priming effect. We distinguish three cases of this comparison ( The priming effect appears very shortly after the treatment of the soil, before the activity of microorganisms or its amount have changed ( The maximum of the priming effect appears approximately at the same time as the maximum of the activity or amount of microorganisms ( The maximum of the priming effect appears during the decrease of the amount of microbial biomass ( Finally one may draw the conclusion that there are no studies which are likely to explain causes, mechanisms, and sources of the extra C and N mobilization in priming effects in a satisfactory manner. The connection or the relationship between the C and N transformations has not been taken into consideration sufficiently. As shown in We hope that the classification of priming effects proposed in application of both simultaneous monitoring of N gross-mineralization and of CO the simultaneous observation of the dynamics of nutrient release and the microbial activity; experiments concerning the simultaneous interaction of plants, micro-flora and soil fauna; the necessity to quantify nutrients mobilized or immobilized in priming effects by means of the above mentioned approaches relative to the amount of the substrate added as well as relative to the unaffected natural mineralization, i.e. basal respiration ( We thank two anonymous reviewers and Editor-in-Chief Professor J. Waid for improvement of the manuscript, and Joan Miller for linguistic help.