Steel Fibre Reinforced Concrete (SFRC) is a two-phase heterogeneous material that is composed of steel fibres and a concrete matrix, whose specimen toughness, residual strength, and impact resistance is dependent on the distribution of steel fibres within the concrete matrix. Thus, this paper has elected to study the effects of fibre distribution on the post-cracking tensile strength of cubic SFRC specimens at the mesoscopic level using physical experiments and numerical simulations. The first step of analyzing the effects of fibre distribution must invariably be the determination of fibre distribution itself; therefore, inductive tests were conducted to determine the distribution of fibres in cubic SFRC specimens of varying fibre contents. A three-dimensional steel fibre distribution model was generated in MATLAB according to the steel fibre distribution that was obtained from the inductive tests. Physical multi-axial cube splitting tests (MCST tests) were carried out on all cubic SFRC specimens to study the effects of fibre content and orientation on the post-cracking tensile strength of SFRC. Afterwards, the three-dimensional steel fibre distribution model was imported from MATLAB into ABAQUS, a finite element software, to establish the SFRC mesoscale model, wherein the assignment and calibration of model parameters were based on the results of the MCST tests. Finally, simulated MCST tests were carried out using the mesoscale SFRC models. Comparative analyses between the mesoscale SFRC numerical simulation results and the experimental results show that both agree well with each other, which verifies the validity of the numerical model. This paper’s verified model has a broad range of applications, which include a variety of scenarios that range from simple mechanical tests to complex steel fibre reinforced concrete structures.In the 1960s, a promising new type of composite construction material, steel fibre reinforced concrete (SFRC), was introduced into the market and was quickly adopted by governments. The widespread usage of SFRC in military applications, construction, and road paving Thus far, numerical models of SFRC have been grouped into two categories, integrally and separately modelled SFRC models. Integrally modelled SFRC Most contemporary SFRC numerical models assume that the steel fibres are distributed either uniformly or randomly within the matrix; however, these assumptions stray from reality because fibre distribution has a marked effect on the toughness and crack resistance of SFRC. Studies have shown that many factors affect fibre distribution The pre-determination of an experiment specimen’s fibre distribution is an essential step of the analysis of SFRC mechanical properties. Currently, the primary methods used to determine steel fibre distribution are Alternating Current Impedance Spectroscopy (AC-IS) The procedure followed by this study is as follows: performing inductance tests on cubic SFRC specimens of varying fibre contents to determine their fibre distributions, generating a three-dimensional steel fibre distribution model in MATLAB that is based on the fibre distribution results, importing the MATLAB fibre distribution model into ABAQUS to establish the two-phase mesoscale SFRC model, conducting MCST tests on cubic SFRC specimens to determine the effect of fibre distribution on the post-cracking tensile strength of SFRC, utilizing the results of the experimental SFRC tests to calibrate the two-phase mesoscale SFRC model, simulating MCST tests using the two-phase mesoscale SFRC model, then finally comparing the simulation results with the experimental results to verify the validity of the two-phase mesoscale SFRC model. Five batches of cubic, 150 mm × 150 mm × 150 mm, C60 grade SFRC specimens were prepared for this study’s MCST experiments to determine the effect of steel fibre content and orientation on the post-cracking tensile strength of SFRC, wherein the steel fibres used for the preparation of the SFRCs were Bekaert hook-ended Dramix 4D steel fibres, which have lengths of 60 mm, diameters of 0.9 mm, and tensile strengths of 1500 MPa. The amount of cement, sand, gravel, water, and superplasticizer used for the preparation of each SFRC batch was identical, while the amount of steel fibre for each batch varied. Of the five batches of specimens, one was plain concrete, while the other four had fibre contents of 20, 30, 40, and 50 kg/m All specimens were demoulded within 36 h after casting and then cured in a humid chamber room for 28 days. The curing room was kept at a 20 ℃ ± 1 ℃ with a relative humidity of ≧95%. In total, there were four plain concrete specimens, 48 SFRC specimens, wherein each of the SFRC batches contains 12 specimens. The equipment used in the inductive test consists of a TH2830 LCR Meter and a discontinuous coil with a circular cross-section, as shown in The value of Prior to the inductive tests, all cubic SFRC specimens were labelled according to the convention: CU-steel fibre content-specimen number (For example, CU-30-4, represents the fourth cubic specimen with a steel fibre content of 30 kg/m Based on the theoretical derivations and experiments conducted by Torrents et al. The average fibre orientation percentage The cube splitting test is typically conducted along a single axis to determine the post-cracking tensile strength because the fibre distribution in the matrix is widely accepted to be random. However, the results from the inductive test indicate that the fibre distribution is not random, wherein there are fewer fibres parallel to the casting direction (vertical) than the ones that lean towards the X- and Y- (horizontal) axes. Therefore, this study proposes to utilize an MCST test Each batch contained twelve specimens, and the CU specimens 1–4, 5–8, and 9–12 from each batch were split along the X-( In Analysis of An accurate representation of the effect of steel fibres on the reinforcement of SFRC using numerical models can be achieved by ensuring consistency between the fibre distribution of the numerical model and that of the experimental specimen. A series of inductive tests were carried out on cubic SFRC specimens to determine the orientation of the fibres inside the specimens ( A straight steel fibre distribution model, with circular cross-sections, was generated in MATLAB and was used as a frame of reference on which the hook-ended fibre distribution model would be created. The hook-ended fibres, which were used in the experiment specimens, have lengths of 62 mm. 62 mm was also chosen as the lengths of the straight steel fibres, so that the number of steel fibres in both models will be the same when the total masses of both straight and hook-ended fibre distribution models are the same. The position of the fibres in the concrete matrix was determined using the coordinates at the central point of the fibre and the angle of rotation of the fibre. The procedure for the random generation of the straight fibres is as follows: Calculate the number of fibres in the SFRC specimen, N; Install the first steel fibre inside the model, while recording the coordinates of the central point and the endpoints of the steel fibre. With specific steps as follows: Let the coordinates of the central point of the fibre be ( Calculate the coordinates of the fibre endpoints. Let the angle between the Z-axis and the fibre be α, and the angle between the X-axis and the projection of the fibre onto the XOY plane be β. Then, the coordinates of the endpoints A and B, ( Generate all the fibres that satisfy all the above conditions. Use the boundary conditions of the model to ensure that all fibres have indeed been generated within the model. A mathematical technique is used to determine the shortest distance between two fibres in the matrix, to ensure that the newly generated fibres do not intersect and overlap with other fibres. Output all recorded fibre center, endpoint coordinates, and the projection length of the fibre on the X-, Y-, and Z-coordinates. Assuming N fibres were generated, the total length of all projections on each axis can be expressed as: This paper’s experiments utilize Bekaert hook-ended Dramix 4D steel fibre and a schematic of its geometric features are shown in The aforementioned straight steel fibre generation method was used as a frame of reference to develop a hook-ended steel fibres generation method. The center of the line segment BG was considered as the center of rotation of the steel fibre and the half-length of BG was considered as the equivalent radius, R. The coordinates of points B and G can be determined in the same manner as in the straight fibre generation method, and coordinates of points C and F can be determined using a proportional relationship between BC and R. The coordinates of point C and F were represented using the notation ( Due to the discovery of fibre content not significantly affecting the fibre distribution in the inductive tests from section 2.2, this paper’s cubic SFRC specimens all have an axial fibre orientation ratio ( Determine the total number of steel fibres in the SFRC specimen and the number of steel fibres that should be installed each time. The number of steel fibres in the cubic SFRC specimen was 225 and was calculated using Eq. Install the first batch of steel fibres and determine the axial sum projection lengths. Steel fibres must be installed in the specimen domain such that the angle between Z-axis and the steel fibre is Install the second batch of steel fibre and ensure the total axial sum projection length ratios (axial fibre orientation ratios) The installation of the second batch of steel fibres is included to ensure that the axial fibre orientation ratio is approximately equal to 1:1:0.7778 because the first installation does not necessarily meet the requirements of the axial fibre orientation ratio. The fibre installation in the second batch was adjusted until the total axial projection lengths meet the requirement of Three-dimensional numerical models with steel fibre contents of 30, 40, and 50 kg/m The SFRC is assumed to be a two-phase heterogeneous material composed of steel fibre and concrete matrix, rather than a multiphase (steel fibres, cement mortar, aggregate, and ITZ) heterogeneous material, for the simplification of numerical calculations. The establishment of the finite element mesoscale SFRC model entails the following steps: Firstly, a MATLAB ADPL file with the steel fibre coordinates was imported into ANSYS. Secondly, the steel fibre and concrete elements were meshed separately in ANSYS, and a CDB file was output. Lastly, the CDB file was imported into ABAQUS, and the constitutive models of concrete and steel fibre, concrete damaged plasticity model (CDP) and elastic-plastic model, respectively, were selected according to the simulation requirements. The CDP model was chosen because it is very suitable for simulating the failure modes, tensile cracking and compressive crushing, of this study’s simulated MCST tests. However, it should be noted that the stress-strain relationship of the CDP model is not a nominal stress-strain relationship. The compressive strain of the model is non-elastic strain, GB50010-2010 Similarly, the stress-strain curve of concrete under uniaxial compression can be determined using equations in Eq. For the plastic yield criterion of concrete, the values of viscosity (μ) and dilation angle ( The stress–strain curve of the CDP model requires the input of initial yield strength because the curve is linear prior to the initial yield strength; however, the GB50010-2010 The elastic–plastic model was adopted for the constitutive model of steel fibres. This study’s steel fibre mechanical parameters were taken from The quality of element meshing and quantity of model elements play a crucial role in the convergence, accuracy, and run-time of numerical simulations. As the number of elements increases, so too will the accuracy of the simulation. However, the increase in the number of elements will lengthen the run-time. Furthermore, unreasonable element meshing will lead to the nonconvergence of the calculations. This paper’s model assumes that there is no slippage between concrete and steel fibres to economize on calculation time because of the size of the model and the sheer number of steel fibres. Therefore, the steel fibres were directly embedded into the concrete matrix. The C3D8R solid element and T3D2 truss element were adopted for concrete and steel fibre, respectively. Since embedded constraints can only constrain the two nodes of a truss element to its adjacent concrete element, the meshing of steel fibre into a single truss element cannot reflect the continuous constraints of steel fibre on the concrete. Conversely, if a steel fibre was to be meshed into several truss elements, the nodes between the truss elements become hinge points; if the nodes are not embedded into the concrete element, then the simulation will likely not converge. To avoid nonconvergence of the numerical model and to approximate the actual restraining effect of steel fibre on concrete, the size of the steel fibre element was set to 1.5–2 times that of the concrete element. In the case of hook-ended steel fibre models, the minimum size of the hook is 2.62 mm, therefore the concrete element size is set to 1.5 mm, as shown in In order to avoid the nonconvergence of the numerical model during the loading process, the loading plane of cubic SFRC model was coupled with RP-1, the central point of the top surface. The displacement loading of the numerical model was realized by setting the loading path to pass through RP-1, as shown in In order to determine the width of the loading plane, numerical MCST tests using varying loading plane widths were carried out on the same SFRC model, and the simulation results were compared with the experimental test results. Taking SFRC numerical model with steel fibre content of 20 kg/m The differing loading plane widths cause the force–displacement curves to be different, as shown in The distribution of steel fibre greatly influences the mechanical properties of SFRC, while the fibre distribution itself is affected by myriad factors. Even if the external conditions are identical, there is no guarantee that the fibre distribution in each SFRC specimen would be the same. In order to practically reflect the steel fibre distribution, the random function was used in the process of generating the steel fibre model. At the same time, in order to fully verify the validity of the randomly generated SFRC mesoscale model, it is necessary to test the SFRC numerical model repeatedly. Therefore, three steel fibre distribution models were generated for each steel fibre content, and three corresponding cubic SFRC numerical models were established. The MCST tests were conducted on all of the SFRC numerical models, and nine force–displacement curves were obtained for each numerical model of differing fibre content. The average force–displacement curves for each cubic SFRC numerical model of differing fibre content were obtained by averaging the results of numerical simulations that had the same fibre content and loading direction, as shown in It can be seen from From the data in The distribution of steel fibres directly affects the strength and durability of SFRC. In order to more accurately simulate the effect of steel fibre distribution on the post-cracking mechanical properties of SFRC, the distribution of steel fibres in cubic SFRC specimens initially obtained using inductive tests, and the SFRC mesoscale model was forced to mimic the previously determined steel fibres distribution. Finally, the simulation results and experimental results of MCST tests of varying fibre contents were compared to verify the validity of the model. The main conclusions are summarized as follows: As fibre content increases, so too does the post-cracking tensile strength of the SFRC specimens. Moreover, the post-cracking tensile strength of SFRC specimens that were loaded along the direction of casting is greater than those along the other two axes. The fibre content has little effect on fibre distribution in cubic SFRC specimens and has a negligible effect on SFRC initial cracking strength. According to the results of the inductive tests, a three-dimensional model of hook-ended steel fibres conforming to the test results was generated using MATLAB software. If the hooked portion of the hook-ended steel fibre in the concrete matrix has not slipped, then the reinforcing effect of steel fibres is only dependent on the length of the steel fibers. In this case, embedded constraints, wherein the reinforcement effect of both the straight and hook-ended fibres on concrete are equal, can be used in the SFRC mesoscale model; therefore, straight steel fibres can be used to replace hook-ended fibres to reduce the calculation time of the SFRC mesoscale model. MCST tests were carried out on SFRC numerical models of varying fibre contents, and the numerical simulation results are in good agreement with the experimental results. Furthermore, the values of the similarity coefficients were extremely high for all SFRC batches, thus the validity of the SFRC numerical model can be ensured. The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. The authors greatly appreciate the financial support provided by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (Project No. 51604183), the Scientific and Technological Innovation Programs of Higher Education Institutions in Shanxi (Project No.2019L0332), the State Key Laboratory of Explosive Science and Technology (Project No: KFJJ20-05M), and the Shanxi Provincial Natural Science Foundation (Project No. 201901D211050, 201703D111027,). The authors also wish to acknowledge professor Hongxiu Du and Zhendong Shi, masters’ students Xujin Zhang and Jian Xue for their suggestions and help in the experiment. The authors would also like to thank Ruihao Zhao for his assistance in the language improvement of this paper.