In order to produce a W–25%Cu nanocomposite powder manufactured by a thermochemical procedure a novel pair of precursors were used. Cu2WO4(OH)2 and CuWO4·2H2O precipitates were first produced by reacting the copper nitrate and sodium tungstate aqueous solutions under certain pH and temperature. The precipitates were then dried and calcined in order to prepare CuWO4−
                        x
                     , CuO, and WO3 oxide powders for the next step reduction. The reduction was carried out under a H2 atmosphere to form the final W–Cu metal nanocomposite powder. Characteristics of the final powder such as distribution, uniformity and size were then discussed based thoroughly on the dominant mechanism of reduction; Chemical Vapor Transport. It was found that the average particle size of the reduced powder is 35 nm for W and 54 nm for Cu.W–Cu fabricated composites, constituted of W particles in Cu matrix, prepare considerably enhanced mechanical and physical properties, good arc erosion resistance, and remarkable thermal and electrical conductivity. The mentioned benefits in company with the high ability of microwave absorption, introduce them as a unique alternative for a variety of applications such as electrical contacts, arc resistant electrodes, microwave packages and etc. White colored sodium tungstate (Na 50 cc aqueous solutions of copper nitrate and sodium tungstate were prepared separately. Based on the stoichiometric proportions to produce a final W–25 wt.%Cu powder, 9.50 g of copper nitrate and 13.45 g of sodium tungsten were used. Then, aqueous ammonia was added to the copper nitrate solution with a proportion of 1 cc ammonia for any 100 cc of copper nitrate solution. This mixture was then added to the sodium tungstate solution which formed a light green bushy mass of precipitates. The precipitates were stirred on a heater up to 90 °C for 1 h after which pH of the solution was fixed at 7. The precipitates were then separated from the solution, completely washed and dried in an oven at 150 °C for 3/4 h. The dried precipitates were calcined at 450 °C for 1 h in an electrical muffle furnace and finally hydrogen reduced in a tubular furnace at 800 °C for 2.5 h to prepare oxide free powders. Dried, calcined, and reduced powders were all analyzed by X-Ray Diffractometry (Jeol 8030). Present phases and the crystallite size of each phase were evaluated by utilizing XRD observations. The microstructure and morphology of the powders and also their distribution were studied by scanning electron microscope (SEM, Cambridge S360). Image analyses were performed on the SEM observations in order to evaluate the volume percent that each phase has occupied (60 days trial version of Clemex vision & R'Kive explorer ver.3.5.025). The morphology of the reduced powders was studied via transmission electron microscope (TEM, Jeol, JEM-1400). XRD patterns of the dried precipitates after the reaction between aqueous solutions of Na  In The reduction of Cu takes place under a simple reaction of direct transformation from Cu But the reduction of tungsten is more complicated. Today, the most important approach to reduce tungsten oxides is using hydrogen gas which takes place under the following reaction: This process is not a simple replacement, but it is accompanied by the complex chemical vapor transport for the tungsten, forming the final properties of the reduced product This hydrate is exactly the responsible organ for the phenomenon called Chemical vapor transport. After starting the reduction by hydrogen and any of the oxides, water vapor is formed and as a result brings the volatile hydrate to the system. This hydrate keeps attendance up to the last stages of the process. In this regard the reduction process has three stages itself Production of volatile hydrate via surface reaction of oxide with water vapor Transformation of WO Reduction of the tungsten content of the WO The fundaments of CVT mechanism and its stages are designed in schematically in Chemical gas infiltrates through all of the oxides homogeneously and this diffusion is influenced only by the partial pressure of WO In this order, with a chain of occurrences, CVT completes the reduction. As previously described, in the presence of tungsten's different oxides, tungsten is transported three times via chemical gas. With each transport it diffuses at new places and sits on new group of nuclei which themselves were oxides in the former stages. The scheme provided in An image analysis of With the assumption of identical shape of the particle and homogeneous sub-micro distribution, this amount can also be taken for the area percent proportions. But with image analysis of SEM image, a different result will be achieved which shows some deviation from the calculated area percents. These results are shown in In this work, a novel thermochemical method called homogeneous co-precipitation was used to produce the nanocomposite W–25%Cu powder. With addition of the ammonia to the copper nitrate solution, a complex solution was made which as soon as added to the sodium tungstate solution, initiated the precipitation of nanosized Cu The authors gratefully acknowledge the Collaborations of the Material Science & Energy Research Center, Iran, Karaj (MERC) for the laboratory facilities. Iranian Nanotechnology Initiative is regarded for its support. Authors also thank the staff of the Hydrometallurgy Lab of Iran University of Science & Technology (IUST) specially Mr. H. Mehrjouei for his sympathy.