Two modified melamine resins has been prepared and investigated, the modification process took place through the treatment with thiourea to produce R1 or tetraoxalyl ethylenediamine to produce R2. The adsorption behavior of the obtained resins towards Ag(I) and Cu(II) from their aqueous solutions has been studied using batch method. The obtained resins were tested for selective separation between Cu(II) and Ag(I) form their binary mixtures. Resin R1 showed high selectivity towards Ag(I) from Cu(II) solution, while R2 gave a promising results for the selective separation of Cu(II) from Ag(I) solution. Both kinetic and thermodynamic parameters of the adsorption process were obtained. Thermodynamic data indicated that the adsorption process is endothermic spontaneous reaction. Kinetic analysis showed that the adsorption of Ag(I) on R1 is perfectly fit pseudo-first order model, while the adsorption of Cu(II) on R2 is perfectly fit pseudo-second order one. The interaction mechanism between metal ion and active sites has been interpreted as chelation. Durability of resins was estimated from column studies. These parameters indicated that the prepared resins have a good efficiency for repeated use.Silver(I) is generally found in the combined state in nature, usually in copper(II) or lead(II) mineralization ( Melamine, formaldehyde (37%), thiourea, were Aldrich products. All other chemicals were Prolabo products and were used as received. Silver nitrate and copper acetate were used as a source for Ag(I) and Cu(II) respectively. R1 was prepared from the reaction of melamine, thiourea and formaldehyde at molar ratio of (1.5:1:1), respectively according to the following method: in 250 mL round flask 0.76 g of thiourea was dissolved in 100 mL distilled water, thereafter 1.89 g melamine and 8 mL formaldehyde were added, then few drops of ammonia was added to reach pH 9. The reaction mixture was heated at 90 °C for 6 h with stirring. The precipitate produced was collected, washed thoroughly with hot water, cold water, ethanol then acetone and air dried. Tetraoxalyl ethylenediamine (TOED) was prepared according to the previously reported method ( R2 was prepared through the reaction of melamine, Tetraoxalyl ethylenediamine and formaldehyde at molar ratio of (1.5:1:1), respectively. In 250 mL round flask 1.89 g of melamine was dissolved in 100 mL water, then 3.48 g of TOED was added to the flask, the contents of the flask was heated in water bath with stirring at 75 °C for 5 h. Then 8 mL formaldehyde were added to the reaction mixture with continuous stirring. Thereafter the temperature was raised to 90 °C for 6 h. The precipitate gel particles was collected, washed thoroughly with hot water, cold water, ethanol then acetone and air dried. Water regain factor, W%, represents the percentage of water held intrinsically by the resin. For water regain determination, resin samples were centrifuged for one h at 1000 rpm to remove excess water and then weighed. These samples were then dried at 50–60 °C until complete dryness then weighed again. To calculate this factor, the following equation was applied: The surface area of the prepared resins was measured by methylene blue adsorption as this material is known to be adsorbed as a monolayer only on solid sorbents. A standard solution of this material was prepared (0.02 g/L). A calibration curve for methylene blue was drawn ( The average pore sizes of the prepared resins were measured using High Pressure Mercury Pore Size Analyzer, Micromeritics 9320, USA. The average pore diameters were found to be 0.12 and 0.09 (µm) for R1 and R2, respectively. FT-IR spectra of the synthesized resin were performed using Nicolet IR200 FT-IR Spectrometer. Elemental analysis was used for sulphur content determination in R1 and found to be 8.1%, which is equivalent to 2.5 (mmol sulphur/g resin). Carboxyl content of R2 was determined according to the early reported method ( Where Stock solutions of silver nitrate and copper acetate (2 Uptake experiments under controlled pH were carried out by introducing 0.1 g of dry resin in a series of flasks containing 100 mL of Ag(I) or Cu(II) solutions at initial concentrations of 1 The uptake behavior of Ag(I) from binary mixtures with Cu(II), Pb(II), Cd(II), Zn(II) or Ca(II) was studied at normal pH using R1. Therefore 0.1 g of dry resin was introduced in a series of flasks, each flask containing 100 mL of 1 Metal ion uptake at different time intervals were done by introducing 0.1 g of R1 in a flask containing 100 mL of Ag(I) and 0.1 g of R2 in a flask containing 100 mL of Cu(II) solution at initial concentration of 1 Complete adsorption isotherms were obtained by introducing 0.1 g resin in a series of flasks. To each flask, 100 mL of Cu(II) or Ag(I) solution at the desired initial concentration were added. The flasks were conditioned at 300 rpm while keeping the temperature at 25, 35 or 45 °C for 3 h. Later on, the residual concentration was determined where the metal ion uptake was estimated. Column experiments were performed in a plastic column with a length of 10 cm and a diameter of 1 cm. A small amount of glass wool was placed at the bottom of the column to keep the contents. One gram of resin was introduced into the column. Metal ion solutions having an initial concentration of 4 The resin loaded by metal ion in the previous column was then subjected for elution. 100 mL of thiourea (0.5) acidified with H The obtained resins were characterized by FT-IR spectroscopy. As shown in Metal ions adsorption from aqueous solution into a resin is a pH dependent process due to pH influence on both the chemistry of metal ions and resin functional groups. The data of the effect of variation of equilibrium pH on the uptake of Ag(I) or Cu(II) is shown in According to the Hard and Soft Acid and Bases (HSAB) theory ( It is reported that thiourea forms stable complexes with several metal ions such as Ag(I), Au(III), Cu(II), Hg(II), … etc. ( TOED molecule has EDTA-like (Ethylenediaminetetra-actic acid) structure, therefore it was expected that TOED moiety will behave EDTA behaviour towards Ag(I) and Cu(II) ions (EDTA does not interact with Ag(I) ions and forms stable complexes with Cu(II) ions ( From the observed adsoption behaviour of R1 and R2 towards Ag(I) and Cu(II) at different pHs, we can conclude that R1 is suitable for uptake of Ag(I) while R2 is suitable for uptake of Cu(II) from their aqueous solutions. Selective separation of Ag(I) from binary mixtures with Cu(II), Pb(II), Cd(II), Zn(II) or Ca(II) was studied at normal pH and same other adsorption conditions. The separation factors for silver (I) ions over copper (II), Zinc (II) and calcium (II) ions were calculated from the adsorption data using the following equation (  The adsorption-time data in The Elovich equation was also applied to the sorption of Ag(I) on R1 and Cu(II) on R2. The Elovich equation is given as follows ( Thus, the constants can be obtained from the slope and intercept of a straight line plot of  The degree of suitability of resin towards metal ions was estimated from the values of separation factor constant ( The observed increase in both values of The values of ΔG° at different temperatures were calculated and reported in  Nature of the chelating group in each resin. Nature of the adsorbed metal ion. The difference in pore size distribution in both resins as well as the higher hydrophilicity of R1 in addition to the external film diffusion found in case of R2 as reported in kinetic studies. Thus we can separate between Ag(I) and Cu(II) from their binary mixture using any one of the studied two resins. It is obvious from the comparison between the efficiency of the studied resins that R1 is more economical resin for the separation between Ag(I)/Cu(II) mixture than R2. Sorption/desorption cycles up to three runs were carried out for Ag(I) on R1 and Cu(II) on R2. The elution of Ag(I) was performed using 100 mL of thiourea (0.5) acidified with H Modified melamine resins were obtained through the treatment with thiourea (R1) or tetraoxalyl ethylenediamine (R2), The obtained resins were tested for selective separation between Cu(II) and Ag(I) form their binary mixtures. R1 showed high selectivity for Ag(I) from Cu(II) solution, while R2 succeeded for the selective separation of Cu(II) from Ag(I) in their binary mixtures. Kinetic studies indicated that the adsorption reaction of Ag(I) on R1 is perfectly fit pseudo-first order model rather than pseudo-second order one, while the adsorption of Cu(II) on R2 is perfectly fit pseudo second order model rather than pseudo first order one. Thermodynamic parameters obtained indicated that the adsorption process is spontaneous and endothermic. The mechanism of interaction between metal ion and resin was also clarified. The resin obtained showed good durability and easy regeneration.