Methane emission fluctuations are strongly related to the barometric pressure changes. Variations of barometric pressure increase the occurrence of fires and explosions of underground mines. As part of the project supported by the Australian Government Coal Mining Abatement Technology Support Package (CMATSP), the methane concentration at tailgate return and the barometric pressure in the longwall panel were monitored and analysed. It was found from the monitoring that when the amplitude of barometric pressure change reaches +/− 0.5%, the emission methane concentration measured changed from the minimum value of 1% to 1.5%. In order to understand better the mechanism behind the phenomena, a 3D computational fluid dynamics (CFD) model developed during the project is used to investigate the effect of barometric pressure on methane emission. Intensive studies on the effect of different parameters on the fluctuation amplitude of methane emission are conducted including the period of barometric pressure variations, the size of the longwall goaf. It is found that the longwall goaf formed during the longwall mining performs like an air accumulator in storing and releasing methane. Barometric pressure changes with smaller period causes larger changes of methane concentration at the return, and larger goaf in size causes larger variation amplitude of methane concentration. Concentrations of methane drawn from vertical boreholes are also affected by the barometric pressure changes.High gas emissions in complex and multi-seam mining conditions not only challenge safe and productive operations of underground coal mining, but also lead to significant fugitive emissions to the atmosphere. Underground coal mines need to control the methane emission so that it does not exceed the regulatory limit. Monitoring of methane concentration at underground coal mines, especially at the return of longwall panel indicates that the methane level is far from stable. The methane concentration fluctuation is of course attribute to many factors including the conditions of the mining coal seam and the surrounding overlying and underlying seams, and the changes of the operating conditions such as ventilation and production rate. However, even in a relatively short term when the geological conditions keep relatively stable and the retreating speed keeps unchanged, significant fluctuations of methane concentration are still observed. This fluctuation of methane emission has been attributed to the changes of the barometric pressure (Belle 2014; A number of researches which examined historical mine explosions have recognised that the changes of barometric pressure have significant influence on the occurrence of fires and explosions of underground mines ( The fluctuation of methane concentration not only brings potential risk of underground fires and explosions, but also increases the ventilation cost because measures have to be taken to ensure the maximum of methane levels being within the regulatory limits. In addition, the fluctuation of methane level also increases the difficulties in utilising the discharged ventilation air methane, resulting in damaging of atmosphere. Barometric pressure changes affect not only the active mining, but also have influence on abandoned mines. By studying sealed sections of abandoned coal mines, As the advance of monitoring technology is applied in coal mines, more reliable data reflecting the correlation between the barometric pressure changes and the fluctuations of the methane concentration in the ventilation system has been obtained. Monitoring carried out in longwall mines indicates that the methane concentration in longwall ventilation systems fluctuates significantly due to the barometric pressure changes. However, the mechanisms on how and in what extent the atmospheric pressure affect the methane emission remains to be clarified. For example, will the barometric pressure influence the borehole drainage performance? How will the frequency of barometric pressure changes affect the fluctuation amplitude of the methane emission? It is not sufficient for us to obtain these knowledge based on limited measurement data. To understand the mechanism behind the phenomena it is a need to conduct deeper studies combining mine site monitoring and numerical modelling. This study, we uses the 3-D CFD goaf gas flow model to investigate the methane emission behaviour under the varying barometric pressure. Firstly the simultaneously monitored results of barometric pressure and the methane concentration discharged at the return of an underground coal mine over more than 100 days is shown. From the data, a typical period showing the relation of the barometric pressure and the methane concentration is extracted for CFD modelling calibration. After calibration, the CFD model is run several times under different conditions to investigate the details of different factors such as the length of the longwall goaf, the barometric pressure change frequency, on the methane concentration at the return. This provides understanding in the relationship of barometric pressure and the methane emission, and will help to take appropriate measures to reduce the fluctuation of methane emission caused by the barometric pressure changes in mining operations. To handle the problem of high gas emissions, a joint research major project between the Glencore Bulga Underground Operations (hereafter referred to as “Bulga”) and the Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial Research Organisation (CSIRO) was carried out under the auspices of Australian Government Coal Mining Abatement Technology Support Package (CMATSP). The purpose of the project is to develop a holistic and optimal approach of planning, design and operational control of coal mine methane drainage and ventilation systems to maximise methane capture and minimise fugitive emissions in gassy and multiple seam conditions. Extensive studies including mine site characterisation of in-situ strata, hydrogeological and gas condition were conducted through systematic and continuous monitoring, test and measurement. Numerical studies also conducted to understand the mining induced strata changes and gas release and gas flow behaviour to assist to develop and optimise the goaf gas drainage system. Applying the developed optimal drainage system on the Blakefield South mine has achieved significant success in improving mining safety and coal productivity, and improving the gas capture efficiency and reducing the CMM emission. Through the CMATSP project, many new data and understandings in mining engineering and goaf gas drainage were obtained. Part of the works of the project have been published elsewhere ( The longwall panel for this study is the LW3 at the Blakefield South mine located 15 km southwest of Singleton in New South Wales, Australia. The panel layout and the ventilation flow directions are shown in  The correlation between the barometric pressure and the methane concentration can be seen more clearly by extracting a short period of monitoring as It is found from the monitored data that the methane concentration increases when the barometric pressure decreases, and vice versa. However the changes of pressure and methane concentration are not synchronous. The methane concentration variations have an interval delay of about one-third period in the case of the 90 h period. In the following section, a 3D CFD model will be described that simulates the methane emission under conditions affected by barometric pressure variations. CFD modelling has been considered an effective approach to simulate the fluid dynamics in coal mines enabling mining engineers to see the “unseen” happening in the longwall goaf ( The CFD model is based on the LW3, and the layout is shown in In order to investigate the effect of barometric pressure, the pressures on the boundaries have to be periodically varied, and the gas flow in the domain including the goaf and the ventilation gate roads is treated as transient flow. However, as we only simulate a relatively short period of time (less than 60 h), the length of the goaf is assumed unchanged. The goaf is treated as Darcy-type porous media. To define the permeability and porosity of the goaf, numerical modelling with COSFLOW, a CSIRO's 3D finite element code ( The fluids in the domain are defined as gas of multispecies including air and methane. The gas is defined as compressible ideal gas, which is described by the gas law: The gas sources include Whybrow goaf, Redbank Creek seam, Wambo seam, Glen Munro seam and the active goaf. Various methods has been developed to estimate gas emission from the adjacent overlying and underlying seams. According to Pressure boundary conditions are applied to all the gate roads and boreholes. Simulations were run to calibrate the CFD model with actual drainage data at the mine. In running the CFD model with constant barometric pressure, the methane concentration at the return and at boreholes are all tend to be constant after running more than 80 h regardless what initial conditions are applied, as it is actually a steady flow when the boundary conditions are constant. During mining LW3, the drainage pressure, flow rate and concentration of methane at each borehole were continuously monitored while the ventilation air flow rates in roadways were measured monthly as they were quite steady from time to time. The daily average methane flow rates in vertical boreholes when the face retreated by 1000 m were used to calibrate the CFD base model. To investigate the effect of the varying barometric pressure, the model is run again by replacing the average barometric pressure with a varying barometric pressure obeying a sine function.   Similar relationship of pressure and methane concentration was found from the measurement on the mine site. It is worth to mention the importance of selecting the compressible flow model. When the CFD model was run by assuming incompressible gas, the results would not be able to showed the variation of the methane concentration at return even if the pressures at the boundaries including the maingate, tailgate, and drainage boreholes varied due to the barometric pressure changes.  To further investigate the pressure response at different locations in the goaf to the barometric pressure changes, pressures at three locations are observed during running the CFD model. These 3 locations are A, B and C on the maingate side of the goaf, with distances from the working face of 0, 400 and 800 m respectively, as shown in To investigate the effect of the period of barometric pressure on goaf gas emission, three CFD simulations are conducted with 3 different barometric pressures applied to all the boundaries. The fluctuation periods of these barometric pressures are 12, 24, and 48 h respectively, and with the same fluctuation amplitude of 500 Pa, as shown in The results of the CFD simulation demonstrate that the period of pressure change plays a very important role in causing the fluctuation of gas concentration in TG. If the amplitude is the same, smaller period implies larger change rate of pressure, causing larger fluctuation of gas concentration at return. The maximum value in the larger fluctuations is easy to exceed the safety limits. The above simulation agrees with the observation from the mine site. As the goaf acts like an accumulator as mentioned previously, it is naturally to assume that the size of the longwall goaf would have effect on the gas emission in responding to the barometric pressure changes. To investigate quantitatively the effect of the goaf size on the methane emission, three CFD simulations of longwall goaf models with different lengths of 700, 1200 and 1700 m are carried out.  As mentioned before, the goaf can be considered as an accumulator, or a gas storage reservoir due to it has a large pores and the large compressibility of the gas. The larger goaf can accumulate more gas in the pores when the pressure increases, and it can release more gas when the pressure decreases. Mine site monitoring and CFD simulation clearly shows the effect of the barometric pressure on the methane emission. Through the CFD simulation the following understandings behind the phenomenon are achieved: Fluctuation of barometric pressure has significant effect on the methane emission. When the barometric pressure change less than 1% (1000 Pa), the methane concentration at return can change significantly, from 1.0% to 1.5%. Similar to the barometric pressure change, the change of the methane concentration at the return obeys a sine-like function, however the changes of the barometric pressure and the methane concentration are not synchronous. The methane concentration changes have a delay interval of about one-third period. Both measurement data and CFD simulation show the relationship of CH4 concentration and barometric pressure as a shape of an envelope, proving the porous longwall goaf acts like an accumulator which stores and releases methane by the compression and expansion of the gas within the goaf. The barometric pressure also influence the methane concentration of the drawn gas from the vertical boreholes, however, the effect of barometric pressure on the methane drawn from the vertical boreholes is much less than that of the return flow. The farther the borehole away from the workface, the less the influence of the barometric pressure. The mine site monitoring and CFD simulation demonstrate that the period of pressure variation have significant effect on the variation of gas concentration at return. With the same pressure drop, a shorter period for the same pressure drop causes much larger amplitude of methane concentration variation than those of longer period. In the range of 700 m to 1700 m, the amplitude of methane concentration variation increases with the increase of goaf length. From the CFD simulation and mine site monitoring, it is clear that the barometric pressure changes have a significant influence on methane emission from longwall goaf. To reduce the fluctuation of methane emission, it is necessarily to supress the variation of intake and outlet pressures of the longwall goaf. Although it is impossible to artificially change the barometric pressure, it may be possible to artificially adjust the ventilation system according to the barometric pressure change so that to reduce the change of the pressure in the underground longwall workings. This can be an objective of the work in the future. The authors are very grateful to the