Batch adsorption was studied for d-glucose on different types of zeolite-based adsorbents from an aqueous solution of 1-ethyl-3-methylimidazolium acetate ([C2mim][CH3COO]). The goal of the studies is to establish a possible process for recovery of glucose and of ionic liquid for recycle in a continuous process for converting a wild grass (miscanthus) to a liquid biofuel. A significant increase in glucose uptake is obtained when ionic liquid is present in the aqueous glucose solution. Highest glucose uptake was obtained for Faujasite structures and for zeolites with a high Si/Al ratio. Adsorption on KX-zeolites can reach 45% glucose removal in one step. Desorption of glucose into water is complete in 50min at 50°C and in 10min at 60°C.The low cost of readily available lignocellulosic biomass has caused increasing interest in the bioconversion of this feedstock into liquid fuels and chemical products In addition to low operation cost, high selectivity and simplicity in implementation, essentially reversible physical adsorption becomes more attractive compared with other separation processes, because it is possible to regenerate the adsorbent. The adsorption of glucose and polysaccharides onto solid surfaces is important in several areas including soil chemistry and mineral processing. Previous studies 1-ethyl-3-methylimidazolium acetate ([C Several adsorbents were studied: Na-X type zeolite (Sigma Aldrich, The literature gives few references for glucose adsorption onto zeolites, and the existing data are limited to sugar adsorption from IL-free aqueous solutions. No published studies report adsorption of glucose in the presence of IL. We used several zeolites to study the effect of the zeolite nature in terms of structure, Si/Al ratio or Si/C ratio where C is a particular cation. Adsorption studies were carried out by the “batch method” as reported elsewhere For batch-adsorption experiments, we prepared several aqueous mixtures representing the likely process feed that has a known content of glucose; their compositions were determined before starting the adsorption experiments. For each solid adsorbent, 3 The uptake, Batch desorption was studied after determination of adsorption equilibrium isotherms. The loaded solids were separated from the supernatant solutions by centrifugation. They were contacted with hot water where the solubility of glucose in water is high. In the desorption experiments, we used the same liquid-to-solid ratio (mL of water/g of solid) as used in the adsorption experiments (mL of total solution (glucose Several kinetic models were considered for interpreting the observed rates of adsorption. The pseudo-first-order equation given by Lagergren A pseudo-second-order model was proposed by Lagergren A third kinetic model given by Elovich The solute distribution between de adsorbent phase and the supernatant phase at equilibrium can be represented by several equilibrium isotherm models. The Langmuir model Several types of zeolite-based solids, as well as charcoal and alumina, were considered as potential adsorbents for glucose. Except for the latter two, all other possible sorbents show no adsorption of IL and different capacities of glucose sorption. In preliminary 24  For most applications of porous crystalline molecular sieves, such as zeolites, migration or diffusion of sorbed molecules through the pores and cages within the crystals plays an important and sometimes dominant role in the rate of adsorption. Often, the intracrystalline transport can be rate-limiting. (Perhaps a shape-selective separation process could be based on the restricted molecular migration and limited mobility of one type of molecule relative to those of another through the intracrystalline space). The LTL-zeolite has a one-dimensional network with 12-ring channels, while X- and Y-zeolites show tridimensional structures of the Faujasite (FAU) family. In accord with the literature  Good contact between the solid adsorbent and the liquid phase is crucial for reaching adsorption equilibrium. Vigorous magnetic stirring (1000 After about one hour of phase contact, the glucose uptake rate shows a weak maximum. To explain this phenomenon, we must take into account, for water, glucose and IL, the difference in elution feasibility through the pores and channels of the adsorbent. An unexpected increase in glucose removal from the supernatant phase may be due to slower migration and diffusion of IL molecules through the zeolite pores compared to those for glucose. When the IL reaches the crystalline pores, the mobility of glucose molecules relative to the solvent molecules is reduced when IL reaches the intracrystalline space. The final concentration of IL in the supernatant phase indicates that no IL adsorption takes place; however, the presence of IL raises glucose uptake. A possible explanation may follow from the strong interactions of IL and water molecules. The literature shows qualitative changes of water structure and decreased rotational motion as a consequence of aggregation or clustering of IL molecules. For imidazolium ILs, high hydration numbers were observed For the seven porous materials, glucose uptake at equilibrium follows the same ranking as that shown in For better understanding of the mechanism of adsorption, the effect of the adsorbent and the influence of the IL, the kinetic models given in Eqs.  Curves with sharp slopes and with In an adsorption study, it is desirable to fit the equilibrium data to an adsorption isotherm model as well as the kinetic equations to analyze and design the separation process. Therefore, the Freundlich isotherm model was selected to fit the experimental data. At 50 This work indicates that several types of zeolite-based adsorbents may be useful for the separation of glucose after hydrolysis of cellulose in aqueous solutions containing 1-ethyl-3-methylimidazolium acetate. For all adsorbents, adsorption capacity is higher in the presence of IL. Our studies include the effect of zeolite network pattern and pore shape and size as well as substituent cation and Si/Al ratio. Tridimensional channel structures represented by Faujasite-type zeolites showed higher glucose uptake than the monodimensional structures represented by LTL-type zeolites. When comparing X-type zeolites with Y-type zeolites, the higher the Si/Al ratio, the higher the adsorption capacity. The substituent cation plays an important role. KX and KY zeolites show higher adsorption capacity than NaX and NaY or H-FAU zeolites. Best results were obtained for the KX zeolite that shows a glucose uptake of 45% of the inicial feed concentration as reflected in The authors are grateful to the María Francisco thanks the Ministry of Science and Innovation of the Government of Spain for funding support through project CTQ2009-10776, for the award of an FPI grant with reference BES-2007-16693. Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at 