Purpose: This retrospective study was designed to evaluate the clinical and radiographic results of a hemi-hamate autograft for the treatment of comminuted dorsal proximal interphalangeal (PIP) joint fracture/dislocations.
                  
                     Methods: Thirteen consecutive patients underwent hemi-hamate autograft for the treatment of an unstable dorsal PIP fracture dislocation. The fractured middle phalangeal base was debrided and the defect was replaced using a size-matched portion of the dorsal/distal hamate osteoarticular surface and was secured with miniscrews. The average middle phalangeal volar lip involvement on initial radiographs was 60% (range, 40% to 80%). The average time to surgery was 45 days (range, 2–175 d). Range of motion, stability, and grip strength were measured at a mean follow-up evaluation of 16 months. Radiographs were evaluated for union, graft incorporation, and/or collapse. Subjective data, satisfaction, and return to work were obtained on 12 of the 13 patients at a mean follow-up evaluation of 17 months.
                  
                     Results: The average arc of motion at the PIP joint was 85° (range, 65° to 100°). The distal interphalangeal (DIP) joint average arc of motion was 60° (range, 35° to 80°). Average grip strength was 80% of the uninjured side. Bony union was achieved in all patients. One graft showed ulnar collapse but graft resorption was not noted. Except for 2 patients with recurrent dorsal subluxation there were no complications. The average pain level was 1.3 (as rated on a visual analog scale of 0–10). Eleven of 12 patients were very satisfied with their function and one was somewhat satisfied; one patient was lost to follow-up.
                  
                     Conclusions: When greater than 50% of the volar base of the middle phalanx is fractured in a PIP fracture/dislocation or the joint remains unstable despite a lesser degree of involvement, a hemi-hamate autograft should be considered. This procedure reconstructs the cup-shaped contour of the middle phalangeal articular surface and facilitates a stable, functional arc of motion at the PIP joint. Additionally, in our experience the procedure renders minimal disability and has a low complication rate.