Experiments were conducted in a liquid–solid circulating fluidized bed to study the effect of liquid viscosity and solids inventory on pressure gradient, critical transitional liquid velocity, onset average solids holdup, axial solids holdup distribution, average solids holdup and solids circulation rate in circulating fluidization regime with riser operated in fixed inventory mode. The results indicate that critical transitional liquid velocity decreases with increase in liquid viscosity. The onset average solids holdup, on the other hand, increases with increase in either auxiliary liquid velocity or solids inventory. The variation of axial solids holdup distribution, average solids holdup and solids circulation rate with liquid viscosity when solid inventory was 0.15m was dissimilar with either 0.25m or 0.35m solid inventory. Correlations were proposed for estimating the average solids holdup and are satisfactorily compared with experimental values.Fluidization is the preferred method of operation when fluid and solid phases are to be brought into contact either for physical or chemical processing. Although fluidization can be achieved by utilizing either gas or liquid as fluidizing medium, gas–solid fluidization have so far received greater attention as potential industrial applications of gas–solid fluidized beds are more numerous than liquid–solid fluidized beds Liquid–solid circulating fluidized beds consist of a riser, liquid–solid separator and downcomer with continuous circulation of solid particles between the riser and the downcomer. In LSCFB, two different process streams can be applied separately in the riser and the downcomer without mixing for different operations. A rather large number of publications have appeared on topics covering hydrodynamics and its modeling The characteristics of fixed inventory mode are: Liquid velocity and the solids charged (or total solids inventory) to the system establishes the solids holdup and solids circulation rate ( Solids circulation rate is not an independent variable but depends on the fluid velocity, the total solids inventory, flow resistances in the system and the carrying capacity of the system. The solids flux (or solids circulation rate) is not known The characteristics of variable inventory mode are: Liquid velocity and solids mass flux (or solids circulation rate) are independent variables, and are varied independently to achieve a desired solids holdup in the riser. Solids flow rate or solids circulation rate is independent of total solids inventory charged to the system. The solids flow control devices such as mechanical valves like L-valves, screw feeders, rotary screw or butterfly valve and non-mechanical devices like venturis, L-or J-valves are used to set the solids flow rate and hence both the solids flux and fluid velocities are independent variables. The solids flux (or solids circulation rate) is known but often the behavior of the solids flow control devices is complex and an As with other multiphase reactors with moving solids particles, the performance of a liquid–solid circulating fluidized bed as reactor/contacting device requires estimation of various transport properties, kinetic and mixing parameters. These parameters strongly depend on hydrodynamics. Since many industrial processes involve viscous liquids as a processing fluid, it is of primary importance to know the influence of liquid viscosity on macroscopic flow structure which indirectly affects transport properties and mixing parameters for reactor design/contacting device. The liquid–solid suspension density within riser of a liquid–solid circulating fluidized bed greatly influenced by liquid superficial velocity, solids mass flux, solid and fluid characteristics and therefore these operating parameters directly affect heat transfer, mass transfer and chemical reaction rates The effect of liquid viscosity on hydrodynamics and transport properties in liquid–solid circulating fluidized beds was investigated by few investigators with riser operated in variable inventory mode A critical analysis of literature indicates that the effect of liquid viscosity as well as solids inventory on macroscopic properties with riser operated in fixed inventory mode is not available. Hence, an attempt is made in present study to investigate the influence of liquid viscosity as well as solids inventory in addition to primary and auxiliary liquid velocity on macroscopic flow properties, viz., pressure gradient, critical transitional liquid velocity to circulating fluidized bed regime, onset average solids holdup, axial solids holdup distribution, average solids holdup and solids circulation rate and results are discussed in detail. The experimental configuration of the present study is operated in fixed inventory mode. The schematic of experimental set-up used in present study is shown in The liquid pumped from reservoir consists of two streams with main stream (or primary stream) enters riser through stainless steel tubes and the secondary stream (or auxiliary stream) enters at side of column through porous plate distributor to mobilize particles in lift pot. A large cone based liquid–solid separator separates entrained solids from liquid. The separated solids return to the downcomer through solids returning pipe and solids circulation rate measuring device. In a typical experiment, particles were first packed to a known height in riser and in downcomer (expressed as solids inventory). Initially, primary liquid was admitted into column through calibrated flow meters at very low liquid velocity. After steady state was reached, the pressure drop across bed was noted. The primary liquid velocity was incremented in small intervals till the bed expands to entire length of riser with solids about to entrain from top of riser and the pressure drop was noted each time. The secondary liquid was then introduced at a known velocity and held constant. Then circulation of solids between riser and downcomer starts. Once the system attains steady state, the pressure drop along length of riser and solids circulation rate were noted down. The solids circulation rate was determined by closing butterfly valve and noting down time needed to accumulate a definite height of solids above butterfly valve. The solids circulation rate measurement was repeated 2–3 times to ensure accuracy. The experiments were continued by increasing primary liquid velocity until transport bed regime was reached or limited by pump capacity. This procedure was repeated for various fixed auxiliary liquid velocity, various solids inventory in downcomer and various viscous liquids. Glass beads with an average diameter of 1.36 The total liquid superficial velocity (  With increase in liquid velocity, for particular static bed height in the riser, the bed can be categorized into four regimes based on solids motion, viz., packed bed, particulate or conventional fluidization, circulating fluidized bed and transport bed regimes. Of the four experimental methods, viz., discriminate analysis of voidage fluctuation signals, measurement of pressure profile, solid circulation rate method and bed emptying method available in literature The critical transitional liquid velocity depends on particle and fluid properties. The average solids holdup in the riser at critical transitional liquid velocity to circulating fluidized bed regime is called the onset average solids holdup. Since auxiliary liquid velocity regulates the solids flux into the riser, the onset average solids holdup is different at different auxiliary liquid velocities and is independent of primary liquid velocity by this method of operation. Previous studies  The effect of liquid viscosity on onset average solids holdup at fixed auxiliary liquid velocity with solids inventory as parameter is shown in On analyzing plots drawn similar to The sectional solids holdup was obtained from pressure drop measurements and the average solids holdup in the riser was the average of local sectional solids holdups. The first section, i.e., up to 0.5 The effect of auxiliary liquid velocity and total liquid velocity on average solids holdup in the riser for water–particle system has been studied by many authors At any fixed total liquid velocity, average solids holdup increases with increase in auxiliary liquid velocity. For a fixed auxiliary liquid velocity, solids holdup decreases with increase in total liquid velocity. These observations are similar to that reported in literature For low viscous liquids (0.9 Since the riser of a liquid–solid circulating fluidized bed is always accompanied by a downcomer, hydrodynamic behavior in the riser depends on solids inventory in downcomer and the structure of non-mechanical valve or feeding system that connects downcomer with the riser. As explained by Zheng and Zhu  There is no information available in literature on effect of solids inventory and viscosity of liquid on average solids holdup with the riser operated in fixed inventory system. The effect of liquid viscosity on average solids holdup with total liquid velocity as independent variable at different solids inventory and auxiliary liquid velocities is shown in Within range of total liquid velocities common for all viscous solutions, when solids inventory in the downcomer is 0.25 and 0.35 From As discussed in the previous section, development of circulating fluidized bed regime was different for different viscous liquids because of variations in their critical transitional liquid velocity to circulating fluidized bed regime. In order to understand the effect of solids inventory and viscosity of liquid for direct comparison, variation of average solids holdup is plotted in terms of normalized liquid velocities with respect to critical transitional liquid velocities.   For a given auxiliary liquid velocity, variation of average solids holdup with viscosity of the liquid at a solids inventory of 0.15 For a constant set of primary and auxiliary liquid velocity, effect of viscosity and solids inventory is shown in Solids circulation rate is one of the important variables that determines the performance of the riser as a reactor or a contacting device as it gives solids superficial velocity, decides time of contact with flowing fluid phase and hence the extent of conversion  By observing the variation of solids circulation rate with total liquid velocity at various constant auxiliary liquid velocities, two different types of profiles are noticed. One is at lower auxiliary liquid velocities, where solids circulation rate varies linearly with superficial liquid velocity. At higher auxiliary liquid velocities, the variation of solids circulation rate with superficial liquid velocity can be divided into two regions; one is at low liquid velocities where solids circulation rate varies linearly with superficial liquid velocity at faster rate and second is at higher liquid velocity where the variation of solids circulation rate with liquid velocity is insignificant. This observation is different from the reported literature The effect of solids inventory in downcomer on solids circulation rate has been studied by two investigators, viz., There is no published information on the effect of solids inventory and viscosity of liquid on solids circulation rate with riser operated in fixed inventory system. The variation of solids circulation rate with total liquid velocity with liquid viscosity as parameter at different solids inventories for a particular auxiliary liquid velocity is shown in By analyzing At constant total liquid velocity, with solids inventory of 0.15   The literature on hydrodynamics reveals that Zheng and Zhu Similarly, Basava Rao et al. These correlations involve dimensionless solids circulation rate as one the variables affecting the average solids holdup. But solids circulation rate is an independent variable and depends on operating conditions such as liquid velocity (primary and auxiliary), fluid and particle characteristics and solids inventory, etc. Moreover while developing the above correlations to predict the average solids holdup, solids inventory in the downcomer was not considered. In fact, solids inventory significantly affects solids circulation rate and average solids holdup as observed in their research results In addition, these correlations involve dimensionless liquid velocity expressed in terms of total liquid velocity. As noticed earlier The comparison of experimental and predicted average solids holdup by Eqs. For liquid solid circulating fluidized bed with fixed inventory, the effect of operating variables, viz., primary and auxiliary liquid velocity, solids inventory and viscosity of liquid on macroscopic flow characteristics were studied. The following conclusions are drawn from present study: The critical transitional liquid velocity to CFB regime decreases with increase in liquid viscosity. The onset average solids holdup increases with increase in auxiliary liquid velocity and solids inventory. The axial and average solids holdup decreases with increasing primary liquid velocity and increases with increasing either auxiliary liquid velocity or solids inventory. At constant set of primary and auxiliary liquid velocities, the behavior of axial solids holdup distribution with solid inventory in downcomer of 0.15 At constant set of primary and auxiliary liquid velocities, behavior of average solids holdup and solids circulation rate with viscosity of liquid are different when solids inventory in the downcomer is 0.15 The axial solids distribution is not unique indicating that there is a significant interaction effect of solids inventory and liquid viscosity on axial solids holdup distribution. Correlations proposed for estimating average solids holdup satisfactorily compares with experimental.  particle diameter (m) dimensionless particle diameter acceleration due to gravity (m/s solids circulation rate (kg/m dimensionless solids circulation rate axial distance from bottom of the riser (m) solids inventory in the downcomer (m) minimum fluidization velocity (m/s) total superficial liquid velocity (m/s) dimensionless superficial liquid velocity primary or main liquid velocity (m/s) secondary or auxiliary liquid velocity (m/s) critical transition velocity from conventional to circulating fluidization regime (m/s) particle terminal velocity (m/s) maximum average solids holdup minimum average solids holdup average solids holdup experimental sectional solids holdup static pressure gradient (Pa/m) viscosity of liquid (cP) viscosity of water (cP) density of liquid (kg/m density difference(