In this study, the effects of various experimental parameters on the cementation yield of copper by iron were investigated statistically. A statistical experimental design based on the second-order central composite rotatable design (CCRD) was planned fixing the cementation period at 2h. The experimental design was done at five levels of the operating parameters which were the initial copper concentration, temperature, pH and flow rate and their studied ranges are 10–100mg/L, 20–60°C, 1–5 and 0.46–4.38mL/s, respectively. The model equation for copper cementation yield was developed and an optimization study was done.
                  The optimal conditions determined by using surface contour plots for initial copper cementation, temperature, pH and flow rate were 75.25mg/L, 60°C, 2.2 and 3.79mL/s, respectively. Under these conditions, the copper cementation yield obtained was 99.6%.Electrochemical cementation is known from a long time to remove noble or toxic metallic ions from solutions and is still used in hydrometallurgy, surface waste treatment and electrolyte purification. It consisted in the spontaneous heterogeneous reduction of a metallic ion present in solution by a more electropositive sacrificial metal. This technique is a type of corrosion reaction in which the anodic half reaction is the dissolution of the less noble metal and the cathodic half reaction is the deposition of the more noble metal The present study concerns the copper–iron system and the corresponding global cementation reaction is Removal of heavy metals, especially copper, by cementation has been studied by a number of researches on various substrate materials like Zn, Fe and Al with different type of electrodes, such as rotating disc There are a number of variables (temperature, reaction time, agitation, electrode geometry, pH, flow rate, etc.) known to affect cementation reaction and many attempts have been made to optimize them using statistical experiment designs such as TAGUCHI method The present study is undertaken to investigate the effectiveness of process variables, namely: initial copper concentration, temperature, pH and flow rate on the copper cementation yield of a laboratory-scale tubular reactor containing volumetric electrode of iron. The experiments are planned using experimental design based on a central composite rotatable design to study the main effects and the interactions of these variables and to found the combination of factors levels that give the optimum operating conditions. Our article has not aspired to bring newness towards the cementation reaction of copper by iron very much investigated but to provide the calculation tool in the field not yet exploited. Indeed, the experimental studies are often carried out by the empirical method, i.e., while varying all parameters at the same time and while seeking to determine the variation domain of the best output. On other side, cause complexity of the electrode as grill in zigzag unfolded into tubular reactor which was used, we think that the experimental designs make it possible to clear the ground in the understanding of the difference influences on the cementation kinetics in this case of figure. The main objective in using experimental design is to provide maximum and accurate information from a fewer possible number of runs The regression equation of fitted model for cementation yield was established and responses surface contour plots were drawn to investigate the interactions of operating parameters. These provide easiness in noticing the change in response when those factors are changed simultaneously. The cementation experiments were carried out in the apparatus shown in All reagents used in this study were analytical grade and distillated water was used to prepare all the copper sulphate and sulphuric acid solutions ((CuSO Experimental design is widely used for controlling the effects of parameters in many processes. Its usage decreases number of experiments, using time and material resources. Furthermore, the analysis performed on the results is easily realized and experimental errors are minimized. Statistical method measures the effects of change in operating variables and their mutual interactions on process through experimental design way In this study, four operating factors were chosen as independent variables, namely, initial copper concentration ( The original values of each factor and their corresponding levels are shown in The experiments were performed according to the central composite rotatable design (CCRD) matrix given in The correlation of the independent variables and the response were estimated by a second-order polynomial equation The results of second-order central composite design experiments are collected in The estimated The tabulate The test of reliability for predicting equation has been carried out by Fisher's variance ratio test known as  The upper degree of freedom ( Finally, The model equation for copper cementation by iron obtained after performing 36 experiments and discarding the insignificant effects is as follows: The regression equation obtained above (Eq. Concerning pH effect, literature results According the regression equation, temperature ( The significance interactions found by the design of experiments for copper cementation yield are essentially between flow rate and solution pH ( In this work, the model equation is used to find the direction in which the variables should be changed in order to optimize cementation reaction yield. The corresponding two dimensional response surfaces of the quadratic model are shown in The surface contour plots of mutual interactions between the variables ( The analysis of these figures indicates clearly the significance influence of flow rate and its interaction with solution pH. The optimum cementation yield in all conditions ( Under economical considerations, 95.8% cementation yield ( The present work is a convivial tool for the determination of the optimal conditions of the cementation process functioning. It shows that experimental design is an appropriate method to optimize the cementation process of a laboratory-scale tubular reactor containing volumetric electrode of iron. The influence of various operating parameters namely: initial copper concentration, temperature, pH and flow rate in cementation yield has been investigated by using statistical method called central composite rotatable design (CCRD) to determine the optimum cementation conditions. The quadratic model for copper cementation yield is developed using “EXCEL” software. The validity of regression equation has been controlled by statistical approaches. The optimal conditions determined by using surface contour plots are, initial copper cementation 75.25