The quantitative description of packing behaviour of particulate systems under consideration of realistic particle size distributions and material properties poses one challenging problem in powder technology, with impacts on a broad range of technological areas. Here we investigate the packing characteristics of micrometer to millimeter-sized, polydisperse spherical particle systems of glass, zirconia and copper by means of experimental measurements of the bulk density, X-ray microtomography (CT) and numerical simulations of the granular packings using a 3d discrete element method (DEM). The applied DEM method takes realistic material properties into account and considers the experimentally obtained particle size distributions as well as attractive inter-particle forces including adhesion (Johnson, Kendall, Roberts (JKR)) and non-bonded van der Waals (vdW) interactions. Good agreement of the packing densities predicted by DEM and observed in the experiments (bulk density determination & CT) is found. Moreover, we show that a simple mathematical expression for the packing fraction as a function of average particle size of the polydisperse powder system describes well our experimental and simulation results for all investigated materials, with only two fitting parameters. From the DEM simulations, the mean (first) coordination number in the respective polydisperse packing is extracted and discussed with respect to the experimentally obtained direct neighborhood detection from X-ray tomography and in context of previous works. The mean coordination number shows a rather broad variance due to the polydispersity of the samples considered. It also shows a remarkable dependency on the definition of particle contact. Therefore, caution is advised when evaluating coordination numbers with this quantity being highly dependent on the instrumental resolution.contact radius adhesion parameter the Hamaker constant additive manufacturing dissipative parameter tangential dissipative parameter free parameter X-ray microtomography mean particle diameter discrete element method minimum distance of the particles’ surfaces at contact gravitational force adhesion force normal force tangential force van der Waals (vdW) force shear modulus Johnson, Kendall and Roberts constant magnification mean coordination number polyamide 12 polybutylene terephthalate particle size distribution number density distribution volume density distribution number sum distribution volume sum distribution radius effective radius selective electron beam melting selective laser melting selective laser sintering settling velocity van der Waals Volume Player Plus work of adhesion particle diameter Young’s modulus free parameter free parameter surface energy free parameter packing fraction packing fraction for large particles free parameter elastic parameter friction coefficient Poisson’s ratio solid density force ratio F deformation free parameter The packing behaviour of particles and strategies to tailor packing fraction, porosity, void volume or the particles’ coordination in the packing are of great interest in many practical applications e.g. in chemical engineering (c.f. fixed bed reactors, filtration) or manufacturing. Especially in the production of ceramics, powder metallurgy or in powder bed fusion additive manufacturing (AM) processes like selective laser sintering (SLS), selective laser melting (SLM) or selective electron beam melting (SEBM), the packing characteristics and the powder’s behaviour during processing have an immanent impact on product properties, such as dimensional accuracy or mechanical strength. In these fields, a deeper understanding of the influence of powder characteristics like particle size (distribution), particle shape (roundness) The motivation of this work is to assess the prediction of packing characteristics of unconsolidated bulk materials in the micrometer size range, namely packing fraction and average (first) coordination number, by DEM for different model particle systems (copper, zirconium oxide and glass) taking experimentally determined particle size distributions (c.f. image analysis, laser diffraction particle sizing) and realistic material properties Bulk density measurements were performed for spherical particles of different materials, namely glass, zirconia (ZrO The PSDs of the glass spheres ( PSDs and the shape factor (circularity = 4*π*area/perimeter For the determination of the bulk density the following two procedures were applied: in the case of the glass spheres and the polymer particles, about 80 mL of the respective powder were poured into a graduated glass cylinder of a total volume of 100 mL and a diameter of 3.5 cm via a funnel without the application of compression or tapping. The outlet of the funnel (diameter approx. 2 cm) was placed about 2 cm above the opening of the cylinder, i.e. at a height of about 12 cm above the bottom. In this experimental setup the packing volume could be determined with an accuracy of 0.5 mL. The bulk density was obtained by dividing the mass of the particles filled into the cylinder by the occupied volume. The mass of the powder has been determined with a lab balance at an accuracy of 1 mg. The (dimensionless) packing fraction is given by the quotient of the bulk density and the solid density. The reported packing densities determined with this setup are the average of 5 independent measurements. The relative standard deviation of the obtained packing density for all powders was smaller than 3%. The bulk density of the ZrO X-ray microtomography was applied for the determination of the bulk density and the (first) coordination number of ZrO For the measurement preparation the granular material was poured into a small cylinder of 3 mm diameter, i.e. a particle to tube diameter ratio of 33:1 applied for a typical particle size x Prior to analysis of the packing fraction, partial volumes with 400 The procedures applied in the DEM simulations have been reported previously; for details please refer to with the deformation ξ for particles of radii R Y is the Young’s modulus, ν the Poisson’s ratio and the effective radius is The tangential force F Moreover, particle interactions, namely adhesion (considered by the JKR model Non-bonded van der Waals forces were calculated using the expression by Hamaker with a cut-off distance of 1 µm Here A The values of the material parameters used in the DEM simulations are summarized in For the determination of packing fractions a simulation box of size 12 <d> ∙ 12 <d> in x- and y-direction, with <d> being the mean particle diameter, was chosen and periodic boundary conditions applied. The dimension of the simulation box in z-direction was chosen that it allowed for realization of packings of a height >30 ∙ <d>. For an initial setting, the particles not touching each other were placed at random positions in the simulation box (overall packing fraction < 0.2). When starting the DEM simulation, the particles were allowed to settle due to gravity. The packing fractions given in the following were computed after full relaxation. Snapshots of DEM simulations performed for glass (5 … 10 µm) and ZrO Two particles were defined as neighbors, if the distance between the particle centers was smaller than the sum of their radii, i.e. if the particle-particle surface distance was 0 (or less). To obtain the mean coordination number in the packing for all particles the number of neighbors in the volume of the packing was calculated; particles found in volume elements close to the bottom or top of the cylinder were excluded from the evaluation, the same applies for particles found in volume elements close to the lateral boundaries. The following procedure was used to determine <N Particles at a minimum distance of D = k * R (R: radius, k: constant, starting from e.g. k = 0.1) are selected and the contact numbers of the selected particles are summarized and divided by the total number of selected particles, thus, a mean contact number <N Step (1) is repeated and the value for the constant k is increased. Step (2) is repeated until <N To account for the spatial resolution of the CT method, respectively, to demonstrate the influence of the definition of ‘particle-particle contact’, also further evaluations allowing for particle-particle distances > 0 were performed (see The packing fraction of particles is known to depend on many factors, besides intrinsic materials properties especially mean particle size, the PSD and the particle shape will influence this quantity. In the case of fine (cohesive) powders, particle-particle interaction forces remarkably influence packing behaviour and agglomeration due to the larger ratio of van der Waals forces to gravitational force The effect of particle shape on packing fraction has been extensively studied by DEM simulations (see e.g. In summary, the shape of the particle has only a sizeable effect for strong deviations from the spherical shape. This statement was not à priori obvious, but is a result of our studies The effect of particle size on the packing fraction becomes notable for particles smaller than 50 µm, c.f. Several simple relationships to describe the dependence of packing fraction on particle size, respectively characteristic force ratios –often deduced from DEM simulations- have been proposed so far. In our previous work φ Yang et al. Here φ In recent work Here ε and κ are two free parameters, φ The aforementioned relationships deduced from DEM simulations on the dependency of packing fraction on particle size have several similiarities, they all use two free fitting parameters, in all cases give a limiting packing fraction φ give smaller packing fraction for smaller particle size, as expressed by the dependencies of packing fraction on a reciprocal characteristic particle size for the system, c.f. Eqs. A comparison of the experimentally determined packing densities (bulk density measurements, c.f. filled symbols) and X-ray microtomography (open symbols) with the packing fractions obtained by DEM simulations (cross symbols) taking the material parameters given in The size dependency of the packing fraction as calculated by Eq. The experimentally determined packing fractions for Cu and ZrO While the determination of the packing density is straightforward (c.f. determination of mass and volume of the bulk solid) and reliable data are obtained, information on the coordination of the particles in the packing is not that easily accessible by simple experiments. More sophisticated methods like X-ray tomography need to be applied that allow for a direct observation of the spatial arrangement of particles For monomodal spherical particles a positive correlation of packing density and mean coordination number has been reported in theoretical studies and different correlations have been established Yang et al. checked this relationship for packing fractions between around 0.3 and 0.8 and claim that the parameters are rather insensitive on material properties -including the van der Waals interactions considered - and remarkable changes were only found for extreme small friction coefficients. They obtain mean coordination numbers of about 6 with φ  Packing properties of micron to millimeter-sized spherical model particle systems (glass, ZrO In summary, it could be demonstrated that experimentally validated DEM simulations give the possibility to correctly predict packing densities for non-consolidated particle systems showing a certain width of PSD, which e.g. is of immanent importance in the design of particle systems for powder-based manufacturing processes like additive manufacturing (SLS, SLM, SEBM), powder metallurgy or processing of ceramics, although, caution is advised when evaluating and comparing coordination numbers obtained from simulations or different experimental approaches, with this quantity being highly dependent on the instrumental resolution. A future challenge and task will be the simulation and validation of packings of cohesive polydisperse bulk solids made up of particles of non-spherical, complex shape. German Research Foundation (DFG) is acknowledged for funding of this study in the framework of the Collaborative Research Center CRC814 “Additive Manufacturing” (project-ID 61375930, subprojects A1, A2 and B1). We gratefully acknowledge the computing time granted by the John von Neumann Institute for Computing (NIC) and provided on the supercomputer JUROPA at Jülich Supercomputing Centre (JSC). EP acknowledges DFG for funding (grant RI2497/6-1). Supplementary data to this article can be found online at The following are the Supplementary data to this article: