This study was concerned with the interaction between a gaseous dispersion of fine particles travelling in the horizontal direction and discrete drops of water falling vertically through the dispersion. A simple analytical model of the particle–drop collision was developed to describe the particle recovery by the drops as a function of the water flux, covering two extremes of relative velocity between the particles and drops. The Discrete Element Method was used to validate the analytical model. Further validation of the model and insights were obtained through experimental studies. The physical process of wetting was observed to be important in influencing the tendency of particles to become engulfed by the drops of water, or to either adhere to the drops or by-pass the drops altogether. Hydrophilic particles were readily engulfed while hydrophobic particles, at best, adhered to the surface of the drop, or failed to attach. Moreover, the recovery of the hydrophilic silica particles was significantly higher than the recovery of hydrophobic coal particles, with the selectivity ratio approximately 1.5. Spherical ballotini particles were the most sensitive, with a notable increase in recovery when cleaned, and evidence of increased recovery with increasing particle size. The recovery of irregular shaped silica flour particles, however, was largely independent of the particle size. A similar result was observed for irregular coal particles, though the recoveries were all lower than relatively more hydrophilic ballotini or silica flour.Froth flotation is the conventional method used in coal and mineral processing to separate the valuable particles from the unwanted gangue, by exploiting the differences in physical properties such as hydrophobicity and hydrophilicity. This process has evolved since its inception in the early part of the twentieth century There has been great progress in developing methods for processing raw materials in the dry form, but major challenges remain with respect to the finest particles. The present study was motivated by the idea of applying some of the principles of froth flotation to the processing of fine particles in the dry state. This was clearly ambitious, but nevertheless considered worth an investigation. In considering the principles of froth flotation it is important to identify some of the difficulties that exist, and in turn incorporate further advantages into a new system. Firstly, in conventional flotation the recovery of fine hydrophobic particles requires intense levels of energy to encourage the finest particles to overcome powerful lubrication forces in the viscous boundary layer surrounding the rising air bubble. As shown in In this study the interactions between a gaseous dispersion of fine particles passing horizontally through a zone of falling drops of water was investigated. As shown in The purpose of this study was to investigate the strength of the interactions between the dispersed dry particles and the falling water drops, and to in turn assess the selectivity based on a range of physical properties. There is relatively little literature available on the selectivity of this proposed system. One approach that has some similarity is film flotation Relatively recently, Tran et al. Wet scrubbers have been used extensively in industry to remove virtually all of the particulate species present in a dispersed cloud, with little attention to issues of selectivity derived from differences in wetting. Particle collection in wet scrubbers is influenced by the circulation of the liquid drops through the gas stream. Particles are collected by the water drops through inertial impaction, interception, Brownian motion, and gravitational settling Galvin et al. The basis for a selective separation between the hydrophilic and hydrophobic particles is best characterised in terms of the wetting and adhesion between the particles and the water drops. Particle adhesion is governed primarily by the lowering of the surface energy, and is further influenced by the surface charge. The thermodynamic criterion governing the potential for drop–particle attachment is the contact angle at the line formed by the intersection of the three phases In this section, two analytical models for describing the interception of falling water drops with a dispersion of fine particles are developed. It is noted that the models assume that each collision between a particle and drop results in particle attachment to, and subsequent engulfment in, the drop. The trajectory of the particles, which may follow the streamline of the gas, are assumed not to be influenced by the falling drops. These models are assessed in the later experimental section. The first model is based on the assumption that the horizontal velocity of the particles, The theoretical collision zone where the particles and drops interact, shown in In this section it is assumed the horizontal particle velocity, In a time, The projected disc area corresponding to a water drop having a diameter The volume of particles that collide with this swept volume per m Note that the steady state volume fraction of the drops is, The volume flux of particles that collide is, That is, Similarly, Therefore, the recovery via collision is, We now consider the other extreme, in which the horizontal particle velocity, For The corresponding projected area of these drops is, Therefore the fraction of the two dimensional projected area covered by drops is, Incorporating Eq. Applying the binomial approximation and setting Eq. It is noted that the drops commence their motion from a state of rest, as they detach from their source, and accelerate towards their terminal velocity. Thus the relevant drop velocity, which is much lower than the terminal velocity, must be calculated with regards to the inertial forces. For this study, half the total average fall distance, Both models provide the recovery due to collision in terms of the distance For The Discrete Element Method (DEM) was used in this study in order to validate the analytical models described above, and to also cover the intermediate conditions where the particle and drop velocities were of a comparable magnitude. DEM treats particles by assigning material properties and sizes to each individual particle within the system. Despite the fact that this methodology is usually dedicated to the study of particulate solids it has also been applied to the study of multiphase systems such as the capture of particles by bubbles The simulation model is based on the experimental system. At the beginning of the simulations drops were positioned at the top of the system and distributed randomly in the Two experimental approaches were used to investigate the selectivity associated with the particle–drop interaction. Preliminary experiments were conducted using a single drop subjected to a dispersion of dry particles. In the first series of experiments a vibratory table was used to energise the fine particles and cause the particles to rise and contact the drop. In the second series of experiments a fine particle dispersion was formed above the drop and allowed to settle over the top of the drop. The single drop was then placed on a microscope slide in order to examine the particles either inside or at the surface of the drop. The major focus of this study was on the interaction of a horizontally moving dispersion of fine particles with the controlled release of a system of falling drops. A laboratory scale experimental system was designed and developed to study this interaction. A schematic representation of the particle dispersion and collision chamber is shown in The system operated under vacuum hence it was necessary to always insure the vessel was sealed around the feed entrance. A double pinch valve arrangement permitted the feed of dry particles to be added progressively. A total of 50 A vacuum pump was used on the exit side of the collision zone to generate the air flow. A 37 The water distribution system mounted on the collision chamber consisted of a closed rectangular shaped cell. Municipal tap-water was used in the experiments, with pH of 7 Particles of ballotini and silica flour were prepared using standard laboratory sieves, resulting in the particulate systems listed in Samples of glass ballotini and silica flour were treated separately using 10% All coal samples used in this study contained 6% by weight mineral matter. The coal was wet sieved into different size fractions and oven dried overnight at a temperature of 90 When a dispersion of ballotini particles was permitted to interact with a fixed water drop, there was rapid and efficient engulfment, resulting in the particles settling and collecting near the base of the drop. Three theoretical models were developed to describe the interaction between a horizontal cloud of gas dispersed particles and vertically falling drops. The first two were analytical, and focussed on two extremes in relative particle and drop velocities, i.e. where The recovery of the fine dry particles by the falling water drops in the developed laboratory-scale apparatus was measured as a function of the water flux. The water flux, In the present study selectivity was a critical issue. Experiments were conducted using different particle species as a function of the water flux, with all other conditions held constant. Selectivity was then determined from the ratio of the recoveries obtained at a given water flux. In order to focus on the measurement of selectivity, it was sensible to conduct the experiments in a manner that would achieve relatively low rates of collision with the falling drops. Thus the distance Spherical particles of glass ballotini 23–47 The data shown in The underflow recovery was then investigated using two different size fractions of cleaned glass ballotini. The results of this series of experiments are shown in  When hydrophobic coal particles were introduced to the same system relatively low recoveries were obtained for all size fractions as shown in This study was concerned with the collision of fine particles with water drops, and the potential for achieving selectivity between hydrophobic and hydrophilic particles. Preliminary single drop experiments supported this hypothesis. A novel experimental system was developed to systematically measure the selectivity. Dry particle systems present a host of challenges that are not present in water based systems. It was necessary to design an arrangement for delivering particles to a system operated under vacuum, disperse those particles using a vibrating screen, and then transport the particles into a horizontal air flow. The experimental system required a series of improvements in order to deliver the dispersion of the particles uniformly into the chamber. Care was taken to insure all of the particles would exit the chamber, in the absence of the falling water drops. We are not aware of any previous experimental arrangement that has achieved this level of control. The underflow recovery, associated with particles captured by the falling drops, was then measured as a function of the water flux. This recovery increased in direct proportion to the water flux. The experimental data were found to be highly reproducible, and hence this work provides perhaps the best basis for validating theoretical models of the particle–drop collision. There was a slight, but notable, difference in the recovery achieved for clean and as received glass ballotini, and a dependence on particle size for these spherical particles. Irregularly shaped particles of silica flour, however, exhibited recoveries independent of their particle size, suggesting spherical particles interact differently to irregular shaped particles of similar surface chemistry. A significant difference in recovery between clean silica flour and hydrophobic coal was observed, with a selectivity of approximately 1.5 in favour of the silica. Prior to this study it was anticipated that much higher selectivity would be possible, but clearly this is not the case. Hydrophobic particles only associate with the outer surface of a drop, and hence fail to enter. The efficiency of the collisions between these particles and the drops was clearly high, but less than that evident for the hydrophilic silica particles. The authors thank the Australian Coal Association Research Program for funding this work, and Mark Mason for helping to develop the experimental system.