The separation of carbon from fly ash significantly improves the potential end-us of combustion byproducts. Froth flotation is the most effective separation technique for ultrafine material. Diesel dosages, conditioning time, and impeller rotating speeds' influences on carbon flotation performance were studied. From flotation products, +25 and −25μm fractions were screened out to study their different flotation behaviors. At a given impeller speed, carbon recovery of +25μm fraction increased significantly from 38.46% to 74.22% over a range of diesel dosage from 0.5 to 4.5kg/t, while that of -25μm fraction was relatively constant at 85% over the same diesel dosage range. Morphologies and microstructures of coarse and fine carbon were studied by using scanning electron microscope. Porous structures of coarse carbon were observed. It's difficult for diesel droplets of several microns to penetrate the pores of coarse carbon particles, which increases diesel consumption. Increasing impeller speeds from 1200 to 1600rpm during conditioning improved the carbon recovery and separation efficiency of +25μm fraction by 79% and 110%, respectively, which significantly reduced diesel consumption. Flotation kinetic studies indicate that increasing impeller speeds during conditioning stage can improve the flotation rate constant and maximum carbon recovery for both +25 and −25μm fractions.It has been estimated that 750 After its first significant industrial applications in early 20th century, flotation has been widely used in mineral processing industries. Many papers concerning carbon flotation from fly ash have been published since the 1970s. Hurst and Styron Recently, significant work has been conducted using state-of-the-art flotation systems instead of conventional cells to recover carbon from fly ash. Niewiadomski et al. Carbon in fly ash can be recovered efficiently by using proper reagents and equipment. However, some drawbacks such as large reagent consumption exist. In this publication, collector dosages, conditioning time, and impeller speeds' influences on the flotation of both coarse (+ Representative fly ash samples were collected from the electrostatic precipitators of an eastern U.S. coal powered facility. Feed coal of the plant is of high volatile A bituminous rank. Chemical composition of the fly ash determined by X-ray fluorescence (XRF) is reported in Size distribution of the fly ash was determined by using wet screening and following sieve sizes: 100 (0.15 Flotation tests were accomplished by using a Denver flotation machine equipped with 1 Carbon content was represented by loss of weight on ignition (LOI), which was measured following the ASTM D7348-08 standard LOI, LOI distribution, and weight distribution in different size fractions of fly ash are shown in   As shown in  Overall, lower diesel dosages such as 0.5  For − Several experiments were conducted to evaluate the influence of impeller speeds at conditioning (CIS) and flotation (FIS) stages on flotation performance. The experiment parameters and results are given in Flotation concentrate with 13.93% LOI and 77.95% was obtained by using 1600 Flotation kinetic studies were mainly used to evaluate influences of various parameters such as flotation reagents on flotation processes As shown in  Flotation behavior of a collected fly ash was studied systematically. Among studied factors, diesel dosages and CIS have the most significant influences on carbon recovery. Carbon recovery of + Flotation kinetic studies indicated that classical first order flotation kinetic model fitted the experimental results very well. Increasing diesel dosages could improve the flotation performance of +