Bone substitute materials based on bioceramics and polymers have evolved shifting from a passive role where they are merely accepted by the body; to an active role, where they respond to particular environmental conditions or to different types of cues generating suitable integration (osseointegration for this case) inside the host tissue. In this work, two types of composite materials based on a bioceramic (synthetic nano-hydroxyapatite, HA) and a biopolymer (sodium alginate, ALG) have been designed and assessed for promoting the bone regeneration. These materials were loaded with ciprofloxacin (CIP) for obtaining, not only a suitable material for a filling but with antibacterial properties. Therefore, their main features were studied through Fourier transformed-infrared spectroscopy (FT-IR), X-ray diffraction (XRD) and transmission electron microscopy (TEM). Ultraviolet–Visible (UV–Vis) spectroscopy was used for obtaining the released concentrations of CIP and Zeta-potential (ζ-potential) was used for characterizing the adsorption of CIP onto nanoparticles. The release profile of this drug has been fit with the Ritger-Peppas model, used for studying the release kinetics of hydrogel-based systems. The bioactivity of these composites was also evaluated after 30 days of incubation in a simulated body fluid solution (SBF). Then, the assessment of antibacterial capability against the three main strains cause osteomyelitis was performed. Finally, the cell viability study and the cellular morphology assay were also carried out. These last assays have shown encouraging results and, gathered with their other properties, such as their bioactivity and antibacterial properties; they could lead to propose these materials as new bone filler antibiotic devices.The bone mass loss evidenced in different bone diseases, encourage the development of new strategies for mitigating this issue. The autologous bone graft is still considering the gold standard for treating this illness [ There are many bone diseases caused by bacteria and for their treatment ciprofloxacin (CIP) must be administrated [ For this aim, at first, bare nanoparticles were characterized by TEM, XRD, ζ-potential and FT-IR. Then, drug-loaded composites were developed with loaded and bared nanoparticles and for studying their bioactivity the growth of biogenic HA onto the surface of each composite was demonstrated by TEM, XRD and FT-IR. Composites have been loaded with CIP but one of them has been loaded with CIP onto the surface of the nanoparticles and the other composite has been loaded the CIP dissolved into ALG matrix. After that, and for guarantee no adverse effects, their biocompatibility was studied through cell viability assay and cell morphology. Additionally, the release of CIP, in different pH conditions and with different ionic strength for both types of composites, was evaluated by Rigter-Peppas model [ Sodium alginate (ALG) with mannuronic/glucuronic acid ratio (M/G) estimated in 0.79 by Nanoparticles of HA were synthesized and characterized as we previously reported [ Two types of antibacterial composites with the same concentration of CIP were assessed. Both materials were prepared by adding HA nanoparticles (as crosslinking agent) to an aqueous solution of 2% alginate. One of these composites was prepared by adding nanoparticles previously loaded with CIP (by adsorption process, see below) to a solution of alginate and then the formed suspension was complemented with 1 ml of 110 mM CaCl It is important to consider that, the concentration of the solution of CIP used for obtaining the loaded nanoparticles which then will form HA-CIP/ALG materials should be higher than the concentration of the solution of CIP for obtaining HA/CIP-ALG composites because the adsorption process (HA-CIP) yields a performance of ~70% as was reported in the literature [ The preparation of HA-CIP/ALG composite has needed a first step, the adsorption of CIP onto the nanoparticles before be included in the alginate matrix. This adsorption process of CIP onto nanoparticles was carried out by incubation of nano-rods into an aqueous antibiotic solution (Milli-Q water at pH = 6) and using a magnetic stirrer for 1 h. After that, the nanoparticles into the antibiotic solution were kept for 7 days (10,080 min) at 25 °C for reaching the maximum concentration per gram of nanoparticles, such as was previously reported by Benedini et al. [ Zeta potential (ζ) of the bare and CIP-loaded nanoparticles were measured by means of a Zeta sizer Nano ZS90 (Malvern Instruments, Malvern, UK), with a He The concentration of CIP adsorbed onto nanoparticles (for developing composites) and also that desorbed from composites (release process study) were measured with a UV–Vis–NIR scanning spectrophotometer (Varian Cary 100 Bio) provided with a temperature controller (UV09005M013), using a 1 cm path length rectangular quartz cell. Adsorption and desorption experiments were carried out in 5 ml glass-tubes with round bottom immersed in a thermostatic bath. Adsorption and desorption temperature was set at 37 °C (biological conditions) such it was reported in previous work [ In bioactivity assay, CIP-loaded composites were soaked with simulated body fluid (SBF) following the standard procedure described by Kokubo et al. [ Powder X-ray diffraction (XRD) data were collected with a Philips PW 1710 diffractometer with Cu Kα radiation (λ = 1.5418 nm) and graphite monochromator, operated at 45 kV, 30 mA at 25 °C. The mean crystalline size (δ) of the particles was calculated from XRD line broadening measurement using the Scherrer equation [ The FT-IR spectra were obtained in 4000–400 cm SEM micro pictures were obtained using a JEOL 35CF, Tokyo, Japan. The composites rinsed with Milli-Q water were dried and then, they were fixed onto the respective support for observing their surface morphology and evaluate their changes depending on the incubation time. In this work, primary cultures of rat calvaria osteoblast (OBs-r) were used. The cultures were obtained from calvaria isolated from young Wistar rats as previously described by Placente et al. [ In this section, both types of materials (HA-CIP/ALG and HA/CIP-ALG) were tested. Additionally, three types of controls were used: a composite without antibiotic (HA/ALG) prepared such as Benedini et al. [ The samples (2 mg of both CPSs) were sterilized by UV (λ = 254 nm) light during 5 min per side, then pulverized with mortar and finally, they were included into 48-well plates. Afterwards, OBs-r were seeded in the well plates and cultured for 72 h in Alpha-Minimum Essential Medium supplemented with 1% fetal bovine serum (α-MEM-1% FBS, Sigma-Aldrich), in a humidified atmosphere (5.5% CO After that time, the cell viability estimation was carried out following the Neutral red uptake assay [ The assessment of the behavior of composites with pH variations has been carried out by using polarized light optical microscopy (OM) using a Nikon Eclipse E-200 POL polarizing microscope (Tokyo, Japan). Additionally, a hot plate was used to control the temperature at 37 °C. By means of this technique, it is possible to determine the possible appearance of mesophases in the CPSs in different media. For their evaluation, CPSs have been formed onto slides with a central excavation and they were observed by OM with a retardation plate. This technique is simple, economical and allows to quickly determining if there is any variation in the three-dimensional structure of the CPS depending on the medium features. The materials have been observed using the peripheral dilution method using those solvents used in release assays: phosphate saline solution (PBS), pH = 7.4; Milli-Q water (W), pH = 6; and acetate buffer (ACE), pH = 4.2. This method is used for simulating the conditions suffered by materials when are incubated into the different media for studying the release of CIP. The release of CIP from composites has been studied at 37 °C in three different media: phosphate saline solution (PBS), pH = 7.4; Milli-Q water (W), pH = 6; and acetate buffer (ACE), pH = 4.2. Briefly, 1 mg of composites was incubated into 5 ml of those different media. Samples of 1 ml has been taken at different times in minutes (0; 10; 30; 60; 90; 120; 240; 360; 600; 1000) and, was replaced by 1 ml of the corresponding media. Once removed from thermostatic bath, the samples were centrifuged at 9000 rpm. Then the supernatant containing CIP was taken with micropipette and the concentration of CIP released was measure by UV–Vis spectroscopy. Three independent experiments have been carried out for each experimental point. Finally, the results were fitted through Ritger-Peppas model. The Ritger-Peppas model [ Concentrations of CIP adsorbed onto nanoparticles have been expressed on percentage and its maximum release from both composites has been established as follows: The antibiotic capacity of materials was evaluated by culturing the materials loaded with CIP (either in the HAs or in the ALG) and not loaded (used as control) with strains of clinically relevant spectrum of organisms [ On one hand, sterilized petri dishes (8.5 cm diameter) containing 20 ml of sterile Mueller Hinton nutritive agar (Sigma-Aldrich, CAS N° 70191) were prepared. At the same time, both different types of materials were sterilized by UV light (λ = 254 nm) for 5 min per side. In the Following step, 100 μl of a bacterial inoculum of a concentration equivalent to 0.5 McFarland turbidity standards were spread uniformly on the plates using a sterile plating bead [ All experiments were conducted at least three times. All values were informed as the mean value ± standard deviation (SD). Statistical analysis was carried out through the one-way analysis of variance (one-way ANOVA). Student's Nano-sized hydroxyapatite (HA) was synthesized through micelles formed by a mixture of CTAB and PEG. Under synthesis conditions, rod-like micelles are formed by the cationic surfactant which behaves as a template for the deposition of PO The characterization process of bared nanoparticles is summarized in Our synthesized hydroxyapatite has a Ca/P ratio of 1.53 which differs from the theoretical hydroxyapatite ratio Ca/P of 1.67. This condition is favorable to be applied in hard tissue repair; additionally to its poor crystallization and its non-stoichiometric composition. In previous work [ In Bioactivity assay is an obligatory step to propose any material as potential bone filler. In this context, features of the used polymer have an important role in the behavior which drives the deposit of minerals; in other words, in the mineralization process. Each polymer has its own influence on the nucleation and growth of crystals, hydroxyapatite in this case, through specific organic-inorganic interactions [ One of the simplest and cheaper analyses of this feature was carried out by means of X-ray diffraction (XRD) spectroscopy. In In In After analyzing the behavior of both materials after their incubation into SBF by XRD, SEM and FT-IR spectroscopy, we can remark that the presence of CIP loaded into CPS does not have an influence on bioactivity behavior of those materials; thus, by means of these techniques, similar results were obtained than those results reported by Benedini et al. [ Summarizing, after 30 days of incubation into SBF, both composites have shown high amounts of biogenic hydroxyapatite growing onto their surface (good bioactivity parameters); and this behavior was demonstrated by SEM (clusters of hydroxyapatite growing onto the surface of materials), FT-IR (characteristic bands are shown), and XRD (characteristic pattern). Therefore, due to these results, the next step is the establishment of biocompatibility. The neutral red assay shows the capability of viable cells to assimilate dye molecules into their lysosomes [ In The amount of CIP released into different media over time has been established by UV–Vis spectroscopy. The First of all, it is clearly noted that the The pH of the medium used for agar diffusion assay is 7; therefore, we can predict how CIP can be released from the CPS to the medium by using the PBS curve (fit) in Such as was reported by Benedini et al. [ The solubility of CIP into PBS does not influence its antibiotic effect. On one hand, the composite in PBS is degraded and consequently high concentration of CIP is released and on the other hand, it is evidenced that the lowest release of CIP from composites is shown into the water where the ionic strength is the lowest. This effect is probably driven by the interaction between CIP (positive charged) and nanoparticles included in CPS (negative charged) which reduce the release of CIP generating a slow-release effect in the water. Therefore, the effect of the polymer in water is outshined by nanoparticles effect and in this context, a very low release of CIP in water from hydroxyapatite nanoparticles (27%) has been reported by Benedini et al. [ Two mechanisms we infer that have an opposite role in the release of CIP in acetate buffer. On one hand, the release of CIP form HAs is important when no polymer is present (81%) [ The swelling process to activate the release of drugs of the ALG-formed system depend on the type of gel formed, its physicochemical properties and the features of the dissolving media play an important role in the release profile. Therefore, the assessment of release behavior of CIP from CPSs when pH conditions are modified was studied through the release profiles and antibacterial activity and then these results were contrasted with those obtained by optical microscopy with crossed polaroids. Composites formed by ALG and hydroxyapatite nanoparticles can develop liquid crystals phases (mesophases) depending on pH conditions of media and the ionic strength [ The effect of the media is more significant for HA/CIP-ALG system than for HA-CIP/ALG. In this context, it is clearly noted that for the first system there are differences between the released concentration of CIP depending on the media and for the second, the concentration of CIP released in water is lower than that in PBS and Acetate buffer but there are not significant differences between those last two (see As a consequence of that, we propose that the release of CIP from HA-CIP/ALG is driven by a mixed mechanism which is a conjunction of the high degradation of composites due to the features of the PBS and a middle release of CIP from HAs in PBS, such as was reported in other studies [ The release of CIP from both composites has been evaluated by the Ritger-Peppas model and the parameters have been summarized in Another important point considered for choosing the model is that such as was reported by Ritger and Peppas [ Owing to that the Once the biocompatibility of composites was confirmed; their antibacterial activity was evaluated. In the preceding section, it was demonstrated composites have required concentrations of CIP to exert an adequate therapeutic action in the proper healing time frame. As a confirmation, In The objective of this work was to assess bioactivity, biocompatibility, the bactericidal activity, and drug release profile of composites materials based on ALG cross-linked with nano-HA (synthesized in our laboratory) loaded with CIP. These materials were developed for overcoming the drawbacks of ceramic materials used alone in the filling of bone defects. After 30 days of incubation into SBF, both composites have shown high amounts of biogenic hydroxyapatite growing onto their surface showing good bioactivity parameters. Additionally, both composites have shown high biocompatibility with calvaria rat osteoblasts during three days of incubation; hence, no adverse effects were shown on tested cells  The authors declare no conflict of interest. The authors acknowledge