Various gas to melt ratios (GMR) that govern the cooling rate of spray forming can be achieved through controlling the atomizer form and the atomization pressure. The effect of the GMR on microstructures of an Al–10.83Zn–3.39Mg–1.22Cu alloy produced through spray forming has been studied using electron microscopy. When the GMR is high at 3.5, dendritic structure and quasi-crystalline i-Mg32(AlZn)49 particles inherited from the original powders can be observed. Spray forming at medium GMR of 2.3 produces equiaxed α-Al grains and MgZn2 phase that discontinuously distributes along the grain boundaries and within the grains as small particles. The low GMR of 1.4 corresponds to low cooling rate. Coarse and equiaxed α-Al grains together with eutectic structure consisting of b.c.c.-Mg32(AlZn)49 and α-Al phases along the grain boundaries are obtained.7XXX series Al alloys are typical light alloys widely used in aeronautical and automotive industries due to the high ratio of strength to density During SAD process, the gas to melt ratio (GMR) is a critical factor that controls the microstructures. Generally, the cooling of a spraying droplet is governed by heat convection at the interface between the droplet and gas. Moreover, the heat convection is directly related to the atomized gas mass flow rate and the liquid metal mass flow rate. Thus, control of the GMR can effectively control the microstructure of the SAD products. Pryds and co-workers Although considerable research has been done to understand the effect of the SAD process parameters on microstructure of the ultrahigh strength Al–Zn–Mg–Cu alloys, knowledge of, the variation of the microstructure of alloys produced with GMR is limited. The aim of the present work is to investigate the effect of the GMR on the microstructure of an ultrahigh strength Al–Zn–Mg–Cu when the GMR varies from 1.4 to 3.5 during the SAD process. The raw materials used were 99.95% pure Al, 99.92% pure Zn, 99.9% pure Mg and 99.999% pure electrolytic Cu to produce the ultrahigh strength Al–Zn–Mg–Cu alloy by spray atomization and deposition (SAD). After melting the Al alloy with designed composition in an induction furnace, the melt was superheated to 1073 After SAD, the microstructure of the Al alloys was examined in both scanning electron microscopy (SEM) and transmission electron microscopy (TEM). The TEM specimens were prepared as follows: 3  In order to identify the phases in the as deposited microstructure, nanobeam diffraction was carried out in TEM. From Through TEM examination, two different types of particles on the α-Al matrix are identified in Zone 2. One type of the particles has irregular or teardrop-like shape as shown in The back scattered electron micrographs of the as deposited Al–10.83Zn–3.39Mg–1.22Cu alloy produced at medium GMR (2.3) are shown in TEM examination together with systematic-tilted SAED patterns, as shown in As this orientation relationship is reproducible, it is considered as a true orientation relationship between α-Al and the MgZn When the GMR is reduced to 1.4, the obvious microstructure coarsening occurs in the as deposited Al–10.83Zn–3.39Mg–1.22Cu alloy as shown in  The secondary phases within the grains in TEM are rod-shaped as shown in Many researchers have examined the nucleation behavior during spray atomization deposition and proposed an hypothesis that heterogeneous nucleation governs the solidification  The growth of deposited crystal and evolution of precipitated phase rely on the chemical composition of alloys and actual process parameters. In the presently used Al–Zn–Mg–Cu alloy, during conventional casting, the growth of α-Al in the undercooled melt results in equiaxed grains. At the final solidification stage, the liquid among dendrite enriches in solutes, and lamellar eutectic of Al and intermetallic compounds form when the liquid compositions reach to the eutectic compositions. However, in the SAD process with high GMR, the microstructure consists of the fractured dendrite and partly solidified liquid. The secondary phase is partly from the hereditary of solidified droplets, and others are precipitated products from liquid. At medium GMR, the number of nuclei in the deposited and solidified layer and the liquid are limited. The dendrite cannot grow freely, resulting in equiaxed dendrite. The eutectic composition in the melt compositions is achieved. They will grow on the primary Al matrix as divorced eutectic form due to their limited amount, and eutectic MgZn The secondary phase in Al–Zn–Mg alloy series alloys varies according to the ratio of Mg:Zn as follows Mg:Zn Mg:Zn Mg:Zn The Mg:Zn is about 1:3 for the alloy investigated, falling in the range of 2:5–1:7, therefore the secondary phase should be MgZn With conventional casting process, the solidified microstructure of Al–Zn–Mg–Cu is normally consisted of b.c.c.-Mg  During spray atomization and deposition process with the high GMR of 3.5, the original structure of droplets is retained and inherited into the deposited microstructures. The secondary phases are i-Mg Fine equiaxed grains are obtained when sprayed at middle GMR of 2.3. The secondary phase of η-MgZn Decreasing GMR to 1.4, the solidified secondary phases include T-Mg