The hydrophobicity, selectivity, and adsorption state in bastnaesite flotation using alkyl phosphates were examined by contact angle and zeta potential measurements, microflotation and microcalorimetry experiments, as well as density functional theory calculations and molecular dynamics simulations. The contact angle and microflotation results show that bastnaesite flotation with alkyl phosphates (lauryl phosphate and 2-ethylhexyl phosphate) is accomplished at a remarkably lower collector concentration. Selective flotation of bastnaesite from calcite with 2-ethylhexyl phosphate increased the bastnaesite grade from 52% to 95% without sacrificing recovery when compared to lauryl phosphate. As expected, the results from density functional theory calculations, together with the microcalorimetry and molecular dynamics simulation results, suggest that the hydrophobic surface state is due to a chemisorbed monolayer of the alkyl phosphate and that the lower reactivity of 2-ethylhexyl phosphate accounts for higher selectivity when compared to results for lauryl phosphate.Semisoluble salt minerals, with ionic bonding and limited solubility in water, include bastnaesite ((Ce,La)FCO Fatty acids and hydroxamates are typically reported as collectors for bastnaesite flotation ( Our initial evaluation indicated that the branched chain alkyl phosphate, 2-ethylhexyl phosphate, has even better selectivity compared to lauryl phosphate. The effect of the phosphate collector chemical structure on bastnaesite flotation, such as hydrophobicity, selectivity, and collector adsorption states, is the subject of this paper. The intent is to understand the effect of the alkyl phosphate chemical structure on the bastnaesite flotation response, which includes, but is not limited to, the interactions of the branched chain phosphate with bastnaesite, calcite, and quartz. The evaluation is based on contact angle and zeta potential measurements, microflotation and isothermal titration calorimetry experiments, as well as density functional theory calculations and molecular dynamics simulations. Also, a comparison and discussion regarding the use of branched chain phosphate and lauryl phosphate is included. It is expected that the results of this research will enable us to further understand the bastnaesite/calcite/quartz flotation chemistry using alkyl phosphate collectors, with consideration of chemical structure, which includes the hydrophobic surface state, selectivity in flotation, and adsorption phenomena for the design of alkyl phosphate collectors. Cola®Fax PME (potassium lauryl phosphate, C Captive bubble contact angles were measured by a Rame-Hart goniometer (Rame-Hart, Succasunna, NJ, USA). The average value was reported from five equilibrated captive bubble contact angles at different locations on the mineral surface. The maximum contact angle variation was found to be ±1° ( The bastnaesite, calcite, and quartz samples were dry ground to −45 μm, and 0.1% suspensions were prepared with 10 min centrifugation. A Zeta PALS instrument from Brookhaven Instruments Corporation (Holtsville, New York, USA) was used, combined with the Doppler Effect and the phase shift of reflected light, to determine electrophoretic mobilities. The particle mobilities were measured as a function of pH and further converted to zeta-potentials (ξ) by the Smoluchowski equation, as shown in Eq. The 100 × 200 mesh size class was selected for flotation. A 112 ml column cell with a porous sintered glass bottom and a magnetic stirrer were used for the microflotation experiments. One gram of mineral (100 × 200 mesh) was conditioned in the collector solution for 5 min, followed by 2 min flotation using 50 ml/min nitrogen gas flow ( The 2-ethylhexyl phosphate and lauryl phosphate molecular structures and charges were calculated by the Gaussian 09 program ( The heat of adsorption was measured by a TAM III isothermal titration microcalorimeter (TA Instruments, USA) at 25 °C using the heat flow model. The results appear as power peaks as a function of time, and each peak represents the injection of the collector solution. The collector heat of adsorption at the mineral surface was calculated by the subtraction of the dilution heat in the blank experiment from the total heat in the standard experiment, as shown in Bastnaesite flotation issues, such as hydrophobicity, selectivity, and adsorption state using alkyl phosphates, are examined and discussed, based on the experimental results from contact angle and zeta potential measurements, microflotation and microcalorimetry experiments, as well as density functional theory calculations and molecular dynamics simulations. Hydrophobicity is the physical property describing the rejection or repulsion of water, and is the fundamental property which accounts for the flotation of mineral particles. In this regard, hydrophobicity of a mineral surface can be determined experimentally by contact angle measurements (sessile drop, captive bubble) ( Zeta potentials of the mineral particles are influenced by the adsorption of collector and may be indicative of the hydrophobicity/flotation response. The zeta potentials of bastnaesite, calcite, and quartz minerals in 10 mM potassium chloride (KCl), with and without 5 × 10 Single mineral flotation results for bastnaesite, calcite, and quartz using 2-ethylhexyl phosphate as a function of concentration and pH are shown in Selectivity usually describes the preferential recovery of a valuable mineral when compared to the recovery of gangue minerals, and can be examined by contact angle and zeta potential measurements, and microflotation experiments. The contact angle difference between bastnaesite and calcite at a high concentration of 1 × 10 Compared with the decreased zeta potential of 10–50 mv and 0–20 mv for bastnaesite and calcite at 5 × 10 The flotation difference between bastnaesite and calcite/quartz using 2-ethylhexyl phosphate at 3 × 10 Since quartz was not sensitive to alkyl phosphate addition in contact angle, zeta potential, and single mineral flotation experiments, mixed flotation experiments only involved bastnaesite and the typical gangue mineral, calcite. As shown in The hydrocarbon chain length and the polar group are the main factors which affect the performance of the collector ( The 2-ethylhexyl phosphate anion with lower HOMO (highest occupied molecular orbital) and higher LUMO (lowest unoccupied molecular orbital) indicates the weaker electron-donating and accepting ability compared to lauryl phosphate, as shown in Chemical, electrostatic, hydrogen-bonding, and hydrophobic interactions contribute to collector adsorption at mineral surfaces ( The partial charge of -OPO The energy difference between HOMO and LUMO represented by ΔE The phosphate collectors were adsorbed at the bastnaesite (1 0 0) surface after 1 ns of molecular dynamic simulation, specifically, with the phosphate groups in preferred positions with respect to cerium atoms in the crystal structure, as shown in As shown in The relative densities of O, P, and C from the phosphate collectors are also presented in The adsorption free energy change should be negative ( The microcalorimetry results in Contact angle and zeta potential measurements, single mineral microflotation and microcalorimetry experiments, as well as, density functional theory calculations and molecular dynamics simulations were used to examine the effect of alkyl phosphate chemical structure on hydrophobicity, selectivity and collector adsorption states. The contact angle, zeta potential, single mineral microflotation and microcalorimetry results indicate that lauryl phosphate has a stronger adsorption potential when compared with 2-ethylhexyl phosphate. However, the differences in contact angle/zeta potential/flotation responses between bastnaesite and calcite/quartz for 2-ethylhexyl phosphate are greater than for lauryl phosphate, at specific concentrations. In this regard, the microflotation results for a mineral mixture of bastnaesite and calcite show that 2-ethylhexyl phosphate has better selectivity when compared to the results with lauryl phosphate. The molecular dynamics simulations revealed that more water is accommodated at the bastnaesite surface with 2-ethylhexyl phosphate when compared to lauryl phosphate. The microcalorimetry and molecular dynamics simulations mean square displacement results further indicate that lauryl phosphate has a more negative adsorption free energy when compared to 2-ethylhexyl phosphate. The polar functional headgroup and non-polar hydrocarbon chain length of the collector affect the extent of hydrophobicity and the bond strength of the collector at the mineral surface ( Bastnaesite flotation chemistry issues with alkyl phosphate collectors, including hydrophobicity, selectivity, and adsorption states were examined and discussed based on the results of captive bubble contact angle and zeta potential measurements, as well as microflotation and microcalorimetry experiments. 2-ethylhexyl phosphate has lower adsorption affinity/hydrophobicity and higher selectivity toward bastnaesite when compared to lauryl phosphate in the flotation of bastnaesite from specific minerals, such as calcite and quartz. The microcalorimetry experiments, collector structure analysis, and molecular dynamics simulations results further prove that 2-ethylhexyl phosphate has a lower adsorption affinity but higher flotation selectivity with respect to calcite when compared to lauryl phosphate. Further research is in progress. Conclusions at this time include the following points: The contact angle, zeta potential, and single microflotation results indicate 2-ethylhexyl phosphate has lower adsorption affinity and hydrophobicity for the bastnaesite surface compared to lauryl phosphate. The flotation of the mineral mixture results (bastnaesite and calcite) indicate that 2-ethylhexyl phosphate provides for higher flotation selectivity when compared to lauryl phosphate. Collector analysis showed that 2-ethylhexyl phosphate has a lower headgroup charge and less reactivity. However, the reactive atoms of O1 and O2 in 2-ethylhexyl phosphate have better electron-donating ability compared to lauryl phosphate. In this regard, 2-ethylhexyl phosphate possesses effective collecting power for bastnaesite and excellent selectivity against calcite and quartz. The microcalorimetry results indicate that 2-ethylhexyl phosphate has lower exothermic heat of adsorption on bastnaesite when compared to lauryl phosphate. Together with the molecular dynamics simulations mean square displacement results, lauryl phosphate was found to have a lower free energy adsorption compared to 2-ethylhexyl phosphate. Furthermore, the adsorption heat is a strong predictor of the hydrophobicity for collectors with the same ligand type and different alkyl chain lengths. Molecular dynamics simulations showed that both 2-ethylhexyl phosphate and lauryl phosphate adsorb at the bastnaesite surface. However, lauryl phosphate excluded more water from the bastnaesite surface, thereby contributing to a stronger hydrophobicity/flotation response when compared to 2-ethylhexyl phosphate. None. Funding for this research by the