A wide range of industrial operations involve the mixing of multiple phases, where the interfacial area between the phases determines the performance of the system. Interactions between phases occur, giving rise to the formation of complex structures containing, for example, air bubbles and small water droplets, trapped in the organic/oil drops. A two-dimensional observation of this phenomenon may lead to an erroneous determination of the amount of dispersed elements and the actual interaction between them, since bubbles and drops coming from different focal planes may appear overlapped. In this work, a method that allows the accurate determination of embedded particles within dispersed elements was developed and validated. By using micro-stereoscopic on-line image acquisition techniques, accurate images from a four-phase system model simulating a fermentation broth were acquired to identify and count the oil-trapped particles moving at high speed. Light refraction effects within embedded particles were considered to obtain highest accuracy. The total error of the measurement system was mainly due to the magnification used for the stereo-microscope and the size range of particles to be measured, being as low as 
                        ±
                        5.7
                        %
                      for 
                        ×
                        6
                      magnification and particles as small as 
                        250
                        
                        μ
                        m
                     . Moreover, 3D results clearly indicated that bi-dimensional observations lead to an erroneous evaluation of the extent of the particles trapped (overestimated by up to 30%) since different focal planes may be overlapped. This original method permits to postulate very accurate models for mass transfer, based on experimental evidence of the actual multiphase systems.Multiphase dispersions are present in different unit operations in a wide variety of industrial processes. The suspension of solids in liquids is a common operation in the mining, mineral processing and in the pulp and paper industries ( In any process involving multiphase dispersions, a key point is to maximize the area between the phases and/or to assure that the solids are in contact with the liquid phase(s) as long and efficiently as possible. The number and size of drops of immiscible liquids or gas bubbles are determined by the energy applied into the reactor/contactor ( Current techniques used to measure the size distributions of elements present in multiphase dispersions ( A method to acquire ( A 2D observation of these high-speed scenes is not suitable for an accurate evaluation of the content of trapped water drops or air bubbles within oil drops, because it does not allow to determine the location of the objects when overlaps of different focal planes occur, resulting in confusing data and therefore, in a wrong estimation of their relative concentration. Consequently, the possibility of determining the relative 3D spatial position of these bubbles and drops would permit to solve this problem, thereby supplying a valuable tool for a correct evaluation of the dispersion. Previous papers have reported the analysis of collected images using a single camera and a This work reports an original method that allows to characterize accurately the number of embedded particles within dispersed oil drops (bubbles—either free or trapped in the organic phase—and drops of the organic/oily phase) moving at high speed in a multiphase dispersion. A synchronized system of two CCD cameras, adapted to a stereo-microscope to acquire sets of image pairs from the inside of a mixing tank, was developed. The outline of drops and bubbles was obtained by a Hough transform-based methodology and a new matching feature-based algorithm was developed to associate the drops and bubbles from both images. The light refraction effects of embedded particles (air-in-oil-in-water or water-in-oil-in-water) are taken into account in our model to correctly assess their real relative 3D size and position. In this way, the 3D spatial position of each particle can be calculated in order to discern situations of inclusions between the bubbles and the drops. This technique can also be used to visualize and document the interaction of the phases, as it is occurring in the reactor/contactor. To test the technique, we have used a particularly complex multiphase dispersion as a model system and worked with a fermentation process in which castor oil is the organic (oily) phase and also the carbon source for the microorganism ( A 7-l stirred tank was used to simulate the conditions prevailing in a bioreactor. The tank (0.21 Two CCD video cameras KP-D50 (Hitachi Denshi, Ltd.), with a resolution of A unique frame grabber The high-speed moving scene was illuminated with a stroboscopic backlight source MVS-2601 (EG&G Optoelectronics, USA) at a rate of 60 The calibration procedure and the accuracy evaluation of the system were performed by using The software development tools were Visual Studio 6.0 (Microsoft, USA), A schematic representation of the stereoscopic system is shown in In this section, the equations to evaluate the position ( It is now possible to calculate the parameters To complete the calculation of the exact position of the At this step, it is known how to calculate the exact position of the In order to calculate the absolute position of a Now, the stereoscopic model is complete. To use it in a real 3D application, we need first to evaluate the three parameters ( Then, the three optimal parameters To estimate the accuracy of the system, a calibrated microscopic glass slide (stage micrometer) with an engraved circle of 3 For six different magnifications of the stereo-microscope ( To estimate if a spherical particle (water or air) is embedded within an oil drop, it is necessary to take into account the light refraction effects produced by the optical system formed by these spheres within mediums of different refraction index. In other words, the ‘observed’ position and size of an embedded particle needs to be corrected to know its real estimates. Consider a virtual point  At the heart of the binocular stereo approach lies the task of stereo matching, i.e., solving the correspondence ( Two main general methods exist for an accurate features matching in the case of stereo systems: In a previous preliminary work ( In the example of As mentioned before, interactions between phases occur, giving rise to the formation of complex structures containing air bubbles and small droplets from the aqueous phase, trapped in oil drops (water-in-oil-in-water). By applying the method described in this work, the measured 3D coordinates of particles can be used to discern situations of real trapped particles from false 2D appreciations due to focal plane overlaps. This was achieved by calculating the Euclidean distance between the centers of spheres representing the drops or bubbles ( As seen before in the refraction effect correction section, real objects are smaller than the virtual observed ones (due to light refraction effect) and their real The accuracy of Eq. To estimate ErrDist, the calibrated glass micrometer (as described in On the other hand, to estimate ErrSize (required to evaluate embedded objects in Eq. Generally, to stay under reasonable total error ranges, the magnification of the stereo-microscope and the range of sizes of measured objects should be carefully selected. For example, from Eq. Concerning the light refraction effect of an embedded particle (air or water) within an oil drop, we have proved in Another factor that influences the accuracy of the system is relative to the particles out of focus. These particles present a perspective effect, in other words, their real size does not correspond with their apparent visualized size (bigger if farther, smaller if nearer). Since the position of particles over Concerning the limitation of the technique due to the speed of dispersed moving objects, the short light pulse emitted from the stroboscopic back-illumination light source— In order to demonstrate the usefulness of the designed micro-stereoscopic system, as compared with the traditional way of performing the analysis of embedded particles with single bi-dimensional images, as it was previously done ( Cases (a) and (b) are not useful to demonstrate the efficiency of the system because either they do not represent a circumstance required to be solved (not being complex structures with no-embedded particles, as case (a)), or there is no possibility of a visual inspection of the expert (meaning no possibility to ascertain a ‘control’ situation), as case (b). Only the cases as (c) were useful for the evaluation as they presented particular situations where an ‘apparently’ embedding case appears in one of the stereo pair images (particles appearing intersected, not being possible to discern, with only that image, if they were ‘embedded’ or ‘overlapped’). However, in this case the complementary stereo image presents a non-refuting argument permitting to claim that those particles are not embedded (as no overlaps exist). Therefore, the last case can be used as the ‘control’ set to be inspected and evaluated by an expert with total straightforwardness and thus to be compared with the results generated by the system. From the test-set, 54 cases were found to present this last specific situation (Fig.  In order to determine the number of bubbles trapped in the organic phase in complex multiphase system, images of four-phase systems acquired under the conditions described in the methods section were evaluated with the method described in this work and the results compared with those using the bi-dimensional technique (data reported by In the case of dispersed mycelium (Fig. In the case of Our system allowed us to discern accurately whether the air bubbles were trapped in the oil drops or if it was only a superposition of particles in different focal planes. The developed system provides the possibility of an accurate evaluation of the relative concentration of air bubbles trapped in oil drops. This phenomenon can determine the extent of oxygen transfer to the culture which thereby affects the productivity of the process. The findings of this work, in multiphase fermentations, are of a crucial importance as more accurate models for mass transfer can now be postulated. In this work, an original method that allows the accurate determination of embedded particles within dispersed elements in multiphase dispersions was developed and validated. The acquisition and analysis of stereoscopic images of oil drops and air bubbles (moving at high speed in a stirred tank) during a simulated process of a multiphase fermentation was achieved. Total measurement error of the method depends mainly on the magnification used for the stereo-microscope and the size range of particles to be measured. Using this method, the relative depth of each particle can be measured with high accuracy, in order to discern about air bubbles and water droplets trapped in the oil drops against overlapped (not embedded) particles in different focal plane. Moreover, the micro-stereoscopic methodology demonstrated that bi-dimensional observations overestimate the oil-trapped bubbles by up to 30%. Knowing the relative spatial position of air bubbles and oil (or other organic compounds) drops allows now the possibility of postulating and/or refining very accurate model for mass (oxygen and organic compounds) transfer based on experimental evidence. The development of this work was possible due to the financial support of ‘Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México’ (DGAPA Grant IN111105) and ‘Consejo Nacional de Ciencia y Tecnología’ (CONACyT Grant U44098-Z). Biomass production and the four-phase systems experiments were performed by I.I. Ruiz-Burguete. The authors would like to thank R. Ciria for computer support and S. Ainsworth for bibliographic assistance.