Foam flotation is an effective and energy efficient method of harvesting microalgae. This study has investigated the influence of growth phase and lipid content on harvesting efficiency. The highest biomass concentration factors were gained during active culture growth. Surprisingly, the quantities of lipid recovered from microalgae harvested by foam flotation using the surfactant cetyl trimethylammonium bromide (CTAB), were significantly higher than from cells harvested by centrifugation. Further, cells harvested by CTAB-aided foam flotation exhibited a lipid profile more suited to biodiesel conversion containing increased levels of saturated and monounsaturated fatty acids. The enhanced lipid recovery was partially explained by the interaction of the cells with the surfactant, CTAB, which adsorbed onto the algae and was carried over into the total lipid extraction process. However, further evidence also suggested that CTAB promoted in situ cell lysis by solubilising the phospholipid bilayer, thus increasing the amount of extractable lipid. This work demonstrates substantial added value of foam flotation as a microalgae harvesting method beyond energy efficient biomass recovery.Microalgae are considered as having great potential as a sustainable, scalable and affordable source of bioproducts including biofuels and high value chemicals In recent years, considerable research efforts have focussed on the application of harvesting technologies to improve biomass recovery; however, the majority of harvesting methods are not sufficiently cost effective for the economical production of low value outputs Despite the obvious appeal of flotation for harvesting microalgae, there remains limited evidence of its direct application in situations wherein the biomass is a valued product as opposed to a waste/nuisance. It is vital to determine the effects of harvesting on biomass quality and composition, particularly when the biochemical components must achieve defined quality standards for subsequent downstream processing A non-axenic Cells from the same culture were harvested at 3 day intervals between days 3 and 21 using two separate methods: foam flotation and centrifugation. The flotation column was previously described in Coward et al. To prepare the cells for freeze drying and to remove any potential CTAB residue the foam flotation harvests were further concentrated by centrifugation ( To compare the effects of foam flotation and centrifugation on lipid recovery and fatty acid profiles, additional harvests were conducted from the same cultures after 12 days of growth, as this is when the highest concentration factor was gained (see A methyl orange colorimetric test was conducted to assess the extent of CTAB adsorption onto the algae cells. An average culture dry weight of 350 ± 120 mg L The percentage of CTAB adsorbed onto the algae A modified version of the Folch method The total lipid extracts were separated into lipid classes by solid phase extraction following the methods of Kaluzny et al. CTAB has a lipid-like chemical structure; therefore, if CTAB adsorbs onto the algae cell surface it may enter the lipid extraction process where it may inadvertently contribute towards the total pool of recovered lipid. To determine the likelihood of this chemical carry over, known quantities of pure CTAB, 0.05–0.15 g, were put through the same total lipid extraction process as the microalgae and calculated as follows: The mass of CTAB harvested ( The total dry mass of cells harvested excluding CTAB ( The total dry mass of lipid in the algal cells harvested by foam flotation excluding CTAB ( The total mass of CTAB recovered by the lipid extraction process ( The predicted total lipid percentage (PL Fatty acid composition was determined using a Carlo Erba Model Mega 5160 gas chromatograph (Carlo Erba, Milan, Italy). Ten milligrams of the freeze dried cells harvested by foam flotation and centrifugation on day 12 were placed into capped test tubes with heptadecanoic acid (C17:0) as an internal standard. Fatty acid methyl esters (FAMEs) were extracted by the one-step method of Gracés and Mancha Algal growth, concentration factors, total lipid, lipid classes and FAME contents for cells harvested by foam flotation and centrifugation were compared using analysis of variance (ANOVA). All percentage data were arcsine transformed prior to analysis. An alpha level of 0.05 was used to determine data significance. The cultures grew linearly until day 15, attaining a peak cell density of 4.44 × 10 Changes in zeta potential have been linked to changes in the dissolved organic matter (DOM) pool within a culture. DOM concentration generally increases with culture age and can play an important role in promoting or inhibiting flocculation processes From the perspective of a commercial grower, these observations present an inconvenient, yet interesting paradox. If the grower is targeting lipid-derived bioproducts such as biodiesel, the period for optimal harvesting efficiency using foam flotation does not correspond to the period of maximal lipid yield (typically early stationary phase following a period of nitrogen deprivation To gain insight into which electrochemical interaction and hydrodynamic forces that dominate the foam flotation process, the adsorption of CTAB onto the algae cells was analysed. The adsorption efficiency is influenced by a range of factors including cell age (and therefore zeta potential), cell density, and the surfactant concentration. It was assumed that the surfactant present in the supernatant was representative of that adsorbed onto the air/liquid interface, and that surfactant not present in the supernatant had adsorbed onto the algae cell. From Lipid yields (mass fraction of dry cell weight) were within a similar range to those reported in other studies Despite the harvested cells being washed and freeze dried prior to lipid extraction, a significant amount of surfactant may still have been adsorbed to the cell surface. Therefore, the capacity for CTAB to be carried over into the total lipid extraction procedure was considered. Up to 79.4 ± 4.0% of CTAB by weight was recovered from the total lipid extraction, with an average of 76.6 ± 8.74% recorded. The effect of CTAB on the extractable lipid pool was calculated based on total lipid recovered from flotation and centrifuge harvested cells, CTAB adsorption efficiency, and the proportion of CTAB recoverably from the total lipid extraction process.  It has however been found that the electrostatic interactions that aid flotation may also compromise the integrity of the cell wall, which may potentially result in cell lysis The total lipid pool is composed primarily of neutral lipid in the form of energy storage bodies, as well as glyco and phospholipids within structural membranes. Within the literature the total lipid content of microalgae is commonly quoted as an indication of its appropriateness as a biodiesel feedstock CTAB that had been put through the modified Folch method was also separated by solid phase extraction. The CTAB in chloroform was applied to the separation column under vacuum, which should have left the full mass of CTAB on the column; however, 27.6 ± 17.1% was removed during the application process. From The neutral lipids found within microalgae extracts are mainly comprised of triacylglycerols (TAGs) However, whilst not necessarily valuable for biodiesel production, there are established and growing markets for certain phospholipids and their by-products The effect of foam flotation on the fatty acid profile was investigated ( Lee et al. Harvesting of This work was supported by an