Various studies have been carried out on the effect of microwave-treatment on grinding different types of coal. However, the effect of microwave treatment on grinding coal samples −3.35mm in size which can be considered to be fine is still under investigation. The purpose of this paper is to make contributions to these studies conducted. In the study, lignite coal samples with pyritic sulphur and 25% structural moisture were crushed below −3.35mm particle size using jaw and cone crushers and then classified into three different mono size groups by Russel sieve. For a complete removal of the structural moisture from the lignite coal, a microwave application with 600W needs approximately 35% more energy consumption than that with 850W. The untreated coal samples and the ones treated with microwave at 850W were ground for 5, 15, 30, 60, 120s in a stirred media mill. The breakage rates of microwave-treated coal increased and accordingly the ground products of microwave-treated coal yielded finer particles than −106μm as compared to untreated coals. The untreated and microwave-treated feed coals of −3350μm and −1180μm particle sizes were ground for 2min in the stirred media mill. It was found that the increases in the rate of weight percentages for −106μm particle size fraction after 2min of grinding of untreated and microwave-treated feed coals of −3350μm and −1180μm were found to be 15.81% and 2.69%, respectively. Moreover, Hardgrove Index (HGI) test results of lignite coal showed that the HGI index value increased by approximately 23% after microwave treatment with 850W.Grinding is one of the most widely used unit operations but the most inefficient process. Most studies on grinding aim to determine the relation between energy and size reduction and the possibility to consume the least amount of energy to achieve the most convenient size Microwave technology in mineral processing has been investigated for over the past three decades. There has been a growing interest in microwave heating in mineral treatment. This includes microwave-assisted ore grinding, microwave assisted drying, microwave assisted mineral leaching, microwave assisted spent carbon regeneration and microwave assisted waste management Many researchers have focused on microwave treatment of minerals. Kingman et al. Microwave heating may cause thermal fracture through differential heating of the various phases in a material Microwave can be transmitted, absorbed or reflected depending on material types It is assumed that when electromagnetic waves are applied on a material, thermal stresses occur because of moisture in the structure. Coal has a very low loss factor, where as water has very high loss factor Some impurities in coal show different behavior when absorbing electromagnetic irradiation Phases consist of different heterogeneous structures because they have different degrees of ability to absorb microwave. Different phases have also different dielectric loss factors. Consequently, heating occurs in coal samples selectively The microwave pre-treatment technique may increase defects and cracks in coal structure. Thus; it is possible to obtain finer material using less energy The breakage rates of the material within the feed having a certain particle size are different at each particle sizes. Once there is an effective breakage in the mill, first order grinding theorem usually applies to a material at a certain particle size range. The term first order means that the reaction takes places without slowing down. If the reaction slows down, second or third order reaction rates occur. In order to understand first order grinding hypothesis better, a basic mill having “ The particle size at which specific rate of breakage is a maximum changes with material properties. As the hardness of material decreases, the particle size at which specific rate of breakage is a maximum increases Lignite coal samples, containing pyritic sulphur, were taken from Nallihan/Ankara, Turkey. The coal samples were crushed to −3350 Microwave treatments of lignite coal were carried out by means of a Bosch micro type microwave oven. It operates up to 850 Hardgrove grindability test conducted with 50 The lignite coal prepared in −3350 It can be seen from The specific rates of breakage (  The graph for breakage behaviors of untreated and microwave-treated lignite coals with −2360 The specific rates of breakage (  The graph for breakage behaviors of untreated and microwave-treated lignite coals with −1700 The specific rates of breakage (  It can clearly be seen from Lignite coals as feed samples of −3350 It is evident from Three different mono size fractions were ground for different periods of times (0.25, 0.50, 1 and 2 It is clear from Similarly, the increases in the rate of weight percentages of untreated and microwave-treated lignite coals for −106 Furthermore, Hardgrove (HGI) tests were carried out on the untreated and microwave-treated lignite coals. The results showed that HGI value of lignite coal which was treated with microwave power increased by approximately 23% as compared to untreated lignite coal. Moisture within the coal matrix has a significant effect on the formation of cracks that bring about an increase in the breakage rate and the amount of fine products during grinding after microwave-treatment. In the study, the 600 Microwave-treatment has a more favorable effect on coarse samples than fine ones in terms of both breakage rate and the amount of fine ground products. In microwave-treatment, 3