Background
                  Tension band wiring (TBW) and locked plating are common treatment options for Mayo IIA olecranon fractures. Clinical trials have shown excellent functional outcomes with both techniques. Although TBW implants are significantly less expensive than a locked olecranon plate, TBW often requires an additional operation for implant removal. To choose the most cost-effective treatment strategy, surgeons must understand how implant costs and return to the operating room influence the most cost-effective strategy. This cost-effective analysis study explored the optimal treatment strategies by using decision analysis tools.
               
                  Methods
                  An expected-value decision tree was constructed to estimate costs based on the 2 implant choices. Values for critical variables, such as implant removal rate, were obtained from the literature. A Monte Carlo simulation consisting of 100,000 trials was used to incorporate variability in medical costs and implant removal rates. Sensitivity analysis and strategy tables were used to show how different variables influence the most cost-effective strategy.
               
                  Results
                  TBW was the most cost-effective strategy, with a cost savings of approximately $1300. TBW was also the dominant strategy by being the most cost-effective solution in 63% of the Monte Carlo trials. Sensitivity analysis identified implant costs for plate fixation and surgical costs for implant removal as the most sensitive parameters influencing the cost-effective strategy. Strategy tables showed the most cost-effective solution as 2 parameters vary simultaneously.
               
                  Conclusion
                  TBW is the most cost-effective strategy in treating Mayo IIA olecranon fractures despite a higher rate of return to the operating room.Elbow fractures are a common orthopedic injury, accounting for 7% of adult fractures. The olecranon process is involved in 40% of these elbow fractures. TBW is a technique that converts the extensor force of the triceps into a dynamic compression force along the articular surface, allowing for primary bone healing. The TBW technique is inexpensive and requires less operative time than plate fixation. The plate fixation technique compresses the fracture site through the plate, allowing for primary bone healing. Newer implants are precontoured and low profile, making them less prominent in the subcutaneous tissue. Plate fixation involves more expensive implants and a longer operative time than the TBW technique. Clinical outcomes have been excellent in both fixation techniques. Studies comparing clinical and functional outcomes of TBW and plate fixation have not shown superiority of one technique over the other. Surgeons are faced with a difficult decision whether to use a more expensive fixation device (locked plate) to minimize an additional operation or to use a less expensive fixation device (TBW), which has a higher rate of return to the operating room. The purpose of this study is to guide surgeons on making the most cost-effective decision in treating Mayo IIA olecranon fractures. We used decision analysis tools to determine the most cost-effective strategy, understand the most important parameters influencing this strategy, and learn how changing these parameters alters the cost-effective strategy. The economic decision analysis was conducted according to the guidelines set forth by the Panel on Cost-Effectiveness Analysis in Health and Medicine. We built a decision tree for Mayo IIA olecranon fractures, which is shown in Not all surgical site infections required operative débridement. To simplify the decision tree, we assumed that these patients were successfully treated with oral antibiotics. This occurred less than 1% of the time in both the TBW group and locked plate group. These patients were included in the success outcome group. Patients who required operative irrigation and débridement for infection were placed in observation for 24 hours for intravenous antibiotics. To account for societal costs, we incorporated potential loss of income and leisure time for each surgical procedure. The disutility times are listed in The probability of each outcome in the decision tree was calculated by compiling data from previously published trials. Total implant costs were estimated to be $2265 for locked plating and $35 for TBW. These costs are based from the listed national prices obtained by our DePuy-Synthes vendor. The itemized implant costs are shown in To calculate surgical costs, Census Bureau data were used to find the insurance payer mix for individuals aged between 50 and 64 years. Although individuals aged between 50 and 64 years may qualify for Medicaid or Medicare, we used the Medicare cost data for individuals with public health insurance. The cost of the operation for the uninsured patients was made equal to the reimbursement rates for Medicare patients. To calculate private health insurance payments, a conversion factor was multiplied to the Medicare cost data. Wide variation exists in reimbursement for Medicare and private health insurance payments depending on competitiveness of the insurer market, hospital market, and provider market. Several studies have shown equivalent functional outcomes between TBW and plating using the Mayo Elbow Performance Index. Frontline Solver 11.0 decision analysis software (Frontline Systems Inc., Incline Village, NV, USA) was used to create and run the decision model. Rollback analysis was conducted to estimate the costs of each branch of the decision trees. Because the reimbursement payment varies significantly depending on insurance payer mix, we took the weighted average reimbursement for this demographic in the rollback analysis. In a single Monte Carlo trial, the decision model chose Medicare or private health insurance payer based off of the payer mix demographic for this age group. As a result, during a single Monte Carlo trial, there was a 75% chance that private health insurance payment data were used and a 25% chance that Medicare data were used. The reimbursement rate for each trial varied according to a normal distribution with a calculated standard deviation. Lastly, we varied the rate of implant removal for TBW and locked plating using the weighted standard deviation. A Monte Carlo simulation consisting of 100,000 trials was performed on the decision tree shown in Sensitivity analysis was performed to show how different parameters influence the most cost-effective strategy. Strategy tables were created to show how changing 2 parameters simultaneously would change the most cost-effective strategy. Based on the reference case, TBW was the most cost-effective strategy using rollback analysis and Monte Carlo simulation, with more than $1300 in cost savings. In the Monte Carlo simulation, TBW was the most cost-effective strategy in 63% of the trials. Sensitivity analysis was performed on the cost savings of the most cost-effective strategy. The tornado chart in Strategy tables ( This is the first cost-effective analysis study of TBW compared with locked plating for Mayo IIA olecranon fractures. Although the studies used to build the decision model found that the rate of implant removal was almost 2-times higher in the TBW group, TBW was still the most cost-effective strategy in managing these fractures. The sensitivity analysis found that the implant costs for the locked plate and the implant removal rate for TBW were the most influential parameters for the most cost-effective decision. The strategy tables are a useful guide for physicians to understand the most cost-effective strategy for varying parameters. The Amini et al First, they reported the implant cost of locked plating was $6688.52, which is about 3-times higher than the listed price in our study. Second, they estimated operative costs by how much the insurance company was billed, not how much was collected. This overestimates the cost because hospitals only receive a fraction of what they bill. In our decision model, we estimated costs based off of expected reimbursements in Medicare and private health insurance data. This is a more valid method in estimating societal costs. Third, they based the reoperation rate from 20 patients in their cohort, whereas our decision model based the reoperation rate from more than 1100 patients from 15 studies. Fourth, their cost analysis found that even if implant removal rate was 100% in TBW, TBW would still be the most cost-effective strategy. In our study, strategy table A ( We note the literature used to build our decision model consists of retrospective and nonrandomized trials. In addition, only 5 studies reported a direct comparison of TBW to plate fixation. No prospective randomized trials have compared TBW to plate fixation. Although the fractures in 90% of the patients used to build our decision model were classified as Mayo I or II fractures, not all of the studies in our decision model used the Mayo classification. Many studies did not distinguish between Mayo IIA and IIB. This uncertainty adds a potential confounder in our analysis. In addition, during our literature search we noted significant variability in the average follow-up for the studies analyzed. Considering the average removal of implant ranged from 15 to 61 months, some of the shorter-term follow-up studies may have underestimated the true implant removal rate because patients might still undergo implant removal in the future. This study has some limitations. The analyzed studies used to build our decision model have high variability in the removal of implants, ranging from 8.7% to 92% in TBW and from 0% to 53.8% in plate fixation. To account for this variability, we calculated the mean standard deviation of implant removal and built this variability in our Monte Carlo simulations. Strategy table A ( We assumed the implant removal rate for locked plates and nonlocked plates was identical in the decision model. In the studies used to build our decision model, 86% of the patients who underwent plate fixation received a locked plate. The remaining patients received a hooked plate or a reconstruction plate. The implant removal rate was only 10% in the group with nonlocked plate fixation. The popularity of nonlocked plating has dwindled since olecranon locked plating options emerged 10 years ago. Although we included 3 studies of nonlocked plating to build our decision model, only 1 nonlocked plate study since 2003 was included as an input study for our decision model. It is important to note that nonlocked plates are significantly less expensive than locked plates. Total implant costs including nonlocked plate and cortex screws range from $400 to $600. Using strategy Table B ( Although the decision model considers subsequent events after treatment, such as infection, loss of reduction, and nonunion, the decision model does not consider every possible complication and iteration to manage these complications. In the decision model, patients with loss of reduction or nonunion after TBW were assumed to be treated with a locked olecranon plate. In clinical practice, these complications can often be managed without switching the construct from TBW to locked plating. The exclusive use of a locked plate was done to simplify the decision model because there is no current evidence on surgeon preference in managing these complications after TBW. Because the rate of revision of surgery is only 2.9% for TBW, this parameter would not change the cost-effective decision. If half of the loss of reduction and nonunion after TBW were managed with a TBW construct, the TBW strategy would become an additional $30 more cost-effective. The decision model assumed that clinical outcomes for all branches in the decision tree were identical. By making the clinical outcomes identical, the decision model was designed to be a cost-minimization analysis. We based the assumption of equivalent outcomes on the studies used to build our decision model. For the studies that used the Mayo Elbow Performance Index score, the average scores were 88.9 for TBW and 89.7 for plate fixation. Lastly, our decision model does not account for long-term functional outcomes between different treatment strategies. Long-term outcomes for TBW have been excellent, with low levels of pain, high Mayo Elbow Performance Index scores, and limited disability regardless of radiographic evidence of arthrosis. TBW is the most cost-effective strategy in managing Mayo type IIA olecranon fractures despite a higher reoperation rate than locked plate fixation. Further research should be conducted to determine why nonlocked plating lost favor because this may be the most cost-effective strategy. This study incorporates societal costs involved in treating these olecranon fractures. The strategy tables ( The authors, their immediate families, and any research foundations with which they are affiliated have not received any financial payments or other benefits from any commercial entity related to the subject of this article.