Background
                  Acrylamide has been associated to cancer risk in rodents, but data on humans are inconclusive. We thus carried out a critical review and meta-analysis of studies of exposure to acrylamide and cancer.
               
                  Methods
                  We identified 586 publications, 25 presented relevant results. We conducted meta-analyses of studies of dietary intake based on random-effects models by calculating pooled relative risks (RR) and the corresponding 95% confidence intervals (CI). We combined results of occupational studies according to a fixed-effect model.
               
                  Results
                  The summary RRs for an increase of 10 μg/day of acrylamide intake were close to unity for all the cancers considered, ranging from 0.98 for esophageal cancer to 1.01 for colon, endometrial, ovarian and kidney cancer. None of the estimates was significant. Exclusion of one case–control study from Sweden resulted in a summary RR of kidney cancer of 1.04 (95% CI 1.00–1.08). The combined standardized mortality ratios for high occupational exposure were 1.67 (95% CI 0.83–2.99) for pancreatic cancer and 2.22 (95% CI 0.81–4.84) for kidney cancer.
               
                  Conclusions
                  Available studies consistently suggest a lack of an increased risk of most types of cancer from exposure to acrylamide. The main association that requires further monitoring involves kidney cancer.Acrylamide (CH Until the early 2000s, the primary concern about human exposure to acrylamide was in the occupational setting, and guidelines had been established for occupational exposure and level in drinking water and in foodstuff packaging polymers [ The report that acrylamide is formed during high-temperature cooking of animal feed [ In recent years, new epidemiological studies have been published, reporting risk estimates for dietary exposure to acrylamide, and studies of workers exposed to acrylamide have been updated, but no comprehensive reviews or meta-analyses have been compiled. Studies relevant to dietary acrylamide have used different definitions of exposure: (i) acrylamide intake based on food questionnaires and conversion tables; (ii) intake of foods containing acrylamide, in particular potatoes cooked at high temperature; and (iii) exposure biomarkers, such as protein adducts. As in the case of other experimental carcinogens, the assessment of human hazard is complicated by issues in the extrapolation of results from animal experiments to humans and in the interpretation of results of epidemiological studies. The objectives of this study are (i) to carry out a critical review and, when appropriate, a meta-analysis of studies of acrylamide exposure and cancer in humans and (ii) to identify priorities in the field of acrylamide and cancer that warrant further in-depth evaluation. This review and meta-analysis was conducted following the guidelines developed by the Meta-analysis Of Observational Studies in Epidemiology Group [ We reviewed all the studies on dietary exposure and we abstracted the following information in a standard format: study design; country; cancer sites considered; number of cases and person-years (or noncases, or controls), overall and according to each level of acrylamide intake; gender; data categorization (i.e. quartiles or quintiles); mean (or median) acrylamide intake in each category among controls; risk estimates [rate ratios, hazard ratios and odds ratios, collectively referred to as relative risks (RR)] and corresponding 95% confidence interval (CI); results of stratified analyses and main conclusions. When at least two independent risk estimates were available for a specific cancer—exposure circumstance combination, we carried out a meta-analysis and calculated pooled RR estimates, and the corresponding 95% CIs, for the highest versus lowest level of exposure and for an increment of 10 μg/day of dietary acrylamide intake. For the former, we pooled the estimates according to a random-effects model, i.e. using the sum of the inverse of the variance of the log (RR) and the moment estimator of the variance between studies as weights [ We conducted sensitivity analyses by excluding each study at a time from the meta-analysis and by stratifying the results by study design (cohort and case–control) and by country (Sweden and other countries). Given the small number of studies providing relevant results, we did not carry out meta-analyses on subsets of risk estimates defined according to sex, smoking status, menopausal status or other potential effect modifiers. Presence of publication bias was assessed by examination of funnel plots and by applying the tests proposed by Begg and Mazumdar [ We restricted our review of the studies on occupational exposure to results on cancers of the digestive organs and peritoneum, pancreas, lung and kidney and abstracted the following information: study design, country, period of employment, period of follow-up, study population, number of observed and expected cases or deaths, standardized incidence or standardized mortality ratios (SMR) and 95% CI. Results were abstracted for the following groups: (i) all workers, (ii) workers exposed to acrylamide and (iii) workers in the highest level of cumulative acrylamide exposure. Then, we separately summed up the total number of observed and expected cases or deaths for each group and cancer site of interest and used these data to calculate the overall SMR. We carried out also a search for publications reporting results for intake of acrylamide-rich foods, and in particular fried potatoes, using PubMed, with the following keywords: (epidemiolog* OR case–control OR cohort) AND (French fries OR chips OR fries OR fried potatoes OR crisps) AND (cancer OR tumor OR neoplasm). Relevant results were identified in 12 studies of cancer [ All the statistical analyses were carried out using the STATA package (version 10; StataCorp, College Station, TX, USA). Results on acrylamide exposure estimated from food frequency questionnaires (FFQ)—through computation of dietary acrylamide intake using national and international databases of acrylamide content in foods, as well as Overall, 33 separate risk estimates were available for different cancer sites ( With reference to colorectal cancer, data were available from five studies conducted in three different European areas. None of these reported positive associations with acrylamide, while one study found an inverse relation [ Only the NLCS database to date considered acrylamide from diet in relation to the risk of pancreatic cancer [ Laryngeal cancer was analyzed in a case–control study from Italy and Switzerland [ The NLCS considered lung cancer [ Information on dietary acrylamide and breast cancer risk was available from five studies. There were two studies from Sweden and one study each from The Netherlands, Italy/Switzerland and the United States. In a research letter, Mucci et al. [ The risk of endometrial cancer was examined in the NLCS [ Data on ovarian cancer were available from the same studies of endometrial cancer, plus an Italian case–control study [ The relation between dietary acrylamide and prostate cancer was examined in two cohort [ There was no evidence of association between acrylamide intake through diet and bladder cancer risk in the only two studies that considered the issue [ Kidney cancer is one of the neoplasms for which a large amount of data have been made available, from one cohort and three case–control studies. The NLCS [ Hogervorst et al. [   In sensitivity analyses, summary RRs were calculated after exclusion of one study at a time. For colorectal, colon, rectal, breast and prostate cancer, these analyses did not reveal any notable result (not reported in detail). For kidney cancer, however, exclusion of one case–control study from Sweden [ The results of the meta-analyses stratified by study design are reported in the The assessment of publication bias was not meaningful for cancer-specific meta-analyses, given the small number of risk estimates. We assessed, however, the presence of publication bias in the combined set of 33 risk estimates ( Two epidemiological studies examined the relation between acrylamide and cancer risk using biomarkers of acrylamide exposure. These were the Danish Diet, Cancer and Health study [ In the Danish Diet, Cancer and Health, the median concentration in nonsmoking controls was 35 pmol/g globin for acrylamide–Hb and 21 pmol/g globin for glycidamide–Hb adducts [ In the CAPS study, the mean acrylamide–Hb adduct levels were 54.7 pmol/g globin in a group of 161 cases and 53.7 pmol/g globin in a group of 170 controls [ A total of 14 studies reported results on intake of acrylamide-rich foods and risk of cancer or precancerous lesions. Their characteristics are described in the In a case–control study from Italy and Switzerland, in which fried and baked potatoes contributed ∼40% of total dietary acrylamide, the RR of cancer of the oral cavity and pharynx was 1.1 (95% CI 0.9–1.4) for the highest category of intake of fried and baked potatoes (i.e. more than one portion per week) as compared with noneaters [ In the same study, the RR of colorectal cancer was 0.8 (95% CI 0.7–1.0) for high intake, and there was a significant inverse trend in risk [ A case–control study from Canada including 161 never-smoking female cases of lung cancer and 483 population controls examined consumption of French fries or fried potatoes [ Four studies provided data on consumption of fried potatoes and breast cancer risk. In the NHS-II [ In an Italian case–control study, the RRs of ovarian cancer were 1.4 (95% CI 1.1–1.7) for one portion per week of fried or baked potatoes and 1.1 (95% CI 0.9-1.3) for more thatn one portion per week as compared with noneaters of potatoes [ In a case–control study of prostate cancer from Sweden, in which the contribution of fried potatoes to total acrylamide intake was 10%, the RR for high versus low tertile of intake was 1.31 (95% CI 1.03–1.66, With reference to bladder cancer, in a case–control study from Sweden, the RRs were 1.8 (95% CI 1.2–2.7) for monthly consumption and 1.6 (95% CI 1.1–2.6) for weekly consumption of fried potatoes as compared with less than monthly consumption [ The latter study also included information on kidney cancer: the RRs for frequent intake of different potato-based foods ranged from 0.7 to 1.1; the RR was 0.8 (95% CI 0.3–2.2) for daily intake of total fried or baked potatoes. In a further case–control study from Sweden, in which fried potatoes contributed for 20% of total acrylamide intake among controls, the RR of renal cell carcinoma for the highest versus the lowest quartile of fried potato intake was 1.1 (95% CI 0.7–1.7) [ In a US case–control study of maternal diet around the time of conception and during pregnancy, including intake of French fries, and risk of childhood brain cancer, the RRs for intake two or more times per week versus less than once per month were 1.9 (95% CI 1.1–3.4, periconception, Two occupational cohort studies of acrylamide workers reported data on cancer mortality [ Several publications were based on a study of >8800 male acrylamide workers of three plants in the United States and one in The Netherlands [ A retrospective cohort mortality study included 696 workers (655 men and 41 women) of an acrylamide facility in the United States, followed between 1955 and 2001 [  This analysis of all available epidemiological data on acrylamide exposure indicates a lack of increased risk for most cancer sites. A cancer site for which an association with dietary acrylamide exposure cannot be excluded is kidney cancer. Although only a small increase in risk was detected in the meta-analysis, the only available cohort study reported a significant association [ As it is, in general, the case in nutritional epidemiology, studies on dietary intake of acrylamide and cancer risk suffer from several potential sources of bias [ The studies on cancer risk from intake of acrylamide-rich foods, and in particular potatoes cooked at high temperature, offer only a limited contribution to the investigation of a possible carcinogenic effect of acrylamide in humans. Significant positive associations have been reported in five case–control studies [ The results of the recent update of the multiplant cohort of workers exposed to acrylamide [ Animal experiments have shown that acrylamide is a multiorgan carcinogen in both rats and mice [ Quantitative assessments of risk from dietary acrylamide intake have resulted in estimates of dose needed to produce an excess lifetime cancer risk of 10 In conclusion, epidemiologic studies do not suggest an increased risk of cancer from dietary or occupational exposure to acrylamide. However, a small increased risk of kidney cancer cannot be ruled out on the basis of the available results. As mentioned above, epidemiological studies are not sensitive to detect a small increase in risk and might suffer from exposure misclassification and other biases resulting in underestimate of risk [ Notwithstanding the methodological limitations discussed above, further epidemiological studies of acrylamide exposure and cancer risk are warranted. Such studies should comprise large populations with broad exposure contrasts. Pooled analyses and multicentric studies would represent the best approach; efforts should be made to improve acrylamide exposure assessment, preferably through repeated dietary measurements and exposure biomarkers [ The former had no role in the design, conduct or reporting of this study or the decision to submit the manuscript for publication. The work of CP, CLV and CB was supported by the Italian Association for Research on Cancer (AIRC). The project was supported partially by an unrestricted grant from Fritolay to the International Prevention Research Institute and by the International Prevention Research Institute's internal resources. The authors declare no conflict of interest. 