The representative elementary volume (REV) of fractured rock masses is a significant index to investigate the rock mass behaviors in the continuum mechanics. In this research, a new indicator to estimate the REV size of fractured rock masses based on the Geological Strength Index (GSI) is proposed. For this purpose, a new method that combines the PFC-based synthetic rock mass (SRM) model with the Hoek-Brown (HB) failure criterion is proposed to investigate the strength and deformation properties of fractured rock masses under biaxial stress conditions. Extensive numerical analyses are carried out to estimate variation of the uniaxial compression strength (UCS), deformation modulus (E) and GSI of the Brunswick mine rock mass with increasing the size of the SRM models up to a REV size. Results show that the GSI-based indicator gives relatively larger REV size compared with the traditional UCS or deformation modulus (E) based indicators. Compared with the traditional indicators, the proposed GSI-based indicator has merits of not only reflecting the geometrical characteristics of rock structures but also containing both geometrical and mechanical properties of discontinuities.The determination of rock mass mechanical properties is critical for the design of many engineering infrastructures, such as slopes, tunnels and foundations. Alejano et al. The concept of REV was first proposed by Bear In order to obtain realistic mechanical properties of jointed rock masses, large volumes of rock mass configurations should be tested. However, as Bieniawski Although there are various indicators available as listed in With the aim of achieving a better understanding of the fundamental rock mass mechanisms and improving the accuracy of the determination of REV size, in this research we propose a new indicator to estimate the REV size of fractured rock masses based on the Geological Strength Index (GSI) classification which has merits of not only reflecting the geometrical characteristic of rock structures but also containing both geometrical and mechanical properties of discontinuities. In order to establish such GSI-based REV indicator, we also propose a new method that combines the PFC-based synthetic rock mass (SRM) model with the Hoek-Brown (HB) failure criterion to investigate the strength and deformation of fractured rock masses under biaxial stress conditions. In rock engineering, the Hoek-Brown (HB) criterion based on the Geological Strength Index (GSI) has been widely used for predicting isotropic rock mass strength for many decades. The original HB criterion, which was proposed by Hoek and Brown The details of calculation and selection of The GSI is a rock mass classification system that has been developed in engineering rock mechanics to meet the need for estimating reliable rock mass properties for designing and analyzing tunnels, slopes or foundations. The value of GSI is estimated from visual examination of the rock mass exposed in outcrops, therefore, the heart of the GSI classification is a careful engineering geology description of the rock mass which involves two factors, rock structure and discontinuity surface condition. However, due to the lack of measurable parameters and related interval limits or ratings for describing the rock structure and the surface conditions of the discontinuities, the use of the GSI chart involves some subjectivity. In order to facilitate the use of the classification system especially by inexperienced engineers, many researchers However, it should be noted that the rock mechanical properties of fractured rock masses are generally anisotropic and stress path dependent As GSI not only describes the geometrical feature of rock masses but also relates the mechanical properties of the discontinuities, a GSI-based indicator could be ideal to calculate the REV size for a rock mass, overcoming limitations of the traditional indicators based on either geometrical or mechanical characteristics alone. In this research, the synthetic rock mass (SRM) model of the Brunswick mine rocks was employed as an example to illustrate the method of estimating REV based on the GSI indicator using an upscaling process. The upscaling procedure involves estimating the variation of the mechanical properties with increasing the size of the rock mass volumes up to a REV in which stationary limits are reached for the properties under study. The SRM model, which was constructed in PFC2D software in this research, is based on two well-developed numerical techniques, the discrete fracture network (DFN) and the bonded particle model (BPM). A DFN is generally generated using the Monte-Carlo simulation. Several statistical parameters, including the mean and standard deviation of joint set dip angle and trace length, are required to control the orientation, size and intensity of each joint set in the DFN. In BPM, rigid particles are bonded together to form the basic elements of a hard rock. The bond represents the rock cohesive component and breaks when the external stress exceeds the prescribed bond strength. The particle movement is influenced by frictional resistance. As the BPM explicitly considers the particle-scale mechanical behavior, it requires no continuum-scale constitutive model (such as the Mohr-Coulomb and Hoek-Brown criteria) to control the macroscopic mechanical rock behaviors. The micro-parameters in BPM can be identified following a calibration process to assure the similarity of the macro-properties can be obtained. The SRM is then constructed by inserting a DFN into a BPM assembly and a “smooth joint” logic is developed to assert smooth particle sliding along joints. The smooth joint model (SJM), which resolves the local force-displacement law onto the plane of the joint, could be used to simulate the behavior of such “smooth joint”. By this approach, bonded behavior, Coulomb sliding and tensile opening can be realistically represented. Rock mass data was collected from Brunswick Mine, In this case, the mean values of joints dip angles in 2-D were calculated from the mean direction of fractures in 3-D onto the East-West plane. The trace length was assumed to follow a normal distribution with a specific fracture intensity P In order to build the SRM models, firstly, 12 intact rock samples with different sizes were generated based on the BPM, as shown in It should be noted that the scale effect of intact rocks was not considered in this research, which means the UCS is assumed to be the same for all intact rock samples. It is known that the strength of intact rocks is scale-dependent, which is caused by the existence of micro-cracks and flaws in the rocks. Therefore, in order to investigate the scale effect of intact rocks in PFC2D, initial micro defects need to be added into intact rocks, Based on the geometrical parameters of fractures listed in Finally, the intact rock samples ( The micro-parameters of intact rocks and fractures in the SRM samples need to be identified following a calibration process to assure the rock mass strength and deformation properties estimated from SRM models are the same as that from laboratory and field data. Uniaxial compression tests were carried out to calibrate the micro-parameters of the bonded particle model The details of calibration procedure can be found in the paper by Zhou et al.  In this research, the smooth joint model (SJM) was used to simulate the behavior of a planar interface. The model has three input micro-parameters: normal stiffness Synthetic rock mass samples used for numerical simulation have a width of 50mm and a height of 100mm. During the biaxial test, the lateral stress was loaded to the samples with a confining stress Then, the normal stress Properties of the intact rock and discontinuities are necessary and identical input parameters for both the HB criterion and the SRM models. Therefore, if the isotropic condition for the rock mass properties is satisfied, then the jointed SRM model could be treated as a rock mass satisfying the HB criterion. In general, the GSI is used for quantifying the fracturing of large rock masses. In order to quantify the degree of fracturing of these synthetic rock mass samples with the size ranging from 0.05 m to 12 m ( The strategy to calculate the equivalent GSI for SRM models is to use the HB failure criterion to fit biaxial data using a regression method. The procedure to calculate the equivalent GSI is introduced as follows: Firstly, substitute Eqs. The values of Finally, the equivalent GSI for SRM models can be calculated from the HB failure criterion, which can be expressed as We carried out extensive numerical analyses to identify the equivalent GSI values of 120 SRM samples and presented results in In this research, the Coefficient of Variance (CV) was used to calculate the REV size of rock masses. CV could quantify the random influence of a group of data by calculating the value of Standard Deviation/Mean In order to test the reliability of the proposed GSI-based REV size, we also calculated the REV size of this Brunswick mine rock mass using traditional mechanical indicators, the UCS and deformation modulus In this research, we propose a new indicator to estimate the representative elementary volume (REV) of jointed rock masses based on the Geological Strength Index (GSI). Compared with the existing two geometrical and mechanical categories, the proposed GSI-based indicator has merits of reflecting the geometrical characteristics of rock structures, but also containing both geometrical and mechanical properties of discontinuities. For this purpose, the synthetic rock mass (SRM) models of the Brunswick mine rocks, based on the discrete fracture network (DFN) and the bonded particle model (BPM) techniques, were constructed in PFC2D to investigate the strength of fractured rock masses with increasing the size of the rock mass models up to a REV size. The micro-parameters of the SRM model were calibrated using the published experimental intact rock and field joint data to make sure the SRM model is capable of capturing the mechanical behaviors of fractured rock masses. Biaxial tests on the 120 SRM models with different sizes were carried out to get their failure envelopes, and then, the Hoek-Brown (HB) failure criterion was used to fit the biaxial data to get the values of equivalent GSI of the SRM models. Based on the evaluation of CV value of equivalent GSI values, GSI-based REV size (7 × 14 m) is obtained, which is relatively larger compared with the traditional UCS and The authors declared that they have no conflicts of interest to this work. We declare that we do not have any commercial or associative interest that represents a conflict of interest in connection with the work submitted. This research has been funded by the