 Richard Burkin was born on 23rd September, 1923 in Stratford, East London. He attended Ilford Grammar School, where he excelled in the sciences. In 1943, he obtained a BSc degree in chemistry at the age of 19 and then joined the photographic company, Ilford Ltd., where he worked as a research chemist on war-time military projects. While working at Ilford Ltd, he met his future wife, Ruth, whom he married in 1949. After the war was over, he moved from industry into academia when, aged 22, he was appointed as a lecturer in inorganic chemistry at University College, Southampton, which was then an external college of the University of London. While lecturing in Southampton, Burkin continued studying part-time, obtaining MSc and PhD degrees awarded by the University of London, in 1946 and 1948, respectively. In 1952, he left Southampton to move to London, where he joined the staff of the Royal School of Mines in the Imperial College of Science and Technology in South Kensington, the famous institution where he spent the rest of his distinguished career. At that time, a new undergraduate degree course in Mineral Technology was being set up in the Mining department and Dr Burkin was responsible for teaching chemical aspects of the subject, mainly surface and coordination chemistry. He started a research programme on flotation chemistry with particular emphasis on insoluble reagents, such as oils, which resulted in a series of research papers ( In 1960, Professor Denys Richardson, who was the leader of the renowned Nuffield Research Group in Extraction Metallurgy within the Metallurgy department in the RSM, invited Burkin to change departments and to set up a course in hydrometallurgy for the extraction metallurgy option of the undergraduate metallurgy course and to develop a hydrometallurgy research group in the Metallurgy department. At that time, the RSM was undergoing a major expansion and refurbishment and Burkin was fortunate to be able to move into brand new, state-of-the-art, laboratories and offices in the newly opened Bessemer extension of the RSM. He took full advantage of this unique opportunity and quickly built up a significant research group by attracting students and research funding from various sources. In particular he was supported by the National Research and Development Corporation (NRDC), a funding quango set up by Harold Wilson's Labour government in its “white heat of technology” phase. In the early 1960s, Burkin used his brand new autoclave facilities to study the leaching of refractory oxide and silicate ores, such as zircon, columbite and pyrochlore, and he was granted several patents as a result of this work ( In 1966, Richard Burkin's seminal textbook “The Chemistry of Hydrometallurgical Processes” ( The publication of his textbook led in due course to several significant industrial consultancy appointments for Burkin. In the UK, the Power Gas Corporation in Stockton-on-Tees (later to become Davy McKee), which was developing a commercial interest in the new industrial technique of solvent extraction, became aware of Burkin's innovative research work on the direct reduction of metal powders from organic solvents by reduction with hydrogen gas under pressure and hired him as a consultant. Under Burkin's guidance, Power Gas tried to develop this process to industrial fruition. Unfortunately, these efforts were unsuccessful and direct metal reduction from organic solutions was never commercialized. Nevertheless, the experience and confidence that Power Gas gained in the techniques of solvent extraction while undertaking this development work, led to the company entering the business of the design and construction of solvent extraction plants. The company subsequently built many plants around the world for the production of copper by solvent extraction and electrowinning, including the Nchanga Tailings Leach Plant at Chingola, Zambia, which when it opened in 1974 was the world's largest SX plant, producing 90,000 tons of cathode copper per year. In the words of Barrie Scuffham, who led the solvent extraction design team in Davy McKee: “Richard Burkin, directly or indirectly, helped Davy in the early years of solvent extraction and Davy went on to be a world leader in this technology.” Burkin's hydrometallurgical expertise was also sought by companies outside the UK. In the USA, he was contracted by the huge du Pont de Nemours chemical company, which was considering whether to enter the metal production business, to guide its R&D programme in this area. This contract, which lasted for 2 years, involved Burkin in regular trans-Atlantic commuting to the company headquarters in Wilmington, Delaware. Established metallurgical companies also sought his advice, including Kennecott Copper in the USA and Metallurgie Hoboken Overpelt in Belgium. Another important consultancy was with the Anglo-Belgian company, Interox Chemicals Ltd. This began in 1976 and lasted until 1988, when Burkin retired. Interox, which was a joint venture between Laporte Chemicals in the UK and Solvay Chemicals in Belgium, was one of the world's three largest manufacturers of hydrogen peroxide and peroxy chemicals. Interox's commercial department had noticed that increasingly large orders for hydrogen peroxide were being received from the mining industry, particularly from gold mines. This was an industry about which Interox knew nothing and so they turned to Richard Burkin for advice and help in developing further opportunities in this large and potentially lucrative new market for peroxides in hydrometallurgical processes. Burkin took up this new challenge with enthusiasm and, with the active support of the Interox board, he developed a large research programme at the RSM on the application of peroxides in hydrometallurgy, fully funded by the company. In due course, Interox decided that, in addition to the academic research being carried out in the RSM, an industrial R&D group in hydrometallurgy should be established within the company. This group was set up in the research laboratories of Laporte Chemicals in Widnes, Cheshire, where, by pure coincidence, the research manager was Dr John Bramley, who had been one of Richard's first PhD students when he had joined the RSM a quarter of a century earlier ( In the 1980s, there was a great deal of activity in the gold mining sector, with new mines being developed, old mines being reworked, and new extraction processes making possible the recovery of gold from ore deposits that previously were considered to be untreatable. There was plenty of consultancy and process design work available and Richard Burkin realised that there was an opportunity to commercialize the extensive and often under-utilised experimental and analytical facilities in the Royal School of Mines. In 1986, Burkin, together with his colleague, John Monhemius, and two businessmen, set up Consort Research Ltd. This company was based in the Royal School of Mines and its business model was that it contracted consultancy work with mining or other companies and then it hired the necessary laboratory space, equipment and technical staff in the Royal School of Mines, paying the department at pre-agreed rates for the use of the facilities and staff. This arrangement required a considerable amount of negotiating skill by Burkin to persuade the Imperial College authorities that it could be managed to the benefit of all parties. Consort Research Ltd was in essence the first “spin-out” company from Imperial College and it was set up many years before such entrepreneurial arrangements, which today are commonplace, became politically fashionable and readily sanctioned in research universities. The Consort business model worked successfully for about 5 years, but then the consultancy market was hit by the recession of the early 90s and Consort Research never fully recovered thereafter and it was eventually wound up. Another innovatory organization that grew out of Consort Research during its active period was an international network of metallurgical consultants that operated under the name METNET. This was a mutual support network that enabled individual consultants to offer their own clients a full spectrum of services by drawing on the specialist know-how of others in the network. Apart from Burkin, Monhemius and their colleague, Rod Gochin, who were based in the RSM in London, the METNET experts, who were mainly all RSM alumni, were working in Australia, Canada, Europe and the USA. Today, similar international arrangements amongst consultants are fairly common and are greatly facilitated by the virtually instant global communications available through the internet, but in the pre-internet days of the late 1980s, METNET was a ground-breaking innovation that was unique in the mining world. In the 1980s, the Hydrometallurgy Research Group in the RSM was at its peak in terms of numbers, with more than two dozen research students, post-doctoral research assistants and technicians working in a suite of dedicated laboratories, with supervision of the group shared between Richard Burkin and John Monhemius. By then, the research group had become world famous, with post-graduate students coming from all parts of the globe to carry out research in hydrometallurgy, and Richard Burkin himself had been promoted to a personal chair in Hydrometallurgy. Following the success of his 1966 hydrometallurgy textbook, he continued periodically to publish books, mainly as the editor of compilations of didactic papers on aspects of extractive metallurgy, of which he published four between 1975 and 1987 ( In 1985, staff retirements and other changes within the RSM resulted in Professor Burkin being asked by the Rector of Imperial College to take over the headship of the Mineral Technology section in the Department of Mineral Resources Engineering, (MRE) which had grown from the original Mining department. The whole of the staff, students and equipment of the Hydrometallurgy section, together with responsibility for its main laboratories, were transferred to the MRE department. Thus Burkin returned to his first home in the RSM, but one of his main tasks now was to close down the Mineral Technology undergraduate course, which he had originally been hired to help start up in the 1950s. This course, which had run successfully for over 30 years, was by now suffering from a lack of students and it had become uneconomic to continue to keep it going. This task was successfully accomplished, but the result was that hydrometallurgy at undergraduate level was then being taught at Imperial College only to the diminishing number of students in metallurgy and chemical engineering that opted to take the subject as part of their main degree studies. Meanwhile, the hydrometallurgy research group continued to flourish until 1988 when, at the age of 65, Richard Burkin retired from full-time academic life. In recognition of his distinguished academic career and long service in the RSM, he was granted the title of Emeritus Professor by the University of London. On retirement, Richard was able to devote more time to tending the large garden at his home in Essex that he and Ruth had developed over many years into a classic English garden. They also spent much time searching for a smaller retirement property on the coast of East Anglia, where they could indulge in their other lifetime passion of bird watching. For a number of years after his retirement, Richard continued to travel once or twice a week to Imperial College, mainly to use the library to do research for his final project—an updated and greatly expanded new textbook on hydrometallurgy. This book, In spite of their endeavours, Ruth and Richard did not find a smaller house near the coast that suited them and so they continued to live in their fine Edwardian house in Shenfield until, in February of this year, Richard died at the age of 84, a few weeks after an operation following a fall. His funeral was held in the Parish Church of St Mary the Virgin in Shenfield, where he and Ruth had been married 59 years earlier. Richard Burkin's academic career corresponded with the period during which hydrometallurgy grew from a specialist process technology that was largely confined to the nuclear industry, where it had developed rapidly during and immediately after the Second World War, to its position today, where hydrometallurgical processes rank alongside traditional pyrometallurgical processes for the extraction of many of the non-ferrous metals. While much of the growth and innovation in hydrometallurgical processes stemmed from the USA and Canada, Richard Burkin led the academic development of the discipline in the UK and Europe. His brilliant scientific mind and his academic background in classical inorganic and physical chemistry enabled him to bring scientific rigour to the subject and to analyse the thermodynamic and kinetic principles underlying industrial hydrometallurgical processes, which often were developed using mainly empirical methods. His first textbook ( In his research, Burkin was innovative and forward-thinking. In the early 1960s, he realized that the recently-developed industrial process for the production of metal powders by the reduction of aqueous solutions of metal salts with hydrogen at high temperatures and pressures could in principle be combined with solvent extraction processes, which then were in their infancy. This realization led him to begin an extensive research programme into the direct reduction of metal powders from metal-loaded organic solutions produced by solvent extraction ( Although research was his primary passion, Richard Burkin was a dedicated teacher. Lecturing did not come easily to this essentially reserved and private man, yet he was a well-liked teacher, who was much respected and admired by his undergraduate students. His enduring commitment to teaching is illustrated by the series of didactic review papers and monographs that he published throughout his career (