Styrene maleic anhydride copolymer (SMA) encapsulated single wall carbon nanotubes (SWNT) are melt mixed with PA12 in order to disperse SWNT more homogeneously. The mechanism is found to be a reactive coupling between amine end groups of PA12 and maleic anhydride functionality of SMA during melt mixing of PA12 with SMA modified SWNT. This leads next to a better dispersion to an enhanced interfacial adhesion between PA12 and SWNT as indicated by enhanced rheological, dynamic mechanical, and tensile properties of the PA12/SWNT composites.Since the discovery of carbon nanotubes (CNT) Several attempts have been made to enhance the phase adhesion between polymer matrix and carbon nanotubes such as the use of functionalized CNT and the use of a non-ionic surfactant in CNT/Polymer composites The motivation of this study is to address the effect of reactive compatibilization by styrene maleic anhydride copolymer (SMA) of SMA encapsulated SWNT with amine end groups of PA12 on the electrical, rheological, dynamic mechanical and mechanical properties of PA12/SWNT composites. The SWNT used in this study having a mean diameter of 1.33 The SMA modified SWNT were prepared by dissolving 0.042 g SMA in 50 ml tetrahydrofurane (THF) solvent, utilizing ultrasonicator aided dispersion of SWNT (0.126 or 0.252 g, respectively) for 15 min and subsequently forming a `mat' by solvent removal. Unmodified SWNT were treated in the same way. The unmodified SWNT and the SMA modified SWNT based PA12 composites were prepared by melt mixing in a conical twin-screw extruder (DACA Micro Compounder, capacity 4.5 cm Attenuated total reflection (ATR) spectra were measured with the IR spectrometer IFS66v (BRUKER OPTICS, Germany) and the `Golden Gate' ATR cell (SPECAC, UK) in the wavelength range between 600 and 4000 cm The electrical volume resistivity was measured on the compression molded thin sheets (diameter 60 mm) or small strip (20 mm The rheological measurements were performed using an ARES oscillatory rheometer (Rheometric Scientific, USA) at 260 °C under nitrogen atmosphere and on a parallel plate geometry (plate diameter of 25 mm, gap of 1–2 mm). Frequency sweeps were carried out between 100 and 0.05 rad/s. The strains used were chosen in order to be within the linear viscoelastic range. Dynamic mechanical analysis was carried out with rectangular samples (length 5 mm, width 4 mm and thickness around 0.35 mm) using Tritec 2000 DMA (Triton Technology, UK) in tension mode using a dynamic frequency of 1 Hz from room temperature to 160 °C at a temperature ramp of 4 K/min. Tensile properties were measured on a Zwick Z010 tensile tester according to ISO 527-2 procedure at an extension rate of 5 mm/min on miniature dogbones (length 20 mm, parallel length 6 mm, gauge width 2 mm) punched from the pressed sheets. Scanning electron microscopic (SEM) investigation was performed using Zeiss Gemini 982 without sample sputtering on a sample after the tensile test. It is one of the motivations of this study to address the effect of SMA encapsulation of SWNT on the interfacial interaction towards PA12. In our study we assume that SMA covers the nanotubes and nanotube bundles by physical wrapping induced by wetting of SMA–THF solution. After solvent removal a relatively thick layer of SMA is expected to cover the SWNT more or less uniformly. While untreated SWNT showed aggregates in THF, the solutions of SMA and SWNT in THF showed much better SWNT dispersion. During melt mixing, the composites with encapsulated SWNT showed a higher mixing torque as compared to the composites with untreated SWNT (e.g., 20% higher in case of 6 wt% SWNT), indicative of better dispersion of the tubes and/or enhanced interfacial forces. Electrical resistivity measurements revealed the formation of a SWNT percolation network in the uncompatibilized composites. Values of 3.6 E8 Ω Therefore, oscillatory melt rheology was used in order to check if a percolated network can be detected rheologically in the composites with wrapped SWNT. It was shown in previous investigations that the formation of a percolated nanotube structure leads to qualitative changes in the behavior of complex viscosity and storage modulus versus frequency Dynamic mechanical measurements (  The SMA modified PA12/SWNT composites exhibit strain hardening followed by yielding with higher elongation at break ( SMA encapsulated SWNT are melt mixed with PA12 matrix in a conical twin-screw extruder. The process of encapsulation by SMA copolymer leads to a finer dispersion of SWNT and enhanced interfacial adhesion between PA12 and SMA modified SWNT. This leads to enhanced mechanical properties, which is manifested by tensile and dynamic mechanical properties. Formation of network structure has been identified in unmodified SWNT composites by electrical conductivity measurements and morphological investigations by scanning electron microscopy. In case of SMA modified SWNT composites the formation of network structure has been indicated by rheological measurements though the encapsulation of SWNT by SMA make it insulating. We thank Nanoledge S.A. (Clapier, France) for providing SWNT and PA12 and useful discussions. In addition, we are grateful for assistance in SEM investigation by Prof. Udo Wagenknecht, IPF Dresden.