Background
                  Coronal plane fractures of the distal humerus have special characteristics in classification, imaging, surgical approaches, materials used, treatment modalities, and complications. The purpose of this study is to comment on these topics.
               
                  Materials and methods
                  A retrospective analysis was done for patients with distal humeral coronal plane fractures. They were classified according to Dubberley and functionally evaluated by Mayo Elbow Performance Index (MEPI). The long-term complications were evaluated.
               
                  Results
                  There were 15 patients, with type 1 fractures in 2, type 2 in 6, and type 3 in 7. All patients were treated by open reduction and internal fixation either by lateral or posterior approach. The average MEPI score was 83.3 (range, 60-100) points with 7 excellent, 2 good, and 6 fair results. The MEPI scores of type 3 fractures were significantly lower than those of types 1 and 2 fractures (P = .037 and P = .002, respectively). The complications were avascular necrosis in 4 (27%) patients, degenerative arthritis in 6 (40%), joint step-off in 6 (40%), heterotopic ossification in 7 (47%), nonunion in 1 (7%), and implant failure in 1 (7%). The presence of avascular necrosis and joint step-off were significantly associated with degenerative arthritis (P = .004 and P = .005, respectively). Heterotopic ossification was significantly associated with presence of lateral epicondyle fracture (P = .004).
               
                  Conclusion
                  Type 1A and 2A coronal plane fractures typically had an excellent outcome. However, type 3 and subtype B fractures are prone to developing complications which are primarily avascular necrosis, degenerative arthritis and heterotopic ossification.Coronal plane fractures of the distal humerus involve basically the capitellum and the trochlea, or both. These are entirely cartilage structures and have special characteristics in classification, imaging, surgical approaches, materials used, treatment modalities, and complications. Several classifications are proposed for coronal plane fractures with some modifications. Although routine plain radiography is usually insufficient to demonstrate the extent of the injury, a standard lateral view of the elbow can depict the “double arc” sign, which is a pathognomonic finding, and a radial head-capitellum view can also demonstrate a missed coronal plane fracture. Coronal plane fractures can be treated by anterolateral, lateral (Kaplan or Kocher), and posterior surgical approaches. In terms of surgery, the type of the material, the direction of the screws and the number of the screws to be placed remain controversial. The partially threaded cancellous lag screw, headless screw, antiglade anterior plate, Kirschner wire, absorbable pin, and suture are all used to fix these fractures. Currently, open reduction and internal fixation (ORIF) is regarded as the best treatment option for coronal plane fractures. The purpose of this study is to retrospectively evaluate the clinical outcomes and complications of the distal humeral coronal fractures in a relatively large group of patients. This study also emphasizes the diagnostic tools that help to classify these fractures correctly, the proper surgical approaches, and the appropriate treatment modality for each fracture type. A retrospective review of patient files and operation logs between the years 2003-2009 was done. In this period, we treated 51 patients having distal humeral fracture and 19 of them had partial articular fracture. Of these 19 patients, 17 patients had distal humeral coronal plane fractures. Among these, 2 were excluded from the study. One of them had Kocher-Lorenz type fracture and was treated by fragment excision; the other died of chronic renal failure and had insufficient follow-up. Thus the patient population was made up of 15 patients. The fractures were classified according to Dubberley classification system ( Statistical analyses were made by using the NCSS (Number Cruncher Statistical System, 2007 Statistical Software, UT, USA) programme. The descriptive methods to evaluate the data were the median and the interquartil range. The analytic methods were Kruskal Wallis test for the comparison of groups, Mann-Whitney All patients with distal humeral coronal fractures were treated by ORIF. The surgical procedures were carried out by the same surgeon. There were 5 males and 10 females ( The lateral approach which was described by Kaplan as the interval between extensor digitorum communis (EDC) and extensor carpi radialis brevis (ECRB) was used for all of type 1 and 2 fractures and for 3 of type 3 fractures. In these patients, the origin of the wrist extensors and lateral collateral ligament complex (LCLC) were elevated from the lateral epicondyle and the lateral joint space was opened with a medial translation of the elbow joint by exerting a varus-supination force on it ( The remaining 4 type 3 fractures were managed by posterior approach. The technique was the posterior approach described by Bryan-Morrey in 1 patient ( An osteosynthesis with multiple K-wires was done in 1 patient with type 3B fracture. The remaining 14 fractures were fixed with more than 1 screw (Herbert or Acutrak screws) with K-wires added to the osteosynthesis when needed. Active range of motion (ROM) exercises were begun immediately after the operation in type 1 and 2 fractures. In type 3 fractures, an above-the-elbow splint was used for a maximum period of 10 days postoperatively until edema subsided and active ROM exercises were initiated thereafter. Indomethacin, 25 mg, 3 times a day for three weeks, was given orally for HO prophylaxis. The fractures were uneventfully united within 3 months in all but 1. The average MEPI score was 83.3 (range, 60-100) points with 7 excellent, 2 good, and 6 fair results. There were no accompanying neurovascular injuries in any patient. There were 8 concomitant lateral epicondyle fractures. No instability was detected in any 1 of the patients at the final follow-up. The complications were AVN in 4 (27%) patients, DA in 6 (40%), JS in 6 (40%), HO in 7 (47%), NU in 1 (7%), and IF in 1 (7%). All patients who developed AVN had had type 3 fractures. DA developed in 5 of type 3 fractures and 1 of type 2. HO was detected only in type 3 fractures. At the last follow-up, the median MEPI score was 100 points (IQR 100-100) for type 1 fractures, 100 points (IQR 95-100) for type 2, and 65 points (IQR 60-70) for type 3 ( Among the 6 patients who developed DA, 5 were grade 2 and 1 was grade 3, according to Broberg-Morrey classification. DA developed in all 4 (100%) of those who had AVN and in 2 (18.2%) of those 11 patients who did not have AVN. There was a statistically significant difference between these 2 groups in developing DA ( There were 7 patients all with type 3 fractures who developed HO. That was grade 1 in 1 patient, grade 2 in 2, and grade 3 in 4, according to Brooker classification applied to the elbow. A lateral epicondyle fracture was associated in all 7 (100%) of those patients who developed HO and in 1 of 8 (12.5%) who did not. There was a statistically significant difference between these 2 groups ( There was no statistically significant difference between the time from injury to surgical intervention either between patients who developed AVN and who did not ( Distal humeral coronal plane fractures are rare in all age groups. Female predominance and nondominant side predominance in distal humeral coronal plane fractures were previously reported. There are various classification systems defined for the distal humeral coronal plane fractures. The “double arc sign” detected on the lateral radiograph of the elbow represents a rotated capitellotrochlear fragment. CT and 3-D CT are recommended for determining the exact nature of the fracture morphology and for the operative decision-making. Lateral Treatment options for distal humeral coronal plane fractures are numerous. Various fixation methods were proposed for coronal plane fractures. Acutrak screws inserted anteroposteriorly are proposed to be the most stable fixation method according to some biomechanical test results. It is previously reported that type 1 fractures have significantly better outcomes than types 2 and 3 fractures and the greater the fragmentation of the articular surface, the worse the outcome. The reported complications in distal humeral coronal plane fractures can be evaluated by two aspects, namely, the reoperations and the complications related to the radiological findings. The reoperation rates were reported to be 48% and 43% in 2 previously reported series. The Dubberley classification system is suitable to classify distal humeral coronal plane fractures. The ‘double arc’ sign is pathognomonic in type 2 and 3 fractures if a standard lateral radiography of the elbow is obtained. Type 1, 2, and 3A fractures can be managed by the Kaplan lateral approach and type 3B by the posterior approach. While type 1A and 2A fractures have excellent results, type 3B and subtype B fractures have the worst outcomes with resultant DA. DA development is significantly associated with presence of both AVN and JS. HO development is significantly associated with presence of lateral epicondyle fracture. None of the other authors, their immediate families and any research foundation with which they are affiliated received any financial payments or other benefits from any commercial entity related to the subject of this article.