A novel method of crystal nucleation and detachment from a vibrating chilling solid surface has been proposed to further increase the proportion of equiaxed grains in the solidification microstructure. Using a transparent NH4Cl–H2O alloy, the surface nucleation and evolution behaviors of dendrites were in situ observed. The effects of vibration frequency as well as amplitude on the equiaxed crystallographic morphology were experimentally studied, and the effects of the roughness of solid surface were also considered. The results show that exerting vibration to a chilling metal surface is an effective way to produce a lot of nuclei for forming equiaxed grains microstructure, and with higher vibration frequency and amplitude, much finer equiaxed grains are obtained. Moreover, nucleation on the chilling surface is a much localized behavior, some fixed positions on the chilling surface act as active nucleation sites, of which the number increases with a lowering chilling temperature.Crystal structure in castings is of vital importance for its processing and application properties. Although there have been a lot of researches, the understanding on the formation of equiaxed crystal grain structure in castings is still not very clear. In 1954, Winegard and Chalmers To obtain higher fraction of equiaxed grains microstructure in casting, several control technologies for solidification procedure have been put forward. The supersonic vibration, electromagnetic stirring and electric pulse inoculation are three popular technologies In this article, a novel method of nucleation and detachment of dendrites stirred by vibration is presented. The difference between this method and the above control technologies represented that an external force of vibration was not exerted to the mould but a chilling generator introduced into the alloy melt. The experimental apparatus is illustrated in An NH The behaviors of crystal nucleation and detachment on the chilling surface of the aluminum bar are shown in Pictures in The common through for the localized nucleation behavior may refer it to some kind of very small notch or pit existing on the position of the active nucleation sites. Therefore, surface with greater roughness have been commonly believed to be a better for nucleation because it can provide more nucleation sites. In order to verify this thought, we investigated the effects of surface roughness on the nucleation behavior. Several chilling bars made of the same aluminum alloy but with different roughness were used for the experimental research, the value of arithmetic profile  The geometric micro-pattern of the chilling metal surface was examined with an atomic force microscope (AFM) to reveal the difference between the area with and without active nucleation sites. The solidifying microstructures of NH Other than vibration frequency, the effect of vibration amplitude on the solidifying microstructures was also studied, as shown in The method of nucleation and detachment of dendrites stirred by vibration was presented. Exerting vibration to a chilling solid surface is an effective way to produce lots of nuclei for forming equiaxed grains microstructure by preventing the solidifying shell to form and promoting dendrites to break off and shower down not only from the free liquid surface but also from the chilling solid surface. Increasing vibration frequency and amplitude can achieve clubbed dendrites-to-equiaxed grains transition. To obtain finer equiaxed grains, it is necessary to increase synchronously vibration frequency as well as amplitude. The nucleation on the chilling solid surface is a much localized behavior. Some fixed position, with the small notches or pits, on the solid surface act as active nucleation sites, and there is a size match between the small notches or pits and active nucleation sites. This research is supported by the fund of the State Key Laboratory of Solidification Processing in NWPU (200705), and supported by the scientific and technical fund of talent in XAUAT (RC0716).