A 23-year-old man suffered a severe crush injury with fracture of his left thumb base phalanx and destruction of his extensor pollicis longus tendon. Immediate plate stabilisation and soft tissue coverage was performed; however, a recalcitrant pseudarthrosis developed in this compliant non-smoker despite three revisions with avascular iliac crest grafts for interphalangeal joint arthrodesis, corticocancellous bone application and hardware exchange. An attempt to improve thumb vascularity and soft tissue cover with a pedicled Foucher flap as well as through extracorporeal shock wave therapy failed.
                  Bone healing and subsequent thumb salvage were finally achieved with a free vascularised medial femoral condyle (MFC) bone flap, which was covered directly with a full-thickness skin graft. Both bony and soft tissue healing went well and after 3 months the patient returned to work.
                  This case demonstrates that skin grafting the periosteal surface of the MFC flap is safe and results in a thin skin–bone compositae transplant which also might be very useful for indications other than hand surgery.Recurrent pseudarthrosis in the fingers and thumb after trauma is mostly related to infection, poor osteosynthesis technique, severe comminution or concomitant factors such as diabetes, substance abuse or known small vessel pathology. In most healthy young individuals, a proper osteosynthesis technique and cancellous or corticocancellous bone grafting leads to successful healing and early rehabilitation of hand function. Therefore, vascularised bone transplants in the fingers have only rare indications. We report a case of a healthy young man, where a recurrent pseudarthrosis after a crush injury of the thumb was not achieved with this classical approach and a free vascularised bone transplant with very thin soft tissue coverage was needed. A 23-year-old man suffered an open left thumb crush fracture at the distal third of the base phalanx by a hydraulic press. The remains of the destroyed extensor pollicis brevis tendon had to be resected and immediate open reduction and plate osteosynthesis was performed with primary wound closure elsewhere. Both neurovascular bundles remained intact. Active, load-free physiotherapy for the thumb base joint and carpometacarpal (CMC)-I-joint was prescribed after each operation with a resting splint worn in between sessions and during the night. However, a pseudarthrosis with necrotic condylar fragments and a 20° interphalangeal (IP) joint contracture developed 3 months after trauma and the patient was referred to our clinic. The hardware had to be removed, the IP joint resected and a 2-cm iliac crest graft was fixed with a bridging plate. Unfortunately, the pseudarthrosis recurred together with failing hardware (plate fracture) 4 months later, and reosteosynthesis and corticocancellous bone grafting were done. Now, bone healing started distally, but the plate was exposed after 2 months, and a typical Foucher flap was harvested from the index finger to cover the thumb. It had to be revised once due to haematoma formation, finally died distally and a full-thickness skin graft was applied to the thin but vascularised remaining tissue over the plate. Three months later, the pseudarthrosis was still not healed, the hardware was again exposed and had to be removed. Wound swabs were sterile. A third pseudarthrosis resection and iliac crest grafting again did not result in stable bone healing despite additional extracorporeal shock wave therapy (three sessions) ( Finally, 2 years after the injury, a vascularised corticoperiosteal medial femoral condyle (MFC) free flap with some cancellous bone attached was harvested from the left knee and set into the defect after meticulous resection of all non-vascularised bone. It was fixed with a custom 2-hole plate both distally and proximally and revascularised to the radial vessels in the snuffbox. The extremely tight soft tissue of the thumb after many operations prevented soft tissue closure over the vascularised bone flap ( Crush injuries of the fingers are frequently associated with fractures and successive pseudarthrosis development despite adequate osteosynthetic stabilisation. Our patient was a young compliant non-smoker and was treated in a hand trauma centre where complex injuries are routinely treated. In the vast majority of cases with bone defects in the fingers and thumb, vascular iliac crest grafts work very well. Still, the overall course of the case strongly indicates that the introduction of vascularised bone into the therapy concept should have happened earlier. Most probably, the crush injury destroyed the microcirculation despite leaving the two main thumb arteries intact. All wound swabs throughout the course were sterile, so acute or low-grade infection was not a problem. The MFC flap is a very useful transplant In the literature, we have found only two cases for finger salvage using a free MFC flap so far. Alternatively, a small osteocutaneous radial forearm flap, a free osteocutaneous dorsal metacarpal artery (DMCA) flap from the contralateral hand or a partial toe transfer could have been used, but all three either have a higher donor-site morbidity than the MFC flap or need later debulking. This case demonstrated successful direct skin graft application to the vascular/periosteal surface of an MFC flap which expands the usefulness of this versatile flap even further. None of the contributing authors to this article has any financial disclosures to make nor received any funding of whatever kind.  Supplementary data associated with this article can be found in the online version at