The aim of Brite-Euram project CT94 -1018 has been to recycle jarosite (JW), an iron rich hazardous waste resulting from the hydrometallurgy of zinc ores, to obtain glass and glass-ceramic materials. Granite scraps and mud (GW), generated by the caving, cutting and sawing of the blocks, and glass cullet have been utilized as additives to define the batch composition. The average compositional ranges are 40–70% for JW, 20–40% for GW and 10–40% for glass-cullet. Several compositions were prepared and tailored for the final product destination; melted at the 1400–1450°C temperature range. Glass-ceramic materials have been obtained from the glassy-phase by means of a controlled nucleation and crystallization thermal treatment, yielding a 40–55% crystalline volume fraction. The properties of the glass and glass-ceramics have been tailored to favor the commercial exploitation of the products in the building industry, in the form of paving tiles wall covering panels, glass fibers for insulation and coloring pigments for ceramics. A 1 ton/day vitrification pilot plant, able to work in a continuous or discontinuous way, has been realized and tested using different waste streams.The application of EU Directives 91/156– 91/689 and 94/62 has generated practical actions in the matter of waste regulations in landfill disposal. It has been decided that from 1 January 2000, at different times, landfill disposal will be forbidden for most of the wastes currently land-filled and that new technologies for minimization, valorization and recycling of industrial wastes must be developed. It is the general opinion, however, that the R&D is still insufficiently prepared to face the challenge of the next century and insufficiently supported and financed, though it has a prominent role in recycling and waste management. In fact, the more environmental policies push for higher recycling targets, the more material streams of decreasing quality and complex composition must be transformed into new products. The R&D issue is particularly evident for wastes arising from primary or secondary materials production, which are characterized by a complex composition of regulated heavy metals or organic compounds and by uneconomical recovery of the valuable fractions. A common policy of waste management must be established so that, when new recycling processes are developed, the Best Available Technology for recycling is used on an EU basis, with a uniform procedure to designate the technical evaluation procedure. This means a complete integration of environmental policies with complete and uniform testing protocols in order to obtain the acceptance of a new product made out of recycled wastes in the EU. In the actual labyrinth of national regulations connected with waste classification, recycling technologies and product acceptance, the industrial sectors which seem to suffer most from the present unclear situation are the resource extraction industries, mineral processing and primary metal production which are characterized by low conversion efficiency, high energy intensity and are associated with significant environmental impact In this respect, technologies involving transformation of wastes into cementituous agglomerates, ceramics, glasses or glass-ceramics have acquired economical importance. Immobilization in a cement-matrix, i.e. ordinary Portland cement, does not require expensive thermal treatments to render hazardous wastes inert in a stable matrix The aim of the BRE2-CT94-1018 project “Recycling of Jarosite waste, in combination with granite residues, for the production of glass and glass-ceramic materials” has been to develop a process able to recycle the highest quantity of zinc-hydrometallurgy waste, in combination with granite scraps and mud, into glass or glass-ceramic materials. Batch compositions and controlled vitrification and recrystallization thermal treatments have been developed. The economical aspects of the process have also been taken into consideration with the aim of obtaining products with properties suitable for the construction materials market. During the project, a vitrification pilot plant, able to treat 1 ton/day of vitrifiable mixture was built, and is presently operating in Iglesias, the historical mineralogical area of Sardinia. The principal waste stream investigated in the course of the project has been jarosite red-mud (JW) arising from electrolytic zinc-technology. Goethite, which is the other zinc hydrometallurgy waste produced, depending on the type of treatment used to remove the iron The weight-loss of the JW, during thermal treatment in the 20–1400°C range, has been evaluated by simultaneous thermal analysis (TG + DTA) in air coupled with a mass-spectrometer (MS) for the analysis of gases. The MS technique showed that at 400°C the gaseous species evolving from the sample are H In the 250 – 550°C range the main reactions are: The gaseous phase is made up of H In the 560–700°C range the decomposition of Fe Above 700°C decomposition of FeSO The phase transformation of JW in heating were considered when defining the recovery of ammonia and sulfur, in designing the pilot plant and setting the melting thermal schedule. The zinc-hydrometallurgy by-products are not capable of forming a glassy phase, being mainly made up of Fe, Zn and Pb oxides. They were combined with other wastes available near the zinc plant in order to obtain a glass with adequate properties and capable of crystallizing by means of a controlled thermal treatment. They are listed in Examples of the glass compositions investigated are reported in On the laboratory scale, the melting was carried out in a super-kanthal furnace in the 1400–1450°C temperature range utilizing alumina or mullite crucibles. The melt was quenched in water and the fit obtained was broken and sieved. Other compositions were poured into a stainless steel mould to obtain glass-tiles. Fibers were obtained by re-melting a portion of the glass at 1300°C for 1 h in a platinum crucible. The crucible had a hole of 2.0 mm from which the fiber was obtained at a rewinding speed of 3600 rpm. A 20 μm width and 13–15 km length fiber was obtained for each fusion Glasses were tested for possible re-utilization in the following ways. The as-quenched fit was characterized for the leaching resistance, according to TCLP test, for landfill disposal as inert material. The fit was crushed to a fine powder and tested as black pigment for glazing in the ceramic industry. Other glass batch compositions, with high magnetite crystallization ability were slowly cooled from the melting to room temperature to allow crystallization and to improve the hardness of the glass-ceramics. Suitable powder fractions were employed as abrasive. The glass fibers were utilized as an acoustic and thermal insulator in the building industry. Glass tiles, obtained by pouring the molten batch over a mould, were annealed and thermally treated to obtain fine magnetite-pyroxene structure. The crystallization process was carried out in a controlled manner, usually by l h thermal treatment at 630–650°C and 30 mm at 750–800°C depending on the composition, leading to the formation of 40–55 % crystalline phases throughout the bulk of the tile The final expression The applicability of the above method depends on the difference in density between the crystal, The sinter-crystallization of glass fit was carried out, using glasses of suitable composition and size, to improve the glass-ceramics tiles and obtain an appearance similar to natural stones with enhanced properties [27, 40]. During the heat-treatment, the crystallization starts from the surface to the inside of each grain obtaining a crystal size in the order of mm. The different particles can be easily distinguished in the structure of the materials and, as a result, the appearance imitates the grained structure of marble and granite. Sintered glass-ceramics from jarosite were made at 1020°C for 30 mm utilizing a mixture of 1–10 mm fit particle size The fracture toughness of the glass ceramic tiles, The chemical resistance of the tiles was characterized by sulfuric acid and potassium hydroxide solution tests according to the BS6431-EN106 norm and by the TCLP. This later test was adopted for evaluating the chemical resistance of the products (tiles or fibers) when considered as possible wastes. With the aim of producing suitable quantities of glass-frit to be tested for industrial application, a vitrification pilot-plant was engineered on the basis of the results acquired in the course of the research activity. It has been assembled in the industrial area of Iglesias and it has been operating since June 1998. In designing the plant, particular attention was paid to achieving a large flexibility of the melting unit in order to perform tests with different compositions using a wide range of industrial wastes and residues within the limits of the industrial glass and ceramic production. The pilot-plant produces granulated fit, by the quenching of molten glass, which is then utilized in the ways previously mentioned. The principal sections of the plant are: The weighing unit for dried wastes which is based on an electronic scale placed at floor level; the batch components are weighed and gathered into metallic storage bins transferred to the mixing and homogenizing unit by means of an electric hoist movable on a rail. The mixed and homogenized batch compositions which are discharged by gravity into feeding metallic bins placed underneath and, again by means of the same electric hoist, transferred into the feeding hopper of the melting kiln unit. The melting kiln unit, a −3 to +7° swinging tank type, projected for melting glass batches up to 1450°C by LPG combustion. The batch containing basin has been realized by electromelted zircon-refractories to ensure high thermal stress and corrosion resistance. The furnace can be operated continuously and, in this case, the average production capacity is 1 ton/day of granulated glass frit, or discontinuously with a production of 250–300 kg of glass frit per batch. Gaseous products, evolving during the heating up of the melting cycle from JW or other wastes, as well as any dust produced during melting which are collected and treated in a separate section by means of a hose filter. Dust is recovered in the abatement filter, analyzed by XR fluorescence, and reintroduced into the glass batch. Metallic vapors, mainly zinc and lead, are trapped and condensed over a cold surface, recovered or eventually recycled in the batch.  Three fusions were carried out in order to test the pilot plant using three waste streams available in the area of Iglesias. The batch compositions are listed in Vitrification is recognized as a permanent and environmental acceptable solution to industrial waste disposal because it improves the chemical durability and reduces the volume to be disposed of. By properly selecting the glass composition, the waste loading can be maximized and the raw material additives requirement decreased by the use of compatible wastes. The results of the Brite Euram 1018 project have highlighted the possibility of recycling a consistent amount of jarosite waste in a glass matrix and that different products with competitive properties can be obtained. The pilot plant operation allowed the scale-up of the hazardous waste vitrification process and produced glass-fit from jarosite and other different wastes in quantities suitable for industrial application. The author is grateful to the Commission of the European Union for the financial support given to this project; to Eng. G. Cisi of Sacmi Impianti, Modena, for the technical support given to this paper; to Dr. Alexander Karamanov for the experimental work; to the Partners of CT94- 1018 Project.