Since occupational and environmental exposure to the heavy metal Cadmium (Cd) affects human health this study investigated the effects of exposure to a single, or multiple, sub-toxic Cd concentrations on sub-confluent and confluent human osteoblast growth and expression of specific bone differentiation markers. RT-PCR quantified gene expression of type I collagen, metalloprotease (MMP13), runt-related transcription factor-2 (RUNX2), osterix, osteocalcin, osteonectin, alkaline phosphatase, integrins and bone sialoprotein (BSP). Expression of fibroblast growth factors 1 and 2 (FGF1, FGF2), transforming growth factor-β3 (TGFβ3) and bone morphogenetic protein-2 (BMP2) were also evaluated to determine whether Cd-related effects were mediated by an imbalance in expression. Depending on osteoblast concentration and maturation stages, Cd inhibited or stimulated cell growth, decreased type I collagen, increased MMP13, FGF1 and BMP2 gene expression and stimulated the mineralization process only in continuously exposed cultures. These results suggest that in vivo, acute or chronic exposure to sub-toxic Cd concentrations may affect bone formation differently and support the hypothesis that Cd-induced bone disorders may involve downstream changes in growth factor expression. The results are of interest in forensic and occupational medicine in establishing preventive measures to reduce professional exposure risks.Cadmium (Cd), a heavy metal which is mainly used in industry, affects human health through occupational and environmental exposure. Major sources of human intoxication are mining, metallurgy industry and manufacture of nickel–Cadmium batteries, pigments and plastic stabilizers. Acute intoxication damages the testes, liver and lungs ( Bone extracellular matrix (ECM), a major factor in bone strength, acts as the mineralization scaffold by producing active signalling and specific protein expression ( In order to determine the specific action of Cd on bone metabolism, the present study investigated its effects on cell proliferation and specific gene expression of several markers that are crucially implicated in human osteoblast differentiation. As markers of bone cell differentiation alkaline phosphatase (ALP), type I collagen, osterix, BMP2, BSP, osteocalcin, osteonectin, metalloprotease (MMP13) and integrins were studied by RT-PCR; Von Kossa was used to measure the mineralization process. We hypothesized that, depending on exposure times and the cell maturation stage, even sub-toxic Cd concentrations affect the bone-related gene expression program. We evaluated FGF1 and FGF2, TGFβ Human osteoblasts from the knees were obtained by a 51-year-old male, a 55-year-old female and a 65-year-old female. (PromoCell, Heidelberg, Germany). Patients signed an informed consent form, as stated on the Certificate of Analysis which was supplied by the PromoCell Company. The Certificate also described the cell phenotype as being osteocalcin positive in immunofluorescence and alkaline phosphatase positive in immunochemical staining. Osteoblasts were expanded in D-MEM (Invitrogen, Paisley, UK) containing 10% fetal calf serum (FCS, Invitrogen, Paisley, UK), antimycotic and antibiotics (Invitrogen, Paisley, UK) on sterile polystyrene flasks obtained from Barloworld Scientific Italia S.R.L (Milano, Italy). Cultures were maintained in a 5% CO Preliminary studies determined the effects of Cd on cell counts. Osteoblast growth was estimated by counting cells adhering to wells after 24, 48, 72 and 96 Cytotoxicity was assessed by a modified by Human osteoblasts were cultured for 22 The effects of Cd on gene expression were determined at 0.1 and 1 Real-time PCR was carried out in an Mx3000P cycler (Stratagene, Amsterdam, Netherlands) using FAM for detection and ROX as reference dye. One-step PCR was performed in 25 Culture mineralization was measured by the Von Kossa stain. In brief, human osteoblasts were cultured for 22 Results reported in figures are the mean To investigate the effects of different Cd concentrations on cell morphology and viability, we observed control and treated osteoblasts under a phase contrast microscope. After culture for 24, 48, 72 and 96 On day 12, control osteoblasts showed a sub-confluent sheet of cells with prevalently spindle shape morphology ( Control cells increased progressively in number after 24, 48, 72 and 96 On day 12 of sub-confluent cultures, the addition of 0.1 To evaluate toxicity of different Cd concentrations on osteoblasts, SDH activity was determined by the colorimetric MTT method. No significant toxicity was observed in 12 Subsequent gene expression experiments were accordingly conducted using sub-toxic Cd concentrations at or below 1  To analyze gene expression of several ECM components and growth factors that are closely involved in bone metabolism, total RNA samples were obtained from unstimulated and Cd-stimulated osteoblasts according to experimental protocols A, B and C. Genes were analyzed by real-time PCR. After exposure to 0.1 and 1 Cd (1 RUNX2 expression was lower in osteoblasts that were treated with Cd according to protocols A and B than in controls. The effect was dose-dependent, but was not significantly modified when 0.1 Osterix gene expression was markedly down-regulated by 0.1 BSP gene expression was significantly decreased by 1 Messenger RNA for osteonectin was down-regulated by 0.1 Osteocalcin level was significantly increased in 0.1 FGF1 and FGF2 were discordantly modulated in the different experimental protocols ( FGF2 gene expression was unaffected by 0.1 TGFβ BMP2 gene expression was significantly down-regulated by 0.1 and 1  In order to assess whether moderate or chronic Cd exposure affects calcified matrix deposition, the Von Kossa assay was performed in untreated and treated 22 Compared with controls, 0.1 and 1 The mechanisms underlying Cd-induced bone lesions after acute or chronic occupational or environmental exposure are still unknown. For this reason, it is of interest to examine and compare the effects of sub-toxic Cd doses on key markers of the osteoblast phenotype in relation to different maturational stages. The results suggest that Cd alters osteoblast behaviour and affects expression of biochemical markers of bone turnover in relation to the osteoblast proliferation/maturation sequence. To simulate an acute occupational exposure during the early and late stages of maturation we added Cd in the last 3 days to 12 day sub-confluent and 22 Proliferation studies demonstrated that Cd had an inhibitory effect on cell number when added to a low density cellular sheet, while 0.1 Cd also induced different changes in cell phenotype that were evaluated in terms of ECM production according to concentration, maturation and mineralization stages and exposure times. At the highest dose, Cd strongly reduced gene expression of all the biochemical bone markers we tested, except for integrin β1 which was unaffected. Cd perturbed collagen deposition at both doses, reducing type I collagen gene expression in 12- and 22-day osteoblasts. As collagens function as the structural template for mineral deposition, changes in collagen production are reported to lead to differences in mineral deposition on the osteoid matrix ( MMP13 expression was increased by 0.1 A direct relation has been hypothesized between osteocalcin, a very specific marker of mature osteoblasts which is up-regulated only at the post-proliferative osteoblast stage ( After Cd treatment drops in cellular and extracellular ALP activity might be related to ALP greater utilization due to greater mineral deposition. An increase in ALP activity generally indicates the stage of progression into the differentiated osteoblastic age while the subsequent decrease correlates with advanced matrix mineralization ( Our results also show Cd had a different effect on BSP, a late marker of osteoblast differentiation which is expressed earlier than osteocalcin ( Since TGFβ and FGF affect the multi-step progress of osteoblast differentiation and mineralization it seems intriguing to correlate these different Cd effects to imbalances in their production. The highest dose of Cd decreased FGF1, FGF2, BMP2 and TGFβ In conclusion when present results are extrapolated to the clinical setting they suggest low, moderate or chronic Cd occupational and/or environmental exposures induces bone damage The present results do not lend themselves to any simple, univocal interpretation as, rather than being a single unique phenotype, the osteoblast phenotype encompasses biochemical plasticity ( There are no conflicts of interest regarding this work. This study was supported by grants from We thank Dr. G.A. Boyd for English revision.