The accuracy of energy dispersion X-ray fluorescence spectrometry (EDXRF) decreases via the online detection of slurry grade, which is due to the matrix difference caused by varying slurry components and processes. Among these, the most significant influence is the water content in the slurry, which reduces the X-ray fluorescence intensity of target elements that the detector receives. In this paper, a novel online detection method based on a correction model of X-ray fluorescence intensity is proposed. Using the mineral particle settling model as a foundation, the minimum slurry velocity was first derived to satisfy the condition of pulp content uniformity. Then, the impact of slurry concentration on the X-ray fluorescence intensity was analyzed. An intensity correction model was built, which accounted for the impact of water in slurry on the characteristic X-ray fluorescence intensity of the target elements. The overall methodology was thoroughly validated through several experiments, and was compared with the traditional EDXRF method. The experimental results indicated that the standard deviation of the target’s elemental slurry grade dropped by more than 60% for lead and 40% for zinc. Meanwhile, the average relative error of the slurry’s elemental grade was reduced by more than 80% for lead and 90% for zinc. The accuracy and stability of online slurry grade detection were therefore significantly improved.The knowledge of a slurry’s elemental grade (SEG) is of great importance in mineral flotation processing. The application and analysis of SEGs are essential when evaluating the industrial value of mineral deposits. Moreover, information about elemental contents is necessary for better flotation process control and a more efficient use of energy and raw materials ( Spectral analyses have been widely discussed in research of online elemental assaying of slurry flow, where the primary techniques are dual-energy gamma-ray transmission, wavelength dispersion X-ray fluorescence spectrometry (WDXRF) and energy dispersion fluorescence spectrometry (EDXRF) ( The interest of EDXRF applications for SEG detection has recently increased due to several advantages over other analytical methods, including its simplicity, it is economical, it does not require any sample preparation, simultaneous multi-elemental analyses can be performed, and it has very little radioactive pollution and a broad range of element detection. Elemental composition is calculated through a calibration model, which indicates any linear relationship that is present between the element concentration and the excited elemental X-ray fluorescence intensity. However, this technique is limited for analyses of mixtures containing water ( This work concentrated on SEG detection using EDXRF, where we corrected for water absorption to produce an accurate online elemental slurry analysis method. First, to ensure the mineral uniformity of the flowing slurry, we introduced the minimal slurry velocity through research on the mineral particle settling behavior. Then, under the condition of the limited velocity, we explicated the effect of water content on X-ray fluorescence intensity in the slurry and set up a general model to correct the elemental slurry EDXRF intensity to the equivalent dry specimen intensity. The proposed method was then compared to the traditional EDXRF method applied in SEG analyses. By taking some lead-zinc flotation slurries as examples, we verified the rationality of the correction model and the accuracy and stability of our online detection method. A large lead-zinc flotation plant concentrator in Qinghai Province of China was taken as the sample collection point. The primary mineral components in the area were mainly pyrite, marmatite and galena, while the main gangue minerals were quartz and calcite. The mineral processing flowsheet of the plant adopted the lead preferential flotation-zinc sulfide mixed floating-zinc sulphur separation process (  An East & West Analytical Instruments XD-8010 Energy Dispersive X-Ray Fluorescence Spectrometer analyzer was used to obtain the elemental EDXRF intensity data. The analyzer was equipped with an X-ray tube (molybdenum anode) operating at a maximum of 50 W, and an Si-PIN X-ray detector with a 1-mm thick beryllium window. The element concentrations were calculated via a built-in algorithm and a factory calibration (Solid Mode). The zinc quantitation depended on its K In practical flotation processing, in order to prevent pipe blockages, the flowing slurry was diluted to a relatively low, but unstable concentration. Any changes of water content in the same volume of slurry made the matrix lighter and changed the detected elemental EDXRF intensity. First, an increase in water content enhanced the absorption ability of the slurry, which affected primary X-ray fluorescence and the characteristic X-ray fluorescence of the target element, and led to a decrease in the detected elemental X-ray fluorescence intensity. Secondly, an increase of water content in the slurry increased the amount of scattering by the slurry to the primary X-ray fluorescence. On one hand, the X fluorescence intensity of the target element detected by the detector was reduced. On the other hand, the increase of the scattered primary X-ray fluorescence enhanced the background levels. Therefore, the effect of water content on the elemental slurry EDXRF detection was a superposition of the absorption and scattering of X-ray fluorescence. As such, it was necessary to correct for the water effect when obtaining real information of the elemental X-ray fluorescence intensity to ensure the accuracy of the online SEG detection method. The slurry must be in a stable state before testing so that uniformity of the samples could be guaranteed. Generally, the size of the mineral particles in a flotation slurry was very small, most of which were about 200 mesh ( According to the operational principle of EDXRF, the characteristic elemental X-ray fluorescence intensity is proportional to the elemental content in the slurry within the range of the detector window. The element concentration is constant in the uniform slurry while the EDXRF is running. However, for the slurry flowing at a low velocity, the relative motion between mineral particles and water leads to the particles above the top of the detector window settling down to the detected area, which results in an increase of elemental content during detecting. Accordingly, the detected characteristic XRF intensity of the target element is stronger than that in the uniform slurry and leads to deviations in the SEG analysis. By increasing the slurry velocity, the relative speed between mineral particles and water decreases in the detected slurry. Therefore, the increase of elemental content caused by settling slows down and the detected elemental XRF intensity gradually declines. As the slurry velocity is over terminal velocity of the particles ( It should be noticed that According to the Lambert-Beer law ( The available intensity of the single-scattered X-rays from the sample to the detector can be calculated as ( When analyzing the effect of water content on the X-rays scattered by the slurry samples, it was assumed that a slurry particle was a solid sphere covered by a layer of water (as shown in It was assumed that ε and Translating the volume of water into the mass fraction of water, the intensity of the single-scattered X-rays from the slurry could be calculated as: From Eq. It has been found that there is a close relationship between the intensity of primary X-rays scattered by a sample and the amount of water in the sample. As the water content in flowing slurries is hard to be detected rapidly in practice, based on this relationship, the water content in flowing slurries used in Eq. Integrating Eq. In order to verify and analyze the proposed models, a series of tests on lead-zinc flotation slurries were conducted. At the sampling plant, for efficient flotation, the densities of the feed ore slurry, lead concentrate slurry, and zinc concentrate slurry were about 40%, 25%, and 25%, respectively. Moreover, to avoid any sedimentary minerals blocking the transportation pipelines, the slurry was diluted in transport. For the SEG detection, 10 experimental slurries with gradient distribution densities of each of the three flotation slurries were prepared, where the slurry densities ranged from 8% to 35%. The slurry elemental X-ray fluorescence data were obtained using the laboratory setup shown in  The influence of water content on the EDXRF intensities is presented in  Test slurry samples with different (unknown) water content were prepared for all three sampled floatation slurries. The equivalent solid, dry elemental EDXRF intensity (   Compared with the elemental concentration in the solid, dry samples ( Conclusions from this work are summarized below: The effects of water content on the online SEG detection with EDXRF were analyzed first. Based on an analysis of the settling motion of the mineral particle in a slurry, a slurry velocity limitation model was built in terms of maintaining uniformity in the mineral distribution in the detected flowing slurry. Then, a unified correction model was set up that considered the influence of water on the characteristic elemental X-ray intensity and the single-scattered X-ray intensity on SEG detection with EDXRF. A prediction model of water content in slurry was built, which considered the linear relationship between the intensity of Compton-scattered X-rays from the X-ray anode tube and the liquid-said ratio of the slurry. By integrating the studied model, an improved EDXRF method that included water correction was proposed for online elemental slurry detection. Via comparison with the traditional EDXRF detection, the proposed, online EDXRF analyses for three kinds of slurries from a lead-zinc flotation plant showed that the new SEG detecting method had smaller standard deviations and relative errors, and it could be feasibly applied for industrial monitoring for better performance in stability and accuracy. There are no conflicts of interest. This work was supported by the Yue Qi Distinguished Scholar Project for