Al–7Si–3Cu–Fe, Al–7Si–3Cu–Fe–0.5Mn, Al–12Si–Mg–Ni–Cu, A319 and A380 alloys containing 0.0020, 0.0040, 0.0080, 0.1 and 0.2 wt.% Ca were used in this research to study the effects of Ca additions on their microstructures and hardness. Samples from the molten alloys were taken and characterized by SEM, EDS and EBSD analysis. Electron backscatter diffraction patterns (EBSDPs) were used to assess the crystallographic characteristics of calcium compounds, thus identifying their stoichiometry. On the other hand, microstructural formation was predicted using an adapted version of Thermo-Calc™ software. Compounds which contain calcium-rich particles with “needle-like” or “plate-like” morphologies were consistent with that of the hexagonal CaAl2Si2 intermetallic phase in all of the alloys used. Moreover, it was found that Ca additions of 40 ppm and higher, refined the eutectic Si particles and coarsened the iron-rich intermetallics as well. Brinell hardness was evaluated to determine the effect of calcium concentration on the hardness of the Al–Si alloys used in this study.Al–Si casting alloys are widely used in the automotive industry mainly due to the high strength, lightweight, good corrosion resistance and castability they possess Because of the disagreement about the performance of calcium in aluminum alloys, it is interesting to perform both thermodynamic calculations and experiments, in order to evaluate the solidification and precipitation sequence of calcium-rich phases. In the present paper, we report the simulated phase diagram, morphology surface characteristics and Brinell hardness of calcium-rich phases in Al–Si alloys with high contents of copper, iron and manganese. The base alloys used in the experiments were two “pure” alloys in the form of Al–7Si–3Cu–Fe, Al–7Si–3Cu–Fe–0.5Mn, and three commercial alloys of the A319, A380 and Al–12Si–Mg–Ni–Cu type. The compositions of these alloys are given in The base alloys were remelted in a medium frequency induction furnace, maintaining the temperature of the melt in the range from 650 to 670 °C. Calcium was added in the form of a 75Ca–25Al master alloy. The nominal addition levels were 20 ppm, 40 ppm, 80 ppm, 1000 and 2000 ppm. The surface of the melt was skimmed periodically with an iron ladle covered with a refractory layer to avoid entrapment of inclusions. Prior to pouring, the melt was degassed with high purity argon for 15 min through a graphite rod immersed into the melt, to ensure a low hydrogen content. Molds were preheated before pouring to minimize micro-shrinkage porosity. The pouring temperature was kept close to 700 °C. Sample preparation is the key factor for obtaining good quality EBSD patterns, since the backscattered electrons are very sensitive to surface condition The samples were analyzed using a Philips XL 30 Scanning Electron Microscope (SEM), with an Energy Dispersive X-ray Spectroscopy (EDS) device coupled to a TSL Delphi EDS patterns of calcium particles revealed strong Al, Si, and Ca reflections. All calcium compounds listed in the ICDD™ and TSL Delphi Theoretical simulations of the solidification path of calcium-rich phases were performed by means of the Thermo-Calc™ Software for comparison to the results of the EBSD/SEM analysis. The Thermo-Calc™ database system consisted of a thermodynamic software which can be used together with several modules. Poly_3 module and CAL “database of calcium compounds” were used for the thermodynamic calculation and prediction of the precipitation sequences of calcium- and iron-rich phases. The calculation software can handle single equilibrium, property diagrams or phase diagrams with up to twenty elements or 200 species. Thermo-Calc™ software is used to simulate transformations where just local equilibrium has to be considered. One example of this is the solidification path according to the Scheil–Gulliver model. In this case, one assumes that the molten phase is always homogeneous, whereas the solid phase will retain the composition it had when it is formed. This is equivalent to having diffusion coefficients equal to infinity in the liquid and equal to zero in the solid phases. At the phase interface between the molten and the solid phases, conditions can be described by equilibrium thermodynamics A study of Brinell hardness was carried out to evaluate the effect of calcium on Al–Si alloys. Steel balls 10 mm in diameter and a load of 1500 kg were used in the hardness determinations. Average values of five indentations were taken by avoiding maximum and minimum values. Morphology and atomic number contrast in the SEM initially allowed the locations of calcium intermetallics within the samples to be analyzed. For identification of the calcium-rich phases precipitated from all the Al–Si–Ca alloys used in this work, a preliminary study was carried out based on thermodynamic calculations. As stated above, the Thermo-Calc™ software was used. Input data in the Poly_3 module system and CAL databases were based on the initial compositions and temperature limits of the Ca-containing Al–Si alloys. Input data were entered to generate a theoretical approximation of the solidification and precipitation path of the main calcium and iron-rich phases. EBSD/EDS/SEM analysis was used to identify calcium-rich phases in all the Al–Si–Ca alloys. Calcium intermetallic particles in all the alloys produced had needle- and plate-like morphologies, exhibiting EBSDPs consistent with hexagonal CaAl It was found that not all Kikuchi lines of the EBSD pattern could be indexed by TSL Delphi    A simulation by Thermo-Calc™ software predicted the precipitation of the calcium-rich phase CaAl EBSD, EDS and SEM analysis were used to identify calcium-rich phases in all the as-prepared alloys in this study. Calcium intermetallic particles in all the as-prepared alloys had needle-like and plate-like morphologies, exhibiting EBSDPs consistent with that of hexagonal CaAl It was found that Ca additions of 40 ppm and higher, refined the eutectic Si particles, and coarsened the iron-rich intermetallics as well. Brinell hardness was not significantly affected by the addition of calcium in the five alloys used in this study. The authors acknowledge financial support of CONACYT-Mexico, Project 38466U, to JV Foundry from Ramos Arizpe, Coahuila, Mexico for providing the aluminum alloys. Thanks are also due to the technical support staff from CINVESTAV-IPN Unidad Saltillo, especially to Eruviel Cordova of the Foundry Pilot Plant for his recommendations in the smelting of the alloys, Miguel Aguilar of the Microanalysis Laboratory for his technical support in EBSD/EDS/SEM analysis and Sergio Belmares in the thermodynamic calculations by the Thermo-Calc™ software.