Calcium sulphate solubilities in simulated nickel sulphate–chloride processing solutions, as well as the densities of the corresponding saturated solutions, were determined on heating and cooling in a series of experiments carried out from 20 to 95°C. The solubility of calcium sulphate decreases progressively with increasing NiSO4 concentrations up to 1.4 M NiSO4, in a base solution containing 0.15 M H2SO4, 0.2 M Fe(SO4)1.5 and 0.3 M LiCl, but the decrease is most pronounced for concentrations in the range from 0.0 to 0.3 M NiSO4. In the base solution containing 1.3 M NiSO4, increasing acid concentrations in the range from 0.0 to 0.7 M H2SO4 and increasing ferric sulphate concentrations to 1.0 M Fe(SO4)1.5 slightly depress the solubility of calcium sulphate at temperatures below ∼60°C, but have the reverse effect at higher temperatures. Increasing chloride concentrations systematically depress the solubility of calcium sulphate in 1.3 M NiSO4–0.20 M Fe(SO4)1.5–0.15 M H2SO4 solutions, and the effect is nearly independent of the temperature. The presence of up to 0.5 M Na2SO4 in the base solution slightly depresses the solubility of calcium sulphate at all temperatures; however, the presence of both Na2SO4 and Fe(SO4)1.5 results in the precipitation of sodium jarosite at temperatures >80°C. Supporting X-ray diffraction analyses showed that the solubility depends strongly on whether the saturating solid phase is gypsum (CaSO4·2H2O) or anhydrite (CaSO4). The transition from gypsum to anhydrite is promoted by elevated temperatures, by high acid and salt concentrations, and by the presence of anhydrite seed. Unlike the solubilities, which often varied in a complex manner, the densities of the calcium sulphate-saturated solutions increased systematically with increasing concentrations of any of the solution species and decreased slightly, in a nearly linear manner, with increasing temperature.Inco Limited is developing a hydrometallurgical process to treat the nickel sulphide concentrates produced from the Voisey's Bay Ni–Cu–Co deposit ( Because lime is employed in the neutralization circuit, calcium sulphate is generated. In general, calcium sulphate has a limited solubility in aqueous media, and the limited solubility is beneficial in that it restricts the accumulation of calcium and sulphate in the processing circuit. However, the limited solubility also means that calcium sulphate can precipitate throughout the circuit, as the temperature and solution composition change. Furthermore, calcium sulphate occurs in three polymorphic forms; namely, gypsum (CaSO The solubility of calcium sulphate in water has been extensively studied ( The above discussion indicates that the solubility of calcium sulphate in nickel processing solutions is an important parameter, which has not been extensively investigated. To address this need, a systematic study of the solubility of calcium sulphate in simulated nickel sulphate–chloride processing solutions was carried out over the temperature range from 20 to 95 All solutions used in the study were prepared from reagent grade chemicals. Calcium sulphate dihydrate reagent from J.T. Baker was employed as the saturating solid phase. The reagent contained 0.09% Mg, 0.002% Cl and < The experiments were done using a 2-L reaction vessel which was heated to various temperatures (± A solution of known composition was placed in the 2-L reaction vessel together with an excess of calcium sulphate dihydrate. In this regard, the base solution contained 1.2 M NiSO After the solution samples were taken, the reactor temperature was increased in 10 The densities of the saturated solutions were calculated as a function of temperature from the measured weight of the sample and the volume at temperature as determined from the calibrated pipette. The solubility of calcium sulphate (reported as grams CaSO A preliminary series of experiments was carried out using pure water as the solvent to assess the accuracy of the experimental procedures. The solubilities, determined in four independent experiments, had a standard deviation of ±  However, the presence of even 0.3 M H  Although the calcium sulphate solubility decreases with increasing NiSO Both the solubility versus temperature and density versus temperature curves, for the entire range of NiSO  Although the acid concentration has a complex effect on the solubility of calcium sulphate in NiSO The solubility versus temperature and density versus temperature data sets obtained in the various 1.3 M NiSO In the proposed hydrometallurgical process for nickel sulphide concentrates, the associated iron is dissolved in the autoclave. Although most of the dissolved iron reprecipitates as hematite or goethite in the autoclave during leaching, some remains in the discharged solution. This iron is subsequently oxidized and precipitated with lime. Thus, various iron concentrations will be encountered in different parts of the process, and for this reason, the effect of the concentration of ferric sulphate on the solubility of calcium sulphate is of special importance. The corresponding density versus temperature curves for the calcium sulphate-saturated solutions containing various concentrations of ferric sulphate are smooth and decrease systematically with increasing temperature. This indicates that the modest variations in the amount of calcium sulphate dissolved on heating have little effect on the solution density, which is dominated by the significantly higher concentrations of NiSO The individual solubility versus temperature and density versus temperature data sets were fitted to second order polynomial equations (Eq. The presence of a modest chloride concentration in the NiSO Given the importance of the chloride concentration in the hydrometallurgical process for Voisey's Bay nickel sulphide concentrates and the unpredictable effect of the chloride concentration on the solubility of calcium sulphate, a systematic series of experiments was carried out to ascertain the influence of the chloride concentration on the solubility of calcium sulphate. In this regard, The densities of the calcium sulphate-saturated solutions also vary systematically as the LiCl concentration of the 1.3 M NiSO The solubility versus temperature and density versus temperature data obtained for the various LiCl concentrations were fitted to second degree polynomial equations (Eq. Sodium carbonate will be used for pH control in parts of the proposed hydrometallurgical process for Voisey's Bay nickel sulphide concentrates. This practice will result in the presence of sodium ions in the circulating sulphate–chloride processing solutions, and sodium concentrations as high as 20  The densities of the calcium sulphate-saturated 1.3 M NiSO The various solubility versus temperature and density versus temperature data sets were fitted to second order polynomial equations (Eq. Although the presence of Na  The effect of the presence of Na As shown in    Calcium sulphate solubilities in simulated nickel sulphate–chloride processing solutions, as well as the densities of the calcium sulphate-saturated solutions, were determined using gypsum (CaSO Unlike the solubilities of calcium sulphate, which are a complex function of temperature and solution composition, the densities of the corresponding calcium sulphate-saturated solutions behave in a consistent and predictable manner. The densities of the calcium sulphate-saturated solutions increase with increasing solution concentration and decrease monotonically with increasing temperature. The magnitude of the concentration dependence, however, depends very much on the molecular weight of the solute species and their concentration. Thus, species such as LiCl and Na The authors wish to recognize the support of Inco Technical Services Limited for part of the experimental program and for encouraging the publication of the study. The assistance of CANMET staff members J. Wilson with the X-ray diffraction analyses and I. Lafferty with the preparation of this report is gratefully appreciated.