The growth characteristics of several strains of Acidithiobacillus thiooxidans and Acidithiobacillus ferrooxidans were studied in the presence of soluble inorganic arsenic(III) and (V) with regard to media pH changes, total bacterial populations and sulfur oxidation rates. Most of these bacteria could reach large populations and have strong sulfur oxidation activity in the absence of arsenic. However, in the presence of up to 120 mM arsenite or arsenate, different strains showed different inorganic arsenic resistance. A. thiooxidans LYS and A. ferrooxidans BY-3 were two of the best performers which showed high arsenite resistance: up to 80 mM and 60 mM, respectively. On the other hand, A. thiooxidans JY and A. ferrooxidans TKY-2 could adapt up to 120 mM and 100 mM arsenate, respectively. These bacteria strains may play key roles in the bioleaching of arsenopyrite or in the bio-oxidation pretreatment of arsenic-bearing refractory gold sulfide ores and concentrates. Arsenic is a toxic metalloid carcinogen that is distributed widely in surface and ground water from natural and anthropogenic sources ( The high toxicity of dissolved arsenic in the system can seriously inhibit the activity of micro-organisms and even completely stop the bio-oxidation process. It has been reported that the growth of both So far as we know, many prokaryocytes and eukaryotes can tolerate arsenic of different concentrations via different arsenic-resistant mechanisms. For instance, a relatively large number of micro-organisms are capable of growing in the presence of potentially toxic arsenic ( The purpose of this investigation was to determine and compare inorganic arsenic resistance of several Five strains of  All chemicals were of analytical grade and de-ionised water was used for all analysis. Experiments were carried out in 250-mL Erlenmeyer flasks agitated on a rotary shaker at 150 rpm and 30 °C. The bioleaching bacteria with an inoculum concentration of 10% (v/v) were transferred into the fresh Waksman media when they were grown to the exponential phase. The changes of media pH were measured every day and the determination assays were carried out for a period of 10 days. One group of flasks had 20, 40, 60, 80 and 100 mM additional sodium arsenite [As(III)] in the media, and another group had 40, 60, 80, 100 and 120 mM supplementary sodium arsenate [As(V)]. To test arsenic resistances of these micro-organisms, firstly, every experimental bacteria wild strain was inoculated into fresh medium containing a low concentration (e.g. 20 mM) of either arsenite or arsenate. When the adapted strains reached the exponential phase, they were transferred into media containing higher concentrations of arsenite or arsenate than before. The adaptation was put into practice for about 2 months until they did not survive in the higher concentrations of arsenic. Among these experimental acidophiles, adapted strains and unadapted strains were all involved in the comparison, in accordance with uninoculated sterilized media containing arsenic as negative controls. All the experiments were carried out in triplicates. The data were analyzed with the statistics software SPSS (Statistical Product and Service Solutions) 13.0. Direct microscopic count method was introduced to determine total bacterial population by using a Petroff–Hausser counting chamber mounted on a phase-contrast microscope (Olympus BH-2, Japan) at bacterial exponential phase. The sulfur oxidation rate (SOR) was deemed a necessary and key index to determine the growth activities of these bioleaching micro-organisms, for elemental sulfur was selected as the only energy source for these cultures in Waksman media. Sulfur oxidation and soluble oxygen were monitored in an Oxygraph (Gilson 2K, France) with a Clark oxygen electrode at 25 °C, and the initial linear rate of O In this investigation, it was noticed that different wild bioleaching strains showed different tolerance to soluble inorganic arsenic, according to their respective sources and habitats. However, their arsenic resistance was much enhanced after a period of adaptation for nearly 2 months ( Even though elemental sulfur could not dissolve in the aqueous solutions by itself, The growth traits and resulting pH trends of the bacterial strains in the presence of arsenic are shown in On the contrary, in the presence of arsenite, Silver and others concluded that As(III) was more mobile and easier to adhere to bacterial cells and thus was usually more harmful to the micro-organisms than As(V) ( During the determination, the total bacterial populations of all the In summary, the comparison of biomass of When the growth and energy utilization of these experimental strains were evaluated, the measured SORs of The maximum SOR values of the unadapted and arsenic-adapted strains in the presence of 50 mM arsenite and 70 mM arsenate are presented in However, after adaptation for nearly 2 months, the SORs of most of the cultures were significantly enhanced under the same conditions, compared with those of unadapted cultures. In 50 mM arsenite culture, The SORs of the sterilized controls in the two comparative experiments groups were found to be negligible (0.10 mg mL Most of the adapted  This work was supported by the Key Program of Ministry of Education, China (Grant No. 107108), Scientific and Technological Project of Gansu Province, China (Grant No. 2GS064-A43-019-02, Grant No. 2GS035-A52-008-01), Scientific and Technological Project of Lanzhou City, Gansu Province, China (Grant No. 03-02-24) and International Cooperation Projects of Gansu Province, China (Grant No. 0708WCGA150). We also gratefully acknowledge Dr. Barrie Johnson, University of Wales, UK, for kindly providing