Generally, wet ponds are constructed only to reduce the hydraulic load of downstream receiving water bodies. Often most particulate matter will be retained, whereas dissolved nutrients mostly will be unaffected by the pond due to short retention times. A suite of lab-experiments have demonstrated that crushed concrete has high affinity for dissolved phosphorus (TDP), and potentially could be an effective new measure to reduce discharge of phosphorus (P) to downstream located P-limited lakes and estuaries. To verify this potential we have developed a dynamic model for a combined sedimentation and infiltration pond in Denmark, using the software PowerSim. The model simulates retention of P and suspended particulate matter (SPM). It is possible to change the description of filter material in the model to either a traditional sand filter or a filter of crushed concrete, and thereby demonstrate the P-retention efficiency of the different materials. Two scenarios with changing wet volume and storage volume of the pond indicated that 400 and 50m3
                     pr. reduced hectare (red. ha), respectively, would be optimal for retention of particles. In combination with this result, the model showed a significant increase in TDP retention with a concrete filter (≈60%) compared to a traditional sand filter (≈10%). This only applies for water actually percolating through the filters and not for the overflow. Because concrete is an alkaline material, pH in the discharge to the receiving water body will be high (>9.5) for approximately 100 days and then decrease to neutral. If adequate precautions against high pH in the discharge are put in place, crushed concrete can reduce the discharge of TDP to sensitive receiving water bodies.Runoff from urban catchments makes up a significant amount of the total runoff diverted into sewers or surface waters ( Detention ponds have been used to prevent overflows from sewers and thereby reduce discharge to receiving water bodies after heavy rain events ( To achieve a better retention of both particulate and dissolved nutrients, a combined sedimentation and infiltration pond are recommended ( A new alternative to the traditional sand filters are filters of crushed concrete ( By using crushed concrete as filter material, the removal capacity for P is increased ( To compare different filter materials, we have developed a dynamic model for a specific pond to handle a mixture of water from a separate sewer system and agricultural runoff with outlet to Lake Nordborg (Denmark) ( The study was carried out in a pond situated in the town Nordborg in the southern part of Denmark. It is a combined sedimentation and infiltration pond with a catchment area of 375 The filter clogged shortly after construction. Runoff caused erosion of clay from the pond banks that subsequently was washed into the pond and loaded the filter. In September 2007 the filter was renewed, but the level between filter surface and elevation of overflow was reduced to only 5 During the first year after construction the system were sampled once a month ( Data series for local daily precipitation and evaporation has been obtained from the Meteorological Institute of Denmark, covering the period from construction in 2006 to the end of 2011. The precipitation and evaporation were measured at a standardized weather station positioned approximately 20 The model consists of 4 sub-models (water, TDP, PP and SPM) all affecting each other dynamically ( Sub-model 1 simulates the water flow and predicts the actual water volumes in each state variable. This sub-model links all the sub-models together to an integrated model, either by processes (arrows) or state variables (boxes). All processes, except evaporation and percolation through the filter, depend on the inlet and the overflow level, defining the capacity in each state variable. Evaporation is controlled by data series for local evaporation related to the current water surface of the pond. Darcy's Law determines the percolation from the hydraulic conductivity and the hydraulic pressure of the filter. Sub-model 2 and 3 handles P and SPM dynamics, respectively, focusing on the retention. Part of the particulate fractions (PP and SPM) settles in the sedimentation pond and part of it is retained in the filter material. The dissolved fraction (TDP) is retained in the system by phytoplankton P-uptake for growth purposes and P-binding to the filter material. Besides sub-model 2 includes a description of PP-mineralization of settled PP leading to fluxes to the water column. Daily values of temperature in the water column create sufficient dynamics for the simulation of algae growth and mineralization of organic matter. The retention of TDP, PP and SPM is affected by overflow, caused primarily by a partly clogged filter. Sub-model 4 is devoted to a pH description, but it only becomes important when crushed concrete is used as filter material. Since concrete is an alkaline material, the water percolating through the filter will also become alkaline. pH will gradually decline, though, as the total amount of water percolating through the filter increases. The integrated model is developed as differential equations using the dynamic modeling software PowerSim, which is applicable for biological and ecological processes (e.g. The model was verified with respect to mathematical expressions and consistency of units. Besides, mass conservation was ensured, so that the inflow of water, P and SPM could be retrieved in the different state variables. We have emphasized the verification to make up for the reduced data foundation for calibration and validation. Most parameters, forcing functions and initial values were either from dedicated field measurements and lab experiments or found in literature. All variables were truly dynamic. The biological processes were varying in time dependent on temperature, P concentration and light availability, whereas the non-biological related variables included less dynamic dependencies. See There are different methods to determine runoff from the catchment. One is to calculate the reduced area, consisting of the paved and unpaved area contributing to runoff from the total catchment ( A sensitivity analysis was made before the rest of the parameters, forcing functions, initials values and sub-models were calibrated. It was carried out by changing one parameter at a time by ±50% and observing the response on the most important state variables according to the procedure described by The model was developed to simulate P and SPM removal in a specific combined sedimentation and infiltration pond. By changing the parameters related to size and filter material, it was possible to improve the removal efficiency that mainly is affected by size and hydraulic conductivity. We made 2 relevant scenarios as described below. For both scenarios we compared sand to crushed concrete with respect to P removal. The difference is that sand mainly removes PP, whereas crushed concrete removes both PP and TDP. The two filters had the same size (820  During this scenario the overflow level was kept constant at 5  The model showed mass conservation and was very stable with respect to changes in parameters. The sensitivity analysis showed that only input data (precipitation, TDP, PP and SPM) was very important for sub-model 1–3. It was quite different for sub-model 4, as all parameters related to the concrete filter were very important (porosity, hydraulic conductivity, volume and depth). These parameters influenced the outlet pH, which was very sensitive due to the logarithmic scale of pH. As expected, input data was important for the model, since they define the amount of water, P and SPM in the pond and filter. The in-pond parameters controlling sedimentation, algae growth and mineralization processes were very unaffected by the inflow, which indicates a robust system. Set-up of the model and the following verification has been very thorough, so that the limited data foundation would not conflict with the calibration and validation. During the verification most of the parameters have been determined based on field and lab experiments or literature search. The sensitivity analysis has justified this procedure as it showed that the parameters were only of minor importance. The only parameters changed in the calibration process were the hydraulic conductivity, retention efficiency of PP and PM in the filter and the sedimentation rate of PP and SPM. These parameters affected the retention in the pond and filter and were therefore carefully determined. Overall, the model corresponded well with the measured data. When using the model we got a very precise estimate of the total discharge of the year of both water, P and SPM. But when looking at a single day or rain event the model was less precise ( Simulation of the most important processes ( Though the filter material was renewed in autumn 2007, observations at the pond in 2009 revealed that the filter was partly clogged. Observations were supported by the calibrated model setup with a hydraulic conductivity of 8.1 According to the Danish National Organization of water treatment Based on the correspondence between measured and modeled data, the model has proved its ability to simulate the dynamics of P and SPM in the presented pond. The next step was therefore to set up scenarios where model simulations assist evaluation of the needed wet volume and storage volume to improve both the P and SPM retention. The scenarios do also include simulations of different kinds of filter material – sand and crushed concrete. An increase of the wet volume (scenario 1) resulted in increased retention of all parameters, indicating an increase in sedimentation of PP and SPM, and in phytoplankton growth (TDP retention) ( In the model the filter was set up to retain 65 and 70% PP and SPM, respectively, regardless of the filter material. But when considering TDP retention, the concrete filter was much better (60%) than the traditional sand filter (10%), probably due to adsorption ( Compared to the first scenario, the storage volume needed for a satisfactory retention is smaller ( Well-designed ponds can ensure a satisfactory retention of TP and SPM of >40 and >70%, respectively ( Comparison of the optimal wet volume and storage volume for a traditionally sand filter ( Crushed concrete is an alkaline material, increasing pH in the treated water, but pH decreased slowly to neutral (<8.5) within 166 days. By making proper precautions against pH in the discharge e.g. neutralization with concentrated acid, crushed concrete makes up a good alternative to sand filters, by retaining considerable amounts of TDP. There is a high content of calcium in concrete, and some of this will gradually washout to the receiving water body where it induces a higher alkalinity. Thus, using crushed concrete as a measure of reducing the discharge of TDP is not recommendable in low alkaline systems.  It is possible to set up a simple dynamic model of an existing pond, using point measurements for calibration and validation. More measurements would improve the articulation of the model. When making a dynamic model it only becomes as good as the data entered. Therefore, one has to be very careful about the model set-up and the following calibration. On the other hand, PowerSim is a very flexible program allowing for the user to enter all the processes desired. Modeling of a detention pond is quite similar to that of a lake, but due to the shorter and more varying retention times in ponds, input data have to be measured with higher resolution. The model will then give information like retention times, nutrient cycles and seasonal retention/release. This kind of information could be very valuable when reduction of nutrients to a downstream water body is necessary, e.g. during the process of fulfilling the requirements in the European Water Frame Directive. By changing volume related parameters in the model, it is possible to simulate the improved removal efficiency of especially PP and SPM. This can become a very useful tool when renovating existing ponds with respect to improved removal efficiency, since it is possible to change size and filter material in an optimizing process. The traditional sand filter has a poor removal capacity of TDP, whereas crushed concrete is very efficient. The model can simulate TDP removal in these 2 filter materials, including pH in the outlet from the concrete filter. During the calibration process of this pond it became obvious that the hydraulic conductivity of the sand filter was similar to silt, due to clogging in the top cm with small particles. When designing a new pond similar to the one just described (combined sedimentation and infiltration pond), the model indicates an optimal wet volume and storage volume of 400 and 50 The study was supported by Centre for Lake Restoration (CLEAR, Denmark) – a Villum Kann Rasmussen Center of Excellence project. Carl Chr. Hoffmann was supported through a grant from Detailed description of the sub-model equations This is the most important sub-model for the entire model, since it connects all the sub-models either by flow, depth or volume. The volume of the pond depends on inflow ( An equation for runoff from this specific catchment defines the inflow during summer (May to October) and winter (November to April) ( We assume that the water flow into and out of the filter is the same, and since the percolation ensures that the filter cannot be overloaded, the outflow ( This sub-model consists of five state variables (phytoplankton-P, TDP The change in phytoplankton concentration is controlled by the amount of phytoplankton-P entering and leaving the sedimentation pond by growth and sedimentation according to: Growth of phytoplankton (PhytoGr) is inhibited by the Michaelis–Menten kinetics for TDP concentration and light, and is further inhibited by the exponential Arrhenius equation for temperature (Tdep.). Lambert Beer (LB) controls the light inhibition with Phosphorous dynamics in the pond are modeled for TDP and PP. Processes involved are phytoplankton growth, mineralization of settled PP incl. algae (PP Phosphorous removal in the filter is controlled by two processes; adsorption of TDP (TDP In this sub-model focus is on retention of SPM in the pond and filter. Since SPM is the reason for gradually clogging of the filter and thereby the reduced efficiency of P removal, most SPM should be removed in the sedimentation pond. The processes controlling the retention are similar to the processes of PP, and should therefore not be repeated: This sub-model only becomes important when crushed concrete is used as filter material. Since concrete is an alkaline material, the water percolating through the filter will also become alkaline, though pH will gradually decline as the total amount of percolating water increases. Though the previous three sub-models have focused on processes in the pond and filter, sub-model four will focus on the filter and outlet from the pond, since pH changes in the pond are insignificant compared to that of the filter and outlet. There is a linear relation between pH in the filter and the total amount of water percolating through the filter ( Whenever overflows occur, the alkaline water from the filter is diluted with the overflow before entering the recipient. The dilution is assumed to be the same as for a weak alkaline i.e. 10 times dilution for a pH drop of 1: Parameters of the model.