Metallurgical processes for scandium recovery from various resources are reviewed. Scandium is mainly recovered as by-product from residues, tailings and waste liquors in the production of other metals such as rare earths, uranium, titanium, tungsten, aluminium, nickel, tantalum and niobium. Bauxite and nickel laterite ores are proposed as the most promising scandium resources for its production. Currently, the methods combined with hydro- and pyro-metallurgical processes, including ore pre-treatment, leaching, solvent extraction, precipitation and calcination, are commonly used for scandium recovery. New technologies for scandium recovery such as selective leaching and solvent extraction are possible development direction in the future.Scandium is the 31st abundant element in the Earth's crust, with an average crustal abundance of 22 The absence of reliable and long term production coupled with the high price of scandium has limited the commercial applications of scandium. Scandium is a rare and expensive metal because of its scarce distribution and difficulties associated with its extraction. In 2009, the prices of scandium oxide (Sc Scandium and its compounds have been found wider applications such as in optical, electronic, aeronautical, automotive and transportation industries ( Pyrometallurgical processes are suitable for recovery of scandium from its ores with high contents of scandium. However, the energy consumption is intensive. Scandium is often enriched in slags, residues, tailings and waste liquors, and primarily produced as a by-product during processing of various ores. Precipitation of insoluble scandium compounds from scandium-containing solutions is the easiest method to recover scandium. However, the co-precipitation of other metals makes it unsuitable for recovery from solutions with large amounts of impurity metals. Currently, hydrometallurgical processes, which mainly involve leaching, solvent extraction and precipitation are most commonly used for scandium recovery. The complexities of flowsheets to recover scandium depend on the different types and amounts of impurities. In this paper, the metallurgical processes for scandium recovery from various resources including scandium ores, residues, tailings and waste liquors are reviewed in consideration of selecting processes to recover scandium as a minor element and incorporating the scandium recovery process to the main flowsheet for the production of the main metal. Scandium minerals with high scandium content, such as thortveitite and lolbeckite, are mainly dispersed in the thortveitite-rich pegmatites in Madagascar and Norway ( As mentioned above, minerals containing appreciable quantities of scandium are rare with limited deposits being found which have not been exploited in mass amount ( Scandium is often found in nature together with yttrium (Y) and lanthanides (Ln) ( China dominates the world rare earth exports for the time being and some scandium is recovered during rare earth production. The separation of scandium from other rare earth elements is difficult due to their very similar chemical properties. Complicated flowsheets are needed to obtain high purity scandium products, which increases the capital and operating costs. Trace amounts of scandium are found in most uranium ores such as uraninite. The worldwide production of uranium in 2009 amounted to 50,572  Scandium is often associated with aluminium ores in nature. The aluminium phosphate minerals can contain 0.01–0.80% Sc Scandium is almost doubly enriched in red mud ( Numerous researchers such as The mineralogy study with X-ray diffraction showed that the red mud produced by the Bayer Process has the following major constituents: hematite, maghemite, calcite, calcium-titanate, calcium-silicate, rutile, diaspore, aluminium silicate and aluminium sodalite ( Recently, methods have been developed to selectively leach minor metals, leaving main impurities such as iron in the red mud un-dissolved. In a selective leaching process for rare-earth recovery from red mud, the rare earth elements were leached in a diluted acid medium by introducing gaseous SO Some titanium minerals such as ilmenite (FeTiO Ilmenite is often further beneficiated to produce synthetic rutile and titaniferous slag. The scandium was enriched in the slag, for example, a significant amount of 128 About 90% of the scandium was leached from the ilmenite slag with a process shown in  The hydrolytic solution from TiO Zircon is a co-product or by-product of the mining and processing of heavy-mineral sands for the titanium and tin minerals. World reserves of zircon were estimated to be 51 Acidic and neutral organophosphorus extractants are most commonly used for scandium recovery from titanium and zirconium residues. However, the significantly high contents of titanium and zirconium in the residues are readily co-extracted to the organic phases and difficult to be removed by conventional scrubbing methods with diluted acids. It is reported that in some practices, the co-extracted titanium and zirconium can be removed with solutions of acidic H Scandium is found in the tungsten minerals such as wolframite (iron–manganese tungstate, FeWO Much work has been carried out to recover scandium from the tungsten bearing material. Since scandium mainly presents in the form of hydroxide in the residue, it can be converted to soluble scandium salts by leaching with various acids such as sulphuric, hydrochloride and nitric acids. Hydrochloride acid can preferentially leach scandium because of the formation of stable scandium chloride complexes ( The main disadvantages of the HCl-leach method are the evaporation of HCl and the formation of toxic compounds, leading to the increase in operating costs and pollution. The H The residues from processing tungsten and tin ores normally contain relatively high contents of scandium and can be considered important resources of scandium. Although the residues can be leached with concentrated HCl at high temperatures, the leach process with sulphuric acid is preferred due to its less pollution. Acidic organophosphorus extractants are suitable for the extraction and separation of scandium from the main impurities in the leach solution including iron, manganese and tungsten. Chelating extractants and primary amine extractants are more suitable for scandium extraction from sulphuric acid solutions due to the easier stripping with diluted hydrochloride acids. The nickel ores in Australia containing relatively high content of scandium are considered as important scandium resources. For example, the nickel and cobalt deposits at Syerston and Lake Innes, New South Wales have an average grade of 76 The scandium can be recovered as a byproduct during nickel and cobalt extraction operations. A typical nickel laterite ore contains Ni (1-2%), Co (0.05-0.10%), Fe (15-50%), Al (2-5%) and trace amounts of Sc (0.005-0.006%) ( The industrialised plants for scandium recovery from nickel laterites are under development by several mining companies and are expected to produce scandium oxides in large amount. For example, a hydrometallurgy plant is designed to produce 28,000 In the United States, some scandium was produced from mine tailings of the tantalum mining ( It was reported that the niobium deposits in Russian Arctic area contain Sc During the production of Sc-containing alloys such as Fe–Sc, Al–Sc and Mg–Sc, considerable amounts of scandium are lost because scandium has high reactivity with oxygen, chlorine and fluorine, especially under high temperatures ( Although the scandium contents in the alloy scraps are high, the gross of the scraps produced in the Sc-alloy production worldwide is not enough as a reliable resource. In addition, no accurate data are available at moment. Scandium is commonly found in ores of other metals and recovered from their residues and tailings. Various metallurgical processes of scandium recovery from various resources, such as ores of scandium, rare earths, uranium, aluminium, titanium, tungsten, nickel, tantalum and niobium are reviewed. Considering the scandium content and the availability, bauxite residues (red mud) and nickel laterite ores are the most promising scandium resources. A pilot plant for scandium recovery from bauxite residues was reported and some industrial scale plants for scandium recovery from nickel laterites are under development. Pyrometallurgical processes are not suitable for recovery of scandium from residues and tailings due to intensive energy consumption. Currently, hydrometallurgical processes consisting of ore pre-treating, leaching, solvent extraction, precipitation and calcination are the most widely used methods for the production of scandium products. The co-dissolution and co-extraction of metal impurities such as iron, titanium, zirconium, uranium, thorium and rare earths could interfere the scandium extraction. Although much work has been done by many researchers, it is necessary to modify existing processes or develop new processes in the area of leaching and solvent extraction to improve extraction selectivity and efficiency. Leaching with medium to concentrated mineral acids could lead to dissolving large amounts of impurities and is not economical due to the high acid-consumption to dissolve trace amounts of scandium. Therefore, the development of selective leaching of scandium under moderate conditions is necessary to reduce acid consumption and pollution. Both acidic and neutral organophophorus extractants have their drawbacks: the former has the difficulties in stripping and the latter is lack of selectivity. Therefore, it is necessary to develop new extraction systems with high scandium selectivity. Since scandium is mainly produced as a by-product during processing of various ores, residues and other materials, its recovery should be considered in the development and design of the overall flowsheet. It is suggested that red mud from treating bauxides and nickel laterite ores are proposed as the most promising scandium resources for its production in the future. The authors thank Dr Matthew Jeffrey for reviewing the manuscript and providing valuable comments. The support of the