High shear granulation of powders with a wide size distribution can lead to the formation of core-shell particles consisting of a few larger particles in the core with a shell of fine particles. We demonstrate successful scale down of core-shell granule formation and, using a new model for interpreting observed cross-sections, show that above a critical speed the shell-thickness remains constant at about ~5% of the granule diameter with a crushing strength of about 5.5 MPa. Below this speed and at low fill-levels, shell-thickness increases and granule strength reduces. Under a low mixing intensity at the lowest fill-levels core-shell particles are not formed at all.
                  Theoretical work on the strength of liquid bridges shows that small particles attached to each other would redistribute more easily than the same particles attached to a large particle. We propose therefore that a detachment-reattachment process is responsible for the formation of core-shell granules.Granulation is an important process widely used and applied for the aggregation of powder clusters in various industries including mineral processing, agricultural products, detergents, pharmaceuticals, food, and specialty chemicals. This technique has been used for improving the macroscopic and microscopic structures, flowability and handling of material, bulk density, and products appearance as well as reducing the dust formation of products and pressure loss for fluid flow through a packed bed [ A number of researchers have extensively studied the granulation of calcium carbonate powder using different binders and granulator types. For example, polyethylene glycol (PEG 4000) as a binder and Zanchetta Roto Junior granulator (10 L) have been used by [ Rahmanian et al. [ In addition, to study the effect of the feed's particle size distribution on the production of core-shell granules, three grades of calcium carbonate powder, namely Durcal 15, 40 and 65 were analysed by Rahmanian et al. [ Calcium carbonate powder (Durcal 65, Omya UK Ltd) and aqueous polyethylene glycol (pluriol E4000 powder, BASF) as a binder were used for the granulation process. In this work, a small scale, top driven and batch high-shear wet granulator (MiPro, ProCepT, Zelzate, Belgium) was used, as shown in The same methodology followed was as discussed in [ In the equations above The different conditions and scales used are summarised in Sieving was carried out to characterise the dried granules for size distribution. A complete batch sample from 90 to 1000 g (dependant on the batch volume) was sieved using a series of 12 ASTM standard sieves. A Haver sieves shaker (EML 200 premium, H&B Wire Fabrications LTD, Germany) was used for 10 min per run. The amplitude and period were set as 1.0 mm and 8 s, respectively to minimise breakage of granules as discussed by Rahmanian et al. [ Granules in the size range of 500–600 μm, were selected for the strength and structure analysis, so as to allow comparison to the results from other authors [ The crushing strength of the granules was analysed using the Instron 5566 Universal Testing Machine. Granules are compressed between two rigid plates until a sudden drop in the applied load detects their breakage. For each granulation run, 30 randomly selected granules were tested with a maximum load of 10 N and a loading velocity of 0.083 mm/s. More details on the test procedure and the method are given by number of authors [ The crushing strength of a granulation run is described by the average and standard deviation of the 30 tests. In preparation for the core structure analysis of granule, the sampled granules were embedded in resin. A 30 mm mould with removable base was filled with 1–2 mm depth of sample. The resins used are epoxides: EpoThin and Araldite, which are two-component resins (resin and hardener). EpoThin mix ratio is 1:0.45 g resin to hardener (HY 951). Araldite (DBF) mix ratio is 10:1 by volume resin/hardener. About 12–15 mm depth of resin was poured into each mould and left for overnight to dry. Initially, P600 silicon carbide grinding papers were used with the solid blocks to reveal sample across its face. After that, P1200 grit paper was used to refine the surface. The block was polished using a 6 μm diamond paste (Struers Monocrystalline) for 5–6 min. This step was repeated using finer diamond pastes: 3, 1 and 0.25 μm. In addition, to prevent “plucking” in the samples, fluid is not used within this process. The structure of the granules was analysed using a Scanning Electron Microscope (HITACHI Benchtop TM3030 Plus). A number of SEM images for each sample was taken. Then, a manual thresholding method using AVIZO software was applied to identify particles. After that, using the naked eye the granules with a visible core were counted. A particle was considered to have a core if the one or more large particles where completely surrounded by significantly smaller particles. The core-shell fraction ( The recorded impeller torque profile was used as a guide to monitor the granulation process stages, as shown in  The granule size appears to be increasing with batch volume, but the trend is weak, and is more apparent the 1.9 L bowl size. For example, increasing the batch size from 0.50 to 1.5 L in 1.9 L bowl at 6.12 m/s, increases the D50 granule size from 300 to 400 μm and the D90 from 1000 to 2000 μm. The granule size appears to be independent of agitator speed at the 0.5 L bowl size. The D10 and D50 appear to be constant or increase slightly in the 1.9 L bowl, the D90 in contrast reduces significantly as agitator speed increases. For example, at a batch size of 1.0 L, increasing the impeller tip speed from 3.50 to 6.12 m/s decreases the D90 from 2000 to 1000 μm. It appears that the force on the granules exceed their strength only in very specific circumstances, and it is not clear why the 0.5 L scale does not respond to agitator speed. Core Shell type granules where observed for most granulations executed. An over view of the core-shell granulation process observations is schematically presented in Newitt and Conway [ Iveson et al. [ In both routes (A) and (C) particles are held together by liquid bridges. The liquid bridges' static surface tension force between two, either unequal or equal-sized spherical particles as well as a sphere with flat plate has been studied by number of authors [ In The mechanism of core-shell granulation appears to be different from route A and C in Based on our observation below, that in systems with a wide, or bimodal size distribution, at the right conditions most granules consist of a large core covered by a shell of fine particles. We propose route B in which the large particles interact with similar size droplets and wet. Small particles will attach to the surface of a large particle by the formation of a liquid bridge strong enough to absorb the momentum of the small particle during attachment. These smaller particles may subsequently detach due forces exerted during subsequent collisions. As demonstrated above, small particles nearer to the surface of a large particle are more strongly bound than small particles attached to other small particles, e.g. those “sticking out” tend to break off, and subsequently may re-attach in places where more or stronger bridges can form (e.g. in a gap where more of its surface is near surrounding particles). Two or more granules or large particles can aggregate to create a larger granule with multiple larger particles in its centre as shown near the end of Route B in The observations of the cross-section of granules, shows both granules with, and granules without core. Here we propose a boiled egg model to explain this observation. All eggs have a yolk but depending on where the egg is cut, the yoke may be visible, or not. Likewise, we assume all granules have a core, whether of the core of a granule is visible or not depends on the where the centre of a granule is with respect to the polished sample's surface. If the total number of granules in the cross sectional slice is Given the granule diameter The observed values of Shell thickness increases at speeds below the critical speed, and is also affected by the fill level. Between 3 and 4 m/s, granules shell thickness The minimum shell thickness is one layer of small particles, on a large core particle. The volume percentage of the core to the fine particle (shell) can be found from. In order to generate granules with With 6/ The crushing strength of granules is described by the average and standard deviation of thirty 500–600 μm granules picked at random ( We suggest in addition that at constant agitator speed higher fill levels result in denser particle beds which causes higher shear forces on the particles. As a result the smaller particles break off and redistribute resulting in lower shell thickness, and stronger agglomerates (route B in The focus of the paper is on mechanistic understanding of the formation of core shell particles we postulate that the shell results from redistribution of fines as fines connected to large particles are more firmly attached then fines attached to other similar small particles. The granulation of Durcal 65 with a wide size distribution in a ProCepT MiPro granulate at 0.5 L and 1.9 L scale demonstrated successful scale down of the formation of core shell granules to laboratory scale. We found that the fine material essentially covers the surface of the larger particles in the feed resulting in core shell particles. We show that core shell granules are formed at small scale as long as the mixing intensity is such that fines at the surface of granules get redistributed. Hence with sufficient fill volume and agitation speed core shell granules can be formed at all scales. If the rate of fines redistribution is too low, softer agglomerates are formed, in which larger particles are randomly dispersed. The MiPro granulator processes in a highly reproducible way as evidenced by the similarity of the torque profiles of repeat runs, and the high reproducibility of the granules particle size distribution (d50: 300–400 μm). The size distribution is practically independent of agitator speed. Only the D90 at the larger scale reduced with increasing agitation speed. The nature of the core shell granules was observed using cross sections of granules in the range of 500–600 μm. This showed core-shell granules to consist of a core consisting of one or more large particles ( This is also reflected in the granule's crushing strength of particles. Above the critical speed the crushing strength is 5.5 MPa and this reduces for lower speeds and fill levels. Based on theoretical strength of liquid bridges, we propose a new granulation mechanism where small particles are more easily detached when connected to other small particles compared to small particles attached to large particles. The force on the small particles increases with agitator speed, as well as with fill level, and results in a larger extend of redistribution of the small particles resulting in denser, thinner shells. At the critical speed the strength of the liquid bridge of a small particle is readily overcome during collisions. Granulation is an important unit operation for many sectors, and with up to 30% of material in the shell, the understanding of core shell granule formation presented here underpins engineering design of new structured materials for use in end user formulations. This project has received funding from the