The evolution of coal permeability has been studied exhaustively and a broad array of permeability models developed. These models are normally derived under the assumption of fluid pressure equilibrium between matrix and fractures. Under this assumption, these models define coal permeability as a function of either gas pressure or effective stress. However, experimental observations indicate that coal permeability may change significantly under a constant observed gas pressure or assumed effective stress. The goal of this study is to resolve this contradiction. In this study, we hypothesize that coal permeability is closely related to the expansion of gas-invaded area/volume as a concentration front propagates from the fracture wall into the matrix. When this invaded volume/area is localized around the fracture, the gas-induced swelling reduces the coal permeability. When the area spreads throughout the entire matrix, gas-induced swelling may increase coal permeability. This important mechanism of transition from local (to the fracture) swelling to global (into the matrix medium) swelling is incorporated into an overlapping dual permeability approach. In this approach, the coal is characterized by a well-defined macroscopic model consisting of four overlapping/interpenetrating continua comprising: (1) coal matrix system; (2) coal fracture system; (3) gas flow in the matrix system; and (4) gas flow in the fracture system. These four continua are connected through a full set of cross-coupling relations, including (1) local force balance between the matrix and the fracture; (2) local deformation compatibility between the matrix and the fracture; and (3) mass exchange between the matrix and the fracture. We apply this approach to generate coal permeability maps under the influence of multiple coupled processes. For a particular coal sample, the permeability is bounded by the solutions for the free-swelling case (upper bound) and for the constant volume case (lower bound). The variations of permeability between the upper and lower bounds under a constant gas pressure are determined by the dynamics of matrix-fracture interactions. Current experimental measurements are bounded by these limits depending on the state of equilibrium between matrix and fractures. These model results are verified against experimental observations reported in the literature.Permeability is one of the most important properties of coal that determines the extraction of coalbed methane (CBM). CBM production begins with dewatering the coal seam to reduce the reservoir pressure and liquid saturation. Then the adsorbed gas in the coal matrix desorbs from the pore surfaces, and diffuses into the fractures and flows into the coal cleats towards the production wells as free phase gas. When the gas desorbs/adsorbs from the matrix, the matrix may shrink/swell. Matrix shrinkage/swelling changes the fracture apertures. Thus, CBM extraction triggers a series of interactions between coal matrix and fractures. These interactions modify the coal permeability during CBM extraction. These modifications are sufficiently large that representative permeability models have to be used for the evaluation of CBM extraction. Over the past few decades, a variety of permeability models have been developed to define the impact of shrinkage/swelling. Earlier models ( In this approach, the coal is characterized by a well-defined macroscopic model consisting of four interpenetrating continua: (1) coal matrix system; (2) coal fracture system; (3) gas flow in the matrix system; and (4) gas flow in the fracture system. The governing equations and boundary conditions are derived by applying the laws of continuum solid/flow mechanics to each continuum. These four continua are connected through a full set of cross-coupling relations, including (1) local force balance between the matrix and the fracture; (2) local deformation compatibility between the matrix and the fracture; and (3) mass exchange between the matrix and the fracture. Coal is a typical dual porosity/permeability medium containing porous matrix and fractures. The gas flows rapidly in the fractures and diffuses slowly in the matrix. Gas flow and diffusion have a significant influence on the strains in the coal matrix and fractures which are directly related to the evolution of porosity and permeability. In this section, we apply an overlapping continua approach to characterize the interactions between the two systems - the matrix and fracture systems - and to explain why permeability changes as a function of the interactions between the two-solid media. As shown in Based on the conceptual model above, Key physical processes include gas flow process in the fracture and the gas diffusion process from fracture to matrix. Initially, there is no gas in either fracture or matrix and the differential pressure between them is zero. Due to the high permeability of the fracture, gas flows into the fracture quickly while the pressure in the matrix remains to zero. As time progresses, the differential pressure gradually increases, which triggers gas diffusion from the fracture into the matrix. When fracture and matrix eventually achieve a final pressure equilibrium, the differential pressure is again zero. From the initial equilibrium to the final equilibrium, the differential pressure tracks from zero to a maximum then to zero. Because of the very large contrast between matrix permeability and fracture permeability, this process may last over a very long period. This is why this transient process must be considered. We define a full set of field equations that govern the deformations of the matrix and fractures and gas flow and transfer in and between them. Originally, we develop the governing equations for the matrix based on previous work ( The mechanical properties of the matrix and fractures are very different. The response of the coal is controlled by the full coupling of different physical fields: (a) solid deformation of coal fractures,(b) solid deformation of the coal matrix, (c) gas flow in the fracture, (d) gas diffusion in the matrix. These formulae are correlatively dependent with their interplay controlled by material properties. To better reveal the interactions between matrix and fractures, the two solid deformation equations are derived independently, based on single poroelasticity, rather than use the smeared equations that combine deformations. The equilibrium equation for matrix and fracture is defined as The strain-displacement relation is expressed as Based on poroelastic theory ( Applying the Langmuir isotherm, the sorption-induced volumetric strain of matrix and fracture can be defined as ( Coal can be seen as a combination between a matrix medium and fracture network. Gas flow regimes in the matrix and fracture progress on different temporal scales, as illustrated in For an REV, the stress states at point 1 (yellow point) and point 2 (red point) are different. The local total stresses applied on matrix and fracture are related to time: The local effective stresses are not only affected by pore pressures in the matrix and fracture but also influenced by the changes of local total stress. This item considers the counter interaction between matrix and fracture when gas begins to diffuse into the matrix. Because of different flow regimes in the matrix (diffusion) and fracture (Darcy flow), the time scales are strongly different. Stress states at local areas within the coal are different with those in the entire coal. The local total stress varies with pore pressure gradient. Therefore, the deformation of the matrix grains is controlled by Eq. Similarly, the deformation of the fracture is controlled by Combining Eqs. Above all, Eqs. Gas flow in the matrix follows Darcy's law, so the equation for mass transfer of the gas in the matrix is defined as The typical relationship between porosity and permeability is the cubic law ( As mentioned in the conceptual model, the effective strain is not only interrelated to the matrix global strain but also the local force induced by the differential pressure between fracture and matrix. The effective volumetric strain increment is Substituting Eqs. The gas flow regime within the natural fractures also obey Darcy's law. The equation for mass balance of the gas is defined as Similar to the permeability model for the matrix, the permeability of the fracture is also related to the porosity of the fracture ( The effective strain of the fracture is also related to the fracture global strain and local force applied by the differential pressure between matrix and fracture. Thus, the effective volumetric strain increment of the fracture is Substituting Eqs. As shown in Eq. The mechanisms of gas flow/diffusion in coal and coal deformation are controlled by fully coupled physical fields, as shown in Detailed interactions between different physical fields are summarized as follows: The interaction between fracture deformation and gas flow in the fracture is defined by the terms − The interaction between matrix deformation and gas flow in the matrix is defined by the terms − The interaction between matrix deformation and fracture deformation is defined by the terms The interaction between gas flow in the matrix and gas flow in the fracture is defined by the terms ω( The interaction between gas flow in the matrix and gas flow in the fracture is defined by the terms − In order to investigate the performance of the new model under the influence of coupled multiple processes, we apply the model to two common situations: constant confining stress (CCS) and constant volume (CV) conditions. These represent the two endmember conditions. The case of CCS represents free-swelling while the case of CV represents zero-swelling. The model geometry of 0.5 The evolution of coal permeability and pressure are shown in The evolution of pressures in matrix and fracture, from the initial equilibrium state to the finial equilibrium state, under different injection pressures are shown in The evolutions of pressures in matrix and fracture, differential pressure and permeabilities of matrix and fracture without the effects of sorption are illustrated in In the second stage (SII), pressure in the matrix increases as gas diffuses from the fracture into the matrix as shown by the blue solid line in In the third stage (SIII), pressures in the matrix and fracture are both still increasing but the differential pressure between them switches from an increase to a decline. And the fracture permeability switches from decline to recovery while the matrix permeability increases continuously. These features are caused by the diminishing of local deformation effects. As the gas-invaded area/volume expands, the effective stress in the matrix decreases throughout the entire matrix medium. When pressures in the matrix equal that in fracture, the system reaches a final equilibrium state and the local effects vanish completely. At this stage (SIV), gas is diffused uniformly within the coal. The fracture permeability stabilizes at a constant magnitude as shown in The impacts of injection pressure magnitudes on the evolution of matrix permeability and fracture permeability under the condition of constant confining pressure are shown in We generate permeability profiles for another common case under the condition of CV. The model geometry is 0.5 Evolution of pressures and permeability are shown in We apply the afore-developed permeability models to represent experimental data available from the literature ( For Anderson coal, two experiments were conducted using CH The model results and their comparisons with the experimental data for the case of Anderson coal with CH The evolution of coal permeability, as shown in The model results and their comparisons with the experimental data for the case of Anderson coal with CO For Gilson coal, two experiments were conducted, also using CH In this study we explore mechanisms of permeability change due to the transition of coal deformation from local (to fracture medium) swelling/shrinking to global (into the matrix medium) swelling/shrinking. This is incorporated into an overlapping continuum approach. Based on the modeling results, the following conclusions are drawn: The state of gas pressure equilibrium between matrix and fractures determines whether experimental permeability changes under a constant observed gas pressure or assumed effective stress. If an equilibrium condition is reached, coal permeability is determined by the equilibrium pressure and remains unchanged. If it is not in the state of equilibrium, coal permeability is determined primarily by the dynamics of coal matrix-fracture interactions and evolves with time. This conclusion explains why experimental permeability may change significantly under a constant observed gas pressure or assumed effective stress. For coal seam gas reservoirs, the high contrast between the initial matrix permeability and fracture permeability determines that the evolution processes of both permeability and the associated physical processes from the initial equilibrium state to the final equilibrium state are far more important than these equilibrium states themselves. A typical profile of coal permeability for the case of gas injection experiences four distinctive stages: permeability increase due to the injection pressure, permeability decrease due to local (to fracture) swelling, permeability increase due to the global swelling (into the matrix medium), and permeability stabilization when the final equilibrium is achieved. Depending on the contrast in coal properties, the relative importance of each stage may be different. For example, the stage of permeability decrease duo to the local swelling may complete quickly if the matrix permeability is high. Coal permeability can be characterized by a map. The upper limit of the permeability is bounded by the solution for free-swelling while the lower limit is set by the solution for the zero swelling (constant volume) case. The variations of permeability between these upper and lower bounds, under a constant gas pressure, are determined by the matrix-fracture interactions, while both the upper and the lower limits are set by the external boundary conditions. This work is a partial result of funding by