Quantitative evaluation of minerals by scanning electron microscopy (QEMSCAN) and diagnostic leaching (DL) are the two main methods to evaluate the gold refractoriness nature. Limited availability of QEMSCAN or its cost sometimes can be the drive to use DL method, or vice versa.
                  We present the results of a comparative study that investigates and compares the origin of the refractoriness of two different gold samples with QEMSCAN and DL. As a baseline, the gold recovery values of samples 1 and 2 via the standard cyanidation process over a leaching period of 24h were 74% and 54%, respectively. Based on the DL tests, the refractoriness of samples 1 and 2 was mostly related to the fine dissemination and association of the electrum (Au-Ag alloy) and gold telluride with the sulfide minerals, particularly pyrite. The QEMSCAN analysis provided more details about the gold deportment in the two samples. The QEMSCAN results showed that the gold in the two samples was mostly present as electrum and gold-telluride. In sample 1, about 89% of the gold occurred in the form of electrum with a 63% Au and 36% Ag composition. The main gold form in sample 2 was gold-telluride (81%). Energy dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDS) results demonstrated that the gold telluride phase was in the form of calaverite (AuTe2) in both samples. The QEMSCAN results suggested that 77% of gold in sample 1 and 88% of gold in sample 2 were liberated or locked in the sulfide minerals, and the balance was the solid solution gold. Based on the QEMSCAN study, the total liberated gold and the gold locked in the sulfide minerals are expected to be amenable to cyanide leaching after a complete sulfide oxidation process, i.e. pretreatment. DL tests, however, suggested that 91% of the gold in sample 1 and 87% of the gold in sample 2 were leachable after the oxidation of sulfides in the two samples.
                  Lastly, the two samples were pretreated by (1) roasting, and (2) atmospheric oxidation to oxidize sulfide minerals and render the samples more amenable to cyanide leaching. The gold recoveries of the roasting calcines by cyanidation were 93% and 76% for samples 1 and 2, respectively. The cyanidation of the atmospheric oxidation residues provided a greater gold recovery for both sample 1 (96%) and sample 2 (85%). Gold recovery for sample 1 was underestimated by QEMSCAN, however the gold recovery values were estimated well by DL.Gold cyanidation is a leading industrial gold leaching method due to its relatively low cost and high selectivity for gold and silver over other metals ( Physical encapsulation: gold is surrounded by reactive gangue minerals and frequently sulfides, which is not liberated even after fine grinding. Chemical interference: gold occurs with the minerals that consume high dosages of oxygen, cyanide and lime, for example, pyrrhotite, marcasite, enargite and arsenopyrite. Preg-robbing: gold occurs with organic carbon and carbonaceous matter, which adsorb the leached gold during the cyanidation process. Leach kinetics: gold is associated with the minerals leading to a very slow gold leaching kinetics, for example maldonite. To successfully process the refractory gold ores, an oxidative pretreatment process often is required to oxidize the refractory minerals, thus rendering the gold amenable to cyanide leaching. A comprehensive mineralogical characterization of the different mineral phases in the gold ore and gold department is often required prior to the selection of an economically viable and efficient pre-oxidation process for the refractory gold ores ( Anglo American Research Laboratories were the first to propose the diagnostic leaching (DL) process in 1980 ( Quantitative evaluation of minerals by scanning electron microscopy (QEMSCAN) is an alternative or sometimes a complementary technique to investigate the gold deportment in gold ores, and understand the sources of gold refractoriness ( This study aims to investigate the refractory characterization of two gold-containing samples using QEMSCAN and DL. The findings obtained from the DL tests were compared to those of the mineralogical results obtained from the QEMSCAN study. In addition, the two samples were pretreated by roasting process and atmospheric pre-oxidation process followed by conventional cyanidation to further analyze the reliability of the refractoriness analysis by QEMSCAN and DL. 10 Hydrochloric acid (36%, VWR, Canada), sulfuric acid (98%, Anachemia, Canada), nitric acid (67%, Anachemia, Canada), hydrofluoric acid (70%, Anachemia, Canada) and iron chloride (III) (Sigma-Aldrich, Canada) were used to carry out the DL. Sodium cyanide was supplied from Anachemia (Canada). All solutions were made using reverse osmosis purified water (pH of 5.5 at 25 First cyanidation test was conducted to determine the amount of gold leached into the cyanide solution and also the refractory nature of the two test samples. It is worth mentioning that all cyanidation procedures for samples 1 and 2 were similar, unless otherwise stated. 400 The acidic treatment tests were conducted in a 2 This process is a combination of two steps: (i) fine grinding, followed by an (ii) oxidative dissolution of pyrite and other sulfides at the atmospheric pressure. The samples were finely ground using Isa Mill M-V (Netzsch, Gemany) where 80% of particles had a smaller diameter than 13 Samples 1 and 2 were roasted using a rotary kiln where the temperature ranged from 570 to 610 The neutral, oxidizing and reducing properties of samples 1 and 2 were quantified prior to fire assay analysis. Neutral ore/concentrate such as siliceous, oxide and carbonate ores exhibits no reducing or oxidizing power. The term “reducing power” of the ore/concentrate is referred to the amount of lead which 1 Two preliminary fusions were performed using two crucibles at 1050 Flux components and a silver inquart were added to the sample in a fireclay crucible. The sample was fused at 1050 The sulfur content of the solid samples was quantified by using Eltra CS 2000 carbon and sulfur analyzer (Romquest Technologies Corp., U.S.A.). Inductively couple plasma spectroscopy (ICP-OES) (Optima 2100 DV, Perkin Elmer, Canada) was employed to determine the concentration of the gold leached in the cyanide solutions and the gold in the aqua regia digestion solutions. The percentage of gold recovery into the cyanide solutions was calculated using Eq. QEMSCAN analysis was carried out in order to determine the mineral abundance, and investigate the association of microscopic gold minerals in the two samples. QEMSCAN is an automated system comprised of a scanning electron microscope (FEI Quanta 650F SEM) with three energy dispersive X-ray spectrometers and iMeasure 5.3 software for data collection and image processing. The analysis was carried out at Expert Process Solutions (XPS), Falconbridge, ON, Canada. The SEM was equipped with a field emission gun (FEG) electron source with the accelerating voltage and beam current were set at 25 Laser Ablation-Inductively Coupled Plasma-Mass Spectrometry (LA-ICP-MS), an in-situ micro-sampling technique which is capable of performing highly sensitive element and isotopic analysis achieving detections limits at the ppb level, was used in this study. This technique can be used to measure the ultra-low concentrations of precious metals and other trace-elements in solid solution in the minerals. LA-ICP-MS ablates and vaporizes materials using a laser beam with a diameter ranging from 4 to 400 In this study, LA-ICP-MS analysis was carried out using a Thermo X Series II ICP-MS quadrupole mass spectrometer equipped with a Resonetics Resolution M-50 ArF excimer laser system (193 Gravity upgrading was carried out on sample 2 using a superpanner table to increase the recovery of gold minerals. The gravity products included concentrate, middlings, and tails. Each superpanner product was spin-riffled into equal aliquots. Polished sections were prepared from multiple aliquots of each product for QEMSCAN analysis. Additional polished sections were analyzed for the superpanner tails in order to increase the counting statistics of the lower grade material. The representative sub-samples of samples 1 and 2 were mounted into an epoxy resin. The samples were then polished using a combination of grit paper (220–1200 grit) and polishing disks. Care was taken not to over-polish the sections. A layer of carbon was coated on the polished sections prior to QEMSCAN analysis. Mineral identification of samples 1 and 2 was conducted using Philips X'pert Pro multipurpose X-ray diffraction (XRD) with Co-K Samples 1 and 2 were mounted and then polished for observation with a 500 The mineralogical study of samples 1 and 2 was carried out prior to DL. XRD analysis ( As depicted in Electrum (Au-Ag alloy) and gold telluride were the major gold minerals in samples 1 and 2. The liberation percentages of the electrum and gold telluride are shown in The QEMSCAN analysis of the two samples showed that overall 77% (9.10 The LA-ICP-MS analysis ( The results of the gold deportment calculations for samples 1 and 2 are provided in The DL is a method wherein the consecutive acid treatments followed by the conventional cyanidation are implemented in order to determine the capability of minerals for gold dissolution. As illustrated in The residues from the conventional cyanidation tests were used to carry out the DL tests. As illustrated in In the third step, the samples were treated in sulfuric acid solution. In spite of no gold recovery for sample 1, 8% (0.14 The fourth step of DL process is treatment under oxidative condition, FeCl The remaining proportion of gold, which was associated with the silicates, was liberated using hydrofluoric acid treatment (Eq. Overall, the DL process suggested that 74% (8.74 The data attained from the mineralogical analysis ( The two techniques applied to analyze the refractoriness of the samples of the present study have shown similar results for sample 2. The DL and QEMSCAN studies of sample 2 predicted that an oxidative pretreatment followed by a conventional gold cyanidation can recover 87% (1.56 In this section of the study, atmospheric oxidation and roasting processes, as the two pretreatment methods, were employed in order to oxidize the sulfide minerals enclosing gold and subsequently increase the gold recovery to the cyanide solution. It is expected that the two processes oxidize the sulfides in both samples. The gold cyanidation recovery values of the discharge materials of the two pretreatment processes were compared to those of the QEMSCAN and DL studies. The sulfide minerals of the two samples were oxidized under atmospheric conditions in a solution with pH Sulfide minerals were also oxidized through a roasting process, as a second pretreatment method. As illustrated in As stated in the introduction part, in the absence of microscopic techniques, the DL process could be a promising method to explore the roots of the refractoriness of a gold ore (  Despite a low gold grade in sample 2 (only 1.80 The refractoriness of two gold samples, sample 1 with 3.2% sulfide and sample 2 with 22.6% sulfide, was studied by QEMSCAN and DL tests. QEMSCAN revealed that both samples possessed a high concentration of pyrite, quartz, orthoclase and muscovite which were in compliance with the data obtained from XRD. It was also illustrated that the gold was mainly in the form of electrum and gold telluride in samples 1 and 2, respectively. From QEMSCAN it was estimated that 38.5% (sample 1) and 37.5% (sample 2) of the gold were liberated. The data obtained from both SEM images and image processing showed that the remaining fraction of gold in both samples were associated with non-sulfide gangue minerals, pyrite and complex minerals. The LA-ICP-MS analysis illustrated that 9.0% of gold in sample 1 and 14.4% of gold in sample 2 were carried in solid solution in pyrite. Conventional gold cyanidation on samples 1 and 2 resulted in 74% and 54% gold recovery. A complete gold recovery was achieved only after the HF treatment stage of DL process. Atmospheric oxidation and roasting processes, as oxidative pretreatment methods, were carried out on both samples in order to decompose the sulfide minerals. This led to a significant improvement in the gold recovery, owning to the better availability of the gold in the two samples to the cyanide solution, which was initially locked by sulfides. Atmospheric oxidation process possessed a greater gold recovery for sample 1 (96%) and sample 2 (85%) compared to that of roasting. It was concluded that the DL is an effective tool to characterize the sources of the gold extraction refractoriness for low and high sulfide minerals. The cumulative gold recovery attained from the nitric acid treatment (DL) of sample 2 was close to those obtained from QEMSCAN and the atmospheric oxidation process. However, in the case of sample 1 (low sulfide and high gold grade), QEMSCAN underestimated the gold recovery which might be related to the presence of the invisible colloidal and chemically bound gold in the samples. In addition, gold recovery obtained via the roasting of sample 2 was approximately 11% underestimated than those attained from the DL, QEMSCAN and atmospheric oxidation process. The authors acknowledge the financial support of