In The Netherlands, construction and demolition (C&D) waste is already to a large extent being reused, especially the stony fraction, which is crushed and reused as a road base material. In order to increase the percentage of reuse of the total C&D waste flow to even higher levels, a new concept has been developed. In this concept, called ‘Closed Cycle Construction’, the processed materials are being reused at a higher quality level and the quantity of waste that has to be disposed of is minimised.
                  For concrete and masonry, the new concept implies that the material cycle will be completely closed, and the original constituents (clay bricks, gravel, sand, cement stone) are recovered in thermal processes. The mixed C&D waste streams are separated and decontaminated. For this purpose several dry separation techniques are being developed. The quality of the stony fraction is improved so much, that this fraction can be reused as an aggregate in concrete.
                  The new concept has several benefits from a sustainability point of view, namely less energy consumption, less carbon dioxide emission, less waste production and less land use (for excavation and disposal sites). One of the most remarkable benefits of the new concept is that the thermal process steps are fuelled with the combustible fraction of the C&D waste itself. Economically the new process is more or less comparable with the current way of processing C&D waste.
                  On the basis of the positive results of a feasibility study, currently a pilot and demonstration project is being carried out. The aim is to optimise the different process steps of the Closed Cycle Construction process on a laboratory scale, and then to verify them on a large scale. The results of the project are promising, so far.In The Netherlands, construction and demolition (C&D) waste is already to a large extent being reused. The stony fraction is crushed and more than 95% reused as a road base material. In order to improve the quality and reuse level of this stony fraction, and to further decrease the amount of C&D waste that has to be disposed of in landfills, a new concept has been developed by TNO. In this concept, called ‘Closed Cycle Construction’, the processed materials can be reused at their original quality level and the quantity of waste to be disposed of is minimised. The concept is briefly visualized in On the basis of the positive results of a feasibility study, currently a pilot and demonstration project is being carried out. The aim of this project is to optimise the different process steps of the Closed Cycle Construction process on a laboratory scale, and then to verify them on a large scale. The project is managed by TNO, and carried out by a consortium of ten Dutch companies and four institutes (including TNO and the Delft University of Technology), and is supported by the Dutch Government. The new concept, called ‘Closed Cycle Construction’ is principally based on closing the material cycles, especially for masonry and concrete in the construction sector. In addition, the remaining mineral fractions of C&D waste are being re-utilised. In short this means that, after deconstruction/demolition of a building, concrete rubble, masonry debris and mixed stony rubble are separated and treated individually, gaining minerals that can be reused as raw materials for the manufacture of new construction products (clay bricks and concrete). One of the most remarkable benefits of the new concept is that the thermal process steps are fuelled with the combustible fraction of the C&D waste itself. In fact, in the Closed Cycle Construction concept, four different C&D waste streams are distinctly processed, namely clean concrete rubble, clean masonry debris, mixed rubble and mixed C&D waste (also including wood, plastic, plasterboard, glass, etc.). This is shown in For concrete, this new technology involves a rotary kiln in which pure concrete rubble is thermally treated at a temperature of about 700 For masonry debris, the new technology consists of a three-step process. In the first step, the large pieces of debris are thermally treated at a temperature of about 550 To be able to process the entire supply of C&D waste, the above mentioned processes have to be implemented in an overall process. This overall process also includes process steps for the treatment of mixed C&D waste. The mixed C&D waste streams are separated and decontaminated. For this purpose several density separation techniques are being developed. The quality of the stony fraction is improved to a level that it can be reused as an aggregate in concrete. For demolition waste that has not been separated at the source, advanced detection and separation techniques are being developed, to sort out contaminants such as gypsum and hazardous materials. The remaining material is divided into a heavy (stony) fraction and a light (combustible) fraction. The combustible fraction (wood, plastic, paper, bituminous roofing material) is cleaned up and prepared as a fuel for the thermal process steps. To be able to completely close the material cycle for concrete, high quality raw materials must be produced from concrete rubble ( The process step suitable for liberating the different components of concrete is based on the input of a combination of thermal and mechanical energy. The installation consists of the following unit operations (see a jaw crusher to reduce the size of the coarse concrete rubble to below 10 a magnet, to remove any reinforcement steel present in the concrete rubble; a rotary kiln for the combined input of thermal energy (to disintegrate the matrix) and mechanical energy (to further release the different concrete components); and a vibrating screen and an air separator to separate the following three fractions: coarse aggregate (primarily gravel), fine aggregate (sand) and cement stone. The proposed process is based on the experiences of Mitsubishi, TNO and KEMA ( If the concrete is treated at a relatively high temperature (>750 The dehydrated cement stone fraction can be used as a substitute for part of the Portland cement clinker in the cement production process. The cement stone can be directly fed to the Portland cement mill. This saves considerable energy and raw materials. In co-operation with the Technical University in Delft, at TNO a PhD study was carried out into recycling options for masonry debris ( The first step in the recycling of masonry debris is a thermal process, to recover whole bricks. The process is based on the difference in linear expansion coefficient between mortar and brick. This means that with increasing temperature, strains are built up in brick and mortar, causing shear stresses on the interface. Because of the fact that this interface, in general, is the weakest part of the masonry, this phenomenon leads to crack formation on the interface, setting free the whole bricks. In the laboratory, optimum process conditions were determined. In particular, the temperature required to separate all of the mortar from the surface of the brick was investigated for different brick types and different mortar systems. It appeared that for cement dominated mortars, the best temperature was around 540 To verify the laboratory experiments, two experiments were carried out on a semi-practical scale (one with a cement dominated mortar and one with a mortar also containing lime). In the experiment with the cement-based mortar, 2.5 In the experiment with the lime-containing mortar, 2200 In both cases the bricks had a grey appearance on the bottom and top sides. The facing sides, however, were clean. The bricks were of good technical en environmental quality, in accordance with the Dutch standard NEN 2489 (dimensions and strength), and with the Dutch Building Materials Decree (leaching of heavy metals and salts). Mixed C&D waste streams will have to be separated and extensively cleaned up, in order to gain enough quality to reuse the different fractions. In the Closed Cycle Construction project the aim is to end up with a decontaminated mineral aggregate fraction that can be reused in concrete and a decontaminated combustible fraction that can be used as a fuel in the thermal processes, as described before. The challenge in this respect is to find the right combination of an inexpensive bulk separation technique (as a rough pre-concentration) and one or more automated sorting techniques for the further clean-up of the pre-concentrated fractions. This approach has already proved successful in the processing of recycle glass and metallic scrap. An example is shown in With regard to the pre-contamination of the mixed C&D waste stream, several dry density separation techniques were investigated experimentally, on a pilot scale ( The Although of lower separation efficiency, the  With regard to the automatic sorting techniques required for the further clean-up of the pre-concentrated fractions, two techniques have been extensively investigated (  The results gained with the CombiSense exceeded expectations. It could well be used to increase product quality and avoid the presence of unwanted materials in the stream to be recycled. Total wood recovery and grade from the light fraction are high, reaching values of 83% and 92%, respectively. However, 3% of stones and tiles are separated with wood; by more effective density separation a large proportion of this heavy material could be removed and the grade would be about 95%. It can be concluded that colour sorting can be effectively used for wood removal from mixed CDW. Colour sorting also allows a good removal of gypsum form the heavy fraction showing a recovery of 94%. This is a good result because in recycle aggregate the presence of that mineral should be avoided due to its sulphate content. The grade is only 5.6% because of the presence of stones and tiles of similar colour in the concentrate. These could be easily removed by density separation in a second stage. Glass recovery and grade are 96% and 56%. Thus the CombiSense separator would be also useful for glass removal from mixed building waste, where glass comprises the disturbing component. A second automatic sorting technique that was investigated in the project is a In addition to the lab-scale experiments mentioned above, experiments were carried out with DE-X-ray sorting, on a larger scale (1–2 As preparation for the tests, the material (mixed C&D waste) was screened into a 20 The fractions of C&D waste were analysed for composition in the categories of wood, stone, glass, gypsum, metal, plastic, textile, paper and cardboard and others (“rest”). The DE-XRT sorting machine that was available at CommoDas GmbH in Wedel, Germany, was adjusted and trained to concentrate wood in the usual way. The composition of the 20 The test results indicate that from mixed C&D waste in the 20–80 The new concept as a whole has several advantages. The most illustrative advantages are: Closing the material cycles for concrete and masonry within their own chain. With regard to the framework of sustainable development, this fulfils one of the objectives of the Dutch government. It also fits into the industries policy of producer’s responsibility and long-term raw materials availability. Recovery of high-grade raw materials for the production of new concrete and ceramic bricks means higher profits for the C&D waste treatment industry, because of higher prices for their products. The production of high-grade raw materials also reduces the excavation of primary materials, such as sand, gravel, clay and marl. Utilising the combustible fraction of demolition waste as a fuel doubles the environmental profit. First, in reducing the amount of waste to be disposed of, and second in reducing the amount of fuel that is required for the thermal treatment of concrete and masonry rubble. Reuse of the recovered cement stone fraction in the production of new cement (as replacement of part of the Portland cement clinker) leads to less excavation of marl, and less carbon dioxide emissions. The integrated character of the process finally implies a reduction in transport costs. This means less fuel consumption and less exhaust gases.