Nonaqueous methods (NAMs) for the reprocessing of oxide fuel include the processes that are carried out in molten salts (MS) or under the interaction of irradiated fuel with gaseous reagents. NAMs exclude the use of water solutions and organic liquids. These methods can be applied to spent nuclear fuel (SNF) or to high-level wastes (HLW). NAMs have these important differences from aqueous reprocessing: high capacity of fissile material; no neutron moderator needed; minimized HLW volume; and final products are often ready for manufacturing fuel. NAMs provide possible new technologies for a nuclear fuel cycle (NFC). The following properties of MS are important for reprocessing:  MS are ionic liquids and they are not subject to radiation influence. Neutron moderators are absent in MS, therefore criticality problems are solved more easily. Both factors allow for working with high radiation loading and with a high content of fissile materials, which results in reduction of equipment volume and HLW amount. Strong cation–anion interaction takes place in MS; therefore the vapor pressure of the components is low. MS with alkaline cations consist of polar ions; therefore voltage of MS decomposition is higher than dissolved components. MS can be restored and impurities can be concentrated by electrochemical processes. During reprocessing it is impossible to free the fuel totally from fission products (FPs). This fuel cannot be used for the manufacture of nuclear weapons. The oxide fuel reprocessing should include three stages:  Dissolution of oxide fuel in halide MS by means of a chlorinating or fluorinating agent. The dissolution in oxy-anion MS could be carried out by direct or dissolving agent treatment. The removal of components (actinides) from MS can be carried out by electrolysis. The removal of actinide compounds from MS is possible by change of temperature or by treatment with special gases. Many FPs have properties different from actinides in MS; therefore it is easy to carry out their selective extraction. Various methods can be used: electrochemical, precipitation, etc. Oxide fuel can be reprocessed in a number of salt systems. The main systems are molten chlorides, but alkali fluorides, nitrates, sulfates, molybdates, and tungstates were also studied. Molten alkali and alkaline-earth chlorides are the most studied for fuel reprocessing. There is extensive experience with molten chlorides, and development is being continued in Russia, USA, and Japan. Nowadays, pyroelectrochemical reprocessing is being applied to oxide fuel (RIAR, Russia) and to metal fuel (Argonne National Laboratory (ANL), USA). The methods which use these salts can be grouped into two sets:  Chloric pyrometallurgy or pyroelectrochemical reprocessing with the use of a chlorinating agent, with direct dissolution of oxide fuel and obtaining of oxide fuel. The processes can be carried out at 500–700 °C and include the following operations fuel chlorination: electrolysis: cathode: anode: precipitation: Pyrometallurgical processes based on oxide reduction to the metal or nonoxygen-containing cations, followed by electrorefining or purification by exchange reactions and obtaining of metallic actinides. These processes are carried out at 500–700 °C and can include the following operations: reduction in media of liquid alloy (cadmium or others) and salt (CaCl electrolysis (in molten LiCl–KCl): During development, most researchers chose molten chlorides only, with alkaline cations in various combinations (for example, 3LiCl–2KCl, or NaCl–KCl). The studies on oxide SNF reprocessing with the production of uranium and plutonium oxides from molten chlorides were carried out in the former Hanford National Laboratory (USA). In the USSR, the work in this direction has developed in RIAR (Dimitrovgrad), where these developments are being continued. The basic principles of fast breeder reactor nuclear fuel cycles with the application of pyrochemical technology were experimentally demonstrated by RIAR. This included the pyrochemical reprocessing of SNF and waste treatment, the obtaining of dense fuel particles, the manufacturing of fuel pins by vibropacking, and the use of remote-controlled automated equipment. The basic technical problems were solved. The wide reactor tests were carried out and all aspects of such cycle safety were investigated. Concerning oxide fuel reprocessing technology, the following properties of uranium and plutonium are the most important.  From an electrochemical point of view, uranium and plutonium oxides behave like metals. During dissolution in the MS, they form MeO At temperatures above 400 °C, UO In molten chlorides, uranium has the stable ions U Plutonium can be converted into the dioxide from any oxidation state by changing the oxidation–reduction potential of the system. UO Technological processes for production of oxide fuel from the molten chlorides have been developed. The process of UO Experiments with irradiated UO The process of PuO The process of uranium and plutonium oxides electro-codeposition includes chlorination in molten NaCl–2CsCl, with formation of uranyl chloride and plutonium chlorides and oxidation for the transformation of plutonium into plutonyl chlorides. Electrolysis is carried out with treatment by a chlorine–oxygen gas mixture; thus codeposition of UO To perform processes in remote conditions, the necessary equipment was developed. The main device—a chlorinator–electrolyzer—uses pyrolitic graphite as the material for bath-anode, cathode, and gas tubes. The device used nowadays has a working volume of 40 For pyrochemical reprocessing of irradiated fuel, the following options are under development in RIAR.  Reprocessing of MOX-fuel for only plutonium recycling. Reprocessing of MOX-fuel with production of MOX-fuel. Pyroelectrochemical process of PuO  Fuel chlorination in molten NaCl–KCl or LiCl–NaCl–KCl–CsCl. Electrolysis for partial removal of UO Precipitative crystallization of PuO Additional electrolysis for removal of uranium. The main FPs are deposited with UO MS purification from impurities by the introduction of sodium phosphate into the melt. The formation and precipitation of impurity phosphates occur, which are soluble neither in molten chlorides nor in water. Only caesium, rubidium, and, partially, strontium remain in the MS. Tests on the reprocessing of irradiated MOX-fuel were carried out. The most important test was carried out with the BOR-60 reactor fuel burned up to 21–24% h.a. Direct recovery of plutonium into the final product was 95.6%. The decontamination of plutonium is quite sufficient from the point of view of fuel nuclear-physical properties (DF was 40–50 for ruthenium, RRE, and more than 3000 for caesium). The pyrochemical reprocessing of nuclear oxide fuel in molten chlorides is a technology with a high safety level. The safety analysis of the process developed by the ANL for metal fuel has shown a higher level in comparison with aqueous methods. Similar results are given by the analysis for oxide fuel reprocessing. An important property of uranium is formation of the hexafluoride, which is stable and gaseous at room temperature. The simple reaction of oxide SNF at 350–400 °C with a fluorine–nitrogen mixture: Developments have been carried out in many countries. The special “FREGAT” facility allowed the carrying out of complex studies on the reprocessing of irradiated UO  Decladding (and voloxidation). Fluorination. UF FPs sorption of NaF at 400 °C, UF “Desorption–sorption” cycle for UF The fuel for tests had burn-up of 10% h.a. and a 3–6 months cooling period. UF MOX-fuel reprocessing: for PuO A big advantage of the method is that UF One property of UO  A spent fuel pin with UO The oxidized product is treated with hydrogen at 600 °C. The reactor system “PWR–CANDU” is successful from the point of view of the nuclear–physical properties of fuel. The concept DUPIC (direct use of spent PWR fuel in CANDU reactor) is developed on that basis. The process will include disassembling and decladding of spent LWR fuel, oxidation (with removal of some FPs), reduction, pelletizing, and manufacture of CANDU fuel bundles. KAERI studies are directed to its demonstration and, probably, it will take effect in the future. 