The present study evaluates the possibility of selective leaching of manganese from complex, manganese and iron oxy-hydroxide based sea bed nodule utilising micelles in high temperature acid dissolution process. Application of surfactants during acid leaching of manganese nodules are described based on results from leaching studies. The factors that affected the sulfuric acid leaching of the manganese nodules in the presence of various surfactants were investigated. The effect of anionic (SDS-Sodium Dodecyl Sulphate), cationic (CTAB-Cetyl Trimethyl Ammonium Bromide) and nonionic (Triton-X 100) surfactant on the various metals extraction with respect to sulfuric acid concentration, temperature, type of surfactants and surfactant concentration is reported. Among them, CTAB showed highest improvement in the recovery of Cu, Ni, Co, Zn and Mn. Iron, aluminium, and silica were removed effectively through the present approach of high temperature sulfuric acid leaching route assisted by surfactant. Increasing the temperature of the medium has significant impact in the selective leaching of Mn, Cu, Ni and Co. The optimum conditions established for maximum metal extraction are: pulp density 10%, time 2h, temperature 160°C, sulfuric acid 5.0% (v/v) and at critical micellar concentration of CTAB. Under these conditions, recovery of Mn was 99% along with the (˃99%) recovery of Cu, Co, and Ni. The leached residues were analysed and their phase and morphologies were included herein. The present process may find application of separation of manganese from iron and aluminium at high temperature during various hydrometallurgical treatment of manganese based ores.A number of surfactants are extensively used in mining, petroleum, industrial, agriculture, food, cosmetics, and pharmaceutical ( Manganese nodules collected from the Central Indian Ocean Basin by CSIR-NIO, Goa, were air-dried and ground. The nodule samples were crushed, ground and sieved to obtain 100% -150 mesh B.S.S fraction (< Required amount of sieved manganese nodules were digested using combination of various acids such as H To study the effect of nature of surfactant on the metal extraction values, cationic, anionic, and non-ionic surfactants like CTAB, SDS, Triton X-100 and Tween-80 were used under similar two experimental conditions. Amount of the surfactants were added to the acidic leaching reagent as per their critical micelle concentration (CMC) values. CMC values for CTAB, Triton X-100, SDS and Tween-80 were found to be 0.92, 0.24, 8.2 and 0.012 The effect of concentration of CTAB was studied using half value of CMC, CMC and double value of CMC values of CTAB, while keeping other conditions as 2 The effect of H  From the above studies, it was observed that under experimental conditions of leaching at 10% PD, 2 All the above observations implied this process could be a novel process of separation of iron, aluminium and silica in one step leaching process from other metal values as their dissolution during leaching was suppressed in the presence of CTAB at higher temperature, which simplifies the process reducing the load on iron removal steps. Thus the proposed modified leaching method in the current work may find a way to develop novel hydrometallurgical recovery process of manganese nodules for Cu, Ni, Co and Mn. However, for complete flowsheet development, in addition to the above leaching process experimental studies for other expected downstream processes such as removal of partially leached iron, bulk sulphide precipitation of Cu, Ni and Co values, recovery of manganese carbonate from the solution, dissolution of bulk sulphide followed by solvent extraction and electro-winning of Cu, Ni and Co or EMD/CMD from the Mn containing solution after bulk sulphide precipitation will be required to test the commercial viability of the treatment of manganese ores. The dissolution of manganese nodule in sulfuric acid solution was studied both in the presence and in the absence of the various surfactants. It showed that the surfactant could be effectively used to enhance leaching of Cu, Ni, Co and Mn from manganese nodules. Particularly, cationic surfactant CTAB played an important role for the recovery of metal values along with rejection of iron. Under the optimum conditions 99% Mn could be recovered along with other metal values Cu, Co, Ni. Higher temperature was preferred for complete dissolution of manganese with minimisation of iron dissolution (about 6.69%). The XRD pattern of the residue obtained from the leaching study using CTAB matched with mixed phase of aluminium silicate, iron–aluminium silicate hydroxide and iron oxide phases, whereas the sample obtained without CTAB showed iron silicate and manganese ferrite phases. These findings highlight that surfactant assisted leaching is a suitable method for enhancing extraction of Mn, Cu, Ni and Co metal ions while rejecting iron into the residue from polymetallic manganese nodules. Authors are thankful to the Director, CSIR-IMMT for permitting to present and publish the work in IC-LGO, Dr. I. N. Bhattacharya, Head, H&EM Department and Dr. M.K. Ghosh, Sr. Pr. Scientist for their thoughtful help. Authors gratefully acknowledge the funding and support from the projects