Proximal humerus fractures treated with intramedullary nails show good results. However, the correct anatomical reconstruction of four-part fractures is demanding especially when using intramedullary nails. We therefore compared different intramedullary nail designs for the proximal humerus in a virtual morphological manner. Three commercially available nailing systems where virtually implanted in virtually generated reproducible four-part fractures of 25 digitised humeri. The objective of this study was to quantify and characterise the anatomical position of the proximal screws in the most vulnerable case of a four-part fracture.
                  Taking into account a minimum distance of 5mm between the screw head and the fracture line, osteosynthesis was possible in 54 out of 75 cases. Difficulties placing the proximal screws could be observed at the localisation of the lower lesser tubercle or/and at the sulcus intertubercularis. This morphological analysis could be the basis for choosing the most sufficient implant intra operatively or even improving the nail design.About 4% of all fractures in the human body involve the humeral head with severe fractures patterns often seen in the elderly population For this reason, we examined the nail design morphologically with a focus on screw configuration, i.e. arrangement, position and orientation of the proximal screws, using a new computer based imaging method. We especially focused on how the osteosynthesis is influenced by the anatomical variance, which can be seen in the European population. We used radiographic landmarks for evaluating the anatomical variance, which can also be seen on images taken preoperatively. This could lead to a better appraisal of operative results. Overall, we compared commercially available intramedullary nail systems used for multi-part proximal humerus fractures. Cadaveric humeri corresponding to the normal distribution in the European population In total 25 fresh frozen cadaver humeri (43–88 years, mean age: 65 years, 16 male, 9 female) were digitised using computer tomography (Cardiac Sensation, Siemens, Erlangen, Germany, 120 Diameter of the anatomical neck Diameter of the humeral head Diameter of the shaft Three intramedullary nails currently available for the treatment of proximal humeral fractures, Targon-PHN (left and right version), T2-PHN (left and right version, bend setup) and TriGen-PHN (unilateral setup), were digitised with the help of a CAD system (Catia V5 R14, Dassault Systems, Suresnes Cedex, France). For clarity reasons, the screws were replaced by short bolts allowing analysis of the proximal screw orientations (see The nails were virtually implanted according to the manufacturers’ instructions and recommendations published in recent specialist literature After the implantation, the position of the implant was evaluated based on selected distances between the fracture lines and the screws. Distances were measured in 4 directions at each of the tubercles. These were the cranial and caudal direction as well as the medial and lateral on the lesser and the ventral and dorsal direction at the greater tubercle. Current literature considers an implantation to be safe if there is a distance of at least 5 For the evaluation of the osteosynthesis, implantation success was divided into three categories (see    The normal distribution of the available bone collection was tested with the Kolmogorov–Smirnov-Test and verified based on the epidemiological study The cadaveric specimens represented a normal distribution with respect to anatomical features. According to Mall, the mean diameter of the anatomical neck is 4.70 According to the measurements, osteosynthesis was possible (class A) in 54 out of 75 cases (72%) based on the evaluation matrix. All screws were more than 5 An examination of the Class B and C implantations showed that in all cases either the screw for the lesser tubercle was too inferior or that there was perforation of the intertubercular groove by one of the proximal screws compromising the long biceps tendon. The distribution of each nail can be seen in The screw in the lesser tubercle is likely to be positioned in the tubercle's lower part. The risk of the screw to cut out is enhanced. In order to optimise the positioning of this screw we measured the distance of the screw to the fracture line. The mean distances for each nail can be seen in The statistical analysis of the data revealed a significant correlation between the size of the humerus as represented by the diameter of the anatomical neck and nail implantability ( Good results have been reported for the treatment of proximal humeral fractures with an intramedullary implant The use of a classification for humeral head fractures generally accepted in specialist literature The results we found correspond to the clinical data out of actual literature The screw configuration, in terms of localisation and orientation of the nails could be optimised and validated in further studies. First, the screw fixing the lesser tubercle would lead to a better effect when inserted higher in the humeral head. Second, the screws lying close to the intertubercular grove should be positioned in a way to secure it. The angle between these two screws, namely the screw for the lesser tubercle and the screw inserted most ventral in the greater tubercle should be increased to prevent those screws from perforating into the intertubercular grove. One should keep in mind that in a clinical setting, a comminuted fracture is not uncommon and ideal fixation is often impossible using a standard implant. The modalities evaluated in this study would be easily transferable to actual clinical data evaluation. By choosing a novel approach utilising a virtual implantation system, we were able to examine all three implants in one model and compare them on the basis of a reproducible fracture pattern. In contrast to clinical studies we had the chance to fracture a humerus, implant three different nails in it, and examine the position of the screws in the reduced fracture. Future research will include imaging obtained from patients with complex proximal humerus fractures. In addition it will allow us to place the proximal screws in the safe zone by changing their angulation. The variation of the proximal screw insertional angle allows to optimise the position of the screw in the fracture fragment. This can lead to better load shift and a reduction of cutting out. Further investigation to this subject has to be done virtually and biomechanically with prototypes. In correlation with the diameter of the anatomical neck, the conditions for osteosynthesis were found to become increasingly favourable as the diameter of the anatomical neck increases. This diameter could easily be determined by evaluating X-rays or CT-Data of the humerus. This information may allow the surgeon to accurately predict implant capabilities. According to our results, if the diameter of the proximal humerus is larger than 42.2 Excellent results in treating displaced four-part fractures of the proximal humerus with intramedullary nailing are possible, if the positioning of the nail and the proximal screws are in anatomically correct and load relevant stable areas of the fracture fragments. However, some challenges remain with fragment fixation and postoperative stability. The present study was conducted to examine the position of the proximal screws for three intramedullary implants and to evaluate their fragment fixation using a collection of 25 cadaver humeri. We conclude that regarding the anatomy some nailing systems cannot be implantated in humeri with four-part fractures without interference of important anatomical structures like the long biceps tendon. Summarising our results we believe that a proximal humerus nailing system, which allows an individual angulation of the interlocking head screws, would overcome these limitations and in addition have the possibility to address the good bone stock. I declare no conflict of interest for the manuscript “Virtual morphological comparison of three intramedullary nailing systems for the treatment of proximal humeral fractures” for me and the other authors. We would like to thank the Dr.-Ing. Leonhard-Lorenz foundation for the financial help and T. Schuster from the Institute for Medical Statistics and Epidemiology of the Technische Universität München.