The subject of this paper is the flotation (foam separation) of zinc and cadmium cations in presence of manganese dioxide precipitate. The removal of zinc cations by adsorbing particulate (particles) flotation (with Tween 80) is higher than that of cadmium ones. It increases both with the increase of the concentration of manganese dioxide precipitate, and that of the nonionic surfactant (Tween 80). The removal of zinc cations by ion flotation (with sodium soaps) is lower than that of cadmium ones. It does not change with the increase of the manganese dioxide precipitate concentration. It increases, however, with the increase of the anionic surfactant (sodium laurate and stearate) concentration. The mechanism of foam separation was discussed on the base of the interaction: (a) between the surface of the manganese dioxide precipitate and the metal cations; (b) between the surface complexes of the precipitate–metal cations and Tween 80; (c) between the metal cations and the sodium soap.Adsorption of metal ions from aqueous solutions onto solid surface can be an important phenomenon applied both for purification of industrial solutions from traces of rare and toxic metals, and for analytical purposes. Cadmium and zinc are those metals, which should be removed from industrial wastewaters due to their toxicity. There are so many adsorbents, but the metal oxides are used quite often due to the occurrence of such material in natural systems. The possibility of using some new or modified adsorbents is also taken into consideration The wide use of solid particles as adsorbent of metal ions would therefore require finding an efficient method for recovering the solid particles after the water cleaning treatment. Such a treatment could be used for large volumes of extremely diluted solutions, in uninterrupted proceeding. In order to intensify the recovery of the adsorbent and metal ions from solution, the study of the flotation (foam separation) methods has been taken up. Karger et al. Aside of the above nomenclature, there was another proposal depending one nature of the material to be separated. It can be quoted after Sasaki In consequence, the author has taken up the studies on the possible use of the manganese dioxide precipitate for flotation of the zinc and cadmium cation pairs with nonionic surfactant (Tween 80), and the anionic one (sodium soaps). Feed solutions containing zinc and cadmium at concentration of 10 Foam separation (flotation) was carried out with the help of a glass multi-bubble column, supplied (in its bottom part) with a sintered glass G-3 (15–40 Effectiveness of the metal flotation expressed by percentage removal was calculated from the quantity analysis of metal content in the initial solution and in the residual suspension (solution). The metal ions were determined by the atomic adsorption spectrometry method (AAS) with Perkin-Elmer apparatus.      In this investigation, first of all the manganese dioxide precipitate was introduced into the feed solution containing zinc and cadmium cations. According to Kozawa et al. The presence of neutral surface sites suggests the existence of yet another adsorption mechanism, which can be described as a process of releasing (exchanging) H These two adsorption mechanisms result in the same type of surface species. The formation of these species take place due to neutralisation of charge at the ratio 1:1, bivalent cations can be attached to one or two surface sites (hydroxyl groups). It can also take place as an adsorption process related to the hydrolysis of metal cations forming the surface species of type: Because the flotation media used differ as for the form of their surfactant, any further discussion can be divided into two parts. The more intense adsorption of zinc cations (colligends) on manganese dioxide (collecting particle) is reflected in the higher removal of zinc than that of cadmium in presence of nonionic surfactant Tween 80, which is shown in Moreover, as it is shown in With the increase of Tween 80 concentration in flotation media, the removal of metal does also increase, as it can bee seen from curves in As for the adsorption of Tween 80 for the hydrophobization of the manganese dioxide particle with the metal cations, it should be considered that there occurs a certain interaction through the donor–acceptor bonds, formed between the surface hydroxyl groups or the adsorbed metal cations, and oxyethylene groups of Tween 80. It can be expressed in the following way: The visual observation lets us see the abundant and richly hydrated foam, which transports the collecting particles and colligends. The foam's hydration is due to the hydration of the polar groups of the molecules of Tween 80 adsorbed on the bubbles in consequence of the hydrogen bond formation: (CH As for the classification of the foam separation with manganese dioxide precipitate and Tween 80, it can be said after Sasaki The bivalent cations of zinc and cadmium neutralize the charge at the ratio 1:1, they can change the charge of the collecting particles (the manganese dioxide precipitate) from negative to positive, i.e. they can form the positively charged surface species of the type: As it can be seen in The increase in the surfactant concentration causes the intensification of the cations exchange process. That is why the removal of metal increases with the increase of sodium soap concentration ( As it can be seen, the above-mentioned sublates are removed as a scum into a thin layer of the low-hydrated foam. It is therefore evident that a considerable metal concentration was obtained, which is of practical importance. Such a process of foam separation had been described by Grieves The precipitate of manganese dioxide forms a collecting particle for adsorption of zinc and cadmium cations. The adsorption sites of such a particle can be considered as the ones resulting from the process of releasing (dissociation) of H Basing on the above considerations, one can conclude the structure of the material formed and removed in presence of Tween 80 can be represented this way: [z( In presence of sodium soaps, both metals (i.e. cations of zinc and cadmium) are removed in another form, namely, as sublate (RCOO) The analysis of foam separation carried out here turns out to be helpful in understanding the interaction between the components of a solution. It also helps to understand the interface processes.