The present study reports liquid-liquid extraction and separation of zinc and iron values from a spent pickle solution. Tertiary amine viz. tri-iso-octyl amine (TiOA) or tris(2-ethylhexyl) amine (TEHA), in the absence and presence of di-(2-ethylhexyl)phosphoric acid (HDEHP), has been used for the separation of zinc and iron. Three aqueous solutions were investigated: i) HCl–Fe(II)–Fe(III), ii) Zn(II)–HCl, and iii) HCl–Fe(II)–Fe(III)–Zn(II) with the composition similar to that of pickle liquor (g/L) [117 Zn(II), 90 HCl, 30 Fe(II) and 1 Fe(III)]. Co-extraction of Zn(II), HCl and Fe(III) was noticed with the extractants (amine/amine+HDEHP) without any appreciable selectivity except for Fe(II) which was not extracted by the solvent. Zn(II) was extracted selectively leaving Fe(II) in the raffinate provided that Fe(III) was removed from the solution at a low O/A phase ratio or reduced to Fe(II) state. Stripping of HCl, Zn(II) and Fe(III) was also not selective with distilled water. The Zn(II) free raffinate containing Fe(II) was microbially oxidized to Fe(III) and was then quantitatively extracted in 3-stages with 30% Versatic 10 acid at the O/A phase ratio of 3.5:1. Loaded Fe(III) was easily stripped from the organic phase with dilute sulfuric acid. A flowsheet is proposed to produce high purity Zn(II) and Fe(III) solutions by solvent extraction.The iron oxide scales from the surface of steel are removed by treatment with acid solutions, in a process known as pickling, prior to further processing. This generates a huge amount of spent pickling liquor containing high concentrations of zinc and iron besides other heavy metals such as Pb, Ni, Cu, and Mn in low concentrations. Therefore, its disposal is a problem from the environmental and economic points of view. A number of processes have been developed for the treatment of spent pickle liquor which includes: diffusion dialysis, oxidation in fluidized bed, spray roasting, ion exchange, solvent extraction, Several reports are available on the solvent extraction of mineral acids using basic or neutral extractants ( Generally iron is considered a nuisance in the hydrometallurgical processing of metals. Extraction of Zn(II) from its chloride solutions was also investigated ( Extraction and separation of multi-metals from model and waste chloride pickle liquors have also been investigated. The extraction of Zn(II), Fe(II) and Fe(III) from HCl medium was reported by In view of above the present study was carried out to investigate the solvent extraction and separation of zinc and iron from a spent pickle liquor containing 90 A typical spent pickle liquor generated at a steel galvanizing plant contains 90–100 Extraction experiments were carried out by shaking equal volumes of aqueous solution and desired extractant of known concentration in a separating funnel for 15 Extraction of hydrochloric acid from solution-I [90 Extraction of hydrochloric acid using a binary mixture of TiOA/TEHA and HDEHP was also investigated. In the presence of HDEHP both the amines showed similar extraction behavior. Further, The organic salt in turn can extract hydrochloric acid as (Eq. The interaction between amine and HDEHP was evident from the FT-IR studies (spectra not shown). In the presence of HDEHP, both T The number of stages required for complete extraction of HCl from the aqueous solution was determined from the McCabe Thiele plot. At an O/A phase ratio of 2.5:1, HCl was completely extracted with T Stripping of HCl from the loaded organic with the distilled water was also studied at an O/A ratio of 1 and results are given in Extraction of Zn(II) from the solution-II [117 Earlier Extraction mechanism of Zn(II) using binary extractants may proceed as per Eq. This is consistent with the fact that acidic extractant The extraction of Zn(II) and HCl by 50% TiOA/TEHA and 50% TiOA/TEHA McCabe Thiele plot was also drawn to determine the number of counter-current stages required for complete extraction of Zn(II). In 3-stages Zn(II) was completely extracted with T The loading capacity of the extractants was determined by repeated contacts of the same organic phase with the fresh aqueous feed. Saturation loading of the extractants with 40–44 Stripping of HCl and Zn(II) from the loaded organic phase was carried out by water at the O/A phase ratio of 1. Both Zn(II) and HCl were co-stripped from the loaded organic. About 36–44% of Zn(II) was removed from the loaded organic in the first contact which decreased thereafter. In 7 contacts 80–85% Zn(II) was stripped from the loaded TiOA and TiOA On the basis of above studies, attempts were made to separate zinc and iron from the model pickle solution containing 117 Loading capacity of 50% ( The loaded organic so obtained was used to study the stripping of HCl, Zn(II) and Fe(III) with distilled water at the O/A phase ratio of 1 ( In the absence of Fe(III), there was no effect of Fe(II) on the extraction of Zn(II) by any of the extractants. After complete removal of zinc from the aqueous solution by solvent extraction with 50% ( The number of counter current stages required for complete extraction of Fe(III) was determined from the McCabe Thiele diagram ( Stripping of Fe(III) from the loaded Versatic 10 acid [8.32 A flowsheet for separation of zinc and iron from spent pickle liquor is proposed in Solvent extraction and separation of hydrochloric acid and metal values (zinc and iron) from spent pickling solution containing 90 The authors are thankful to the Director, CSIR-National Metallurgical Laboratory, Jamshedpur, India for giving permission to publish the paper. Thanks are also due to