A new generation binder consisting of an organic binder and a borate salt was tested as an alternative to bentonite in magnetite ore pelletization. Carboxyl methyl cellulose (CMC), Ciba DPEP06-0007 and corn starch, and calcined colemanite were used as organic binders and the borate salt, respectively. They were added to the pellet feed separately and in different combinations at several addition levels. It was found that the use of organic binders is sufficient in terms of wet pellet quality; however, they fail to render the required compressive strength to pre-heated and fired pellets. Therefore, organic binders and calcined colemanite were used together so that wet pellets, pre-heated and fired pellets would be of the required quality. The results showed that the use of an organic binder together with calcined colemanite indeed yielded pellets with equal or better wet and indurated pellet qualities compared to the pellets produced with bentonite binder alone.Bentonite is the conventional binder in iron ore pelletization and used at 0.5–1.5% addition levels in the pellet feed by weight of iron ore Organic binders may offer a viable alternative to bentonite as they burn out at high temperatures during the thermal process with virtually no residue. Numerous laboratory, pilot and industrial scale studies have been conducted on the use of organic binders to replace bentonite. All the studies had one particular result in common. That is, while compressive strength of wet and dry pellets produced with organic binders were as good as or better than those produced with bentonite, the strengths of pre-heated and fired pellets were insufficient. These findings have been related to the lack of slag film bonding introduced by bentonite Colemanite, a Ca-borate salt, has a chemical formula 2CaO The magnetite concentrate obtained from Divriği Concentration Plant located in Divriği-Sivas, Turkey. The as-received magnetite sample was washed with tap water repeatedly, filtered and dried at 105 The sodium-bentonite binder was from Reşadiye-Tokat, Turkey and had a particle size of 90% by weight − Colemanite concentrate was obtained from Eti Mine Bigadiç Concentration Plant at Balıkesir, Turkey. The colemanite concentrate contained 43% B Technical grade CMC, food grade corn starch and Ciba DPEP06-0007 (a binder specifically produced for iron ore pelletization) were tested as organic binders. The former two were purchased from the local market; the latter was provided by Ciba Specialty Chemicals Holding Inc. Elemental analyses of magnetite concentrate and bentonite were carried out using Spectra IQ X-ray fluorescence (XRF) spectrometer. The specific surface area of magnetite fines was measured with a Blaine air permeability apparatus as described elsewhere Moist feed for the pelletization experiments was prepared by mixing 1000 The drop numbers and compressive strength of wet pellets were determined on ten wet pellets. Wet pellets were dried at 105 As bentonite is used as binder extensively worldwide in iron ore pelletizing, any binder or combination of binders should be compared with it. Therefore, a baseline with bentonite must be established first. For the reasons explained earlier in this paper, this study was focused on the compressive strengths of indurated, especially those of pre-heated at 1000 The first series of pelletization tests were conducted with 0%, 0.50% and 1.00% bentonite addition in order to determine the performance of bentonite as bench mark. In order to see the effect of organic binders on the compressive strength of pellets, a series of pelletization experiments were performed with the organic binders, namely CMC, Ciba DPEP06-0007 and corn starch, alone at different addition levels. The results are given in A series of pelletization experiments were performed to investigate the effect of only CC addition on the compressive strength of pre-heated and fired pellets. The addition levels of CC were in the range 0.25%–1.00%. Results presented in Boron compounds are known for their low melting temperatures as well as for their ability to also lower the melting temperatures of silicates in literature. The main reason of the increase of the pre-heated and fired pellet strength is due to melting of colemanite at these temperatures since it has a melting point of 986 In light of the findings given above, neither organic binders nor calcined colemanite can be used alone as binders in the pelletization of magnetite ore as calcined colemanite falls short on the wet pellet quality while organic binders fail to meet the pre-heated pellet strengths. Therefore, the combination of organic binders and CC (CMC The compressive strengths of pellets produced with CMC When the Ciba DPEP06-0007 was used together with CC, the compressive strength of pre-heated pellets were increased from an insufficient value 89.40 In order to understand the reason underlying the strength imparted by CC, changes in the mineralogy and the topography of the fired pellets were also investigated by XRD and SEM analyses. It was determined that the original material consisted of only magnetite,  Drop numbers and compressive strengths of wet pellets produced with bentonite or organic binders were found to be sufficient; however, they were found insufficient when calcined colemanite was used as a binder alone. Compressive strengths of pre-heated pellets at 1000 The use of calcined colemanite together with an organic binder yielded pellets with sufficient wet, pre-heated and fired pellet quality comparable to those of pellets produced with conventional bentonite binder. This combination may be a possible alternative to bentonite to eliminate the downsides of bentonite. A comprehensive study is needed and initiated to delineate the bonding mechanisms of colemanite addition in pellets to determine the metallurgical properties of these pellets and to clarify the effect of colemanite addition into pellets in terms of blast furnace operation. The financial support by