Aurocyanide complex adsorption by naturally occurring carbon in Goldstrike ore has been implicated in a form of gold refractoriness known as “preg-robbing”. The aim of this work was to establish a relationship between the aurocyanide uptake capacity of Goldstrike ore carbonaceous matter and the preg-robbing behavior of the parent ore. The effect of varying contact time between the aqueous gold–cyanide and the carbonaceous matter on the uptake of aurocyanide complexes was also investigated. In column adsorption experiments, the adsorbed gold concentration from 100 mL of a gold–cyanide solution depended on the flow rate of the solution. The concentration of adsorbed gold increased with solution flow rate, reaching a maximum concentration at a flow rate of approximately 0.05 mL/min. As solution flow rate increased to more than 0.05 mL/min, the concentration of gold adsorbed on the carbon decreased. Desorption of adsorbed gold into 75-mL sodium cyanide solution also depended on solution flow rate. Maximum desorption of gold occurred at a flow rate of approximately 0.14 mL/min. The gold adsorbed at the lowest and highest flow rates was more slowly desorbed than the additional gold adsorbed at the intermediate flow rates. The concentration of gold remaining on the carbon after desorption at 0.14 mL/min correlated to the amount of gold adsorbed at the highest and lowest flow rates in the adsorption experiments. This amount of slowly desorbed gold correlated to the preg-robbing behavior of the ore, whereas the amount of additional adsorbed gold (i.e., gold adsorbed at intermediate flow rates) was similar for all of the ores. For all of the carbonaceous matters studied, the concentration of gold sorbed in both batch and column experiments increased after autoclaving.Carbonaceous gold ores from Barrick Goldstrike Mines (BGMI) suffer from two forms of refractoriness. Over 50% of the gold is encapsulated within the pyrite rings of arsenian framboidal pyrite During processing of Goldstrike ore, cyanide ions complex elemental gold to form aqueous Au(CN) Roasting preg-robbing carbonaceous ores increases gold recovery. While roasting of carbonaceous ore is an alternative to autoclaving, additional information is, however, necessary to assess whether the ore should be routed to the autoclave or the roaster. BGMI currently uses different methods to determine the preg-robbing nature of the ore, since significant variation exists in the preg-robbing behavior of Carlin trend carbonaceous ores Since it has been hypothesized that the preg-robbing behavior of Carlin trend ore is the result of aurocyanide complex adsorption by naturally occurring carbon during processing Commercial activated carbon is a generic term referring to a family of carbonaceous materials obtained from coconut shells, coal, peach pits, etc., which are heated in the presence of an oxidizing agent to remove the more reactive functional groups from the aromatic carbon structure. The remaining carbon skeleton is composed of featureless aromatic carbon rings with an overall structure similar to that of graphite Graphite, commercial activated carbon, and mature natural organic carbon are each composed of stacked sheets of aromatic carbon rings, referred to as microcrystallites. The maturity of the carbon is directly related to the length of the microcrystallite perpendicular to the aromatic planes ( Another similarity between Goldstrike ore CM and commercial activated carbon is the lack of gold retention during ammoniacal thiosulfate leaching The various mechanisms of aurocyanide complex adsorption by commercial activated carbon can be summarized as one of the following mechanisms: reduction of the gold in the cyanide complex to metallic gold, adsorption as an ion-pair, or the precipitation of Au(CN) as a result of chemical degradation of the aurocyanide complex Recent studies of aurocyanide complex adsorption onto commercial activated carbon indicate that weakly and strongly adsorbing domains occur. Irreversible and reversible components of gold adsorption have been observed in batch experiments BGMI supplied four dry-ground samples (80%–200 mesh) of Goldstrike ore with various preg-robbing behaviors. A fire assay was performed on each of the samples to determine the initial gold content of the ore. In addition, the carbon and sulfide contents of the ores were determined by LECO analysis, and %PR and %REC were determined by BGMI Metallurgical Services The carbon in the ore was concentrated by the removal of quartz and other minerals, according to a demineralization procedure described in Stenebråten et al. Although the primary factor controlling the preg-robbing behavior of Goldstrike ore was shown to be the microcrystallinity of the carbon, the carbon content of the ore also influenced the preg-robbing behavior of the ore Column tests involved placing sufficient CM in a syringe filter (Swinnex 0.22 μm) to obtain 10 mg of carbon. A modified column system was created by pumping fluid from a 10-mL syringe, used as a fluid reservoir, through the syringe filter as was described in Schmitz et al. In addition to column adsorption tests, batch adsorption tests were also performed. In batch tests, CM (10 mg C) from both autoclaved and non-autoclaved ores were equilibrated with the gold–cyanide solution (10 ppm Au and 2.0 g/L NaCN, pH 10.8) in a 20-mL scintillation vial, rotated at 20 revolutions per minute for 72 h (Glas-col Laboratory Products lab rotator). After equilibration, the solution was filtered using a syringe filter, and the filtrate was analyzed for aqueous gold concentration using ICP-AES. During adsorption tests, solubilization of gold, which was initially present in the CM, caused the concentration of gold–cyanide complexes in solution to increase relative to what was added as a spike. Since 100% of gold initially present in the CMs from autoclaved ores and 40% of gold initially present in CMs from non-autoclaved ores was amenable to leaching Desorption of gold adsorbed by CMs from autoclaved ores was also performed. Multiple samples of a given CM were loaded with similar amounts of gold by introducing 100 mL of gold–cyanide solution at a flow rate of 0.10 mL/min, using the procedure outlined for the column adsorption experiments. Desorption of gold complexes from the CM was achieved by pumping sodium cyanide solution (2.0 g/L NaCN, pH 10.8) through the syringe filter containing the gold-loaded CM. Since steady-state values for gold desorption were obtained with 75 mL of cyanide solution at the slowest flow rates, this volume of cyanide solution was used in all desorption experiments. The effluent solution was collected in 5–20 mL aliquots and analyzed for gold in solution using ICP-AES. The desorbed gold mass (concentration multiplied by aliquot volume) was normalized to the mass of carbon (10 mg) and referenced to the initial mass of gold adsorbed, as previously described.  While it is recognized that elution procedures utilizing elevated temperatures and a variety of lixiviants can effectively recover adsorbed gold from carbon, gold desorption was determined under the experimental conditions of the adsorption experiments (23±2°C) (2.0 g/L NaCN, pH 10.8). A washing step to remove entrained solution was not employed prior to desorption since the mass of gold (0.5 μg) present in the pore space in the carbonaceous matter (maximum 0.1 cm   During the adsorption experiments, the solution volume was held constant at 100 mL while the flow rate was varied; thus, the independent variable controlling the total concentration of adsorbed gold was the exposure time of the carbon to the aqueous gold solution. As a result, the shape of and variation in the curves shown in    At the lowest flow rates during the adsorption experiments, the adsorbed gold concentration represented adsorption under conditions where neither C→Aq nor Aq→C were kinetically limited. At higher flow rates, C→Aq became kinetically limited and the adsorbed concentration increased. At still higher flow rates, Aq→C became kinetically limited and the adsorbed concentration decreased. At these highest flow rates in the adsorption experiments, greater solution volume (than 100 mL) would have been required to further increase the adsorbed gold concentration. These results suggest that the component of adsorbed gold achieved at the lowest and highest flow rates in the adsorption experiments were kinetically favored over the additional component of adsorption achieved at the intermediate flow rates. Likewise, further decreases in the concentration of adsorbed gold remaining at the end of the desorption experiments would have required larger solution volumes (than 75 mL). The minimum adsorbed gold concentrations (maximum stripping) achieved during desorption experiments, were achieved at the intermediate flow rates. Comparison of the minimum gold concentrations achieved during desorption experiments to the kinetically favored adsorbed gold concentration achieved at the lowest flow rate during adsorption experiments As described earlier, gold adsorption by commercial activated carbon has been proposed to occur by both “irreversible” and “reversible” mechanisms   Gold–cyanide complex adsorption by commercial activated carbon is thought to occur along edge defects in the microcrystallite Although a significant increase in adsorbed gold concentration was observed for autoclaved CMs relative to the non-autoclaved CMs during the column experiments, this increase was much smaller for the batch experiments. Additionally, even the strongly preg-robbing ores showed low gold uptake in the batch experiments. The low uptake in the batch experiments may be due to the relatively small solution volume exposed to the CM (10 mL in batch vs. 100 mL in columns). Alternatively, the low adsorbed gold concentration observed in the batch experiments could be due to the much longer equilibration time for the batch (72 h) vs. column (∼28 h at 0.06 mL/min and ∼1 h at 2.0 mL/min) experiments. This would be consistent with the observation that long equilibration times reduce gold adsorption The flowrate at which the maximum adsorbed concentration was achieved during adsorption experiments was the same for all the ores studied. The flowrate at which the minimum adsorbed concentration was achieved during desorption as also the same for all ores studied. This was not expected given the wide variation in physical and chemical properties of these CMs. This similarity may indicate that for these CMs, the properties that control the kinetics of aurocyanide adsorption are similar. In contrast, the very different adsorbed gold concentrations achieved indicate that the properties which control the overall extent of aurocyanide adsorption differ Between the adsorption and desorption experiments, the flow rates above which Aq→C became kinetically limited (0.05 and 0.008 mL/min, respectively) and C→Aq became kinetically limited (0.008 and 0.14 mL/min, respectively) differ. This is due to differences in the driving force for mass transfer between the adsorption and desorption experiments. The driving force is equal to the difference between the gold concentrations in the aqueous and carbon phases, which differs in the adsorption and desorption experiments. For example, in the adsorption experiments, the influent aqueous gold concentration was 10 ppm and the concentration of gold on the carbon was initially zero. In contrast, during desorption experiments, the influent aqueous gold concentration was 0 ppm and the concentration of gold on the carbon was a decreasing non-zero value. Gold mass transfer in these experiments cannot be modeled using first order rate constants. For example, if the rate of gold mass transfer is governed by first order rate constants, then the concentration of gold on the carbon can be described by In this study, it was found that the %PR and %REC values determined for the ores examined reflected gold adsorption to the strongly adsorbing domains of the carbon. Under these conditions, it can be expected that the %PR and %REC values would be complementary, that is, ores with high %PR would show low %REC, and vice versa. For other ores, however, the strong component of adsorption may be sufficiently limited to cause the %PR value to reflect both weak and strong components of adsorption. In such cases, the measured %PR and %REC values would not be expected to be complementary, since commercial activated carbon added during the BTAC–CIL test would compete with the naturally occurring organic carbon. Competition with commercial activated carbon would remove weakly adsorbed gold from the naturally occurring carbon during the BTAC–CIL test, and the resulting %REC value would reflect only strongly adsorbed gold. It is possible that for ores where %REC and %PR values are not complementary, the %PR value reflects both weakly and strongly adsorbed components of adsorption, whereas the %REC value reflects only strongly adsorbed gold. Increased aurocyanide complex adsorption for autoclaved vs. non-autoclaved carbon may also obscure the relationship between measured %REC and %PR values, since the preg-robbing test uses non-autoclaved ore, whereas the BTAC–CIL test uses autoclaved ore. The greater accuracy of the bleach leach test relative to the preg-robbing test is thought to derive from deactivation of weakly adsorbing domains of the naturally occurring carbon. It is tempting to equate the weakly adsorbing domain identified in this study to the weakly adsorbing domain that is deactivated during bleach leach tests, but for the fact that bleach leach tests are performed on non-autoclaved ores, whereas the ores examined in this study were autoclaved. Hence, additional studies are needed to determine the relationship between the weak adsorption domain observed for autoclaved ores in this study and the adsorption domain that is deactivated by the bleach leach test. In this study, it was found that long or exceedingly short equilibration times resulted in decreased gold adsorption to naturally occurring carbonaceous matter. In order to assess whether these findings have implications for processing, additional studies should be undertaken to determine how the contact times examined here, with demineralized CM, relate to contact times used during the processing of bulk ore. The concentration of gold adsorbed from 100 mL of gold–cyanide solution by CM depended on the solution flow rate. Maximum gold concentrations were attained on the carbon at a flow rate of approximately 0.05 mL/min, where it is hypothesized that the mass transfer of gold from solution to the carbon was maximized while the concurrent mass transfer of gold from the carbon to solution was kinetically limited. The concentration of gold remaining on the carbon after desorption into 75 mL of sodium cyanide solution also depended on solution flow rate. Maximum desorption (minimum concentration of gold remaining on the carbon) occurred at a flow rate of approximately 0.14 mL/min, where it is hypothesized that mass transfer of gold from the carbon to solution was maximized while the mass transfer of gold from solution to the carbon was kinetically limited. Correlation between the concentration of gold present on the carbon after minimum loading (adsorption from 100 mL gold–cyanide solution at the slowest and fastest flow rates, 0.008 and 2.0 mL/min, respectively) and the concentration of gold remaining on the carbon after maximum stripping (desorption of loaded gold at the flow rate of maximum desorption, 0.14 mL/min) suggests that strongly and weakly held components of adsorbed gold existed on the naturally occurring carbon. The concentration of gold strongly adsorbed to the carbon correlated to %PR (directly) and %REC (inversely), suggesting that this was the component of adsorption measured by preg-robbing and BTAC–CIL tests performed on these Goldstrike ores. Non-complementary %PR and %REC values for some ores can be speculated to be due to the inclusion of weakly adsorbed gold in %PR but not %REC values, as well as increased gold adsorption by autoclaved carbon in the BTAC–CIL (%REC) test. The authors wish to thank BGMI for providing funding and resources for this project. Additionally, thanks to the staff at BGMI Metallurgical Services for obtaining samples as well as performing fire assay and LECO analyses used in this study. Thanks to Dr. William Parry, Department of Geology and Geophysics, University of Utah, and Dr. Michael Free, Department of Metallurgical Engineering, University of Utah for providing resources and equipment used during this study.