Effects on structural characteristics of growth temperature and Si doping in GaN thin films grown on high temperature GaN was investigated. GaN/GaN homojunction structure was grown via metalorganic chemical vapour deposition at intermediate temperature (IT, 840°C) with various Si doping concentrations. V-shaped pits are observed on the surface of the undoped GaN grown at IT by atomic force microscopy analysis. Two beam images by transmission electron microscopy show that only screw- and mixed-type component of dislocations contributes to pit formation. Moderate Si doping reduces pit density but the over-doping of Si deteriorates the IT-GaN property by forming pits again. Not all pits are related with threading dislocations but some of them are observed in the dislocation free area of high Si-doped GaN.The growth of high quality InGaN/GaN MQW structure for active layer in blue and green light emitting diodes (LEDs) and laser diodes (LDs) is very difficult due to the difference of the optimized growth temperatures between InGaN well and GaN barrier Recently, we reported two models of the formation of V-shaped pits in InGaN/GaN MQWs with high In composition However, the results on V-shaped pits have mainly reported on the existence of increased strain energy between InGaN and GaN and there have been very few studies on the growth temperature of GaN barriers. Therefore, in order to understand clearly the effect of growth temperature and Si doping on the GaN barriers in InGaN/GaN MQWs, the microstructure research of GaN films with various growth conditions grown on the thick GaN of high growth temperature must be evaluated in detail. In the present work, we investigated the effect of the lowered growth temperature and Si doping in GaN films using TEM and atomic force microscopy (AFM). Especially, we found that the surface pits of V-shape were strongly affected by growth temperature and doping concentration. GaN (intermediate temperature)/GaN (high temperature) homojunctions were grown by metalorganic chemical vapour deposition (MOCVD) on (0 Pit distribution and density was measured by AFM (3    As reported previously for the InGaN/GaN MQW systems, all pits originate from threading dislocation at their bottoms ( Therefore, we found that the IT growth of GaN layer results in the formation of V-shaped pit due to the reduced growth rate on the pyramid planes by the decreased atomic mobility and the strain between undoped IT-GaN and Si-doped HT-GaN. It supports that V-shaped pits in InGaN/GaN MQWs can be generated by the lowered growth temperature of GaN barriers without strain caused from InGaN/GaN lattice mismatch. For the Si-doped IT-GaN (1.5×10 The high Si-doped IT-GaN sample, in contrast, induces the considerable increase of pit density as shown in Lowered growth temperature induces V-shaped pits on a surface of GaN grown on high temperature GaN. Most of pits are connected with pure screw- and mixed-type dislocation at their bottom while edge type dislocations do not contribute to form V-pits. The shape of pits is an inverted pyramid with a facet slope of 62° as previously reported in InGaN/GaN MQWs for the active layer of LEDs and LDs. Pit density remarkably decreases by Si doping up to 1.5×10 This work was supported by grant No. R01-2002-000-00096-0 from the Basic Research Program from Korea Science & Engineering Foundation and partly funded by the CANSMC (grant No. R12-2002-058-01003-0).