Several leveraging strategies were explored to improve gold leaching during cyanidation in the presence of pyrite, chalcopyrite, sphalerite and chalcocite. Galena, used a source of lead, was found to largely neutralize the negative effect of sulfide minerals dissolution on gold leaching, especially in the cases of pyrite, chalcopyrite and sphalerite. Pyrite–galena galvanic interactions improved gold leaching while for chalcopyrite, sphalerite and chalcocite active galvanic interactions with galena were found to be detrimental to gold leaching. Pre-oxidation of metal sulfides prior to cyanidation significantly increased gold leaching rate when gold–pyrite galvanic interactions were disabled, while their enablement identified pyrite pre-oxidation as counter-productive. Pre-oxidation of mixed mineral systems of pyrite–chalcopyrite and pyrite–sphalerite showed that enabling galvanic interactions between the associated minerals during pre-oxidation controlled gold leaching in the subsequent cyanidation process. For pyrite, lead nitrate addition during pre-oxidation resulted in a significant increase of gold leaching, whereas its addition to subsequent cyanidation canceled the positive effects of pre-oxidation on gold dissolution.Due to the poor cyanide selectivity for gold over the carrier sulfide mineral matrix and to the important electric conductivity of both gold and carrier matrix, gold cyanidation is generally accepted as being complex due to a multitude of factors: (1) gold surface passivation by some reaction products such as Fe(OH) To alleviate the harmful effects of sulfide minerals dissolution in terms of reagents consumption (cyanide and oxygen) and gold surface passivation, atmospheric pre-oxidation strategies and addition of lead nitrate to the slurry have been widely investigated in the open literature ( Addition of galena, which can occur naturally in sulfide gold ore deposits, as a source of lead was also shown to have some beneficial effect on gold leaching kinetics ( Regarding pre-oxidation, investigations focused often on individual sulfide minerals. Consequently, multi-factorial galvanic interactions resulting from the different mineralogical phases present in the ore during pre-oxidation were not addressed with the proper attention. Multi-factorial galvanic phenomena are suspected to give rise to cyanidation responses unexpected from mono-sulfide studies. Further investigations using multi-mineral systems are needed to provide reliable feedback for plant cyanidation circuit where galvanic interactions between associated sulfides may play a significant role. A new packed-bed electrochemical reactor (PBER) technique was developed and tested to decouple and quantify the individual contributions of passivation phenomena and galvanic interactions on precious metal (gold and silver, PM) leaching rates during the cyanidation of sulfide-rich ores ( In consideration of above interrogations, this work aims at several targets: To investigate, using the new PBER, the effects of galena (free and/or associated with sulfides) on gold cyanidation in the presence of several sulfide minerals; To investigate the effects of pre-oxidation of galvanically associated sulfide–sulfide systems and their individual components on gold leaching rate; To highlight the effects on gold leaching of different strategies of lead addition in the presence of sulfide minerals. Five sulfide-rich ore samples received from Ward's Natural Science were used. These samples consisted of pyrite (π), chalcopyrite (κ), sphalerite (σ), chalcocite (χ) and galena (γ) by virtue of the dominant proportion of the named sulfide mineral therein. Their chemical and mineralogical characterizations are given elsewhere ( Four arrangements for each sulfide mineral (X The influence on gold recovery of galena distribution within these various synthetic minerals/phases was studied using the PBER. The aerated cyanide solution feed was continuously recirculated in a closed loop through the fixed bed using a peristaltic pump. The time on stream against which all the concentration profiles were plotted corresponded to the time the aerated cyanide solution sojourned inside the PBER excluding the transit time of flight in the external loop of the liquid circuit. See The effect of non-associated galena on the electrochemical behavior in the X//γ//silica Since pyrite frequently occurs in sulfurous ore deposits associated with other sulfide minerals, e.g., chalcopyrite or sphalerite, pre-oxidation tests were conducted for the single- and mixed-mineral systems. Gold powder (50 In all experiments, the concentration of dissolved metals was measured using a Perkin Elmer AA-800 atomic absorption spectrometer (AAS), while a capillary electrophoresis instrument (CE, Agilent Technologies) was used to analyze the dissolved sulfur and cyanicides (  Pyrite OCP (− An Au–Ag rod (electrode) was implanted in the silica upper layer which was electrically connected via ZRA to the pyrite lower layer (see With less than 2% Au recovery after 12 The evolution of galvanic current between chalcopyrite and gold in presence (dashed line) and in absence (solid line) of galena is shown in The (B) and (C) different gold leaching patterns (  After 6 The measured galvanic current between sphalerite and gold varied from very low (5  Unlike the other tested sulfides (  Therefore, based on the results from Finally, the sudden increase of galvanic current measured in the absence of galena (solid line) after 40 As shown in The bilayer π//silica system was the one that gave the best gold leaching response to pre-oxidation ( Chalcopyrite pre-oxidation had no significant effect on gold recovery numbers ( Sphalerite was also shown to be oxidized in alkaline media ( The results from this study tell that the success of pre-oxidation strategies requires a precise knowledge of gold deportment. As a result, it can be argued that different strategies for oxidative pre-treatments should be determined not only based on the mineralogy of the sulfide ore but also on the occurrence and associations of exposed gold. Therefore, pre-oxidation may improve gold recovery in finely ground ores rich with free gold, while when exposed gold is intimately associated with conductive sulfide minerals, e.g., pyrite, pre-oxidation will be unsuitable to improve gold leaching. The effect of pre-oxidation of mixed mineral systems containing pyrite–chalcopyrite and pyrite–sphalerite on free gold leaching was also investigated. As illustrated in The above results point out that pre-oxidation of individual sulfide minerals went from being beneficial for gold leaching for pyrite (  Speciation of the reaction products released into the leach solution was also examined. When pre-oxidation was performed without lead nitrate ( On the contrary, when lead nitrate was added during pre-oxidation, polysulfides rapidly react with lead (II) to form lead sulfide precipitate ( These explanations are also coherent with the positive effect on gold leaching of lead nitrate addition during pre-oxidation ( Investigations aiming at improving gold leaching during cyanidation in the presence of various sulfide minerals were conducted. A conjunction of electrochemical and chemical speciation studies using a PBER was employed to provide valuable information about the mechanisms and reactions involved. Addition of galena, as a source of lead, was shown to bring important positive effects on gold recovery with pyrite, chalcopyrite and sphalerite. Not only the detrimental effect of passivation was neutralized but also an important acceleration of Au dissolution rate was prompted. The mechanisms involving galena are believed to be similar to those proposed in the literature for lead nitrate. The effects of galena-other sulfide mineral galvanic associations on gold leaching showed that galena–pyrite galvanic interactions induced a positive effect on gold leaching, whereas significant negative effects were observed when galena was successively associated with chalcopyrite, sphalerite and chalcocite. In absence of galvanic interactions between gold and sulfide minerals, pre-oxidation was an effective tool to improve gold leaching in the presence of pyrite while, no beneficial effect was observed in the case of chalcopyrite and sphalerite. However, when galvanic interactions were enabled, the influence of pre-oxidation on gold dissolution went from having no effect for chalcopyrite to being detrimental for pyrite. Furthermore, pre-oxidation of mixed mineral systems of pyrite–chalcopyrite and pyrite–sphalerite showed that enabling galvanic interactions between the associated minerals during pre-oxidation controlled gold leaching in the subsequent cyanidation process. When pre-oxidation was used in the presence of pyrite, lead nitrate addition during pre-oxidation resulted in a significant increase of gold leaching, whereas its addition during subsequent cyanidation step canceled the positive effects of pre-oxidation for gold dissolution. Financial and in-kind support from COREM's precompetitive research program and the Canada Research Chair “