Decarbonizing world economies implies the deployment of “green technologies”, meaning a renovation of the energy sector towards using renewable sources and zero emission transport technologies. This renovation will require huge amounts of raw materials, some of them with high supply risks. To assess such risks a new methodology is proposed, identifying possible bottlenecks of future demand versus geological availability. This has been applied to the world development of wind power, solar photovoltaic, solar thermal power and passenger electric vehicles for the 2016–2050 time period under a business as usual scenario considering the impact on 31 different raw materials. As a result, 13 elements were identified to have very high or high risk, meaning that these could generate bottlenecks in the future: cadmium, chromium, cobalt, copper, gallium, indium, lithium, manganese, nickel, silver, tellurium, tin and zinc. Tellurium, which is mostly demanded to manufacture solar photovoltaic cells, presents the highest risk. To overcome these constraints, measures consisting on improving recycling rates from 0.1% to 4.6% per year could avoid material shortages or restrictions in green technologies. For instance, lithium recycling rate should increase from 1% to 4.8% in 2050. This study aims to serve as a guideline for developing eco-design and recycling strategies.In the 21st United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change celebrated on December 2015 in Paris, it was agreed to keep the increase in the global average temperature to well below 2 °C above pre-industrial levels. Besides, it was proposed that global peaking of greenhouse gas emissions (GHG) should be reached as soon as possible Both, the electric and transport sectors have a great potential to achieve European targets. The electricity power sector has actually the largest potential for cutting down CO During this transition period, green technologies like wind power, solar photovoltaic or electrical vehicles will be needed. According to the International Energy Agency projections Wind power demands important amounts of rare earth elements (REE) like neodymium and dysprosium to build permanent magnets for electric generators In the field of mobility, Light Duty Vehicles (LDV) based on internal combustion engines will be progressively replaced by vehicles based on electromobility. For instance, it is expected that Plug Hybrid Electric Vehicles (PHEV) and Battery Electric Vehicles (BEV) world sales will surpass Internal Combustion Engine Vehicles (ICEV) sales in 2029 and 2038, respectively On the other hand, current recycling rates of some of these materials are almost negligible because more often than not the specific required recycling processes do not pay off. That is the case for indium, gallium, cadmium and tellurium in solar modules The criticality of materials has been extensively studied using different points of view. These assessments can include several dimensions related to vulnerability, economic importance, supply or ecological risks Historically, fluctuations and shortages in demand have generated increases both in price and in geological exploration. One of the most recent examples of mineral shortages can be found in China, with REE trade restrictions that took place during the 2005–2012 period Leaving questions related to geopolitical risk aside, material constraints from a geological point of view can be assessed by comparing future demand with current production capacity Thus, it is an interesting first approach but a dynamic behavior must be incorporated to provide more realistic values. For instance, in the case of the energy sector, models that provide dynamic data, like TIMES-MARKAL or LEAP, can be used to assess the impacts related to fossil fuel supply, emissions and encourage the development of energy policies As for non-fossil fuels, several dynamic models have been developed for specific minerals, such as copper Indeed, creating a model that estimates future raw material production is a challenge. Nevertheless, in the case of fossil fuels, the Hubbert peak methodology is admitted as a useful and reliable model To assess raw material constraints related to the growth of green technologies, this paper presents a methodology that identifies possible bottlenecks based on: 1) cumulative raw material demand with current available reserves and resources and 2) expected raw material demand and raw material production projections. With this approach, it is possible to identify which materials could create constraints in the medium to long term for each green technology analyzed. Once this task has been carried out, the recycling improvements that should take place before 2050 to avoid these constraints are calculated. This information can then be used to promote possible alternatives related to increase geological knowledge, substitutability, investment in new technologies to increase recycling rates, etc. It should be stated that it is not the intention of the authors to propose a new CRM list, but rather to point out which green technologies might be at risk of not achieving current deployment targets due to possible raw material supply shortages. When talking about green technologies, many types of technologies come into play, from solar power to geothermal. In this paper, the green technologies considered are: wind power, solar photovoltaic (PV), concentrated solar power (CSP) and the mobility sector, with special emphasis on Electric Vehicles (EV) including Plug Hybrid Electric Vehicles (PHEV) and Battery Electric Vehicles (BEV). For this endeavor, the identification of bottlenecks is done using a combination of bottom-up and top-down approaches, defined as follows: Bottom-up approach Top-down approach: assessment of material requirements for manufacturing green technologies assuming state of the art developments and competition for materials with the rest of sectors, in the 2016–2050 time period. As extraction is ultimately limited by the amount of minerals present in the crust with sufficient concentration, it is important to identify raw material availability in terms of reserves and resources. According to the USGS (United States Geological Survey), resources (RES) are concentrations of naturally occurring materials on the Earth's crust in such form that economic extraction is currently or potentially feasible. Reserves (RSV) in turn are the portion of resources which can be economically extracted or produced at the time of determination. Reserves figures are thus lower than resources and more dynamic, since identified resources can be reclassified as reserves when commodity prices rise or when there is a decrease in production costs. Different sources have been compared, first using global databases (i.e. USGS As annual production rates need to be synchronized with the rising demand of materials, projections regarding future raw material production are equally required. In this paper it is assumed that material production will follow the Hubbert peak model. Hubbert With this approach, the maximum production peak of the commodity can be obtained, meaning the year when production starts to decrease. Additionally, future yearly projections of production can be obtained using a business as usual scenario. Using this methodology it is presumed that production will continue with an exponential growth, as it has been the case for most commodities (see For the top-down approach, the use of critical raw materials in each green technology has been assessed by reviewing more than 50 scientific papers regarding materials used in each technology. Regarding material demand, it was considered that a certain amount of raw materials comes from recycling processes. As the available information on recycling rates is usually very aggregated or general, the recycling rates used in this study come from the United Nations Environmental Program The impact of recycling on primary production is assumed as one-to-one displacement because reprocessing does not change material properties. It should be stated though that, as Geyer et al. As the projections presented in this study go until 2050 and the technology lifetime is lower, material demand from renovation and repowering activities in renewable energies and passenger vehicle fleet must be considered. This effect is taken into consideration using Eq. The studied “green” technologies will have to compete for materials with many megasectors such as construction, chemicals, metal industry or electronics. For instance, 17% of gallium is used in the solar sector and the remaining is used in integrated circuits, LED, alloys, batteries and magnets Accordingly, total material demand for a given commodity This methodology combines reserves, resources, production and demand data, so as to determine possible constraint risks. Three risk categories have been defined for the cumulative demand and annual production of the selected materials: very high, high and medium. This approach considers expected projections of green technologies, recycling rates of metals (assumed as constant), as well as metal demand for the rest of the sectors, as shown in The first and most restrictive constraint is associated with cumulative production surpassing available resources. This is because, as stated before, the amount of resources is an indication of the availability of a given commodity in the crust that could be potentially extracted now or in the future. The second one is related to reserves instead of resources. Note that reserves relate to that portion of resources that can be recovered economically with the application of extraction technology available currently or in the foreseeable future. It should be pointed out that reserves data are dynamic, as they can change with technology, prices, discovery of new deposits, among other factors. Therefore, results obtained with these data have to be considered as an indication rather than as a fact. Then, as reserves data are more dynamic, a bottleneck based on reserves can be considered less critical than one based on resources. The third constraint is associated to isolated supply shortages. This is assessed with the information coming from the bottom-up and the top-down approaches, through the intersection between future demand and future production estimations. For instance, using nickel expected demand in electric vehicles and other sectors, and nickel estimated production using the Hubbert model approach, a possible bottleneck can be identified beyond 2027 as shown in As for the previous constraint, it must be pointed out that any successful prediction obtained using the Hubbert model depends on many different factors, such as the reliability of the estimated reserves and resources data, which can delay the peak several years if these increase There are many ways to overcome identified bottlenecks. In addition to increasing material supply (i.e. investment in exploration efforts to increase reserves and eventually resources), from the demand side, change of technologies, improving material efficiency or substitution of materials for a given application or technology (i.e. bio-based materials for metals) are some possible options. It should be though not forgotten that substitution can, in some cases, reduce product performance or even increase prices It should be stated that in reality, a combination of all above mentioned options will likely take place. That said, this method gives an indication of where to encourage recycling efforts. Once all the information regarding reserves, resources, demand in green technologies and metal demand for all sectors have been compiled, bottlenecks for each technology can be identified. Demand projections for each green technology are shown in Wind Power Solar Thermal Power Solar Photovoltaics It is noteworthy that cumulative power will grow linearly up to 2050 for all the studied technologies with similar growth rates. The technology that will have a larger share in 2050 will be solar photovoltaic with more than 3500 GW, followed by wind power, with 2500 GW, and finally solar thermal with nearly 900 GW. For each renewable source of energy, different types of technologies can be selected. In the case of wind power two main types of wind turbines have been considered: model 1, with gearbox, and model 2, gearless, each with a constant market share of 75% and 25%, respectively In the case of light duty vehicles, the world fleet evolution and the sales projections by type of vehicle ( Additionally, BEV sales will mainly grow from 2025 onwards and in 2045 their sales will be even greater than PHEV. Considering these projections shown in The assumptions and hypothesis considered to estimate material demand in each green technology throughout the studied time period are fully developed in Wind turbines will basically demand common metals such as aluminum, copper, iron and nickel in huge amounts, along with other scarcer commodities such as dysprosium and neodymium. Solar PV and CSP will demand a greater variety of materials, but EV is the technology that will require more different elements. For instance, among all the technologies analyzed in this paper, gadolinium, platinum group elements, cerium or praseodymium are commodities that will only be demanded in EV. Overall, iron, aluminum, copper and nickel will be the minerals demanded in larger amounts. The most restrictive constraint takes place when cumulative demand of the technologies analyzed is larger than current resource estimations. To better understand these constraints, one must know the percentage that each technology demands for each studied material, this is represented in Combining  By means of the bottom up approach explained in In the cases of cobalt, neodymium and dysprosium, bottlenecks appear when both curves (production and demand) still have growing tendencies. For these cases, the bottleneck would be a problem of supply rather than scarcity, as it can be seen in the curves of In the case of tellurium, if the R2 accuracy is considered, the bottleneck could appear beyond 2050, but the accuracy is the lowest one (0.46). For this reason, projections regarding production have an important level of uncertainty with respect to other elements. Nevertheless, tellurium already falls in the very high risk category considering that cumulative demand surpasses resources, as it was shown in Noteworthy is the case of selenium, which is mainly used in CIGS PV technology. The theoretical peak is reached even before 2016, hence the bottleneck appears from that moment onwards. Yet it should be stated that, as it happens with tellurium, selenium is obtained as a by-product of copper extraction. Consequently, its production projections will depend on copper mineral extraction and hence Hubbert peak reliability is low.  It should be noted that cadmium, chromium, copper, gallium and zinc fall into the high risk but not into the medium risk category. This happens in those materials in which the difference between reserves and resources is notable. For the mentioned metals the ratios between proven resources and reserves are 2.4; 25; 4.2; 192 and 8.3, respectively. Accordingly, cumulative demand is greater than reserves but production projections based on available resources is always greater than expected demand. If projection demand had been assessed with reserves instead, all medium risk metals would fall in the high risk category. Even if the main goal of this paper is not to create a list of critical materials, it is interesting to carry out a comparison between the list of elements that could generate bottlenecks in the development of green technologies with already published criticality assessment papers and reports ( As an example, chromium, copper, nickel or zinc, which have been identified as presenting high risk in this paper, have low risk according to the BGS report. Additionally, silver and nickel have a high risk in this present study, but in Moss et al. As stated before, a way to overcome supply bottlenecks is through increasing recycling rates. Note that recycling improvements to avoid high and very high risks are not calculated because in these cases, the problem is not caused by supply shortage but by geological scarcity. In such cases, if expected demand does not change, the most effective way to overcome bottlenecks is to invest in exploration to increase geological knowledge. This is because recycling can never achieve 100% efficiency due to second law of thermodynamics restrictions, and even if it were possible, exponential growth in demand makes that primary production will always be required to offset the rocketing demand.  The highest growths correspond to lithium, chromium, cobalt and cadmium with annual growth rates of 4.6%, 2.5%, 1.8% and 1.3%, respectively. The case of lithium is of special relevance because of its notable future importance for storage systems and the low current recycling rate, which is below 1%. It is also noteworthy how relatively small recycling efforts could avoid the appearance of bottlenecks for certain materials such as manganese, neodymium or tin, which would require annual growths of around 0.1%, or silver or dysprosium, of less than 1%. That said, recycling would be mainly based on minor metals recovery (cobalt, REE, lithium, tellurium, indium and silver among others). These minor metals began to be used in industrial applications only thirty years ago and there is a lack of information regarding recycling process efficiency Alternative solutions to recycling from the demand side are substitution, dematerialization or resource efficiency and most likely a combination of all, together with increases in reserves, will take place. Considering the green technologies analyzed, electric vehicles will probably demand the largest quantities of critical materials. Constraints are mainly focused on metals for battery manufacturing such as lithium, cobalt and nickel, which fall in high and medium risk categories. Additionally, there could be constraints regarding manufacturing of steel alloys that need chromium or molybdenum and with certain electric and electronic equipments, which require neodymium, dysprosium, silver, copper or tantalum. In the case of solar photovoltaic, along with large quantities of silicon As for CSP, it demands silver, copper, nickel and molybdenum, among others. Silver is used to build high performance solar glasses, while nickel and molybdenum are used for high strength steels and copper mainly for electric grids. These elements fall into the high risk category with the exception of molybdenum which is in the medium risk category. Last, in the case of wind power, the highest risks are associated to the use of permanent magnets, as they require neodymium and dysprosium. Nevertheless, it must be taken into account that copper constraints could also affect this technology mainly for the demand needed to build electric distribution grids. As stated before, in this study, demand in other sectors has been assumed constant until 2050. This is an optimistic scenario since if population grows to 9700 M inhabitants before 2050 Still, some of these constraints might be partially overcome at least by substituting certain elements in each green technology. For instance, in the case of wind turbines, rather than using permanent magnets, wound-rotor generators can be used. Additionally, some research projects from all over the world are also trying to decrease the use of REE in green technologies or look for alternatives To reduce emissions and to move towards a complete low carbon economy, green technologies must be promoted. However, to manufacture them, many critical elements are needed and, as seen in this paper, raw material availability can produce restrictions and bottlenecks that should be avoided. Having a better understanding of what materials are used in each green technology might become critical from a supply side point of view and can favor the promotion of policies related to recycling, substitution, or material efficiencies able to prevent those bottlenecks. Analyzing the materials used in the selected green technologies (solar photovoltaic, concentrated solar power, wind power and electric and hybrid vehicles) different constraints have been identified regarding material demand and available reserves, resources and future primary production. Current green technologies depend on certain materials whose risks have been classified as very high, high or medium. Materials which present a very high risk are those where cumulative demand from 2016 to 2050 exceeds resources (tellurium). With high risk are those where cumulative demand surpasses reserves (silver, cadmium, cobalt, chromium, copper, gallium, indium, lithium, manganese, nickel, tin and zinc). Medium risk commodities are those whose demand might at some point exceed production before 2050 (silver, cobalt, indium, lithium, manganese, molybdenum, dysprosium, neodymium, nickel, selenium, tin, tantalum and tellurium). Technologies which are affected by these bottlenecks are solar photovoltaic, with indium, gallium, selenium, tellurium and silver requirements, electric vehicles, that need cobalt, lithium, molybdenum and gallium among others, wind power which demands permanent magnets (i.e. REE) and solar thermal power that requires silver and molybdenum. Moreover, considering each specific green technology, it is noteworthy that not all available commercial products have the same impact on raw materials. For instance, for wind power, the demand of permanent magnets is lower in the case of turbines with gearbox. Additionally, in solar cells the demand of critical materials is lower in crystalline silicon technologies than in thin film technologies. In solar thermal power systems, a parabolic trough contain less “risk materials” than a central receiver system and so does PHEV with respect to BEV due to the lower material demand to manufacture batteries. Therefore, if current material demands and recycling quotes continue in a business as usual scenario, the transition towards a low carbon economy will be threatened by the availability of certain commodities. This issue should be analyzed in depth to define appropriate strategies that avoid the mentioned bottlenecks. These strategies might be focused on: (1) investments in geological exploration to increase current reserves and resources; (2) to invest in new technologies able to obtain commodities from unconventional sources, i.e. lithium extraction technologies from salt-lake brines and sea water using lithium ion-sieve (LIS) technology; (3) research in the design of green technologies with lower requirements of critical raw materials such as metal-air batteries, generators without permanent magnets or organic photovoltaic solar cells; (4) investing in recycling technologies that are able to recover critical materials based on environmental friendly processes; (5) a combination of all them by means of defining eco-design strategies that reduce the use of critical raw materials and also improve end of life material recovery. This last option would also prevent that critical raw materials end up in landfills, where their retrieval is considerably harder. A proper strategy must bear in mind the own characteristics of materials and technical specifications of products and process. The thermodynamic limits of recycling, rebound effects in raw material demand caused by recycling improvements and the fact that substitutability between materials may decrease product performance, increase the price, or both, must not be forgotten. Finally, as there are important gaps in the mineral statistics at world level, further studies must be made concerning evaluation and characterization of mineral deposits to have better assessments of available mineral resources. Having international standards that can be used by mining companies is a first approach, but other problems related with exploration and technology development must be solved. This paper has been carried out under the framework of MEDEAS project (Guiding European Policy toward a low-carbon economy: Modelling Energy system Development under Environmental and Socioeconomic constraints), Grant agreement no. The authors acknowledge the support offered by Dr. Cesar Torres and Dr. Ricardo Celorrio to develop the mathematical model and M.Sc. Ricardo Magdalena and M.Sc. Miguel Angel Velarde for their support in assessing the material demand of some studied technologies. Ph.D. Alicia Valero is a senior researcher at CIRCE (Research Centre for Energy Resources and Consumption) in Zaragoza, Spain. Prof. Antonio Valero is a professor of the Department of Mechanical Engineering at the University of Zaragoza and director of CIRCE Institute. Ph.D. Guiomar Calvo is a researcher at CIRCE Institute, Zaragoza (Spain). MSc. Abel Ortego is a researcher and Ph.D. Student at CIRCE, Zaragoza (Spain).  See Appendix See Appendix See Appendix See Appendix For the assessment of materials used in batteries, it has been considered that current battery market situation is led by Li: ion batteries as demonstrated by the fact that both Nissan and Tesla are currently using Li: ion batteries in their vehicles See Appendix