Although set-up costs are prevalent and substantial in natural resource extraction, it is known that a Walrasian competitive equilibrium cannot exist in simple extraction models with set-up costs. This paper demonstrates that this result is sensitive to the assumption of unlimited extraction capacity and derives sufficient conditions for existence. An equilibrium exists if extraction is limited such that each firm earns sufficient surplus to cover its set-up costs or if firms choose extraction capacity subject to non-increasing returns. The resulting competitive equilibrium price either grows at the rate of interest when total extraction is below industry capacity or is constant when industry capacity is fully utilized. In the equilibrium, identical deposits are opened simultaneously, and set-up costs for new deposits are incurred when the industry has excess capacity rather than when capacity is fully utilized.Set-up costs of natural resource extraction include costs of tunneling, drilling wells, building pipelines, searching for deposits, and removing overburden from strip mines. The difficulties of analyzing set-up costs have led to rule-of-thumb analysis or to neglect of set-up costs. This paper derives sufficient conditions for the existence of a competitive equilibrium in natural resource extraction with set-up costs. The literature demonstrating non-existence has modeled set-up costs as exogenous and unrelated to extraction capacity. This paper demonstrates that if set-up costs arise from the installation of extraction capacity, then—despite non-convex production sets—the existence of a competitive equilibrium can be saved by recognizing that extraction capacity may be limited. In particular, a competitive equilibrium can exist if current extraction is sufficiently limited or if firms choose their extraction capacity.  In the literature on non-existence, Hartwick et al. and Fischer argue that extraction from identical deposits with set-up costs and constant marginal extraction costs should be strictly sequential. There is, however, a more fundamental difficulty for existence which does not depend on the strict sequencing of extraction, namely: a price-taking firm has an incentive to delay incurring its set-up costs beyond the efficient date. To illustrate, consider a market with a single, price-taking firm owning one deposit which requires set-up costs and has constant marginal extraction costs. Analysis of multiple deposits with set-up costs introduces an additional difficulty for existence: discontinuities in the efficient marginal benefit path. Hartwick et al. showed that the marginal benefit path should jump down each time a new deposit is opened and then should grow at the rate of interest. Consider extraction of an exhaustible resource from heterogeneous deposits. Assume there are two types of deposits called To proceed further, the set-up costs and extraction technology must be described. Two types of technology are analyzed below: To demonstrate existence of a competitive equilibrium, arbitrary time paths of prices, consumption, and extraction can be defined. If these paths characterize a competitive equilibrium, then a competitive equilibrium exists. Define the price, production, and consumption paths as the optimizers of the following constrained optimization problem: To provide intuition for this optimization, note that it looks very much like a planner's problem with two deposits. The objective function is the present value of consumer surplus less extraction and set-up costs. The first constraint ensures that extraction from the shallow deposit does not exceed its initial stock. The second constraint ensures that the total extracted from all the deep deposits does not exceed the initial stock of the deep deposits. The remaining two constraints ensure that extraction from the deep deposits does not occur before the set-up costs are incurred and thereafter does not exceed capacity. Note, however, that the optimization is not the social planner's problem since it does not allow the flexibility of installing different capacity in each deep deposit at different times. The Kuhn–Tucker first order and complementary slackness conditions for To compute the optimal time to install the capacities, first note that the optimal extraction paths need not be continuous at T. Let  See   See  The price and extraction paths which will be a competitive equilibrium can now be described. Under the sufficient conditions in  See The competitive equilibrium in  The conditions in If the sufficient conditions in For the endogenous capacity technology, the set-up costs are assumed to be a differentiable function of capacity with Defining As above, the following lemmas are used to describe  See  See If positive capacities are installed,  See   The first welfare theorem. The existence results can be generalized to analyze set-up costs in resources with various sizes and costs by noting that the shallow deposit can model all deposits for which set-up costs have already been sunk. An equilibrium with many deposits has the following properties: (a) the price is alternately flat or grows at the rate of interest, (b) the price is flat when industry capacity is fully utilized, (c) the price rises when the industry has excess capacity, (d) the marginal producer, for whom net price equals scarcity cost, has excess capacity, (e) set-up costs are incurred when the price reaches the trigger price for that deposit, (f) each trigger price is increasing in average cost but decreasing in deposit size, (g) additional capacity is installed when industry capacity is not fully utilized, (h) set-up costs are incurred simultaneously for identical deposits, and (i) extraction from a deposit is only below capacity when the price—net of extraction costs for that deposit—grows at the rate of interest. If current extraction is exogenously constrained, the sufficient conditions in The case of increasing marginal extraction costs deserves special comment. Note that the fixed capacity technology with constant marginal costs approximates a marginal cost curve which is relatively flat for small quantities but then is very steep at larger quantities. The sufficient conditions in  The sufficient conditions for existence of competitive equilibrium allow the tools of competitive equilibrium analysis to be applied to problems in natural resource extraction with significant set-up costs. For example, first, the competitive equilibrium prices and allocations can be compared to observed market outcomes to estimate inefficiencies from market failures. Finally, empirical tests of the competitive theory of exhaustible resources have largely neglected set-up costs. Although set-up costs are prevalent and substantial in natural resource extraction, the previous literature has shown that their inclusion in the analysis implies that a competitive equilibrium cannot exist. However, non-existence is sensitive to the assumption of unlimited extraction capacity. When models correctly account for limited extraction capacity, the sufficient conditions imply existence of a competitive equilibrium. The sufficient conditions can facilitate use of the tools of competitive equilibrium analysis in analyzing natural resource markets with set-up costs. Many thanks to Stephen Salant, Chad Hogan, Michael R. Moore,and Dallas Burtraw. Thanks to the RFF Joseph L. Fisher Doctoral Dissertation Fellowship for financial support.   When extraction is from the shallow deposit, If If  When S is smaller, its shadow value,  Consider the price path,  Suppose  Note that in Conversely, if  If If To calculate the integral of the shadow value of the capacity constraint if all capacities are installed simultaneously and If