Some displaced greater tuberosity fractures of the proximal humerus can result in pain, stiffness, and prolonged disability when treated nonoperatively. Neer Minimally invasive techniques for greater tuberosity reduction and fixation have been developed to minimize dissection and associated morbidity. Arthroscopic techniques emphasize percutaneous reduction of the greater tuberosity fragment with cannulated screw fixation. A 54-year-old, left hand–dominant woman sustained a fall inside her house and landed onto her left upper extremity. She immediately had shoulder pain and weakness. On physical examination, her left shoulder revealed active forward elevation of 120°, passive forward elevation of 165°, and 60° of external rotation. There was 3/5 strength in forward elevation and external rotation. Otherwise, she had normal neurovascular examination results. Anteroposterior, lateral, and axillary radiographs revealed a fracture of the greater tuberosity that was displaced posterior, superior, and medial ( Given the patient’s pain and limitation in daily activities and the magnitude of greater tuberosity fragment displacement, surgical management was elected. Intrascalene anesthesia was instituted, and the patient was positioned in the beach-chair position. A posterior portal was established, and the arthroscope was introduced into the glenohumeral joint. Diagnostic arthroscopy revealed an intact labrum and chondral surfaces of the glenoid and humeral head. The greater tuberosity fragment was visualized and was noted to be displaced medial and posterior adjacent to the glenoid. The arthroscope was then placed in the subacromial space. The fracture bed in the greater tuberosity was well visualized ( A suture lasso device was used to pass a No. 2 FiberWire suture (Arthrex, Naples, FL) through the supraspinatus tendon adjacent to the tuberosity fragment to act as a traction stitch ( Two 5.0-mm bioabsorbable suture anchors were placed medial to the greater tuberosity fracture bed adjacent to the articular surface ( The greater tuberosity fragment was reduced by use of tension on the traction stitch. The medial mattress stitches from each medial anchor were then tied to one another, with excellent soft-tissue fixation attached to the bony fragment. The fragment at this point was noted to be elevated laterally and not compressed into its fracture bed. Two 5.0-mm bioabsorbable suture anchors were placed lateral to the greater tuberosity fracture bed at 45° angles directed medially. A single limb from the sutures remaining in the medial anchors was shuttled through each lateral anchor, as shown in At 9 days postoperatively, the sutures were removed, and the patient started physical therapy for passive range of motion. At 6 weeks, her radiographs showed no interval displacement of the fracture, and she began active range of motion and terminal stretches and discontinued using the sling. At 3 months, she began strengthening. At her last follow-up, 12 months after surgery, she had no pain and was satisfied with her return to preinjury activities. Physical examination revealed active forward elevation to 165°, external rotation to 60°, and internal rotation to T10. She had no weakness to resisted external rotation or forward elevation when compared with her contralateral arm and had negative impingement signs. Postoperative radiographs showed greater tuberosity healing in an excellent position ( Two-part greater tuberosity fractures account for approximately 15% of displaced proximal humeral fractures with or without anterior glenohumeral dislocation. Neer Traditionally, open reduction–internal fixation of the greater tuberosity fragment via an anterosuperior, deltoid-splitting approach has been effective. Open reduction of greater tuberosity fractures has the advantage of direct visualization and accurate reduction of the greater tuberosity fragment onto the fracture bed. However, the morbidity to the deltoid and risk of injury to the axillary nerve exists. In addition, greater tuberosity fractures, particularly those fractures seen in conjunction with anterior glenohumeral dislocations, often have associated intra-articular injuries, including Bankart lesions, loose bodies, and labral tears. These injuries are not fully appreciated and cannot be adequately addressed with open reduction of greater tuberosity fractures via traditional surgical approaches. Current arthroscopic techniques described for fixation of displaced greater tuberosity fractures emphasize arthroscopic visualization of the glenohumeral joint, greater tuberosity fragment, and fracture bed. Fixation is achieved with cannulated screws introduced percutaneously. Our report is the first to describe an all-arthroscopic technique for reduction and fixation of a displaced greater tuberosity fragment via bioabsorbable suture anchor fixation. The technique allows adequate evaluation of the glenohumeral joint in search of additional intra-articular pathology, sufficient visualization of the greater tuberosity fragment, preparation of the fracture bed, reduction of the fragment, and adequate compression and fixation of the fragment. The strength of fixation is achieved through the stronger rotator cuff tissue. In addition, compression of the fragment against the fracture bed that enhances fracture healing is also facilitated. We conclude that this all-arthroscopic approach to greater tuberosity fractures can provide a successful alternative to current combined arthroscopic-percutaneous fixation techniques for isolated greater tuberosity fractures of the proximal humerus.