Uranium bearing ores are often a complex mixture of minerals and compounds, a number of which are not of economic importance and are commonly referred to as gangue materials. In order to improve the efficiency of the dissolution stage of the overall uranium extraction process, a greater understanding of the minerals and compounds present in the ore is required. A greater knowledge of the gangue materials present is important as they can influence various aspects of the dissolution process such as providing potential adsorption sites for aqueous uranium species and through influencing the equilibrium of reactions involving aqueous uranium species. In this study the mineralogy of a uranium ore was investigated using a range of X-ray diffraction (XRD) based methods including in situ high temperature XRD and XRD using a synchrotron beam line. The results obtained from standard XRD (Cu Kα), high temperature XRD and synchrotron XRD (16.534keV) were compared and a number of minerals were identified. The improved spatial resolution and intensity of the synchrotron data allowed for superior phase identification of a variety of minerals where standard X-ray techniques gave inconclusive results.There are a number of uranium deposits around the world however each deposit is substantially unique in terms of the uranium minerals present, the composition of these minerals and the influential surrounding gangue minerals ( Synchrotron based techniques have previously been employed in the characterisation of complex ores and materials. Some of these studies have reported promising results ( The main aim of this study was to investigate the mineralogy of a uranium bearing sample (ore tailings), that was derived from a uranium bearing ore, using standard XRD and synchrotron XRD. The mineralogy of the ore tailings was also investigated using in situ high temperature XRD and thermogravimetric analysis. A greater knowledge of the mineralogy of ores containing important metals such as uranium is important for understanding the complex chemical and physical processes that take place during extraction of uranium. A greater understanding of the capabilities and limitations of routine and non-routine techniques for characterising the aforementioned ores is also important for determining potential techniques for screening of certain types of ore samples. The ore sample used was sourced from a mine in South Australia. The ore had been pre-treated to reduce the particle size to less than 75 Standard X-ray diffraction patterns were obtained on a Bruker D8 Advance fitted with a copper tube (Cu Kα radiation), monochromator and scintillation detector. Diffraction patterns were run using a 1° fixed divergence slit, a step size of 0.015°, 2.5 All high temperature XRD (HT-XRD) analysis was conducted on a Bruker D8 Advanced X-ray Diffractometer using a Cu Kα radiation source coupled with a HTK 2000 high temperature attachment. A 1° divergence slit was used to analyse between the 2 Synchrotron X-ray diffraction patterns were obtained using the X-ray diffraction instrument at the Australian Synchrotron using a photon energy of 16.5 Thermogravimetric analysis (TGA) was conducted using a Perkin Elmer TGA 7 – Thermogravimetric analyser attached to a Perkin Elmer thermal analysis controller TAC 7/DX with a Perkin Elmer gas selector, to ascertain the mass losses of the sample. All samples were analysed with the following method: hold at 20 The XRD pattern of the ore tailings obtained using a standard XRD instrument is given in The smaller peaks in the XRD pattern of the ore tailings which were almost indistinguishable from the background were investigated in detail and though no conclusive identification could be made, library match data indicated that minerals such as sericite (KAl High temperature in situ XRD analysis of the ore tailings was conducted to investigate if more information on the minerals present could be obtained using this technique. The results of the in situ HT-XRD analysis are presented in Thermogravimetric studies were conducted on the ore tailings to investigate if heating the ore tailings resulted in any reactions/processes that caused significant changes in the ore tailings mass. The results of the thermogravimetric analysis (TGA) of the ore tailings are presented in The XRD pattern of the ore tailings obtained using a synchrotron light source is presented in The reproducibility of the XRD pattern obtained using synchrotron light was investigated. This was undertaken as the homogeneity of ore samples can vary significantly and it was decided to determine if any bias due to non-homogeneity of the ore tailings may have contributed to the differences in minerals identified using standard XRD and synchrotron XRD. It was found that XRD patterns of three separate samples contained identical peaks which only varied slightly in intensity ( In situ HT-XRD and synchrotron XRD techniques provided increased mineralogy information over the standard XRD technique for a complex sample derived from a uranium bearing ore (ore tailings). Results obtained from standard XRD analysis allowed confident identification of only hematite and quartz. In situ HT-XRD enabled the further confident identification of fluorite (using a process of elimination and the stability of bornite and uraninite at high temperatures). In situ HT-XRD results also confirmed the presence of a significant quantity of a copper bearing mineral/compound due to the formation of cuprospinel that was observed at high temperatures. The improved spatial resolution and intensity of the synchrotron data allowed for superior phase identification of a variety of minerals where standard X-ray techniques gave inconclusive results. Synchrotron data allowed identification of minor phases including florencite, barite and birnessite with trace amounts of other minerals including rutile, siderite, chalcopyrite, cuprospinel, alurgite, muscovite and calcite. Due to the trace levels of various minerals and plausible elemental substitution of many minerals X-ray diffraction data alone was not able to be used to determine the complete mineralogy of such a complex assemblage. However the enhanced data obtained from the synchrotron has provided a greater understanding of the ore and will complement further analysis using other techniques. The authors thank the Australian Research Council and BHP-Billiton for supporting this project through the Australian Research Council Linkage Projects Scheme.