Amorphous solid dispersions are a promising option for managing compounds with poor aqueous solubility. However, for compounds with high melting points, thermal stability limitations, or poor solubility in volatile solvents, conventional routes of hot melt extrusion or spray drying may not be viable. Co-precipitated amorphous dispersions (cPAD) can provide a solution. For the material studied in this paper, the cPAD material that was seemingly identical to spray dried material in terms of being single phase amorphous (as measured by DSC and XRD ) but showed slower dissolution behavior. It was identified that physical properties of the cPAD material could be improved to enhance wettability and improve dissolution performance. This was achieved by incorporating the cPAD material into a matrix of water soluble excipients generated via evaporative isolation routes. Importantly, this approach appears to offer another route to further increase the drug load in final dosage units and is significant as increased drug loading generally results in slower or incomplete release. Results showed successful proof of concept via in vitro biorelevant dissolution and confirmatory canine pharmacokinetic studies yielding comparable exposure for capsules comprised of conventional spray dried material as well as capsules with elevated drug load comprised of cPAD hierarchical particles.Among the increasing number of options for improving bioavailability of poorly soluble compounds that retain the option for oral dosage administration ( Hot melt extrusion is an important route to generate amorphous dispersions ( Spray drying is another versatile route to generate amorphous solid dispersions used for early scale development and commercial compounds ( While hot melt extrusion and spray drying can accommodate many APIs, additional options are needed for compounds having low solubility in volatile solvents, thermal instabilities, or viscosity limitations. Several additional approaches to make amorphous dispersions include stabilization in a meso porous excipient matrix ( Co-precipitation was one of the first routes to generate amorphous solid dispersions ( A study of the performance of precipitated materials relative to hot melt extrusion materials ( An additional study of the performance of a co-precipitated amorphous dispersion (cPAD) to spray dried materials yielded similar results in terms of the properties assessed by DSC, XRPD, and solid state stability ( Rotor/stator devices are well understood and scalable ( With the comparability to HME and SDI established, the next phase of evaluation of cPAD materials involves exploring how further improvements can be made. Specifically, cPAD could offer routes to modulate the dissolution behavior and increase the drug load of amorphous solid dispersions owing to drastically different physical properties of that can be generated via this route. It is well established that dissolution generally slows down upon increasing drug load in amorphous solid dispersions from the powders themselves ( The API was synthesized internally. The polymer HPMCAS, M grade, was purchased from ShinEtsu. Lactose was purchased from Foremost, and was subsequently spiral jet milled. Lecithin (refined grade) was purchased from Alfa Aesar. Sodium taurocholate (natural grade) was purchased from Spectrum Chemicals. Sodium chloride (≥99%), 12 N HCl (36.5–38% w/w), sodium phosphate monobasic monohydrate (≥98%), and NaOH solution (50% w/w) were purchased from Fisher Scientific. All water was purified using a Milli-Q water system (18.2 MΩ, <5 ppb organic matter). Compound A and HPMCAS-M were co-dissolved at 110 mg/mL in MEK (methy ethyl ketone). The antisolvent, n-heptane, was recirculated through an HV0 rotor stator wet mill (Quadro Engineering Corp, Waterloo, ON). Two precipitation conditions were explored. These were the high shear precipitations – looking to implement the most rapid quench rate that could practically be achieved, and a low shear precipitation – implementing a slower quench seeking to modify physical properties of the product. The n-heptane was recirculated through the wet mill with the emulsion tooling at the natural draw of the mill. The flow rate was approximately 18 L/min while operating at 70 m/s tip speed for the high shear precipitations, and 4 L/min while operating at 15 m/s tip speed for the low shear precipitation. In the case of the high shear conditions, the n-heptane was also pre-cooled to −15 °C, and was used at a volumetric ratio of 15-1 to the MEK. In the case of the low shear conditions, the n-heptane was kept at approximately 25 °C, and was used at a volumetric ratio of 6-1 to the MEK. The MEK solution containing Compound A and HPMCAS was added approximately at 1/15th and 1/6th the flow rate of the n-heptane for the high shear and low shear precipitations respectively. This solution was added directly to the mill head, where precipitation occurred. The spray dried intermediate with a 50%w/w drug loading of Compound A: HPMCAS was prepared by a spray drying process where drug and HPMCAS were co-dissolved in acetone at the target ratio and a 12.5%w/w solids loading. The acetone solution was spray dried with a PSD1 spray dryer with a Schlick 2-fluid nozzle to produce amorphous solid dispersion powders. For the spray drying process, the solution feed rate and gas flow rate was 106 g/min and 1500 g/min respectively, and the inlet temperature and outlet temperatures were 86 °C and 45 °C respectively. The suspension from the precipitation process was carried forward. Additional water soluble excipients were added, primarily comprised of micronized lactose. All excipients were insoluble in the final MEK/n-heptane solvent system. The lactose was micronized using a 2 in. Micron-Master spiral jet mill (Jet Pulverizer, Moorestown, NJ) operating with nitrogen pressures at 125 PSI for the injector and 65 PSI for the grinder. These conditions resulted in lactose having an D50 of approximately 1.8 µm as measured using static light scattering system with a dry disperser at 3.5 bar pressure (Sympatec, Pulverhaus Germany). This suspension was fed at a rate of approximately 150 mL/min via peristaltic pump to a 0.5 ft Powder X-ray diffraction (XRPD) patterns were collected using a Philips X’pert diffractometer (Panalytical, USA) with transmission mode. Experiments were performed using a voltage of 40 kV and current of 45 mA. Data were collected over a scan range of 2–40° 2θ with a scanning speed of 0.0053 deg/min and a step size of 0.0334°. Samples were analyzed on kapton plate with 96 positions. Modulated differential scanning calorimetry (mDSC) measurements were performed with the Q2000 DSC of TA Instruments. In the mDSC measurement, solid dispersion materials (4–5 mg) were annealed in open aluminum pans from 20 °C to 170 °C under dry nitrogen (45 mL/min). The heating rate was 2 °C/min. The modulation period was 60 s and the modulation amplitude was ±0.5 °C. SEM images were obtained with a Quanta FEG250 instrument (FEI Co.). The SEM images were collected using a 20 kV accelerating voltage. Particle size was measured using static light scattering system with a dry disperser at 3.5 bar pressure (Sympatec, Pulverhaus Germany). Surface area measure was conducted on a Micromeritics Gemini 2360 system by nitrogen adsorption using the BET adsorption model. Solid dosage formulations in capsules were prepared for both co-precipitated amorphous dispersion (cPAD) hierarchical particles and spray dried intermediate (SDI) powders to conduct the dog PK study. Materials were manually filled into size 3 hard gelatin capsules. Material weight per capsule was adjusted for both the cPAD hierarchical particles and spray dried formulations to maintain a 5 mg potency level. The cPAD material containing micronized lactose was directly filled into capsules without additional formulation process. The spray dried intermediate was formulated into granules with other excipients through a blending-slugging-sieving process prior to capsule filling. The slugging pressure was 150 MPa and slugs were pushed through a sieve with mesh size of 600 µm to generate granules, which were filled into capsules The SGF (Simulated Gastric Fluid) was prepared with sodium chloride (34.2 mM) and the pH was adjusted to 1.8 with 12 N HCl. The 4× FaSSIF (Fasted State Simulated Intestinal Fluid) was prepared as previously described using sodium taurocholate (12 mM), lecithin (3 mM), sodium phosphate monobasic monohydrate (114.5 mM) and sodium chloride (423.7 mM) ( Prior to solubility experiments, 4× FaSSIF was diluted to 25% of its concentration with MiliQ water and the pH adjusted to 6.5 with NaOH solution (50% w/w). The solubility of crystalline Compound A in FaSSIF was determined by adding excess solid into volumetric flasks and stirring the samples at 500 rpm. ∼1 mL solution was sampled from the flasks at 1, 4 and 24 h. The samples were centrifuged at 14,000 rpm for 10 min to remove any undissolved particles. The concentration of Compound A was then determined using HPLC-UV. Dissolution studies were conducted utilizing a Distek 2100C (Distek Inc., North Brunswick, NJ) Apparatus II (paddle) USP instrument. The 4× FaSSIF was diluted to 50% with water to generate 2× FaSSIF and the pH was adjusted to 6.9 with NaOH solution (50% w/w). 5 mL of SGF and 5 mL of 2× FaSSIF were added together, stirred, and the final pH was verified to be 6.5. To run the dissolution experiment, 250 mL of SGF solution was warmed in the standard Distek 1000 mL dissolution vessels to 37 ± 0.5 °C. The rotation of the paddles was stopped, the powders were introduced to the media and a small amount of media used to rinse the vials and returned to the vessel. The paddle rotation was started at 100 rpm. After 30 min, 250 mL of 2× FaSSIF, warmed to 37 ± 0.5 °C was added to each dissolution vessel. Fluid samples were collected through a 10 µm cannula filter and 1 µm glass inline filter manually at 15 and 30 min, then through a 10 µm cannula filter and 1 µm glass inline filter at 40, 50, 60, 90 and 120 min using an Distek 2230A dissolution sampling system (Distek Inc., North Brunswick, NJ). Dissolution experiments were performed in triplicate. Sample concentrations were determined by HPLC-UV. The pharmacokinetic (PK) studies were carried out at Charles River Laboratories, 334 South Street, Shrewsbury, MA 01545. Animal studies were reviewed and approved by the IACUC (Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee). The Guide and Animal Welfare regulations were followed in the conduct of the animal studies. Six male Beagle dogs were assigned to the PK study. The dog weights at the time of the study were in the range of 9.8–10.9 kg. A 3-period, 3-treatment, full cross-over PK study design was employed. A one-week washout period separated each dose administration. At Week One two dogs were dosed with formulation A (Conventional SDI granules 10%DL), two dogs with formulation B (cPAD hierarchical particle formulation 20%DL), and two dogs with formulation C (cPAD hierarchical particle formulation 30%DL); at week two the same dogs were dosed with formulation C, formulation A, and formulation B, respectively; at week three the same dogs were dosed with formulation B, formulation A, and formulation C, respectively. Animals were fasted overnight prior to the dosing of Compound A (total fasting time not to exceed 24 h). Each dog was pretreated with pentagastrin 30 min pre-dose via an intramuscular injection of pentagastrin at 0.006 mg/kg. This pretreatment served to transiently reduce the gastric pH, decreasing variability in pH commonly seen in canine stomachs, and making it comparable to human stomach pH. Then, each dog was dosed with a single size-3, hard-gelatin capsule containing formulation A, B, or C (all at 5 mg dose strength). The capsule dosing was followed by 3.5 mL/kg water administered via oral gavage. Drinking water was returned to animals 1 h post-dose, and feed was returned 4 h post-dose. Two 1 mL blood samples were drawn at predetermined time intervals: zero (pre-dose), 15 m, 30 m, 1 h, 2 h, 4 h, 6 h, 8 h, 24 h post-dose into EDTA-containing, BD Microtainer tubes (ref# 365974, 500 μL). Samples were then spun at 10,000 rpm for 2 min (Eppendorf, 5810R centrifuge, using a 9.5 cm high speed rotor, Eppendorf F45-30-11) to separate plasma and plasma was stored at −80 °C until LC–MS analysis. The PK parameters were obtained through a non-compartmental analysis performed in Phoenix™ WinNonlin® 6.3.0.395 (Certara L.P.). Since some 24 h plasma samples were below level of quantification for consistency of analysis and to avoid errors in terminal plasma half-life propagation only zero-8 h samples were included in the PK analysis. PK parameters are reported as arithmetic mean ± standard deviation. Co-precipitated amorphous dispersion (cPAD) and spray dried intermediate (SDI) powders were generated utilizing 50% Compound A and 50% HPMCAS-M. Compound A is a weak acid with a crystalline solubility of <10 µg/mL in Fasted State Simulated Intestinal Fluid, FaSSIF. The low solubility of the compound makes it a prime candidate for formulation as an amorphous solid dispersion to increase the kinetic solubility and bioavailability. Indeed, formulation of the API with HPMCAS-M as an amorphous dispersion increases the solubility by an order of magnitude in FaSSIF. The most notable differences between the cPAD and SDI products involved the physical properties of isolated solids. The SDI powders had a mixture of collapsed spheres and spherical particles with an average particle size of ∼35 µm and a surface area of 0.5 m The cPAD and SDI processes resulted in single phase amorphous glasses with indistinguishable thermal properties. Differential scanning calorimetry (DSC) experiments for all the cPAD and SDI powders show that all materials had a single Tg of ∼115 °C ( To this point, all data has shown that cPAD (high and low shear) and SDI powders with the same composition have similar physical properties except for surface areas. In particular, cPAD materials made with high shear have a significantly higher surface area compared to the SDI and cPAD (low shear) powders with similar surface areas. Biorelevant dissolution is an in vitro test utilized to mimic the average conditions experienced in the human GI tract. Two-stage dissolution begins with the simulated gastric fluid and a pH of 1.8. The samples are maintained in the acidic media for 30 min, representing the average retention time of a dosage form in the stomach. The second stage utilizes FaSSIF, which includes a representative bile salt, sodium taurocholate, and lecithin, and has a higher pH of 6.8. This stage is sampled for a further 90 min and simulates the conditions a dosage form would experience in the intestinal compartment. Hypothetically, the dissolution mechanism of an amorphous dispersion would be comprised of a number of steps. In the first acidic stage, the ionic polymer HPMCAS-M exhibits low solubility, and therefore, the amount of API dissolved would be limited to the material that is surface exposed. Then, upon addition of FaSSIF, the polymer can undergo dissolution at the higher pH and the API entrapped within the amorphous dispersion particles can then be released and dissolved. Dissolution release rates can be related to a number of factors, including surface area, composition, morphology/surface energies, etc. Assuming that other factors are kept constant, one would expect that the material with a higher surface area would result in a faster dissolution rate ( A key factor in how a powder dissolves is related to its ability to wet, (sinking below the liquid surface) and this can be challenging for smaller or less dense particles ( Morphology, for example, could play a role in the wettability of the amorphous dispersion powders. Previously, properties such as surface roughness and shape have been correlated to changes in the wettability of the material wherein the morphology correlates to differences in surface energy ( It follows that modification of the surface properties for the cPAD powders in order to improve wettability would be an ideal way capitalize on the potential benefits of a higher surface area material, including faster dissolution and therefore higher bioavailability. A cPAD process followed by evaporative isolation affords a highly flexible platform that allows for the integration of multiple components into a sample in a continuous fashion, allowing for the generation of designer particles. Other processes to form amorphous dispersions, such as spray drying and hot melt extrusion would require a secondary step with an alternative process to generate particles with layered or complex structures, complicating the manufacturing process. However, with cPAD, other components can be simply added to the antisolvent or to the precipitated mixture prior to evaporative isolation. These components can be either dissolved or incorporated as a slurry (as was the case for material presented here), and collected with the amorphous dispersion during isolation and drying. This approach can introduce several unique benefits, such as intimately mixing the amorphous dispersion with components that may improve product performance in vivo, stability, and/or processing needs such as compressibility and flow. Importantly, slurry based processing circumvents inter-particle (van der Waals) forces that otherwise could be working against forming perfectly mixed particulate systems when processed as dry powders. In addition, this approach can be used to introduce formulation components to generate a blend that can be directly compressed. In contract, the bulk powder density of spray dried materials generally requires predensification via dry granulation prior to tablet compression. A cPAD process followed by incorporation of subsequent excipients and evaporative isolation to further deliver targeted properties with a direct compressible intermediate has notable implications in the realm of continuous processing as well. The benefits of a continuous direct compression process include a simplified control strategy, eliminating stability and segregation risk for intermediates, and allowing for changes to the scale of manufacturing simply by increasing the process time, rather than having to scale up equipment, among others ( In the study presented here, the primary concern involved mitigating the wettability issues with Compound A cPAD powders. Ideally, cPAD samples could have a continuous phase integrated into the processing such that it would coat the surface of the cPAD particles, resulting in decreased hydrophobicity of the cPAD particles. The overall process is illustrated in Using high shear cPAD materials for Compound A, a number of different continuous phases were screened with the quantities added to levels meant to mirror drug loadings of ∼10% w/w that were achieved for the roller compacted SDI granules. As can be seen in Of the three formulations dosed in vivo to Beagle dogs two showed very similar mean PK profiles. The cPAD hierarchical particles with 20% DL matched closely the conventional SDI granule formulation with 10%DL in AUC0-8 h (332.4 ± 150.0 ng·h/mL, and 324.9 ± 160.2 ng·h/mL, respectively), Cmax (107.4 ± 34.9 ng/mL and 106.9 ± 46.3 ng/mL, respectively), and a median Tmax of 1 h ( These in vivo results are in good agreement with the two-stage dissolution results reported in However, the concepts used for this platform are expected to be general to a large variety of APIs that would benefit from being formed as amorphous solid dispersions and further work to explore other systems using this approach are currently ongoing. In this case study, Compound A and HPMCAS-M amorphous solid dispersions were generated via spray drying and co-precipitation. Owing to the fact that this was not a fast crystallizing API, cPAD material could be generated using both high and low shear precipitation processes to interrogate the impact of physical properties. Both of the cPAD powders showed slower dissolution, which was attributed to decreased wettability of the powders compared to the SDI, related to their surface properties/morphology. Dry granulation via roller compaction slightly improved the dissolution of cPAD; however, the dissolution rate still lagged behind those of SDI granules. Finally, hierarchical cPAD particles were generated by embedding the cPAD materials in a water-soluble continuous phase achieved through incorporation of additional water soluble excipients and a subsequent evaporative isolation process. This process ultimately helped moderate the surface properties of the cPAD particles, and resulted in powders that matched the dissolution of SDI granules and allowed the drug loading to be increased to 20% without affecting the dissolution rate significantly. These materials were compared to SDI granules in a single-dose canine pharmacokinetic study, and cPAD hierarchical powders with a 20% drug loading were shown to have equivalent pharmacokinetic performance to 10% drug loading SDI granules, showing the utility of the generation of hierarchical particles to improve in vivo performance and as a path to producing higher drug loading amorphous solid dispersion. Selection of the continuous phase and bulking agents is critical to the performance of the amorphous solid dispersions and should be optimized based on the physicochemical properties of the API. In addition, this approach is expected to be an amendable to enabling a general platform for producing particles that have optimized stability, compressibility and flow compared to traditional amorphous solid dispersions, and whose compositions can be modified to allow for direct compression. None. The authors would like to thank W. Pete Wuelfing, Jason Ehrick, and Joe Kukura for their support.