Alkane–Tween85–water-systems have been used as model emulsion systems to demonstrate the feasibility of emulsification in stirred media mills. The influence of fundamental process parameters, i.e. emulsion formulation (oil mass fraction and oil-to-emulsifier mass ratio), stress conditions (grinding bead size and stirrer tip speed), process time and especially temperature on the emulsion droplet size and size distribution has been studied for this approach. By lowering the process temperature below the solidification temperature of the oil phase, coalescence and ripening can be significantly reduced. Smallest product droplets with x
                     1,2<10nm thus are obtained even for nominal oil mass fractions up to 20wt% in the hexadecane–Tween85–water system. The feasibility of the process proposed to produce nanoscale emulsions using oil phases loaded with compounds such as pigments and other fillers is demonstrated.Emulsions, i.e. colloidal systems composed of a continuous and a dispersed liquid represent a substantial part of products of the pharmaceutical and food industry ( Different devices for emulsification have been proposed so far. For low-viscous emulsions, devices using nozzles for the generation of defined flow conditions such as high pressure homogenizers, membranes, orifices or porous media (packed bed mixers) are frequently applied as well as methods exploiting cavitation phenomena. In the case of highly viscous dispersed phases rotor–stator devices are frequently used ( Within this account we show that stable water-n-alkane–Tween85 nanoemulsions can be produced by an alternative and scalable process applying stirred media mills. The stressing conditions in stirred media mills can be described by stress energy The stress number The possibility to produce nanoparticles in stirred media mills was shown by As will be outlined in this paper, remarkably, the shear and strain rates that may be realized in stirred media mills suffice for the production of nanoemulsions. The influence of process parameters such as grinding media size, stirrer tip speed, process temperature, i.e. emulsification of the liquid oil vs. ‘grinding’ of the solid oil phase and system composition on the emulsification result is discussed for hexadecane–Tween85–water systems. To minimize restrictions due to the emulsifier content (c.f. coalescence phenomena because of lack of emulsifier available in the system) high emulsifier to oil phase ratios have been applied. n-hexadecane (95%, for synthesis, Alfa Aesar) and n-dodecane (>99%, Sigma Aldrich) have been used as oil phase without further purification. Tween 85 (Sigma Aldrich), a polyoxyethylene (20) sorbitan oleate, has been applied as the emulsifier. The feasibility of loading the oil phase with an organic substance was demonstrated for pyrene (>98%, Alfa Aesar). The deionized water used for emulsification was supplied by a Millipore Simplicity 185 device. Emulsification experiments have been performed using a laboratory stirred media mill PE075 (Netzsch). Oil and emulsifier mass fractions between 1wt% and 20 Emulsion droplet size distributions have been obtained by dynamic light scattering measurements using an Ultrafine Particle Analyzer UPA device (Microtrac). All size measurements have been performed at room temperature. Dynamic and static interfacial tensions have been determined using the bubble pressure tensiometer BP100 (Krüss) and the droplet contour analysis device DSA100 (Krüss), respectively. In emulsification the droplets of the dispersed phase are disintegrated by the forces exerted by the continuous phase. Shear and strain stress (shear vs. elongation) ( In a first estimate the droplet diameter From Eq. Emulsification processes have been described applying the dimensionless quantities Weber number ( In general, there is a limiting droplet size, i.e. breakup of a droplet of diameter The characteristic deformation time In the case of turbulent flow the effect of viscous stress induced within the droplet due to internal flow by the deformation need to be considered. This effect is taken into account by the Ohnsorge number Different correlations have been proposed to outline the dependence of the product droplet size on the process conditions using rotor–stator devices or nozzles for emulsification (see e.g. In laminar shear flow the Sauter diameter In the turbulent flow regime droplets are formed due to shear forces exerted by eddies forming under turbulent conditions. The following dependence of the Sauter diameter on the volumetric energy density applies ( To the authors’ knowledge stirred media mills have not been proposed for emulsion formulation so far, although high shear rates may be realized in these devices. In stirred media mills depending on the grinding media used and the stirrer tip speed applied laminar as well as turbulent flow conditions together with different flow regimes (elongational flow and shear flow) and high shear rates can be realized, opening the possibility of emulsion formulation. A unified description of the underlying droplet breakup and coalescence mechanism in stirred media mills does not yet exist. Besides breakup due to different flow regimes, the limiting droplet size depends on the coagulation of droplets, i.e. coalescence, and on the kind and amount of emulsifier available in the system to stabilize the newly formed liquid–liquid interface. In general, the stabilization kinetics must be faster than the coagulation kinetics; otherwise the droplet size is determined by the coalescence rate. Although less surface active, smaller emulsifier molecules will result in smaller limiting droplet sizes: compared to long-chained emulsifiers like polymers, they exhibit faster adsorption kinetics to the liquid–liquid interface ( To gain long-term stability Ostwald ripening needs to be suppressed as far as possible. To this end, emulsions should have a narrow droplet size distribution. Moreover, emulsion systems composed of polymeric emulsifiers with long alkyl chains such as Tween and long-chained hydrocarbons as oil phase will be very stable because of their strong adsorption at the water–oil-interface and their low solubility in water ( The n-alkane-water-Tween systems used in this study have been extensively studied as emulsion model systems previously ( They argue that this rather large difference (at comparable molar mass) is due to the different constitution (c.f. monooleate (Tween80) vs. trioleate (Tween85)), i.e. probably Tween85 also will exhibit a somewhat different minimum interfacial area as compared to Tween80. To account for the uncertainty in minimum interfacial area occupied by a single emulsifier molecule we assumed for the considerations in section 4.2 minimum interfacial areas for the Tween85 molecule of 2.0 In order to study the influence of the process parameters of the stirred media mill on the emulsification result we mainly worked at high emulsifier concentrations, i.e. far above cmc where the effect of emulsifier concentration in terms of limiting droplet size and stabilization kinetics is minimized. The equilibrium interfacial tensions have been determined by contour analysis and Tween85 has been found to be an efficient emulsifier: The liquid–liquid interfacial tensions between the pure components have been determined to 47.9 As emulsification processes imply the generation of newly formed interfaces at small time scales information about liquid–liquid interfacial tensions at the respective characteristic times is useful. Estimates of the time scales relevant to emulsification can be deduced from simple considerations taking colloidal stability (c.f. stability factor W from DLVO theory) and an agglomeration mechanism governed by Brownian motion with subsequent coalescence into account. In the case of droplets of identical size the collision kernel From agglomeration kinetics the time-dependent particle number concentration In emulsification experiments we were able to produce oil droplets of Unfortunately, the dynamic liquid–liquid interfacial tension relevant to the emulsification process is hardly experimentally accessible for small surface ages ( The surface tension data obtained by bubble pressure tensiometry need to be carefully considered with respect to effects of solvent viscosity on ‘apparent’ interfacial tension; for the dilute aqueous Tween85 solution these effects can be neglected ( The influence of the oil-to-emulsifier mass ratio on the emulsification result at constant stress conditions ( An estimate according to Eq. Besides the oil-to-emulsifier ratio the stressing conditions will affect the resulting droplet size distribution. Quantitative predictions of the flow characteristics between the grinding beads in a stirred media mill are rare ( A quantitative description of flow patterns in stirred media mills is, however, not possible: Multiple flow patterns interfere with each other and are not easily predictable in terms of ‘simple’ analytical relationships. From numerical studies (  In With respect to emulsification kinetics, using larger grinding media (c.f. In order to check if the ‘emulsification’ process also works below the solidification temperature of the oil, i.e. if ‘grinding’ of solid oil might be an option for emulsion formulation in stirred media mills, the influence of the process temperature on the droplet size distribution of the resulting emulsion was evaluated for the hexadecane–Tween85-water system. In contrast to dodecane which has a melting point of about −10 After running the process for approx. 2 The influence of process temperature and oil phase mass fraction at constant oil-to-emulsifier ratio on the droplet size distribution of the resulting emulsion has been evaluated for experiments (‘grinding’ vs. emulsification) in the hexadecane–Tween85-water system at different process temperatures under similar stress conditions, too (see ‘Grinding’ the solid oil phase is also advantageous at higher oil mass fractions. Emulsions with a nominal oil mass fraction up to 20 From our findings on the influence of process temperature on the emulsification behavior of the hexadecane–Tween85-water system we conclude that working below the solidification temperature, i.e. ‘grinding’ the solid oil is advantageous with respect to kinetics. Moreover, very narrow droplet size distributions and smaller median particle sizes, as compared to emulsification at temperatures above the melting point, are obtained at temperatures below the solidification temperature of the oil in this system. ‘Grinding’ instead of emulsifying hexadecane is advantageous because coalescence, favoring ripening and thus an increase of the mean droplet size, may not occur in the former process. The emulsification process proposed also opens the opportunity to introduce additional compounds with sufficient solubility in the oil droplets. This possibility might be interesting in the formulation of filled emulsions and master batches with additional features such as color, fragrance, aromatic compounds, electrical conductivity, superparamagnetic properties and controlled release of components sparingly soluble in water. As ‘proof of concept’ we emulsified a pyrene-loaded hexadecane oil phase: 186 Similar droplet size distributions in dependence of process time are obtained if the emulsification experiment is performed at a smaller pyrene concentration of 1.59 The concept of loading the oil phase with additional substances of course is not restricted to pyrene and thus can be easily transferred to other compounds. The feasibility of stirred media mills for emulsion formulation in systems with high emulsifier content has been demonstrated. Product emulsions of Sauter diameters below 25 The influence of system composition and process parameters on the emulsification result has been outlined in detail. The lowest oil-to-emulsifier ratios considered have been most appropriate with respect to obtaining small mean droplet sizes and narrow droplet size distributions. It has been shown that the narrowest size distributions and the smallest mean droplet sizes (at constant oil-to-emulsifier ratio) are obtained at the lowest oil mass concentrations. Moreover, for the hexadecane-Tween85-water system it was shown that ‘grinding’ the solid oil, i.e. working below the solidification temperature, is advantageous as compared to emulsification of the liquid oil: smaller product droplets and narrower droplet size distributions are obtained. The better comminution result in ‘grinding’ as compared to emulsification of the liquid oil is due to the reduced coalescence rate. In principle, the same dependencies with respect to oil mass fraction present in the system as outlined for emulsification hold for ‘grinding’ of the solid hexadecane. This approach has been demonstrated to be applicable for hexadecane mass fractions up to 20 In addition, the possibility to load the oil phase with additional compounds has been demonstrated for pyrene as a ‘proof of concept’. The latter mentioned possibility makes the process interesting for the production of emulsions with tailored optical, electrical, magnetic and controlled release properties. The authors thank Nadine Klinger for assistance in emulsification experiments. This study has been supported by Supplementary data associated with this article can be found in the online version at 