The low strength of commercial purity aluminum can be increased by solid solution, precipitation/aging, work hardening and grain size decrease. The latter has been extensively studied utilizing Severe Plastic Deformation (SPD), leading, however, to a negligible final uniform tensile ductility of the material due to its low or negative work hardening rates. Microstructural and compositional techniques have been used to partially circumvent this problem. Multi-axial compression (MAC) of previously compressed aluminum can soften the material and lead to increased work hardening capacity under ulterior monotonic compression. In the present research, MAC was applied to aluminum after SPD employing Equal Channel Angular Pressing (ECAP). The material softened after MAC, and its ulterior compression evolved with a much higher work hardening rate than in the absence of MAC, thus opening a new possibility of mechanically increasing the work hardening capacity and uniform ductility of aluminum (and other materials) after ECAP.Aluminum is widely available and presents, low cost, light weight, corrosion resistance, ductility and attractive finish. High purity aluminum displays however a yield strength of only about 10 SPD has been achieved through ECAP (Equal Channel Angular Pressing) The material uniform ductility after SPD is very limited in the low temperature regime, for stress states with tensile components such as sheet forming, bending and simple tension An early study connected to MAC in aluminum was performed by Armstrong et al. The above findings suggest that the post-SPD work hardening capacity and consequent uniform tensile ductility of materials would increase through the application of MAC with a strain amplitude lower than the applied monotonic SPD deformation, but that some strength loss is also expected. This approach is simpler than the microstructural and compositional aspects already mentioned The present paper presents experimental results concerning the strength and work hardening behavior of commercial purity aluminum under monotonic compression after one ECAP pass followed by a limited number of low strain amplitude MAC. As predicted, the material softened after MAC and displayed high work hardening rates in the final monotonic compression step. No similar investigation was found in the literature. The material was commercial purity cast aluminum (Al-99.77, Fe-0.15, Si-0.06 Monotonic compression and tension tests were performed in the The annealed material (“  All testing was performed in duplicate in an INSTRON 5582 universal testing machine, at a crosshead speed of 0005  The stress-strain curve in the first compression of the The observation of the stress-strain curves displayed in  Necking (and thus the uniform strain Low strain amplitude Multi Axial Compression (MAC) in aluminum previously submitted to ECAP softens the material and increases its subsequent monotonic work hardening rate, without changes in the dimensions of the material and thus leading to the recovery of a substantial part of its pre-ECAP uniform strain under tension. An increase in the number of MAC cycles, as well as a decrease in the strain amplitude per cycle, cause increasing softening levels and gains in the work hardening capacity and tensile uniform strain ( The authors are grateful for the financial support of the