Through a hydrothermal process, materials contained copper-doped calcium phosphate (copper content 0.04–35.2 wt%) were prepared, which possessed space structure (specific surface area 18.4–89.6 m2/g) and maintained the activity of copper. The conditions of hydrothermal reaction were optimized, such as adding different organic compounds, adjusting pH, the concentration of reagents, reaction time, and temperature. By employing transmission electron microscope, scanning electron microscope, X-ray diffraction, Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy and other detection methods, to monitor the formation of the material, a mechanism was proposed. The material showed acceptable activity (better conversion than copper phosphate) and good recyclability (more than 5 recycles) in the aerobic oxidation of cyclohexene. The kinetic experiments at different temperature (40–60 °C) and time (0–12 h) indicated the reaction order with respect to cyclohexene was zero.Metal phosphate is an important inorganic material, which has been applied in various fields When porous calcium phosphate is used as bone cement, it has excellent biological properties and structural advantages, but with low mechanical intensity Among the catalytic reactions, the oxidation of olefins is an important reaction for converting hydrocarbons into oxygenated compounds, and the oxidation of cyclohexene is always being studied for its industrial application In this work, we designed and synthesized copper-doped calcium phosphate materials with mesoporous structures. By exploring experimental conditions and detecting different materials, we deduced a reasonable synthesis mechanism. The materials were utilized in the aerobic oxidation of cyclohexene. The conversion and selectivity of the reactants were detected by the gas chromatography (GC), and materials were recycled. We find that there are no significant variations between the materials before and after use, indicating that the material is stable, and it provides a suggestion for the heterogeneous reaction study. Ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid disodium salt (Na In a typical synthesis process, the mixed solution of Na The oxidation of cyclohexene catalyzed by the as-prepared copper-doped calcium phosphate (CDCP) was performed in a 50 mL one-necked flask at constant temperature under magnetic stirring. Firstly, 10 mmol cyclohexene, 100 mmol chloroform and 20 mg catalyst were added into a flask; then the flask kept vacuum by using the vacuum pump. When the system was heated to 50 °C, molecular oxygen was poured into the mixture from a balloon. The selectivity and conversion were determined by gas chromatography. The samples for transmission electron microscope (TEM) analysis were dispersed in ethanol by sonication. A small drop of suspension was added into copper mesh and dried in air. TEM analysis was carried out on a JEM-1230 instrument at 80 kV. In order to strengthen conductivity, the samples for scanning electron microscope (SEM) analysis were sprayed with gold. Under the condition of an acceleration voltage of 25.0 kV in Hitachi S-4800 electron microscope, SEM analysis was conducted. The collection of powder X-ray diffraction (XRD) data adopted a D/tex-Ultima TV wide angle X-ray diffractometer, supplied with Cu Ka radiation (1.54 Å), and made use of a scanning rate of 0.02 s Polycrystalline calcium phosphate nanospheres with mesoporous structures were synthesized by heating the starting mixtures with pH of 8–9 at 170 °C for 5 h. The sample 4 ( EDTA in the reaction mixtures was crucial for the formation of CDCP. In the hydrothermal reaction, ethanol, acetyl acetone and EDTA were added respectively ( The effect of pH on the reaction system is mainly reflected in the impact of the EDTA coordinating ability. EDTA can exist in seven forms: H In addition, the reaction time is an important parameter for the formation of the porous Cu-TCMP. As observed from the XRD pattern ( Furthermore, the morphology of materials was controlled by varying the concentration of copper ions. Kept the hydrothermal time of 6 h, the reactions with CuCl Based on the above discussion, a three key-step process was proposed (described in Hence, metal concentration and organic additives play a dominant role in the formation of CDCP. The morphology of the material can be tuned by adjusting the copper content and adding organic additives. Oxidation of cyclohexene can yield a variety of products, such as cyclohexenone, cyclohexene alcohol, epoxy cyclohexane, adipic acid and so on, these are important industrial compounds with a wide range of applications. There are many papers dealing with the oxidation of cyclohexene. Baricelli et al. have reported the homogeneous oxidation reaction of cyclohexene by nitro complexes of copper (Ⅱ), Cu(CH In this work, the material was tested as the catalyst for the oxidation of cyclohexene. The mechanism diagram of cyclohexene ( The overall conversion of cyclohexene was shown in From the result of oxidation, the selectivity of the desired products has no significant correlation with copper content. The conversion of cyclohexene with Sample 6 is almost identical to the control group containing no catalyst. Sample 7, when the copper content and the specific surface area increased, the conversion rate increased. Sample 8 showed that the specific surface area decreased with the increase of copper content while the unit area of the copper increased, resulting a better conversion. Sample 9, although the copper content increased, but the structure of the material was destroyed, the active sites of the copper per unit area were reduced, the conversion decreased. Pure Cu  In summary, we have successfully prepared a new kind of material: copper-doped calcium phosphate (copper content 0.04–35.2 wt%), which possessed space structure (specific surface area 18.4–89.6 m This work was supported by the The following is the supplementary data related to this article: Supplementary data related to this article can be found at