Halloysite nanotubes (HNTs) are natural “green” nanomaterials with tubular structures and have exciting potential applications in many fields. Preparation of homogeneous HNTs remains significant challenges in their fundamental studies and applications. Herein, we provide a method for preparing homogeneous and length controllable HNTs by the combination of ultrasonic treatment and two-step uniform viscosity centrifugation. Raw halloysite bundles have been successfully dispersed and cut by ultrasonic scission. Length controllable HNTs (140–240nm) can be prepared simply by changing ultrasonic treatment time or ultrasonic power. Short HNTs have been successfully separated from the sonicated suspension of raw HNTs by two-step uniform viscosity centrifugation. Transmission electron microscopy, X-ray diffraction and sequential X-ray fluorescence spectrometer measurements demonstrate that the purified HNTs are homogeneous with much less impurities. This simple, rapid, and effective method can be scaled up for industrial preparation of homogeneous and length controllable HNTs. The purified HNTs can be used as high value-added materials in many industrial fields and used as a carrier for a wide range of active agents, such as drugs, cosmetics, and catalysts. The separation method can be used to separate chemically synthesized nanotubes. In addition, a simple method for quick determination of the concentration of HNTs by UV–Vis spectrophotometer has been developed.Halloysite (composition: Al Due to their high mechanical strength, high thermal stability, good biocompatibility, and abundant deposition, HNTs have a number of exciting potential applications in numerous fields The commercially available HNTs are usually inhomogeneous with a length of 0.1 Ultrasonic waves are commonly used in several fields, such as diagnostics, cleaning and sonochemistry The raw HNTs powders were obtained from YanBo Minerals Processing Company (Hebei, China). Polyvinylpyrrolidone (PVP) and Hexadecyl trimethyl ammonium Bromide (CTAB) were purchased from Sinopham Chemical Reagent Co., Ltd. (Shanghai, China). Milli-Q purified water was used throughout. All other chemicals were of analytical reagent grade and were used without further purification. The PVP aqueous solution was prepared by directly dissolving calculated amounts of PVP and CTAB into an exact volume of water. The solution was stirred for 10 The raw HNTs powders (0.12 The sample was characterized by transmission electron microscopy (TEM) (JEM-2010, JEOL Ltd, Japan) and scanning electron microscopy (SEM) (Sirion200, FEI, America). The phase purity of the sample was examined by X-ray diffraction (XRD) using CuKa radiation ( To quickly determine the yield of the purified HNTs, a SP-752 UV–Vis spectrophotometer (Shanghai Spectrum Instrument Co., Ltd., Shanghai, China) was used to determine the concentration of the purified HNTs in solution. The sample of the purified HNTs were suspended in 3% PVP solution with 0.1 The size and homogeneity of raw HNTs were examined by TEM and SEM. As shown in  Utrasonic scission was used to disperse and cut raw HNTs. The raw HNTs (20 Scission and purification of HNTs were characterized by DLS, TEM and XRD. DLS measurement showed that a broad distribution peak ranging from 136 TEM ( As shown in To analyze the effect of sonication on the yield, the raw HNTs without sonication were directly separated by two-step uniform viscosity centrifugation. The HNTs with average length of 200 Weighing is a classical method for quantifying HNTs. However, this method needs dried HNTs. In order to quick analysis of the efficiency of ultrasonic scission and separation by centrifugation, we have made efforts to develop a method for quick quantification of HNTs by UV–Vis spectrophotometer. As shown in To explore the effect of ultrasonic treatment time on the length and yield of the purified HNTs, the raw HNTs (20 To analyze the effect of ultrasonic power on the average length of the purified HNTs, the raw HNTs (20 To investigate the effect of centrifugation time on the size distribution of HNTs, the raw HNTs (20 To analyze whether the concentration of raw HNTs affects on the yield of the purified HNTs, the raw HNTs (5–30 Halloysite is a cheap natural material excavated from deposits in hundred tons. Although halloysite is a promising nanomaterial due to its tubule structure and capability for active molecules sustained release from its lumen, the inhomogeneity of raw halloysite restricts its large-scale utilization in many fields. In this paper, a simple, rapid, and effective method has been developed for preparation of homogeneous and length-controllable HNTs by the combination of ultrasonic treatment and two-step uniform viscosity centrifugation. The present study demonstrates that utrasonic scission is an effective method for dispersing and cutting raw HNTs. Comparison of Our results also show that homogeneous HNTs can be purified from the sonicated mixture of HNTs by two-step uniform viscosity centrifugation. Analysis of the TEM, XRD and XRF data clearly demonstrates that the purified HNTs are homogeneous with much less impurities ( The settling velocity of particles that have a density greater than the medium in which they are dispersed will be dependent on a combined effect of buoyant force, friction force and centrifugal force. The settling velocity ( HNTs have the same A more precise equation was derived by Fagan et al. Under uniform viscosity centrifugation, all HNTs shift downward, and the longer HNTs have a higher sedimentation velocity than the shorter ones. Upon centrifugation for suitable time, most of the longer HNTs with higher sedimentation velocity have precipitated, while most of the shorter HNTs still remain in the supernatant. The separation is likely a result of the different settling velocities of various HNTs. Therefore, identifying a suitable centrifugal time is a key step to get homogeneous HNTs. The successful separation of the HNTs was confirmed by TEM analysis of the nanotube sizes ( Because all HNTs shift downward under uniform viscosity centrifugation at 1163 The present study provides a convenient, efficient, rapid, and green method allowing for the preparation of high-purity short HNTs from raw HNTs. This simple method can be scaled up for industrial halloysite preparation. The homogeneous short HNTs can be used as high value-added materials in many industrial fields and used as a container or a carrier for active agents such as drugs, cosmetics, air fresheners, catalysts, agricultural chemical materials, etc. Nanoseparation is an important and effective complementary process to synthesis optimization for providing strictly monodisperse nanoparticles for investigations of their size- or shape-dependent properties The present work also provides a simple method for quick determination of the concentration of HNTs by UV–Vis spectrophotometer. We have examined the effect of the average length of HNTs on their absorbance value at 650 In summary, a novel method for preparing homogeneous and length controllable HNTs by the combination of ultrasonic treatment and two-step uniform viscosity centrifugation is developed. The results presented above demonstrate that ultrasonic wave is a convenient and powerful tool for dispersing and cutting raw HNTs. Length controllable HNTs can be prepared simply by changing ultrasonic treatment time or ultrasonic power. We have shown the ability to separate HNTs according to their length by two-step uniform viscosity centrifugation. The established preparation methods are expected to accelerate the application of natural “green” HNTs in many fields. In addition, a simple method for quick determination of the concentration of HNTs by UV–Vis spectrophotometer has been developed. This work was supported by grants from the Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at 