Since the dense medium cyclone (DMC) was first patented in the 1940s it has become the process of choice in coal preparation, and is also widely used for upgrading iron ore and in the pre-concentration of diamonds and metalliferous and industrial minerals. It is in every sense a mature technology. This paper summarises the history of the process, considers its current status in mineral and coal processing, and suggests ways in which the process might evolve. Aspects reviewed include the process principles, process models, the importance of medium behaviour, particle size limitations, process analysis, instrumentation and control, and increases in scale. Particular attention is given to the potential for the use of larger cyclones at lower heads in mineral separations, as practiced in the coal industry. Using operating examples and published modelling results, the paper makes the case that these conditions will work in minerals too, and should be adopted. This will significantly improve the economics of DMC mineral separations at a time when pre-concentration is becoming more important for upgrading lower grade ores.The dense medium separation process (DMS) is a mature technology, and is widely used in mineral and coal processing. The dense medium cyclone (DMC) is the most ubiquitous of the DMS vessels in use, and deservedly so. It is efficient (when run properly), can process both coarse and fine sizes, and has a relatively small footprint. Unlike other forms of gravity concentration, it also makes a positive separation at a desired density cut-point, due to the presence of the medium whose density is easily controlled. This paper briefly reviews the status of the DMC process, highlights some particular aspects of interest, and suggests some improvements to current design practice in (high density) mineral applications. The paper is not intended as a comprehensive review of the DMC or its literature, ancient or modern. The invention of the DMC and its subsequent history is related in The first applications of the DMC were in coal, reflecting its origins, and the first large-scale use in minerals was probably at Williamson’s Diamonds in Tanzania in 1955 ( DMCs are widely used in coal preparation, and are also used as the primary concentration step in the recovery of diamonds, in iron ore concentration, in pre-concentration of base metals, and in some industrial minerals. The operating medium density will depend on the application. In coal it is generally less than 1.65 RD and in minerals it is generally more than 2.5 RD. Accordingly coal applications use magnetite medium (a natural material) with a density of about 4.5–5.2 RD, and mineral applications use the more expensive ferrosilicon (FeSi, a manufactured product) with a density of about 6.7 RD. These differences are significant in understanding the performance of DMCs, especially in terms of the rheology and behaviour of the medium which is process-determining (Section 3.1). The scientific literature on hydrocyclones for classification, dewatering and thickening is very large. This is not true of the DMC, probably because of the difficulty of characterising density separations (Section 3.4) and the complexity of the system, involving as it does a dense medium suspension whose segregation in the cyclone is itself process-determining. There has been an increase in recent years in the application of computational fluid dynamics (CFD) to understanding the principles of separation in DMCs (Section 3.2), and these studies are making good progress. However the understanding is still incomplete. Dimensional analysis gives the following relationship for the cut-density of the DMC, δ However Eqs. A common (though not very complete) measure of DMC inefficiency is the Ep, defined as: Feed density ρ Medium behaviour depends in turn on medium properties, including solids density, size distribution and shape. For example, The five FeSi grades to the left are milled (irregular shape) with fineness (and thus cost) increasing from left to right. As fineness increases (higher viscosity) Fe recovery increases, yield increases, and product Fe grade decreases, at the same cut-density (3.6 RD in this case). The two grades to the right are atomised (rounded shape, lower viscosity), C60 being finer than Special Fine. Atomised media, being of lower viscosity than milled, are generally used where the cut-density and thus medium density needs to be high. They show similar trends with fineness as the milled media but quite different overall behaviour, product grade being much higher than that achievable with the milled media, and recovery and yield being lower. Process models are useful if they can predict the separation performance, plus ancillary operating and design information such as throughput and (preferably) medium partitioning. The first process model of the DMC was developed by DSM for coal preparation on the basis of regression analysis of data from their original pilot plant work and the first installations made by them and Stamicarbon’s licensees ( Both the Wood and Dunglison models (both developed at the JKMRC at the University of Queensland) predict the partitioning performance of the DMC, capacity, flow split, and the product medium densities, using mostly empirical equations fitted to operating data from pilot and full scale plants. Dunglison’s model is perhaps a little more robust than Wood’s as it uses a published semi-theoretical partitioning model and a published particle terminal velocity correlation to predict medium and ore partitioning, which may be why it is successful in describing both coal (low density) and mineral (high density) DMC performance. However Wood’s model is the generally accepted standard for coal ( An important and valuable recent development has been the successful application of computational fluid dynamics code to simulating three phase flow As in all fluid-based mineral separation processes the DMC process is sensitive to the size of particle being treated. The maximum particle size that can be processed is governed by the inlet diameter, one third of this diameter being a commonly applied particle size maximum to avoid blockages. In a standard DSM design the inlet diameter is 0.2 times cyclone diameter, so the maximum particle size treatable in the DSM unit is about 0.067 times the cyclone diameter, or 40 mm for a 610 mm cyclone. Material coarser than this limiting value must be treated in other DMS vessels such as DM drums ( DMCs are efficient over a remarkably wide size range. However finer particles cut at a higher density (Eqs. The breakaway size varies with design and operating conditions, especially the cyclone diameter, the breakaway size increasing with diameter. Process economics will also of course play a role in determining the finest size to be treated. One should note however that not everyone believes in the breakaway size, due to the difficulties of measuring inefficiency (Ep) particularly in the finer sizes ( The problem with monitoring and analysing DMC performance is that knowing the true separation performance implies knowledge of the partition (Tromp) curve ( De Beers’ company DebTech has now developed a continuous particle density measurement device which promises to overcome the problems of fractionating in heavy liquids ( A key variable in any DMS process is the density of the medium, which controls the density of separation. From the very early days the medium density has been controlled by over-densifying the circulating medium, measuring the feed medium density with a magnetic pipe coil or nucleonic gauge, and then using PI or PID control to adjust the amount of dilution water added to the pump inlet (or some other part of the process). This approach has proved robust, reasonably precise and easy to implement, and is one of the advantages of DMS over other gravity concentration processes. In recent years good work has been done on developing novel instrumentation and control approaches to other features of the process including optimising control using soft sensors based on empirical models of the kind discussed in Section 3.2. For example The main change in DMC practice since its invention has been an increase in scale, especially in coal applications. Cyclones 1500 mm in diameter are now not unusual in coal. However the largest cyclones in mineral applications remain only in the range 700–800 mm ( Cyclone throughput increases approximately as the square of diameter: So increases in cyclone size have a large impact on capacity without much change in footprint. The benefits are clear. The flowsheet complexity has decreased significantly (less modules and equipment items), and capex reduced accordingly. These advantages were also apparent in a trial of a single 800 mm DMC replacing a module of four 400 mm DMCs in the pre-concentration plant in the then-Xstrata (now Glencore) zinc-lead concentrator at Mount Isa in Queensland, Australia ( The design and operation of DMCs in mineral processing have been slow to follow the advances achieved in coal preparation, in particular in running vary large cyclones at relatively low heads. The argument for large cyclones was made in Section 3.5 above. The argument for low heads is simply that gravity-fed DMCs (as many mineral DMCs are, but few coal ones) require less tall and therefore cheaper buildings, and all low-head installations require less pumping power and generally lead to lower component wear. The ‘standard’ DMC head in coal preparation is 9D where D is cyclone diameter. (An explanation for why heads are generally expressed in numbers of cyclone diameters is given in the However there is no evidence in the literature (sparse though it is) for the higher heads actually being necessary in mineral applications, in fact quite the reverse. The following case studies all suggest that there is no advantage to mineral operations of heads much higher than 9D. Each one includes the lower particle size treated (LPS) to demonstrate that these conditions are effective even at the lower end of the particle size range commonly treated in DMCs (around 1 mm). The 800 mm DMC trial at Mount Isa, discussed in Section 3.5 (head 9.5D, LPS 2.5 mm). The McArthur River plant discussed in Section 3.5 (head 7.0–9.5D, LPS 1.6 mm). A model of a 610 mm DMC in diamond recovery based on extensive testwork (LPS 0.5 mm) suggests that, if anything, the Ep is constant in the range 9.7–11.6D and actually rises above 11.6D ( Data collected in seven coal preparation plants with large DMCs by In an iron ore case study ( It is therefore suggested that future DMC plants in mineral processing should be designed with large cyclones at low heads (around 9D), as is common practice in coal preparation. The benefits would include: Reduced capital cost. Reduced wear of cyclones and other components, and thus reduced downtime. Reduced operating costs for pumping and component replacement. Simpler flowsheets and greater operability. Coarser FeSi media required, which are cheaper and easier to recycle. There is no evidence for reduced metallurgical performance under such conditions; in fact there is some weak evidence for an improvement in performance. And in cases where distributors can be eliminated there is a proven benefit of improved plant performance due to the bias which most distributors introduce, leading to different cut-points in individual cyclones and thus decreased efficiency ( Some mineral DMC plants are regarded mainly as a maintenance problem by their owners, who therefore appoint mechanical engineers to run them rather than process engineers, and make no effort to acquire or preserve DMC operating knowledge and experience. The consequence is unsurprising – non-optimal metallurgical performance, and little progress in design innovation. This loss of expertise, in both operations and engineering companies, is troubling. The knowledge to correct this deficiency exists, but it will require an effort of will on behalf of companies and trainers to build a new generation of expertise. The benefits in terms of process performance would be very great, as has been demonstrated by the coal preparation community over the years. However, despite its Cinderella status in some applications, it is difficult to see a serious competitor for the DMC in the foreseeable future in the processing of bulk commodities such as coal and iron ore. It is also clearly an increasingly important option in the pre-concentration role as metalliferous head grades decline. Its greatest competitor in this role is likely to be the growing capability of high tonnage electronic sorting machines, which are in principle capable of multi-sensing mineral discrimination at relatively coarse sizes ( The ability of the DMC to make a positive separation at a chosen density with relatively tight control, combined with its capacity to treat high tonnages at a wide size range and its maturity as a process, would suggest that it will remain an important and possibly even increasing player in the future of mineral processing. Its attraction in mineral separations will be enhanced if some of the developments discussed in this paper are introduced, particularly the use of larger cyclones at lower heads, the exploitation of novel instrumentation and model-based soft sensors for improved control, dynamic simulation, and the better training of practitioners. More speculative developments worthy of attention include novel geometries suggested by CFD simulations (particularly high angle cyclones), and alternative media with improved rheology. The author thanks the Reviewers for a number of useful comments which have been incorporated into the paper. DMC heads (or pressures) are often expressed as numbers of cyclone diameters, ie H/D. The reason for this is not well understood by practitioners, and the author can find no explicit explanation in the published literature. Although some DSM literature uses this approach, it does not explain why. One possible explanation is as follows. Consider a DMC fed by a steady-head tank with a static head of H m, as shown in the diagram. Assume that medium exits the tank and enters the tangential inlet of the DMC at a mean velocity, V The separation of ore particles in the medium is driven largely by the centrifugal forces which they and the medium experience. The centrifugal force, F Eq. This may be the explanation for why head is often expressed as number of cyclone diameters.