The polymorphic transformation in interfacial intermetallic compounds in three lead-free solder joints was investigated using in situ heating/isothermal/cooling observation techniques in high-voltage transmission electron microscopy (HVTEM). Here, the hexagonal η- to monoclinic η′-Cu6Sn5 polymorphic transformation was visualised systematically through zone-axis electron diffraction patterns and real-space imaging. Cu6Sn5 grains obtained in the as-reflowed solder joints that did not contain Ni (Sn–0.7Cu/Cu and Sn–3.0Ag–0.5Cu/Cu) show weak reflections in the diffraction patterns from the η′-Cu6Sn5. In Sn–0.7Cu–0.05Ni/Cu joints, no weak reflections were present in the diffraction patterns of the (Cu,Ni)6Sn5 grains indicating the presence of Ni prevented the η- to η′-Cu6Sn5 transformation. The movement of bend contours was also observed at around 186 °C in adjacent the grain boundaries in Cu6Sn5 but not in the (Cu,Ni)6Sn5. We also uncover the origin of the weak reflections and confirm the superstructure of monoclinic η′-Cu6Sn5 by obtaining atomic-resolution images within the areas from which the selected area diffraction patterns were obtained.In the last decade there has been a rise in research activities focused on understanding the phase transformation in the intermetallic compound (IMC) Cu To date, at least five crystal structure modulations in Cu The reported theoretical densities of Many attempts have been made to prevent this polymorphic transformation through the addition of doping elements. It is well known that the hexagonal Using a synchrotron powder XRD method, Wu et al. There has been much speculation regarding the polymorphic transformation in multicomponent (including the substrate, IMC and solder) joints because of the continuous flux of Sn and Cu to and from the Cu Therefore, direct observation is needed to understand the significance of the polymorphic phase transformation in more relevant structures. Based on our previous works in The Sn–0.7Cu, Sn–3.0Ag–0.5Cu and Sn–0.7Cu–0.05Ni (wt%) solder balls (supplied by Nihon Superior Co. Ltd., Osaka, Japan) were reflowed on Cu pads that had an organic solderability preservative (OSP) surface finish to make Cu/IMCs/solder joints. The TEM lamella samples were extracted from solder joints using a focused ion beam (FIB) system (FEI Scios Dual-beam FIB, Thermo Fisher Scientific Waltham, MA, USA) and welded with Pt deposition on Cu TEM grids. A thin lamella sample consisting of Cu For real-time in-situ heating/isothermal/cooling observations by HVTEM, a lamella sample was placed on a double-tilt heating holder (EM-HSTH JEOL, Akishima, Japan). TEM characterisations were performed with a JEM-1300NEF (JEOL, Akishima, Japan) at an accelerating voltage of 1250 kV. This high-voltage (HV) TEM at the Research Laboratory for High Voltage Electron Microscopy, Kyushu University, is equipped with an in-column omega-type energy filter and a high-resolution video recorder. Omega-filtered TEM has the advantage of allowing thicker specimens to be imaged at higher contrast To properly characterise the phase transformation in the Cu A thin lamella sample of a Sn–0.7Cu/Cu joint was used to investigate the atomic and high-resolution (HR) TEM images in an interfacial Cu In this study, all obtained SAD patterns were analysed using the Gatan Digital Micrograph software (v2.32, Gatan, Inc., CA, USA) and Single Crystal software (Crystal Maker, v3.0, CrystalMaker Software Ltd., Oxford, UK).  At RT before the heating experiment, a combination of strong and weak reflections was observed in the chosen Cu In Sn–0.7Cu–0.05Ni/Cu joints, no weak reflections can be found in the (Cu,Ni) The polymorphic transformation of Note that there are contrast patterns (annotated by the red arrow) emerging from the grain boundary in the selected Cu The weaker reflections in the SAD patterns of Cu In order to gain further insights into the change in crystal structure based on electron diffraction patterns, a thinner lamella sample (~0.1 nm in thickness) containing Cu High-resolution (HR) TEM images were also obtained and shown in The crystal structure models and simulated electron diffraction patterns viewed along [111] The hexagonal η-Cu The atomic-resolution EDS maps in a The HAADF and ABF images of Cu The brightness in HAADF image follows the atomic number Z of the elemental atom The lower atomic occupancy in the Cu2 sites can be easily visualised in the ABF image where the contrast depends on the atomic column packing fraction. In the ABF image, denser atomic columns are imaged as dark spots. In the A zoomed-in view of the atomic-resolution with ABF is shown in Yang et al. This present study has demonstrated the use of an in-situ HVTEM method to directly observe the polymorphic transformation in three lead-free solder joints; Sn–0.7Cu/Cu, Sn–3.0Ag–0.5Cu/Cu, and Sn–0.7Cu–0.05Ni/Cu. This direct observation approach is necessary to further understanding of the phase transformation in the resulting interfacial IMCs the form between various alloys and substrates in real solder joints during solid-state heating. Thus, more reliable solder joints can be developed through better alloying design and manufacturing processes. The following conclusions can be drawn from this work. The polymorphic transformation can be observed through the appearance/disappearance of weak (superstructure) reflections in zone-axis electron diffraction patterns. This is also manifest as the generation and movement of bend contours in the corresponding real-space images, emanating from the grain boundary regions. We confirmed that Ni stabilises the hexagonal structure in solder joints containing (Cu,Ni) Atomic-resolution TEM images in SAD patterns along the hexagonal The weak reflections are caused by various distributions of the filled Cu2 sites in the hexagonal structure in a long-range order. The weak reflections belong to the monoclinic The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. The authors gratefully acknowledge financial support from the Supplementary material associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at doi: 