Three different polymeric precursor routes viz., (i) amorphous citrate process, (ii) Pechini process and (iii) polyethylene glycol assisted process were compared for synthesising nanocrystalline powders of 7.5 mol% yttria doped thoria (YDT). In each of the processes, parameters such as metal-to-fuel ratio or composition of fuel were varied and the effects were analysed. TG/DTA studies were conducted to identify the ignition temperatures of the precursors. Also, a novel experimental procedure with controlled combustion was devised for the preparation of powders based on the thermal analysis data. All the processes result in phase pure and nanocrystalline powders. The average crystallite size of the powders ranged between 9 and 18 nm. The powder samples were analysed for their carbon content and studied for their sinterability. Densities as high as 99% th.d. could be achieved by sintering the compacts of powders obtained from (i) amorphous citrate process with CA/M ratios 2.0 and 3.0, (ii) Pechini processes (independent of fuel composition) and (iii) PEG-assisted process using PEG 4000 at a relatively low temperature of 1500 °C for 2 h.Zirconia and thoria based solid electrolytes are well known oxide ion conductors. They are used in oxygen sensors and in thermochemical and kinetic experiments Syntheses of nanocrystalline powders of pure thoria by the combustion method have been carried out extensively in our laboratory using urea and /or citric acid as fuels In this work, we have carried out a systematic study of three different processes for the preparation of 7.5 mol% Y Yttrium nitrate (99.9%, M/s. Indian Rare Earths, India), thorium nitrate (AR grade, M/s. Fisons, USA) and polyethylene glycol of average molecular weights of 400, 600, 4000 and 6000 (AR grade, M/s. Fluka, Switzerland) were employed in this work. AR grade nitric acid was further distilled in quartz apparatus and used. As thorium and yttrium nitrates are highly hygroscopic, stock solutions of thorium and yttrium nitrates were first prepared in distilled water. The concentrations of thorium and yttrium in the stock solutions were estimated gravimetrically as their respective oxides after precipitating them first as oxalate followed by conversion to oxide by heating in air at 850 °C for 2 h. The concentrations were also estimated by evaporating a known quantity of the stock solution to dryness and decomposing the nitrate to give oxide by heating at 850 °C for 2 h. The general procedure adopted for the preparation of oxide solid solution is schematically shown in In the Pechini process, the molar ratio of citric acid-to-total metal ion was maintained as 1.0 in the starting solution. The adequate amount of ethylene glycol was added to it so that the molar ratio of citric acid to ethylene glycol was 1:1 (denoted as PP 1:1). This was then converted into precursor by adopting the same procedure as in the case of the amorphous citrate process. Precursors were also prepared with 1:2 and 1:4 molar ratios of citric acid and ethylene glycol and the processes are represented as PP 1:2 and PP 1:4, respectively. In the PEG-assisted process, the ratio of citric acid-to-total metal ion was again maintained as 1.0 in the starting solution. Polyethylene glycol was added to this solution such that the molar ratio of the total metal ion to PEG monomer was 1.0. Polyethylene glycols with molecular weights of 400, 600, 4000 and 6000 were used for this purpose and the respective processes are denoted as PEG 400, PEG 600, PEG 4000 and PEG 6000, respectively. Processing conditions to produce the precursor from this were identical as in the above two processes. Thermal decomposition and mass loss characteristics of the polymeric precursors were studied by thermogravimetric and differential thermal analysis techniques. A simultaneous TG/DTA system of M/s. Rheometric Scientific Co., UK was used for this purpose. Approximately 15 mg of precursors were used as samples. The studies were carried out up to 1000 °C at a heating rate of 10 °C/min under flowing oxygen condition (flow rate=50 ml/min). Ignition temperatures of the precursors were determined from the TG/DTA patterns. The precursors (≈10–20 g) taken in an alumina crucible and placed in a quartz tube were first heated under flowing air for about 30 min at 20–30 °C lower than their ignition temperatures (obtained from the TG/DTA results) to effect the controlled combustion. The temperature of the sample was then increased by 10 °C and maintained at that level for another 30 min. This was continued up to 30 °C above the ignition temperature. This procedure consistently avoided the combustion reaction from occurring in a violent manner. The resulting powder was then calcined at 750 °C for 2 h under flowing air for elimination of any residual carbon. The powders obtained after calcinations (stage C) were characterised by X-ray diffraction for phase identification and determination of crystallite size. A Siemens D500 X-ray powder diffractometer with Cu The sinterability of the calcined powders were determined by compacting the calcined powders into 10 mm diameter and ≈1 mm thick pellets at 60 MPa for a duration of 15 min. Preliminary experiments were carried out to choose appropriate temperature for sintering. Temperatures ranging from 1100 to 1600 °C with soak times varying between 1 and 8 h were employed in these studies. Based on the results, a program of sintering at 1500 °C for 2 h was chosen. The heating/cooling rate adopted during the sintering process was 10 °C/min. The XRD pattern of the sintered pellets were taken and lattice parameters were derived. The densities of the sintered pellets were measured by pycnometry using dibutyl phthalate as the immersion liquid. Average of densities of two pellets from each process was taken as the density achievable by that process. The surface morphology of sintered pellets was studied by scanning electron microscopy (M/s. Philips, Netherlands, Model No. XL30). The colour of the precursors obtained during YDT syntheses varied from white, yellow to brown. No systematic trend or gradation in colour could be observed. The typical TG/DTA curves of the YDT precursors of three different processes are shown in The TG/DTA curve of the YDT precursor prepared by the Pechini process with citric acid-to-ethylene glycol ratio (CA:EG) of 1:1 is shown in  The typical XRD pattern of calcined YDT powders obtained by the amorphous citrate process with a CA/M ratio of 0.5 is shown in The particle sizes of the calcined powders were in the range of ≈20–80 μm. Specific surface area and the residual carbon contents of the calcined powders are also shown in The densities of pellets from each process after sintering at 1500 °C for 2 h in air are shown in YDT pellets sintered in air had black dots distributed both on the surface and in bulk. These coloured spots disappeared on changing the gas from ambient to 2%H A scanning electron image of a sintered YDT pellet from the amorphous citrate process with CA/M=2.0 is shown in Three different polymeric precursor methods were compared for synthesising homogeneous solid solutions of 7.5 mol% Y The authors sincerely acknowledge Mrs Sujatha Vanavaramaban and Mrs Kitheri Joseph for their help in TG/DTA analyses and Dr K.V.G. Kutty and his group for their help in recording XRD pattern. The authors also gratefully acknowledge Mr E. Prabhu and Dr V. Jayaraman for particle size analyses and Dr V. Chandramouli and Dr K. Ananthasivan for carbon analysis of samples. The authors acknowledge the help rendered by Mrs R. Sudha and Dr V. Ganesan in SEM studies. The authors acknowledge Professor N. Satyanarayana, Pondicherry University for useful discussions.