In this work, four quaternary ammonium-based ionic liquids are used to extract methyl orange and methylene blue (major dye species in industry) from water. The influence of extraction time, temperature, salt effect, and pH on extraction efficiency is systematically investigated. Tricaprylmethylammonium thiocyanate ([N1888][SCN]) exhibits optimal ability for extracting both dyes; the extraction efficiency reaches 89.09% and 64.14% for methyl orange and methylene blue, respectively. It is also observed that the efficiency is remarkably increased by adding NaCl in the extraction system except in the extraction of methyl orange using [N1888][SCN]. This work shows that ionic liquids might provide new options in the disposal of dye-wastewater.Synthetic dyes are widely used in many fields including textile dyeing, leather tanning, paper production, food technology and so on In recent years, ionic liquids (ILs) have attracted much attention in different areas of chemistry thanks to their novel physical and chemical properties such as non-volatility, thermal stability, wide liquidus range, non-flammability, and wide electrochemical window Recently, extraction of organic dyes from water by ILs was investigated. Vijayaraghavan et al. In this work, the extraction of anionic dye methyl orange and cationic dye methylene blue from water using four non-fluorine quaternary ammonium-based ILs, i.e., tricaprylmethylammonium thiocyanate ([N The synthesis of ILs was performed using published procedure The aqueous dye solutions were prepared by directly dissolving the dyes into deionized water. The original concentration of dye was about 20–40 The partitioning of dyes in ILs was determined by UV–vis spectroscopy through the standard curves of concentration vs. absorbance. The initial absorbance and the absorbance of the aqueous methyl orange and methylene blue solutions were measured after each extraction with IL at different time intervals. The absorbance of methyl orange was measured at 510 A series of systematic experiments show that the extraction process reaches equilibrium within 30 The distribution coefficients of methyl orange and methylene blue in the four ILs/water system has been determined respectively at different temperatures (293.15–333.15 The phase transfer enthalpy of methyl orange and methylene blue in different IL/water systems can be calculated from the slope of the line in The relationship between the distribution coefficient and concentration of NaCl is shown in The effect of the pH of dyes solution on extraction equilibrium was also investigated. It can be seen from To recover methyl orange from ILs, 0.1 In this paper, four quaternary ammonium-based hydrophobic ILs were synthesized and used to study the extraction efficiency of methyl orange and methylene blue from water. It was observed that temperature, salt effect, and pH have significant effects on the distribution coefficients of methyl orange and methylene blue between water and ILs, while phase ratio does not. The extraction efficiency reaches 89.09% and 64.14% for methyl orange and methylene blue, respectively using [N This work was financially supported by Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at 