The term complex primary total hip arthroplasty (THA) is used when THA is performed on patients with any combination of abnormal anatomy, bone loss and compromised soft tissues. This is often as a result of the development of secondary osteoarthritis complicating an underlying primary pathology. Those most commonly associated are developmental hip dysplasia, protrusio acetabuli, skeletal dysplasias, previous fractures or surgical procedures about the hip and neuromuscular conditions, but this is by no means an exhaustive list. The importance of preoperative planning and the use of reconstructive techniques including bone grafting, as well as the use of modular and customized implants to overcome these significant surgical challenges, are discussed.Primary total hip arthroplasty (THA) is one of the most successful and rewarding operations performed, with approximately 77 000 carried out every year in the United Kingdom. The very nature of these pathologies means that the surgeon can be faced with performing a hip replacement on a patient with any combination of compromised bone stock, abnormal primary or secondary anatomy as a result of previous treatments and compromised soft tissue states. Such procedures are therefore termed complex primary THA and can present significant surgical challenges. Often some of the principles and techniques used in revision surgery can be applied in the primary setting to address these issues, particularly in terms of acetabular reconstruction. The purpose of this paper is to review some of the common conditions associated with complex primary THA, identify the associated surgical challenges they present and discuss techniques to address them. The indications for surgery include uncontrolled pain with functional impairment and radiographic evidence of secondary degenerative change. Contraindications include the presence of infection and a surgically unfit patient. A detailed history should be taken including any known diagnosis of childhood hip problems and any previous operations on the hips. A standard examination of the hip should be performed, paying particular attention to true and apparent leg length discrepancy, which can often be significant, Thomas's test for fixed flexion deformity, range of motion and any neuromuscular abnormality should be carefully assessed. In the primary setting a significant recent leg length change that is noticed by the patient should alert the surgeon to severe progressive bone loss and ensure an up to date radiograph is available. A plain anteroposterior (AP) radiograph of the pelvis centred on the symphysis with a marker ball for templating should be obtained ( Protrusio acetabuli is a hip joint deformity in which the medial wall of the acetabulum projects into the pelvis, with associated medial displacement of the femoral head. The causes can be divided into primary idiopathic (Otto pelvis), which mainly affects women, and secondary causes such as Paget's disease, osteomalacia, inflammatory arthritis, ankylosing spondylitis, sickle cell disease, Marfans syndrome and trauma to the medial wall of the acetabulum. Clinical examination may reveal a positive Trendelenburg test due to the compromised lever arm of the hip abductors. In more severe cases fixed flexion deformities of the pelvis with a compensatory hyperlordosis of the lumbar spine are often present, with limitation of flexion and moreso abduction. In very severe cases intra pelvic swelling can be felt on abdominal, rectal or vaginal palpation. The limiting point of medial migration of the femoral head occurs when the greater trochanter abuts against the lateral aspect of the pelvis, preventing any further progression. Long standing protrusio can result in the development of secondary osteoarthritic changes, with symptoms warranting THA. Radiological diagnosis is made from an anteroposterior radiograph of the pelvis. Protrusio acetabuli is present if the medial acetabular line crosses the ilioischial line (Kholer's Line) by > 3 mm in men and >6 mm in women. Friedenberg  Difficult dislocation of the hip due to medial migration of femoral head. There is a risk of acetabular wall fracture if forced. Consideration should be given to cutting the femoral neck If the posterior approach is utilized the sciatic nerve may be found much closer to the posterior aspect of the hip joint than usual. This must be taken into consideration during the approach to minimize risk of injury. Particular care must be taken if cutting the neck Careful acetabular reaming to avoid further medialization and compromise of the often very thin medial wall. It is important to avoid converting a contained medial bone defect into an uncontained defect. Therefore reaming should concentrate more on the periphery of the acetabulum and if an uncemented component is used, the aim should be to obtain a peripheral rim fit. The contained medial bone defect can be filled with morcellized bone using established impaction bone grafting techniques ( Avoid lengthening of the leg following restoration of the hip centre by performing a low neck cut, particularly if using uncemented implants, and consider using modular components with adequate range of offsets. Mullaji et al. reported excellent medium term results in 23 cases of protrusio in the younger patient (mean age 46 years) treated using autologous impaction bone grafting in combination with cementless porous coated hemispheric cups. At mean follow up of 4.2 years (2–10 years) satisfactory graft consolidation was seen in all cases. Good results were also reported using cemented cups with autologous impaction grafting of the acetabulum, with Rosenberg et al. reporting a 90% survival rate at 12 years in 36 THA's carried out for protrusio. Short term follow up (average 28 months) revealed no loosening or migration of the components. Developmental dysplasia of the hip (DDH) is the most common cause of secondary osteoarthritis in the UK and represents a significant caseload for the orthopaedic surgeon. The term ‘dysplasia’ is a broad term and implies abnormal development of the hip, which can affect all aspects of the hip on both the acetabular and femoral side to varying degrees. This can therefore present a number of significant surgical challenges when attempting to perform THA on these complex and often relative young patients. It is important that the surgeon is aware of the common deformities likely to be encountered in the dysplastic hip and is competent in the various reconstructive techniques on both the femoral and acetabular side before attempting reconstruction. The more severe the dysplasia, the more potential surgical reconstructive challenges the surgeon will be likely to face and therefore it is useful to classify the degree of dysplasia as part of the preoperative planning. The most common classification systems used are those described by Hartofilakidis et al. Hartofilakidis classification describes the position of the femoral head in relation to the true acetabulum:    Crowe et al. described the extend of proximal migration of the femoral head as a proportion of the height of the undeformed femoral head:     Crowe also described the degree of subluxation/dislocation by a second measurement derived by dividing the vertical distance between the tear drop and the head–neck junction of the femur by the vertical height of the pelvis taken from the ischial tuberosities to the top of the iliac crests (ratio shown in brackets). Both systems have been demonstrated to have satisfactory inter and intra observer reliability. However the Crowe classification is arguably more involved in determining the exact level of the head–neck junction, which can introduce variability, and also requires a whole pelvic radiograph (including iliac crests). For preoperative templating of the femora the radiograph needs to be centred on the symphysis pubis. The latter films therefore often truncate the iliac crests and specific films are needed for the classification ( The advantages of the Hartofilakidis classification is that it is easy to apply and gives an immediate indication of the anatomical challenges that will be encountered if THA is to be attempted, the Crowe classification providing a more quantitative assessment. There are many anatomic abnormalities that can present in the dysplastic hip, making preoperative planning absolutely essential in order to minimize the risk of complications. Features often encountered in the dysplastic hip include a small and deformed femoral head, often subluxed or dislocated. There may be the formation of a false acetabulum and it is vital that the presence of a false acetabulum is recognized preoperatively so that the true acetabulum can located at the time of surgery. The acetabular component should ideally be placed in the anatomic position, although some authors report acceptable outcomes with placement of a high but not lateral hip centre. During exposure the hip is dislocated from the false acetabulum. The true acetabulum is often not easily apparent, as the true acetabulum itself is often filled with soft tissue pulvinar. There is often a ledge of bone dividing the false from the true acetabulum and this must not be mistaken for the inferior edge of the true acetabulum in order to avoid a high hip centre, but can be used as a landmark for further inferior dissection. Key landmarks include identifying the transverse acetabular ligament, which marks the inferior border of the true acetabulum, which often appears shallow. It is usually filled with soft tissue and bone and can be oblong or triangular in nature with deficient bone supero-laterally in many cases. In order to recreate the normal centre of rotation of the hip it is important to find the true medial and inferior margins of the acetabulum. This is achieved by removing the curtain osteophyte and pulvinar from the cotyloid fossa to identify the true medial wall and by placing a retractor inferiorly, under the transverse acetabular ligament, thereby marking the correct level for accurate placement of the acetabular component. Once the landmarks of the true acetabulum have been identified reaming can commence to medialize and recreate an acetabulum capable of accommodating the acetabular component. When reaming, more bone should be taken posteriorly in order to avoid perforation of the thin anterior wall. Due to the deficient anterior wall, care must also be taken not to place the cup in excessive anteversion in order to minimize the risk of anterior dislocation, particularly if increased femoral anteversion is not fully appreciated. Hartofilakides et al. have described a technique called cotyloplasty of creating a controlled fracture of the medial wall with autograft augmentation and the use of a small cemented cup in order to medialize the acetabular component sufficiently. The acetabular trial can then be introduced to assess coverage. In some cases there is deficient superolateral bony coverage resulting in the need for acetabular reconstruction using bone graft or trabecular metal augments. This type of acetabular defect is also seen in other complex primary cases, especially in aggressive forms of osteoarthritis and avascular necrosis. The reconstructive techniques discussed are applicable to all cases where a superolateral acetabular defect is encountered and not just cases of DDH. The success of THA in dysplastic hips is determined by how accurately the normal hip centre is restored and by stable fixation of the implants. Often, in dysplastic hips, the superolateral aspect of the acetabulum is deficient. When using a cementless cup for reconstruction it has been suggested that as long as there is adequate bony support from the anterior and posterior acetabular walls, up to 75–80% acetabular component bone coverage is adequate. Bulk femoral head autograft or allograft can been used to reconstruct the deficient acetabulum supero-laterally by fashioning a segment of femoral head much like a segment of orange ( Good mid term results using femoral head bulk autograft and cementless cups in patients with DDH were also described by Schofer et al. with a 6.7% revision rate at a mean of 5.6 year follow up of 118 THA's. Acetabular reconstruction using a stainless steel rim mesh fixed to the pelvis with 3.5 mm cortical screws at approximately 1 cm intervals around the rim of the superolateral acetabular defect acts to convert an uncontained defect into a contained one, thereby allowing the well established technique of impaction bone grafting to be utilized to restore bone stock. Like the other acetabular reconstruction techniques described, this method can be used to reconstruct any acetabulum with similar superolateral bony defects, whether in severe osteoarthritis or as a result of revision surgery. However Somford et al. and Bolder et al. have described this method with considerable success in DDH with a 96% survivorship at 10 years in 28 THA's and 27 THA's respectively. For both structural bone graft and impaction grafting techniques, the larger the defect with a large area of graft covering the acetabular component, the higher the risk of revision. The mixed outcomes with bone grafting large acetabular defects have led to the use of porous metal augments in combination with impaction bone grafting to prevent cement interposition between host bone and augment, as well as to fill any residual defects and promote bony ingrowth. This has been used with considerable success in the short term, with Borland et al. describing only one revision for augment breakage out of 24 patients at an average follow up of 5 years. This technique has the advantages of not requiring the ordering of large amounts of allograft bone, some of which can be wasted in fear of underestimating the amount needed, and can be less technically demanding than the placement of a large rim mesh. The augments are available in a range of diameters and thicknesses allowing virtually any size of defect to be accommodated (  In high dislocations a femoral shortening osteotomy, possibly combined with some de-rotation to compensate for increased femoral neck anteversion, may be required. If the femur has to be translated more than 3 cm a shortening osteotomy may be required in order to facilitate reduction of the hip in the true acetabulum without placing undue tension on the sciatic nerve, which may result in a palsy if the amount of lengthening required is not appreciated. Subtrochanteric osteotomies have been described in many forms including transverse, double-chevron, step and Z osteotomies.  Shortening of the femur is not always necessary but sometimes de-rotation of the proximal femur is needed for anteversion of over 40°. However the use of modern fully modular tapered stemmed uncemented prostheses that can accommodate very narrow femoral canals and permit rotation of the proximal component independently of the stem may avoid having to use a de-rotation osteotomy. The usefulness of these devices was noted by Silber et al., who reported sixteen out of nineteen patients required modular components due to variability in femoral size and shape. Acetabular fracture configurations vary greatly depending on the energy transferred and the quality of the underlying bone, which is often age-dependent. The majority of displaced acetabular fractures are currently managed by open reduction and internal fixation, particularly in the young. McKinley et al. suggested that performing acute THA should be the treatment of choice in the elderly, as initial ORIF has been shown to adversely affect late THA by compromising the blood supply and the soft tissue envelope by the formation of often extensive scar formation and heterotopic ossification. There were more complications seen in patients who underwent initial ORIF, including higher infection and dislocation rates, lower prosthetic survival rates and worse functional outcome. Mears et al. in a series of 57 patients undergoing acute THA for displaced acetabular fracture followed for a mean of 8.1 years (2–12 years) described some subsidence in the early postoperative period but all cups subsequently stabilized and none were revised at the latest follow up. The authors therefore concluded in selected patients with fracture patterns that are unlikely to respond favourably to ORIF that acute THA is a favourable option. However THA is more usually performed late for secondary osteoarthritis after previous open reduction and internal fixation or after initial failed conservative treatment. Previous reports on late THA following initial open or closed treatment of acetabular fractures have shown less favourable results than when THA was performed for degenerative disease. Proximal femoral fractures are extremely common in the elderly population and present a considerable proportion of the trauma workload. They are also seen in the younger polytrauma patient, who may present years later with a malunion associated with the development of secondary degenerative changes in the hip ( Careful assessment of any Ensure any metalwork that is intended to be left Detailed templating is essential to ensure there is no need for a corrective femoral osteotomy and to ensure that standard implants will suffice. Otherwise customized implants can be considered. The femoral canal may be sclerotic and the entry point difficult to find due to distorted anatomy. Careful use of hand reamers and a power burr may be needed to develop the entry point. Consider the use of image guidance when reaming to minimize the risk of fracture and perforation in those with significant deformity. When converting a failed DHS/cannulated screw fixation consider dislocation of the hip prior to removal of any metalwork to minimize the risk of fracture occurring through stress risers left by empty screw holes. If a cemented stem is used, bone wax is useful to plug screw holes to reduce cement leakage into soft tissues and minimize the risk of thermal damage. If a posterior approach is used beware the sciatic nerve lying in dense scar tissue closely adherent to the posterior aspect of the hip, posing an increased risk of iatrogenic injury. Corrective femoral osteotomy performed concurrently with THA is associated with increased complication rates including infection, dislocation, intraoperative fracture, non-union and aseptic loosening. Patients undergoing THA with neurological conditions can present all of the challenges discussed above in terms of abnormal anatomy, but in addition can further tax the surgeon in dealing with muscle spasticity, paresis, contractures and tremors which potentially combine to produce imbalanced muscle tone across the hip. These factors combine to increase the risk of dislocation and aseptic loosening. For these reasons THA is rarely performed in these patients due to their complexity and frequently associated medical morbidities. Neuromuscular patients include a range of underlying conditions such as cerebral palsy (CP), Parkinson's disease, poliomyelitis, cerebrovascular accident and spinal injuries to mention a few. Painful hips affect approximately 25–75% of patients with CP due to an imbalance between strong hip flexors and adductors overpowering the weaker extensors and abductors. This results in contractures and bony abnormalities including excessive anteversion and valgus of the femoral neck, abnormal development of the acetabulum and secondary osteoarthritis. Resection arthroplasty has been described for end stage disease but good outcomes in terms of functional improvement and pain relief have been described with the use of THA. By way of contrast, in poliomyelitis there is flaccid paralysis of the muscles across the hip joint resulting in dysplasia, subluxation and contractures. Evidence on the place of arthroplasty is really limited to few case reports with mixed results. Interestingly a review of the Scottish National Arthroplasty register by Meek et al. Queally et al. hypothesize that there are broadly two groups of patients with neurological dysfunction. The first includes those suffering from Parkinson's disease or CVA and, due to relative immobility and medical treatments, they consider the risk of dislocation to be relatively low in this group and they suggest the use of unconstrained implants. This is contrasted with the second group consisting of patients with CP, poliomyelitis and spinal injury who are more likely to sublux and dislocate and therefore they recommend the use of constrained implants in this group. In summary THA is rarely performed in patients with neurological conditions due to the complexity of the surgery and the high risk of complications. However, in selected patients and with the use of modular femoral implants combined when necessary with constrained acetabular components, adequate soft tissue releases and the involvement of a multidisciplinary team, the current literature supports the use of THA as a viable treatment option for this difficult group. Complex primary hip replacement can present a significant surgical challenge. An understanding of the varied underlying pathologies followed up with meticulous preoperative planning is required to overcome the intraoperative problems often encountered as a result of distorted anatomy and associated bone loss. The surgeon must be familiar with the use of reconstructive bone grafting techniques in order to restore the normal hip centre. Careful templating will help appreciate the possible need for modular or customized implants, ensuring their availability at the time of surgery, thereby maximizing the probability of a good outcome for the patient.