Structure-deformation pattern analysis was made on a highly textured 8090 Al–Li alloy sheet deformed in tension. It is shown that the sharp β-fiber type crystallographic texture induces a strong orientation variation in the mechanical properties and in the deformation structure. The soft orientation is 55° in respect to the rolling direction (RD), while the hard orientation is parallel to the RD. Both results are predicted from the detected texture by the relaxed constrained Taylor deformation model (RC). Cellular dislocation substructure was observed in the samples deformed parallel to the RD. However, in the samples tested 55° to the RD, coplanar dislocation arrangement was preserved even up to 30% elongation. In the hard orientation, the strain hardening ability is quickly exhausted. This is due to the effect of dynamic recovery occurring from the onset of deformation. In the soft orientation, the strain hardening is better sustained as a result of easy glide of the coplanar dislocations, on the primary slip systems, through the grain structure. The pattern of surface slip traces is compatible with the dislocation substructure arrangement observed by transmission electron microscopy (TEM).Al–Li based alloys (8XXX series) are known for their high stiffness and low density. However, because of the anisotropy of mechanical properties commercial 8XXX series alloys have significant drawbacks compared with conventional 2XXX (Al–Cu based) and 7XXX (Al–Zn based) alloys Numerous papers dealing with texture in Al–Li alloys have been published since the late 1980s The objective of this study is to relate the observed anisotropy in the yield stress (YS), ultimate tensile stress (UTS), total elongation ( The material used in this work was a 0.8-mm-thick commercial 8090 alloy sheet, (damage tolerant Lital C). The alloy was received in the T3 condition (solution heat treated, cold worked and naturally aged to a stable microstructure). The chemical composition limits obtained from the manufacturer are listed in Some of the as-received T3 sheets were subjected to a solution heat treatment in an air-circulating furnace for 20 min at 530°C, followed by a water quench. These specimens were classified as W temper and were tested within 15 min after the quench. The pole figures of the as-received sheet were measured on a fully automatic Siemens texture goniometer (Cu Kα radiation) in the range The FC Taylor deformation model assumes that each grain in the polycrystalline material undergoes the same deformation as the polycrystalline aggregate to ensure strain compatibility at the boundaries. The RC model assumes some ‘local’ slip (multiple slip) at the boundary in the neighboring grain, in order to relax the local stress field established by the pile-up of dislocations. This means that for the FC condition the deformation is described by the state of ideal plain strain, where The contraction ratio Sheet specimens with a gauge length of 75 mm, oriented at 0, 25, 45, 55, 75 and 90° to the rolling direction (RD), are tested on ‘Zwik’ tensile test machine, at a cross-head speed of 10 mm min TEM samples were obtained from the gauge sections of the tensile specimens that were strained to different levels. The gauge sections were ground to foils of thickness between 125 and 150 μm, using 500, 800, 1200, 2400 and 4000 grit silicon carbide polishing paper. Care was taken to thin the samples in such a way that the plain of the foils was parallel to the rolling plane. Discs having a 3 mm diameter were then punched from the foils. These disks were then electrochemically polished in a Struers Tenupol-3 jet polisher at a temperature of −25°C with a polishing voltage of 12.5 V. The polishing solution was 75 methanol–25 HNO Surface slip traces were observed on the gauge sections of the T3 specimens, oriented parallel and 55° to the RD, that were strained to different levels. This was done by optical interference microscopy. Kellers reagent was used to etch the surface, revealing both the slip traces and the grains. The texture analysis indicate a strong FCC type cold rolling texture with the {123}〈634〉 S, {110}〈112〉 B and {225}〈554〉 C main orientations, often called β-fiber   Besides the difference in the angles of soft and hard orientations, the two conditions gave different ranges of The detected texture (  The anisotropy of mechanical properties is very pronounced in both tempers. The minimum ductility and maximum YS and UTS appeared in the RD, classifying the RD as the hard orientation. The maximum ductility and minimum YS and UTS occurred near an angle of 55° to the rolling direction, classifying this angle as the soft orientation. According to  At the onset of deformation, the strain-hardening rate is the highest in the RD. However, it quickly decreases as the sample is strained further. Conversely, in the 55° orientation the strain-hardening rate is lower but is maintained throughout the elongation. The temper makes only a small difference in the RD, and is practically negligible in the 55° direction.  The dislocation substructure after 4% strain ( As expected for these temper conditions (T3 and W), the only precipitates that were detected in the microstructure were δ′ (Al  Superdislocations were observed in the microstructure, as illustrated in Individual dislocations and dislocations pairs tend to penetrate through sub-grain boundaries. Occasionally, dislocations were observed to penetrate through a grain boundary. This is arrowed (marked a) in Metallographic examination revealed that the geometry of the slip traces depended both on the orientation and the amount of deformation. Nearly straight slip traces were observed on the surface of the samples oriented 55° to the RD, strained 4 ( For the sample strained 4% but oriented parallel to the RD, the slip traces were slightly wavy ( The RC deformation model predicted a minimum The described hardening effect arises from the variance of the slip plane orientation to the imposed stress (Schmid’s law). The upper limit of the orientation dependent texture induced hardening contribution to the stress strain behavior was estimated to be an additional 20%, relative to a random aggregate In the samples tested parallel to the RD, a fine sub-grain structure was found, indicating multiple slip systems. Conversely, in samples tested 55° to the rolling direction, the coplanar dislocation arrangement indicates an ‘easy-glide’ regime where dislocation glide is limited to a single slip system. Since dislocations were observed to penetrate through the sub-grain and grain boundaries ( The general appearance of the wavy slip traces in samples tested parallel to the RD is a result of cross slip. Conversely, the straight-slip traces in samples oriented 55° to the RD are a result of planar slip. Previously reported results agree with this conclusion After higher strains, in the sample tested parallel to the RD ( The observed deformation pattern can be explained in terms of the very strong preferred orientation and the grain geometry. The local strain behavior of single grains is assumed to be suppressed mainly due the highly aligned grain structure (pancake structure) and the very sharp crystallographic texture. In the samples tested 55° to the RD, the long parallel slip traces make an angle of about 80° to the RD. Since in the majority of the grains this is close to the 〈112〉 orientation, the appropriate Taylor factor should induce slip on the {111} planes. In the samples tested parallel the RD the presence of sub-grains indicates that multiple slip is occurring during deformation. Such behavior was previously predicted by calculating Schmid’s factors for the texture consisting of the {110}〈112〉 main and {112}〈111〉 subsidiary components The tested material is characterized by a strong pancake structure and a sharp β-fiber type crystallographic texture. The anisotropy of mechanical properties was found to be very pronounced, with the lowest and the highest values of YS and UTS at approximately 55° to the rolling direction (RD) and parallel to the RD, respectively. Taylor orientation factor In the samples deformed parallel to the RD, the microstructure consists of a cellular dislocation substructure. In the samples tested 55° to the RD, the microstructure consists of an arrangement of coplanar dislocations. Such a dislocation arrangement is preserved even after 30% elongation. Metallographic examination revealed sets of straight and parallel slip traces at surfaces of the samples tested a 55° to the RD, and wavy slip traces on the surfaces of the samples tested parallel to the RD. These surface slip traces reflect a process of planar and cross slip, respectively, and are compatible with the observed dislocation substructure. Both slip trace analysis and TEM observations agree with the calculated