The extraction of nitric acid, trivalent actinides and lanthanides with N,N,N′,N′-tetra-n-octyl-3-oxapentanediamide (TODGA) dissolved in the aromatic diluents 1,4-diisopropylbenezene and tert-butylbenzene was studied. Nitric acid extraction proceeds along the formation of 1:1 and 2:1 HNO3-TODGA adducts. An(III) and Ln(III) distribution ratios were determined as a function of nitric acid, TODGA and Ln(III) concentrations. Distribution ratios are approximately an order of magnitude lower in aromatic diluents compared to aliphatic diluents. No third phase formation was observed when contacting the solvent with an aqueous phase containing 1.5 mol/L Er(NO3)3 in 2–4.3 mol/L HNO3. Slope analysis indicates the formation of 1:3 and 1:4 M(III):TODGA complexes. Using TRLFS, the formation of a previously unknown 1:2 complex in organic phases loaded with Ln(III) was observed for the first time.Lipophilic An important issue with DGA extracting agents when dissolved in aliphatic diluents is their proneness to third phase formation when in contact with solutions containing nitric acid and metal ions in elevated concentrations. Third phase formation is suppressed by adding modifiers such as tri- This however comes with some drawbacks. Using a pure 1-octanol diluent results in significant co-extraction of nitric acid by the diluent ( The loading capacity of the solvent is increased by using a TODGA concentration >0.2 mol/L. This results in increased distribution ratios of all metal ions (including those to be rejected) and complicates back extraction. To counteract, DGA extracting agents bearing one or two methyl moieties ( Alternatively, a diluent causing smaller distribution ratios compared to aliphatic diluents can be used to counteract the effects of higher extractant concentrations. Aromatic diluents in some cases result in lower distribution ratios compared to aliphatic diluents ( This prompted us to study aromatic compounds as diluents for TODGA in more detail. Following initial successful tests with This paper presents a comprehensive study on solvents comprising TODGA in aromatic diluents, DIPB and tBuB. Such solvents are a promising alternative to solvents used in actinide separation processes developed in Europe, such as i-SANEX, ( All commercially available chemicals (Alfa Aesar or Sigma-Aldrich) used in this study were analytical reagent grade and used without further purification. TODGA was synthesized as described in the literature ( Each 500 μL of 0.3–6.9 mol/L HNO Aqueous phases were either 1–20 kBq/mL Each 500 μL of organic and aqueous phases were contacted in 2 mL screw cap glass vials and shaken for 30 min (except in case of kinetic experiments) on an orbital vortex shaker at 2500 rpm and 20 °C. This time was sufficient to attain chemical equilibrium (cf. SI, Fig. S1). Phases were centrifuged for 2 min at 6000 rpm and 300 μL aliquots were separated. Gamma counting for Preliminary kinetic experiments were performed to determine the time required to attain equilibrium. Aqueous phase was 1 mol/L HNO Aqueous phases were 1 mol/L HNO Aqueous solutions containing 1.5 mol/L Er(NO A La(III) loading isotherm was established extracting La(NO Organic phases for Cm(III) TRLFS were prepared by extracting 10 TRLFS measurements were performed at 298 K using a Nd:YAG (Surelite II laser, Continuum) pumped dye laser system (NarrowScan D-R; Radiant Dyes Laser Accessories GmbH). A wavelength of 396.6 nm and 394 nm was chosen to excite Cm(III) and Eu(III), respectively. A spectrograph (Shamrock 303i, ANDOR) with 300, 1199 and 2400 lines per mm gratings was used for spectral decomposition. The fluorescence emission was detected by an ICCD camera (iStar Gen III, ANDOR) after a delay time of 1 μs to discriminate short-lived organic fluorescence and light scattering. The extraction of nitric acid by TODGA dissoveld in DIPB was determined at TODGA concentrations in the range of 0.15–0.5 mol/L. The extraction of nitric acid by the diluent DIPB itself was also determined. No third phase formation was observed within the range of the initial nitric acid concentrations investigated (0.3–6.9 mol/L). Organic equilibrium nitric acid concentrations as a function of initial aqueous nitric acid concentration are shown in Compared to aliphatic alcohols or mixtures of aliphatic alcohols and kerosene ( Detectable nitric acid extraction by TODGA starts at an initial nitric acid concentration of 0.3 mol/L albeit in small concentrations ([ Nitric acid extraction by a 0.3 mol/L TODGA-DIPB solvent is approximately 55% (at initial aqueous nitric acid concentrations up to 0.5 mol/L) and approximately 80% (beyond 2 mol/L), respectively, of the concentrations extracted by a 0.3 mol/L TODGA-TPH/1-octanol solvent ( The extraction of nitric acid by TODGA and similar DGA extracting agents is reported to proceed along the formation of the (TODGA)·(HNO The modelling approach described in reference ( The model uses activities in the aqueous phase calculated by the Specific Ion Interaction Theory (SIT), see references ( This model accurately calculates nitric acid extraction, see The extraction of Am(III) was studied over a range of nitric acid (0.2–4.9 mol/L) and TODGA (0.05–0.5 mol/L) concentrations. Distribution ratios for Am(III) as a function of the initial nitric acid and TODGA concentrations are shown in Am(III) distribution ratios increase with increasing nitric acid (and thus nitrate) concentration, in accordance with extraction by solvation, Slope analysis was performed to determine the number of TODGA molecules in the extracted Am(III) complexes. Am(III) distribution ratios ( For equilibrium nitric acid concentrations up to 1.4 mol/L, the slopes are in the range of 3.5–3.8, indicating the extraction of Am(III) as a 1:4 complex. For a nitric acid concentration of 1.8 mol/L the slope is close to 3, indicating the extraction of Am(III) as a 1:3 complex. Finally, the slope of 2.1 observed at 2.6 mol/L nitric acid may be interpreted as evidence for a 1:2 complex, However, the presumably greater uncertainties for the very high distribution ratios and the low number of data points does not allow for strong conclusions. On one hand, literature reports the extraction of An(III) and Ln(III) to proceed along the formation of 1:2, 1:3 or 1:4 complexes depending on experimental conditions, see ( Consequently, Cm(III) and Eu(III) extracted from 0.3 to 5 mol/L nitric acid by TODGA dissolved in DIPB or tBuB were studied by TRLFS. The respective Cm(III) and Eu(III) fluorescence spectra are shown in the SI, Fig. S2. They are in excellent agreement with spectra of the Cm(III) and Eu(III) 1:3 DGA complexes found in monophasic titration experiments ( The spectroscopic results do not necessarily contradict extraction in the form of 1:4 complexes. This technique probes the inner coordination sphere of the extracted metal ion, showing it to be directly coordinated to three TODGA molecules regardless of the nitric acid concentration. Additional TODGA molecules associated in the outer sphere will remain undetected. The extraction of An(III) and Ln(III) with 0.2 mol/L TODGA dissolved in DIPB or tBuB was studied as a function of the initial nitric acid concentration. Distribution ratios for Am(III), Cm(III), Y(III) and the lighter Ln(III) are shown in Both systems (TODGA in DIPB and TODGA in tBuB) behave similarly. Extraction As observed earlier (  Due to the small differences between the two aromatic solvents, all further experiments were performed with DIPB only. Am(III) and Ln(III) distribution were determined at varied temperature (10–50 °C). Distribution ratios for all studied metal ions decrease strongly with increasing temperature (e.g. No thermodynamic evaluation of the data was performed as this would require further temperature dependent data on nitric acid extraction. Nevertheless, knowledge of the temperature effect on An(III) and Ln(III) extraction is mandatory for flow-sheet calculations in case a process is to be performed at a temperature other than 20 °C. Extracting Er(III) (initially 1.5 mol/L Er(NO Furthermore, a solvent comprising 0.1 mol/L TODGA in DIPB was loaded with La(III) by extracting La(NO The organic equilibrium La(III) concentration increases linearly To further investigate the formation of the 1:2 complex in Ln(III) loaded organic phases, TRLFS was performed. Aqueous phases containing 1.84 mol/L of Ln(III) (Ln = Y, La, Nd, Sm, Gd, Eu, Er) and 10 The use of two different Ln(III) per sample (Eu(III) First, the excess Ln(III) itself can fluoresce even if not excited at one of its absorption maxima. With the ratio [ Second, a further quenching process can occur in more concentrated solutions. In dilute systems, fluorescence depends mainly on the presence of quenching molecules in the first coordination sphere of the fluorescing metal ion. Harmonic overtones of the OH stretching mode are the main contributors to this quenching process. However, in more concentrated solutions the excited state is additionally quenched by energy transfer via dipole-dipole coupling to neighbouring metal ions. This process is known as “Förster resonance energy transfer (FRET)”. It is proportional to the inverse sixth power of the distance between the acceptor and the donor (k  In case of the organic phases loaded with La(III) and Nd(III), Eu(III) Eu(III) emission spectra of the From the Eu(III) fluorescence spectra (cf. Samples containing only the Eu-TODGA 1:2 complex: Y(III) and Er(III) Samples containing only the Eu-TODGA 1:3 complex: La(III) and Nd(III) Samples containing both 1:2 and 1:3 complexes: Sm(III), Eu(III), Gd(III) The 1:2 Eu(III)-TODGA complex is only found if the excess Ln(III) is similarly well as or better extracted than Eu(III): The solvent is loaded with the excess Ln(III) and the remaining low concentration of free TODGA promotes the formation of the 1:2 Eu(III)-TODGA complex. In case of solvents loaded with La(III) and Nd(III), Eu(III) displaces La(III) or Nd(III) due to its higher distribution ratio, forming the Eu-TODGA 1:3 complex. Fluorescence lifetime measurements of each sample were performed to further characterize the Eu(III) complexes present in the Ln(III) loaded organic phases. Results are shown in Both Nd(III) and Sm(III) are excited by the laser light having a wavelength of λ The lifetimes of the Eu-TODGA 1:3 complexes are in the range of 1929 μs < τ Six coordination sites of Eu(III) are occupied by the tridentate TODGA ligands in the 1:2 complex. With Eu(III) preferring nine-fold coordination in solution, three sites are available for further ligands. As the aromatic diluent is inert, only nitrate or, according to the lifetime, zero or one water molecule may fill the vacant sites (cf. To investigate the formation of the 1:2 complex in other than aromatic diluents, similar loading experiments were conducted using 0.1 mol/L TODGA dissolved in TPH + 5 vol% 1-octanol. Eu(III) spectra in TPH/1-octanol (dashed lines) are compared to the spectra in DIPB (continuous lines) in the SI, Fig. S7. No significant differences are observed for any of the samples, confirming the formation of a 1:2 complex also in the aliphatic diluent. Fluorescence lifetimes similar to those measured in the TODGA-DIPB solvent (SI, Fig. S8) further confirm this observation. These results represent the first spectroscopic evidence of a Eu(III)-TODGA 1:2 complex in loaded organic phases, independent of the diluent. Eu(III) emission spectra confirm that the new species is a 1:2 complex. This explains the observed high Ln(III) concentrations in the organic phase of the La(III) loading experiment (cf. The extraction of nitric acid, An(III) and Ln(III) into TODGA dissolved in aromatic diluents (DIPB, tBuB) was studied. Compared to TODGA-kerosene solvents ( Slope analysis implies that Am(III) is extracted as a 1:4 or 1:3 complex, depending on nitric acid concentration. TRLFS shows the inner coordination sphere of these complexes to be [M(DGA) In summary, the TODGA-DIPB solvent allows for high Ln(III) loading without requiring a phase modifier, other than kerosene-based TODGA solvents. This solvent shows potential in the context of both rare earth recycling and advanced nuclear fuel cycles. All authors have given approval to the final version of the manuscript. All authors contributed equally. This work has received funding from the The authors declare no competing financial interests.  Supplementary data to this article can be found online at