This investigation reports the silver dissolution kinetics from a ore-type sulfosalt identified as miargyrite, which prevails in the chemical concentration process of polymetallic concentrates, in the S2O3
                     2--Ca(OH)2 system as well as a statistical study of the design of experiments concerning the effect of temperature (T), calcium hydroxide concentration ([Ca(OH)2]), thiosulfate concentration ([S2O3
                     2-]), particle size (d0) and stirring speed (RPM). The results show that temperature is the variable with the most significant effect on the dissolution rate of silver and obtains an activation energy (Ea) of 57.19 kJ mol-1, followed by particle size and hydroxide concentration. Furthermore, it was observed that stirring speed does not affect the dissolution rates in basic medium. These results are consistent and demonstrate that the dissolution reaction is controlled by the chemical reaction. The study of the factorial design was relevant to elucidate the behavior of the variables with the greatest impact in the experimental kinetic study. Finally, kinetic and statistical models were proposed to describe the silver dissolution process in an alkaline medium. The highest silver dissolution was achieved using the following conditions V = 0.5 L, mineral = 40 g L-1, PO2 = 1 atm, t = 360 min, d0 = -105 + 74 μm, [S2O3
                     2-] = 0.5 mol L-1, [Ca(OH)2] = 0.05 mol L-1, T = 338 K and RPM = 670 min-1.In the last decade, the variables involved in the leaching processes of precious metals, where thiosulfate acts as a complexing agent, have been studied to create alternative dissolution methods that minimize the toxic conditions of the traditional cyanidation method ( The first studies on the use of thiosulfate in the leaching of gold and silver contained in oxidized or refractory ores, mining residues and electronic wastes indicated that the dissolution of precious metals reached approximately 90% in the loaded solutions, compared to 60% when the cyanidation process was used ( Alternatives such as hypochlorides, thiourea and thiocyanates allow the leaching of gold ores at acidic pH, which obtains a performance similar to that obtained in the traditional processes; however, none of these processes have attained the level of efficiency of thiosulfate for the treatment of silver ores ( The mineral sample was obtained at the El Carrizal mine in the Zimapán mining district, Hidalgo, Mexico. Sampling was carried out in the field using the probing technique for powders and the sieving process was carried out using the wet method. The powders were dimensioned using six Tyler series meshes in the range of +105 to -37 μm. For the characterization of the concentrate and the experimental tests, except for the study of the effect of the particle size, the particles retained in the range -105 + 74 μm were selected. The powders were subjected to a chemical attack for their total dissolution. Later, the silver content in the mineral sample was determined by the Atomic Absorption Spectroscopy (AAS) technique using a Perkin Elmer-Analyst 200 spectrophotometer (Perkin Elmer, Waltham, MA, USA). Two resin samples with mineral powder were also prepared, which were polished to identify the morphology, tone and texture of the mineral species contained in the sample through the Polarization Optical Microscopy (PLM) technique using an Olympus model CX31-P microscope (Olympus Corporation, Shinjuku, Tokyo, Japan). The second resin sample was covered with gold and prepared for analysis by employing the Scanning Electron Microscopy with Dispersive Energy Analysis (MEB-EDS) technique using a JEOL model JSM 6300 electron microscope of 30 KV and 18 mm depth of field at different magnifications with backscattered electrons. This technique revealed the content and elemental relationship of the silver sulfosalt. Finally, the mineral powders were subjected to analysis by utilizing the X-ray Diffraction (XRD) technique using an INEL model EQUINOX 2000 diffractometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Ecublens, Switzerland) with Co-Kα1 radiation (1.789010 Å) at 20 kV to corroborate the composition of the species identified by the aforementioned techniques. To construct the dissolution curve of the general leaching process in the S Excess oxygen was injected constantly to ensure the oxidizing medium that requires the leaching with thiosulfate, utilizing a diffuser connected to a flowmeter that regulates the partial pressure of the oxidizing agent (O The results obtained are from the chemical characterization of the mineral sample, the calculation of the kinetic parameters obtained through the decreasing core model and finally, the analysis of the factorial design 2 The silver concentration equivalent to 245.3 mg kg As previously described, to establish the general dissolution curve of the proposed leaching system, an experimental test was performed under the standard conditions specified in the proposed methodology. Where k Where [Ag] . The effect of stirring speed was also evaluated ( After confirming the fit of the model by chemical control, the experimental tests established to study the effect of the concentration of the leaching agent, the concentration of calcium hydroxide as a regulatory agent of the alkaline medium and the temperature and size of the particle were realized. The calculation of k To study the effect of thiosulfate concentration, the logarithm of k  For the calculation of the activation energy (Ea), the natural logarithm of k Where K To know the effect of the particle size, k Where V Consequently, according to eq. The general equation of global speed represents the relationship of all the kinetic parameters that influence the speed with which a reaction is carried out ( On substituting the kinetic parameters obtained—K After evaluating the effects of temperature, leaching agent concentration and calcium hydroxide concentration, the theoretical values of the experimental constants (k  Regarding the percentage of silver in the solution using the S In Based on the data obtained from the factorial design 2 Where x To verify the validity of the models obtained, the experimental values were compared with those calculated by the statistical model. The points in By means of the different characterization techniques used, consistent results were obtained on the presence of miargyrite, the silver-containing complex species. The experimental tests carried out allowed to establish that reaction speed relating to silver leaching increases significantly if the temperature and the concentration of OH The chemical stages of the process occurred in longer time intervals than the material transport stages; therefore, the process is controlled by the chemical reaction. This was affirmed through the experimental data, which obtained a greater fit with the decreasing nucleus model (k Aislinn M. Teja-Ruiz and Julio C. Juárez-Tapia conducted conceptualization, formal analysis and writing of the research paper. Iván A. Reyes-Domínguez developed methodology, validation and participated in review y editing. Otilio Acevedo-Sandoval and Uriel. M. Flores performed background investigation and theoretical support. Elia G. Palacios-Beas and Miguel Pérez-Labra provided resources for characterization and experimental activity. None.