Ore variability is a big challenge for mineral processing operations, especially in the flotation of complex polymetallic sulphide ores. Processing and blending strategies are determined mostly based on chemical and mineralogical characterization. However, surface characteristics of sulphide minerals is an equally important parameter affecting flotation performance. Changes in surface characteristics of sulphide minerals are usually studied at laboratory scale by using sophisticated equipment, such as ToFSIMs, XPS, etc. In this paper, use of Oxidation Index methodology based on the EDTA extraction technique was evaluated for determination of the presence of secondary copper minerals and surface oxidation of sulphide minerals using a low grade VMS ore deposit from Turkey. These two surface chemistry parameters are known to influence flotation performance significantly, particularly in the copper flotation stage. Therefore, ore variability across the entire ore deposit was evaluated using the relationship between Oxidation Index and flotation performance. The results showed that this methodology can potentially be used as a practical and cost effective method for mapping an ore body regarding variations in surface chemistry of sulphide minerals, prediction of flotation recoveries and selectivity.Ore variability is one of the major factors affecting performance of mineral processing operations. It can be defined in terms of variations in grindability, grade, mineralogy (textural and liberation characteristics) and surface characteristics. Effects of ore variability are observed in the crushing-grinding circuit due to changes in breakage characteristics, in flotation circuits and in dewatering circuits due to changes in grade-mineralogy-surface characteristics. Geometallurgy, which is defined as “a scientific discipline in which geological data, mining data, and processing data are co-analysed to generate useful information and knowledge to optimize resource profitability” becomes recently a common approach for characterization of ore variability during project development and also operation ( Various techniques have been tested in literature to develop a practical and cost effective method for surface chemistry characterization of sulphide minerals. Some of these techniques/methodologies are rest potential of minerals and redox potential of flotation pulp ( There are a number of studies with sulphide ores and/or sulphide minerals showing effects of surface oxidation on flotation performance. While low degree of surface oxidation may enhance flotation ( Mineralogy, texture, presence of secondary copper minerals and surface oxidation of copper minerals are known to affect significantly the flotation performance (recovery and selectivity) of the copper flotation stage ( EDTA is capable of measuring both the presence of secondary copper minerals and surface oxidation of all sulphide minerals, it could be used as a proxy to estimate variability of surface chemistry and its influence on flotation performance. Therefore, the main objective of this work was to determine the ore variability based on EDTA extraction values, derive an Oxidation Index calibration curve for Yenipazar sulphide zone ore and predict flotation performance based on Oxidation Index. In the last stage, predictions of flotation performances were validated by actual flotation results for 6 samples selected upon mine sequence. The relationship between Oxidation Index and amount of secondary copper minerals for these six samples was also determined. Yenipazar (Yozgat/Turkey) polymetallic sulphide ore was used in the experiments. The ore deposit is a volcanogenic massive sulphide (VMS) ore and contains gold, silver, copper, lead and zinc as valuable metals. Detailed mineralogical characterization studies have been performed by QEMSCAN using ore samples taken from different ore types and locations in the ore deposit. The major sulphide minerals are pyrite, chalcopyrite, sphalerite, galena and chalcocite/covellite as secondary copper sulphides observed at variable quantities across the ore deposit. The major non-sulphide minerals are feldspars, quartz and clays ( Ninety samples obtained from different locations of the ore deposit were used in the experiments. Chemical and mineralogical characteristics of the samples studied are given in relevant sections below. The ore samples were crushed and ground using a tungsten carbide ring mill to obtain approximately 80% of the product passes 90 µm, which was the optimum primary grind size for flotation ( The extraction tests were performed using 200 ml of EDTA solution containing 3% EDTA by weight and 10 g of solid. The slurry was stirred vigorously for 30 min in a beaker, which was sealed using parafilm to prevent diffusion of oxygen from air. Then, the slurry was filtrated to separate solid and solution with a standard filter first, and then through a 0.45 µm filter. Chemical analysis of both filtrate and solids were performed for Cu, Zn, Fe, Pb by using Atomic Absorption Spectrometry (AAS). Results of EDTA extraction test were presented in the form of Es values for copper, lead, zinc and iron. Es value represents the degree of surface oxidation on the mineral (Eq. Repeat tests were performed using randomly selected fourteen samples to determine the reproducibility of the test. The maximum standard deviation ranges from 1% to 10% depending on the grade of the sample. Flotation of Yenipazar ore is performed by sequential flotation of copper, lead and zinc minerals. Performance of the copper flotation stage is the most critical stage as the rest of the circuit (lead and zinc flotation) is strongly influenced by performance of this section. Therefore, copper flotation was performed to demonstrate variability of the selected ore samples. The tests were performed using 2 kg of ore samples, ground for 25 min at 60% w/w pulp density in a ball mill to obtain 80% passing 90 µm particle size. The flotation tests were performed at 30% w/w solids percentage using a bottom driven Magotteaux flotation machine with 5 lt cell volume. The flotation reagents and dosages, flotation and conditioning times used for the copper flotation stage are given in The test work was performed in three main phases. In Phase 1, EDTA extraction tests of 90 variability samples were performed and based on these results 10 composite samples representing ore variability were prepared for further EDTA extraction tests and flotation tests. In Phase 2, EDTA extraction and flotation tests were performed to determine the relationship between surface oxidation and flotation performance. In Phase 3, 6 samples having different mineralogical and surface oxidation characteristics were selected from different ore types and locations in the ore deposit. Mineralogical characterization, EDTA extraction tests and locked cycle flotation tests (LCT) were conducted using these samples to validate the results obtained in the second phase. Oxidation Index (OI) is developed to determine the degree of oxidation of an ore relative to fresh ore and artificially oxidized samples. Details of the methodology are given in OI for each metal was calculated using the following equation: Es Es Es  Sample selection was performed based on two main rock types (copper enriched and sulphide zones) and their spatial distribution across the ore body. Ninety samples were selected from drill cores and used in EDTA extraction tests. Results of EDTA tests are given in terms of Es_Cu, Es_Pb, Es_Zn and Es_Fe in The Es_Cu values, in other words surface oxidation and/or presence of secondary copper minerals are variable and the highest value was measured as 89 mg/g with YP84 sample. However, majority of the samples have Es_Cu lower than 20 mg/g. Es_Pb values are significantly higher than the other metals. This is due to higher degree of surface oxidation of galena particles in the ore. Although there are samples with very high Es-Pb values, majority of the samples have values lower than 200 mg/g. In the case of Es_Zn, the maximum value is about 90 mg/g. Most of the samples are accumulated below 10 mg/g. The values for Es_Fe are considerably lower than the other metals. This is attributed mainly to lower degree of surface oxidation of pyrite particles in the samples. Pyrite has generally the highest rest potential and is the most cathodic sulphide mineral. According to galvanic interaction models, the electrons flow from most of sulphide minerals (chalcopyrite, chalcocite galena and sphalerite in this case) towards pyrite ( Distribution of Es_Cu, Es_Pb, Es_Zn and Es-Fe in 90 ore samples was analysed and the results are presented in the form of histogram plots for each metal in Distribution of Es_Pb is different from Es_Cu. Majority of the samples have Es_Pb values between 150 mg/g and 300 mg/g. Es_Pb value for the copper enriched ore is about 800 mg/g, due to the high degree of surface oxidation. There are only four samples with similar values to copper enriched ore. Most of the samples have Es-Zn values lower than 10 mg/g. Es_Zn of copper enriched ore is about 35 mg/g and there are 11 samples with higher Es_Zn values. Similar distribution analysis is also done for Es_Fe. Approximately 65 samples have Es_Fe values lower than 4 mg/g. Es_Fe of copper enriched ore is approximately 5 mg/g. EDTA results of 90 drill core samples showed that there was a large variation in EDTA values, which could be due to variations in ore mineralogy and surface oxidation. Presence of secondary copper minerals and high degree of surface oxidation are known to adversely affect flotation performance of sulphide ores ( The presence of secondary copper minerals and their surface oxidation, i.e. Es_Cu was found as the most important parameter affecting performance in the copper flotation stage ( Based on distribution of Es values, the 90 samples are classified into 10 groups. Ten composite samples representing each group were prepared from the 90 samples and used for flotation tests. Some of the composite samples contain copper enriched ore at certain ratios and demonstrate its influence on flotation performance. Standard flotation conditions ( Oxidation Index for copper was calculated using the equation given in the calibration curve ( Cu recovery decreases linearly as a function of OI. On the other hand, recoveries of both Pb and Zn increased following a logarithmic trend as a function of OI. It is clear that surface oxidation and presence of Cu Enriched ore in the composite samples negatively affected copper recovery and selectivity against galena and sphalerite in the copper flotation stage. Flotation performance was also evaluated based on flotation selectivity between the copper minerals vs sphalerite, vs galena, and vs pyrite. The Gaudin Selectivity Index (SI) was used to determine the selectivity between the related minerals ( Both recovery values in Results of the EDTA extraction and flotation tests show clearly that Oxidation Index can be used as a proxy to predict metal recoveries. Recoveries for copper, lead and zinc were calculated using the equations given in Oxidation Index of the samples selected for the testwork is illustrated in The calculated copper, lead and zinc recoveries of the same samples are given in Similar tests were conducted using another different 6 composite samples representing different mine phases through life of mine for validation.  The relationship between mass of secondary copper minerals, OI % and copper recovery are illustrated in The results also showed that the proposed methodology based on EDTA extraction technique can be successfully used as a geometallurgical parameter to estimate the effects of secondary copper minerals and surface oxidation in sulphide ores. However, further studies should be performed to include different lithologies into the same model, such as Cu Enriched ore in Yenipazar sulphide ore. Variations in surface oxidation of sulphide minerals and the presence of secondary copper minerals across Yenipazar polymetallic sulphide ore body were investigated using Oxidation Index methodology. Ninety samples representing spatial distribution of the ore types are used for EDTA extraction tests. Based on the distribution of EDTA extracted copper values, ten composite samples were prepared for batch scale flotation tests. Results of these tests were used to derive mathematical expressions expressing the relationship between Oxidation Index and flotation performance. Then, copper recoveries of the ninety samples were calculated from these equations. In the last stage, another 6 different samples (upon mine sequence selected) and locked cycle tests conducted for these samples, actual copper recoveries obtained from LCT and predicted copper recoveries obtained from OI % methodology compared. Also a linear relationship was obtained between copper recovery, OI and mass of secondary copper sulphides. The results of this work showed clearly that Oxidation Index methodology can be used as a proxy indicating the presence of secondary copper minerals (which is crucial to identify the boundary of Cu Enriched Ore in the deposit) and surface oxidation of sulphide minerals to predict flotation performance. Oxidation Index can be considered as a practical and cost effective method for geometallurgical mapping of different ore types based on variations in surface chemistry of sulphide minerals for both mines in operation and Greenfield projects. The author would like to acknowledge financial and technical support of