NiTi shape memory alloy thin films of different thickness have been grown on silicon (100) substrates using dc magnetron co-sputtering. Differences in microstructure such as crystallinity, grain size, grain size distribution and surface roughness of these films were studied using X-ray diffractrometer (XRD) and atomic force microscope (AFM). The influence of film thickness on phase transformation behavior was studied using four probe resistivity method. NiTi films exhibited mainly three kinds of transformation behaviors i.e. incomplete, constrained and complete austenite to martensite phase transformation for the films having lower (≤300nm), intermediate (0.6–1.1μm) and higher (2.3μm) thickness, respectively. It is proposed that the constrained or incomplete transformation could be due to the special constraints (resistance force) introduced by the inter-diffusion of film, higher number of grain boundaries and increased level of the intrinsic defects. The level of actuation force can be tuned by choosing the different transformation paths that can have immense technological importance in the fabrication of various types of MEMS devices.NiTi shape memory alloy thin films are attractive candidates for microfabrication and integration in micro-miniature systems composed of mechanical elements, actuators, sensors and electronics made on single chip NiTi films deposited on substrate having the advantage of narrower hysteresis width as compared to the free standing films as substrates provide a bias stress for reversible actuation NiTi films of various thicknesses were deposited on silicon (1 The orientation and crystallinity of the films were studied using a Bruker advanced diffractrometer of CuKα (1.54  The crystallite size of these films was calculated from the integral width of the diffraction lines using Scherrer's equation      The films of 2.3  The influence of film thickness in sputtered NiTi thin films was investigated. XRD results revealed the presence of austenitic (1 The financial support provided by Ministry of Communications and Information Technology (MIT), India, under Nanotechnology Initiative Program with Reference no. 20(11)/2007-VCND and DRDO ARMREB/MAA/2008/91, NewDelhi, is highly acknowledged. The authors are thankful to Prof. Jan Van Humbeeck, Leuven University, Belgium for fruitful discussions.