The separation of nickel(II), cobalt(II) and lanthanides from chloride leach liquors of spent nickel-metal hydride (Ni-MH) batteries is described. After leaching in 12molL−1 HCl, the traces of iron(III) and zinc(II) were extracted in a single stage with pure TBP (25°C, A/O ratio=1v/v). Cobalt was extracted (93.6%) in two stages with Alamine 336 (10% vol. in kerosene, 25°C, A/O=1v/v, free acidity=4.3molL−1). More than 98% of the lanthanides present in the raffinate were recovered through one of the following routes: (i) extraction with PC88A (20vol.% in kerosene, 25°C, A/O=1v/v, one stage, pH 1); (ii) precipitation as oxalates at pH 0.5. Nickel(II) was precipitated (>99%) as oxalate at pH 2. Metals separation in acidic medium avoids partial or total neutralization of the leachate and reduces the amount (and salinity) of the wastewater generated in the separation processes.As a result of continuous technological innovations the number and variety of portable electronic devices have been growing worldwide, causing an increase of battery consumption for such devices ( Nickel-metal hydride batteries (Ni-MH) are an example of typical rechargeable batteries. They have greatly replaced Ni-Cd batteries because of their technological and environmental advantages. The highly toxic cadmium was replaced by a mixture of metals (mischmetal), basically La, Ce, Pr and Nd, which are less harmful ( The processing of spent batteries is an important challenge not only from the viewpoint of treatment of a hazardous waste but also for the recovery of valuable elements from such wastes ( Cobalt(II) can be extracted by amines in the presence of high Cl The separation of lanthanides using SX has also been extensively studied. Organophosphorus extractants have been tested in chloride ( This work aims to test and propose a hydrometallurgical flowsheet to recover nickel, cobalt and lanthanides from hydrochloric acid leachates of spent Ni-MH batteries followed by (i) solvent extraction of Zn(II) and Fe(III), (ii) solvent extraction of Co(II), (iii) solvent extraction and precipitation of lanthanides as oxalate and (iv) precipitation of Ni(II) as oxalate. A total of 120 spent Ni-MH batteries (~ The extractants employed were Alamine 336 (trioctyl/decylamine; Cognis Corporation) and PC88A (2-ethylhexylphosphonic acid, mono-2-ethylhexyl ester; Daihachi Chemical Co. Ltd). They were used without further purification. Deodorized aliphatic (> Iron(III) and zinc(II) were extracted with pure TBP ( Preliminary SX experiments were performed using synthetic CoCl SX of Ni(II) with Alamine 336 was also studied using different concentrations of Ni(II) in the range 12–38 Extraction of lanthanides was performed on the raffinate after Co(II) extraction with PC88A (20 After Co(II) extraction pH was adjusted to the range 0–4 via addition of 6 The composition of the solid after mixing, milling and drying the active components was determined by X-ray fluorescence (Shimadzu XRF 800HS). Calibration curves (0.1–1000   The distribution coefficient, D  The variation of log D At low concentrations in the range 4–5 The increase of Co(II) concentration decreased the extraction yield ( Data on The concentration of metal ions (g In a single stage extraction with Alamine 336, 60% of Co(II) was extracted from the raffinate described in The decrease of the free acidity from 4.5 to 4.3 (after one stage) and 3.0 The extraction of lanthanides by PC 88A (20 At pH 2 some Mn(II) precipitated as a brown solid (probably MnO Lanthanides were easily stripped by 0.5 pH plays a critical role on lanthanide precipitation as oxalate. The reactions for oxalate precipitation are described by Eq. The acidity also plays a critical role on lanthanide precipitation as oxalate. The lanthanides precipitation began at pH 0 but the yield was low (50%). The effect of pH summarized in Despite its simplicity, selective precipitation of lanthanides as oxalate requires a much more rigid control of experimental parameters. The yield was somewhat lower to recover these elements with high purity. Therefore, SX appears to be a better choice for recovering lanthanides from Ni-MH leachates. More than 99.5% of the nickel present in the raffinate after lanthanide extraction with PC88A was recovered as oxalate at pH 2. This corresponds to 97% of the overall element present in the original leachate. The remnant Co(II) not extracted by Alamine 336 and all Mn(II) were also recovered as oxalate. The yield and the composition of precipitate did not change at pH higher than 2. However, Mn and Co accounts for less than 4 and 1% of the metals present in the solid, respectively (  The extraction of Co(II) follows a 1:1 molar stoichiometry with Alamine 336. Tertiary amines appear to be good extractants for Co(II) in high HCl concentrations. The milled and dried active components of spent Ni-MH batteries were leached with 12 Lanthanides were extracted (> The authors acknowledge