A laboratory REE release test procedure was designed to better understand the association and liberation characteristics of rare earth elements (REEs) from coal-based material, such as coal middlings and refuse. For this particular study, three samples of mixed-phase, middling material was collected from three coal preparation plants operating in three different coal basins and coal seams, namely Fire Clay, Middle Kittanning, and West Kentucky #13. In these release tests, the mixed-phase material was first ground in a laboratory ball mill for a designated amount of time and subsequently decarbonized using staged flotation. The REE content of the high ash tailings and low ash concentrate was determined, and the process was repeated for various target grind sizes down to the micron range. The results indicate that smaller grind sizes produce increased REE concentrations in the high ash tailings, and this result is predominantly driven by the increased ash content in the decarbonized tailings. The grinding characteristics of the Fire Clay coal source showed that more energy is needed to achieve the desired particle size reduction; however further size reduction of this sample resulted in a significantly higher ash and REE content in the tailings material due to improved liberation. For the Middle Kittanning and West Kentucky #13 sources, the grinding and release data indicates that the mineral matter is liberated at a coarser particle size, and micronizing the coals only produces marginal improvements in rare earth mineral liberation and recovery.Recent research efforts have suggested that rare earth elements (REEs, i.e. the fifteen elements of the lanthanide series as well as yttrium and scandium) may exist in coal and coal byproducts at concentrations suitable for economic extraction and processing. While the knowledge of REE occurrence in coal material dates back over 50 The REE-bearing minerals that have been commercially exploited include bastnasite, monazite, xenotime as well as ion-adsorbed clays [ Prior studies have consistently shown that a portion of the REEs in coal and the related strata may exist as ultrafine mineral grains with a particle size often <10 Rare earth elements can be detected in measureable amounts in coal and efforts have been made to separate trace rare earth elements along with harmful trace elements from coal [ The coal material used in this study was sampled from the dense medium cyclone circuit at three different preparation plants in Central Appalachia, Northern Appalachia, and the Illinois Basin. All three plants utilize a two-stage cyclone circuit, which produces a stream of mixed-phase particles commonly referred to as middlings material containing between 20% and 30% ash. Basic characterization data for each sample is included in A standard Bond Mill Grindability Test was first conducted on the three as-received samples to determine the work index of each respective sample. Representative samples were obtained by coning and quartering, and each split was subsequently screened at a sieve opening of 3.36 In addition to the Bond Grindability Test, standard Hardgrove Grindability Tests were also conducted on the three coal samples in accordance with ASTM Standard Test Method for Grindability of Coal by the Hardgrove-Machine Method (D409/D409M). The as-received coal samples were air dried, split, and crushed to a size finer than 4.75 In addition to the grinding characterization tests, an REE release test protocol was designed and implemented to assess the association of the REEs with the organic and inorganic constituents. To ensure feedstock consistency, the as-received samples were first staged crushed to −1 An Attritor S-1 batch stirred mill ( During the release tests, the mill was initially loaded with approximately 450 To determine the optimal grinding times needed to produce a range of grinding product sizes, a preliminary kinetic grinding assessment was conducted on the three −1 The flotation stage of the test was conducted in accordance with ASTM D5114, and the detailed operating conditions are summarized in All products were analyzed for particle size, ash, and REE content. Particle size was determined using a Cilas 1190 Lastly, X-ray diffraction (XRD, D8 Discovery, Diffractometer, Bruker, Germany) analyses were also conducted on the decarbonized coal samples which were the combined tailings resulting from the previous staged flotation tests. The results from the Bond Work Index (BWI) and Hardgrove Grindability Index (HGI) tests are shown in Interestingly, the HGI and BWI values for Fire Clay and Middling Kittanning coal largely confirm the correlation equation originally given by McIntyre and Plitt [ Using the HGI values determined in this study, 41.06 for the Fire Clay coal and 74.56 for the Middle Kittanning coal, the work index values calculated from Eq. All replicate tests show excellent repeatability (standard deviation <10% in all cases), with the most noticeable variation associated with the Fire Clay (the standard deviation is still <10% of the mean, though). Likewise, the HGI tests show excellent reproducibility and further indicate that the Fire Clay coal is the most difficult to grind. Results from the initial grinding kinetics tests are shown in The particle size distribution of the flotation feed, concentrate, and tailings samples from the REE release tests are shown in To assess the REE release to the inorganic material fraction, the REE concentration in the flotation tailings was determined and compared to the REE content in the original feed material ( To further show the impact of mineral liberation on the release of REEs from the organic material as a function of particle size, the REE concentration in the flotation tailings was correlated with the grinding P Further information on the release of REEs from the organic constituents can be obtained by analyzing the ash release data from the same tests. As Further analysis of all data from the REE release tests (i.e. flotation feed, concentrate, and tailings) shows strong linear relationships between REE content and ash content for each of the three samples evaluated in this study ( With the exception of the high ash particles in the West KY #13 sample, the linear trends extend across the full length of ash contents, with very high regression accuracy. This result is somewhat contrary to bulk plant samples that have been subjected to washability testing in other studies [ Alternatively, extrapolation of the linear trends in To further investigate the relationship of REEs with sample ash content, data for individual REEs was plotted as a function of ash content ( The element-by-element linear correlation suggests that the observed REE content at intermediate ash values is representative of a simple binary mixture, namely the mixture of a pure organic (i.e., 0% ash) and a pure inorganic (i.e., 100% ash) constituent, each with their own inherent REE content. Given the lack of points at extreme ash values (i.e. <5% and >90%), this hypothesis cannot be proven with the current dataset; however, the results are clearly suggestive of such behavior. Assuming that the binary mixture hypothesis is valid, the data shows that the REE content of the pure constituents varies from source to source, but the REE content of any mixture (i.e. an ash content between 0% and 100%) is then just the simple weighted average of those two values. Interestingly, the 0% ash intercept for each individual REE is very similar for the two Appalachian coals (Fire Clay and Middle Kittanning), but much lower for the West KY #13 coal, particularly for the light REEs, La, Ce, and Nd, which are often associated with rare earth minerals, such as monazite. Furthermore, despite the similar intercept for Fire Clay and Middle Kittanning coal, the slope of the line for each element, and particularly the REM elements, is elevated for the Fire Clay coal. This result suggests that Fire Clay ash constituents are elevated in REMs, which is consistent with several prior studies [ While comparing the plots in Lastly, XRD analyses were conducted on all decarbonized materials for various coal samples as a function of grind time. Partial results from these analyses are shown in A specially-designed REE release test protocol was designed and implemented to study the association and liberation behavior of REEs in three coal middling samples, namely Middling Kittanning, West Kentucky #13, and Fire Clay coals. In this test, the coal middling samples were first micronized in a laboratory ball mill and then decarbonized using staged flotation. The tests were then repeated at different grinding times to evaluate the influence of particle size on the degree of REE release. Supplemental characterizations were also conducted to characterize the grindability of the coal middlings as well as the mineralogy of the decarbonized products. Specific findings from the present study include: The Bond Work Index and Hardgrove Grindability Index results are generally in agreement and show that the Fire Clay coal is more difficult to grind than the other samples included in this study. The difference in grindability may primarily arise from the mineralogical discrepancy observed in the decarbonized products with the Fire Clay tailings containing a larger amount of difficulty-to-grind quartz. The REE content of coal middlings can be increased by simple grinding and decarbonization. For the three coals tested, the concentration ratio between the decarbonized flotation tailings and the initial feed varied from 1.38 to 3.74. Additionally, data from the Fire Clay tests uniquely showed that continued grinding of this sample to smaller particle sizes produced higher REE concentration in the decarbonized flotation tailings. The REE content for all samples shows a strong, positive linear correlation to the sample ash content; however, the nature of this correlation (i.e. the slope and intercept) is unique for each coal sample. The linear correlation extends across the full range of ash values and provides strong evidence for a pure organic REE association and a pure rock REE association in coal middling material. Altogether, the cumulative result suggests that REEs tend to concentrate in the mineral matter dispersed in the organic matrices and these REE-bearing minerals can be eventually released by achieving the proper liberation size. The findings presented in this manuscript were based on a study that was supported by the Department of Energy under Award Number DE-FE0027035. Disclaimer: This report was prepared as an account of work sponsored by an agency of the United States Government. Neither the United States Government nor any agency thereof, nor any of their employees, makes any warranty, express or implied, or assumes any legal liability or responsibility for the accuracy, completeness, or usefulness of any information, apparatus, product, or process disclosed, or represents that its use would not infringe privately owned rights. Reference herein to any specific commercial product, process, or service by trade name, trademark, manufacturer, or otherwise does not necessarily constitute or imply its endorsement, recommendation, or favoring by the United States Government or any agency thereof. The views and opinions of authors expressed herein do not necessarily state or reflect those of the United States Government or any agency thereof.