High-purity niobium powder can be produced via the hydrogenation and dehydrogenation processes. The present work aimed at the effect of temperature and cooling rate conditions on the niobium hydrogenation process using hydrogen gas. The hydrogen contents of the materials were evaluated by weight change and chemical analysis. X-ray diffraction (XRD) was performed to identify and determine the lattice parameters of the formed hydride phases. No hydrogenation took place under isothermal conditions, only during cooling of the materials. Significant hydrogenation occurred in the 500°C and 700°C experiments, leading to the formation of a β-NbHx single-phase material.The metal niobium has been used in different applications due to its outstanding properties such as high melting point (2468 Niobium powder can be obtained by the hydrogenation–dehydrogenation (HDH) process In spite of the significant amount of data concerning the fundamental aspects of niobium hydrogenation and dehydrogenation, there is a lack of data on technological aspects of niobium powder production by the HDH process. Thus, in this work results concerning the niobium hydrogenation process focusing on the effects of temperature and cooling rate from the hydrogenation temperature are presented. The Nb material used in this work was initially in the form of chips which had been machined from an Nb ingot produced via electron beam melting. Before hydrogenation, the chips were submitted to the following cleaning steps, in this order: washing in a soap solution at 60 The hydrogenation experiments were carried out in a stainless steel reactor using approximately 200 In this work, the hydrogen content of the materials is based on the mass variation (before and after hydrogenation), referred as wt-1. The hydrogen contents determined via chemical analysis are referred as wt-2. Additional experiments were carried out in order to produce the β-NbH The phases present in the hydride powder were determined via X-ray diffraction (Cu-Kα radiation), with its lattice parameters refined using Rietveld method. The hydride powder morphology was also evaluated via scanning electron microscopy (SEM). The first important experimental finding was that the Nb chips could not be hydrogenated isothermically in any temperature from 400   The hydrogen contents of the materials from the 500 and 700   Using a linear fitting for the data in  The hydride powders presented 80 In this work the hydrogenation of Nb by hydrogen gas has been investigated. The effect of temperature and cooling rate conditions on the niobium hydrogenation process was evaluated. No hydrogenation took place under isothermal conditions, only during cooling of the materials. Significant hydrogenation occurred in the 500