In the flotation of rare earth minerals (REMs), oxalic acid is reportedly acting both as a depressant and pH modifier. Although results of testing have established the significance of oxalic acid in the flotation process, its specific role in either the recovery or selectivity of REMs over their common gangue minerals is not well understood. Pulp pH reduction trials with alternative acids have not shown the same effect on the REMs recovery or the depression of gangue phases. This work studies the effect of oxalic acid on the surface of common REMs gangue minerals (quartz and carbonates (dolomite and calcite)) in a series of conditioning tests. Gangue surface analyses by time of flight secondary ion mass spectroscopy (TOF-SIMS) indicate that oxalic acid inhibits the transfer of secondary ions generated during the conditioning process from one mineral to another. In this regard, the oxalate anion acts to fix ions in solution through chelation, limiting their participation in surface adsorption.A major difficulty in the separation of rare earth minerals (REMs) by flotation is due to their similar surface characteristics with the two main contaminants: carbonates and silicates during the process Pervious investigations showed that the oxalic acid effectively eliminated the hydrophilic calcium film from the surface of pyrite during flotation, and hence increased the recovery In pyrochlore flotation (REMs usually are associated minerals with pyrochlore), oxalic acid is used to decrease pH (from 7 to below 2), and has been shown to be a selective gangue (silicates and carbonates) depressant when using cationic collectors Taking all above mentioned phenomena, in the flotation of REMs, oxalic acid has been reported to act both as a depressant and pH modifier, and potentially has be effectively used in treating the surface chemistry of ores that contain quartz, dolomite, calcite, barite, or gangue minerals of a similar nature Several investigations have indicated that time of flight secondary ion mass spectroscopy (TOF-SIMS) has the potential for determining the relative loading inorganic and organic surface modifiers, and mapping their distribution between phases and streams. TOF-SIMS consequently can be utilized as a diagnostic method for process optimization, and detect species with absorption rates in the 10 For the mineralogical investigation, pure minerals and oxalic acid (OA) were prepared from the Niobec plant, west of Saint-Honore near Chicoutimi, Quebec. Minerals (calcite (C) and dolomite (D)) were grinded to +10–75 To analyze the outer-most 1–3 monolayers of samples, an ION-TOF, TOF-SIMS IV™ was used Comparative analyses for surface chemical data are discussed in relation to the reported median normalized intensity value for the individual data sets. The median in all figures is defined by the solid line in the box. The decrease in Si intensity on the surface of quartz grains from the test of quartz plus dolomite/calcite implies surface coverage by second phase which is blocking the matrix Si species ( The data reveal that the decrease in Si intensity on quartz grains is related to surface Mg and/or Ca adsorption. Upon the addition of oxalic acid for both tests, the Si specie intensity does not recover to pristine quartz levels (i.e., that of the Q only test) ( For the surface of dolomite and calcite grains, the decrease in Mg intensity on grains from the Q The observed surface chemical relationships are supported by the solution chemistry from the different tests ( The surface analyses of the carbonate mineral grains from the tests show that there is significant transfer and surface adsorption of species in response to the dissolution of the minerals. The data also suggest that, with the addition of oxalic acid, several species are inhibited from surface attachment. The decrease in surface adsorption or transfer is likely related to the chelating ability of the oxalic acid. The data indicate a number of scenarios for the oxalate ions in the quartz-carbonate mineral system: (1) Oxalate ions do not inhibit the transfer and adsorption Mg and Ca ions from the carbonate minerals to the surface of quartz in the tests; they may however limit the proportion transferred through chelation. (2) Oxalate ions appear to chelate dissolved Si ions effectively not allowing them to precipitate on the surface of the carbonate mineral surfaces. (3) The measured transfer of surface ions between carbonate minerals and quartz both without and with the addition of oxalic acid is very similar. (4) The generation of Ca/Mg ions in solution and transfer to quartz surfaces appears to be difficult to control. (5) The data suggest that the reduction in pH as a result of oxalic acid addition may result in an increased rate of carbonate mineral dissolution and transfer to silicates, and decrease in silicate surface dissolution limiting transfer Si ions to carbonate surfaces. (6) The implication here is that the transfer of Ca and Mg from carbonate minerals may be more prevalent at low pH. The function of keeping ions in solution can have several effects towards improved selectivity or mass recovery. The oxalic acid partially acts to keep dissolved species in solution, therefore limiting their transfer and potential participation in inadvertent activation, as in the case of Si on the carbonate minerals. The bench tests to date suggest that the oxalic acid is least effective in limiting transfer and adsorption for Ca and Mg particularly to the surface of quartz. This is likely related to the significant reduction in pH (7.7–3.8 and 7.2–4.4) and the increased dissolution of carbonates, which are significantly less stable than silicates in the ore, but may also be related to the surface precipitation of Ca and Mg oxalate species. The end result may be that passivation of the silicate grains by a secondary oxalate precipitate inhibits collector attachment, limiting flotation. A portion of this work was funded through a