In the cyanidation process, copper–gold deposits containing significant amounts of cyanide soluble copper can lead to high cyanide consumption with low gold extraction. The significant levels of weak acid dissociable (WAD) cyanide must then be destroyed prior to tailings disposal. This increases the cost to the gold mining companies to cover both the extra cyanide consumption in the leaching stage and the additional cost for cyanide recovery/destruction. Therefore, in this study, a selective cyanide leaching process of gold over copper from copper–gold concentrate (also see Oraby and Eksteen, 2014) containing 490g/t Au and 0.97% Cu present as metallic copper, oxides and sulfides has been investigated. To decrease the cyanide consumption, cyanide is added into the leach solutions to maintain a ratio of cyanide to total reactive copper (CN/Cu) below 2. At low CN/Cu ratio, increasing the pH of solution can lead to the precipitation of solubilized copper as CuO/Cu(OH)2, releasing cyanide ions for further both gold and copper dissolution. A comparison of leaching gold in cyanide–caustic, cyanide–ammonia and conventional cyanidation processes has been made. Higher gold extraction and lower copper concentration in the final leach was achieved in the cyanide–caustic system than in either the cyanide–ammonia or conventional cyanidation processes. The effects of the caustic soda (pH) concentration or cyanide concentration on gold extraction and copper suppression have also been studied. The results show that at high pH (>12), the gold dissolution rate increases significantly in solutions containing caustic soda and cyanide at zero, or very low free cyanide concentration.The high cyanide consumption during the hydrometallurgical processing of high copper–gold ores or concentrates often makes the conventional cyanidation uneconomic. Cyanide consumption can be up to 2.3 For economic cyanidation applications, the preferred treatment of copper–gold resources is to selectively leach gold over copper rather than leaching both gold and copper followed by cyanide and copper recovery. One of these applications is the cyanide–ammonia process to leach gold over copper from oxidized ores which has been applied for over a century in the treatment of different gold–copper ores ( Some earlier studies focused on the concept of leaching copper–gold ores in cyanide deficient copper solutions. It was reported by At zero or low free cyanide concentration, low CN/Cu ratio and high pH, the precipitation of copper as Cu(OH) The precipitation of Cu(OH) However, the additional contribution of these hydroxyl ions is insignificant given the low levels of dissolved oxygen available. From the past research studies that deal with the treatment of gold–copper resources, it is known that the gold dissolution and copper suppression can be enhanced under one or both of the following leaching conditions: By leaching at low cyanide/reactive copper molar ratio, most of the cyanide will be involved in copper dissolution and mainly forms By leaching at high pH (>12.5) using caustic soda, copper precipitates as Cu Therefore, taking advantage of the cyanide ions released from copper precipitation at low cyanide/copper ratio and high pH using caustic soda as a pH modifier, the proposed work aims to optimize and enhance the leaching of gold from copper–gold resources containing high reactive copper contents. The research work also aims to reduce both cyanide consumption and copper concentration in the final leach solutions to avoid having to employ either the cyanide destruction or cyanide–copper recovery processes. All experiments were carried out using solutions prepared from analytical grade reagents and deionised water. The feed material for these experiments was a high copper–gold gravity concentrate (Falcon centrifugal concentrator product) diluted with silica powder (100% −75 Preliminary experiments were conducted to evaluate the leaching of gold from a feed containing 490 As a comparison, two preliminary experiments were conducted to leach gold from the copper–gold concentrate using solutions containing an initial 0.8  Gold, copper and other elemental concentrations in the final leach solution are shown in The enhancement of both gold dissolution and copper precipitation in the presence of NaOH (High pH) under conditions of zero or very low free cyanide can be ascribed to the following mechanisms and reactions: At the initial time of leaching, cyanide rapidly dissolves most of the reactive copper (metallic, cuprite, and chalcocite) and forms different copper cyanide complex such as After most of cyanide ions are consumed by copper leaching, and the free cyanide concentration is zero or very low and with the high pH, it is most likely that labile cyanide ions are released, mainly from the higher copper–cyanide complexes as shown in Eqs. The released cyanide ions can then be involved in further leaching of copper (Eq. In the presence of oxygen, Cyanide species were analyzed in the leach solutions containing an initial 1 It is well known that most metal sulfides decompose in cyanide solutions to form different sulfur species including, sulfide, thiocyanate, sulfide, thiosulfate and polythionate ions ( The sulfur speciation includes sulfides, sulfite, thiosulfate and sulfate. The results of sulfur speciation in the absence and presence of 3 In the presence of soluble sulfide minerals, such as chalcocite, which generate sulfide ions in solution, the oxidation of sulfide ions to different sulfur species occurs on a conductive surface such as pyrite ( To evaluate the effect of pH modifiers, leaching experiments were conducted using industrial lime, calcium hydroxide (AR) and sodium hydroxide. The results presented in The effect of sodium hydroxide addition and consequently the leaching pH value on the gold dissolution and copper precipitation in solutions containing 0.8 The kinetics of gold dissolution in solutions containing 1 It has been shown in In this section the gold dissolution from solutions containing cyanide–ammonia (0.8 Increasing the cyanide concentration to 1.2  Selective leaching of gold over copper from a copper–gold concentrate containing significant amounts of cyanide soluble copper has been achieved using cyanide solution and caustic soda as a pH modifier. The results showed that gold dissolution can be enhanced and cyanide consumption can be reduced if the leaching parameters are optimized. The important leaching conditions include cyanide concentration, CN/reactive copper ratio and pH of the leach solution. The study showed that gold extraction was significantly enhanced and cyanide consumption was also significantly reduced by leaching at low CN/Cu ratio and high pH (>12.6). Using caustic soda was found to be more effective than using lime as a pH modifier. At the optimum leaching conditions, the study showed that copper concentration and consequently WAD cyanide in the final leach solutions was very low. This result presents the twin advantages of a relatively low cyanide consumption and reduced cyanide destruction costs. The results have also shown that leaching gold–copper concentrate in cyanide–caustic solutions in the presence of low or zero free cyanide can be accomplished with high gold extraction (97.6% Au), low cyanide consumption and low copper level in the final leach solutions. Consequently, it can be recommended that leaching gold from gold–copper concentrates or ores in cyanide–caustic solutions may address some of the problems of high cyanide consumption and high copper cyanide (WAD cyanide) in the final leach solutions. This study also confirms that the phenomenon of the release of free cyanide ions due to the copper precipitation at low free cyanide and high pH. These cyanide ions are then involved in further dissolution of gold and reactive sulfide minerals. Sulfide ions produced are then re-oxidized to different sulfur species.