A simple method for rapid determination of trace Au in natural water was presented by using UV–vis spectrophotometry after reaction of gold (III) with 3,3′, 5,5′-tetramethylbenzidine hydrochloride (TMBH) in acidic solution. Under the optimum conditions, in a concentration range of 100–2000μgL−1 of Au (III) a good linear calibration graph was obtained (r
                     =0.9969, n
                     =7). The percent relative standard deviation (RSD) for determination of 1000μgL−1 Au was 10% (n
                     =3) and limit of detection based on a signal-to-noise ratio (S/N) of 3 (3Sbl) was 50μgL−1. The proposed method has been successfully applied to the determination of gold spiked and real aqueous samples.Gold belongs to the group of elements (noble metals) which occur on the earth in very low natural contents and used extensively in fields of petroleum/chemical industry, agriculture, and medicine. Due to the low level of gold in the environmental samples and its great importance, many articles have been reported on the separation of trace amounts of gold in water and other matrices. Several analytical techniques, such as atomic absorption spectrometry (AAS), electrothermal atomic absorption spectrometry (ETAAS), stripping voltammetry (SV), inductively coupled plasma atomic emission spectrometry (ICP-AES), inductively coupled plasma mass spectrometry (ICP-MS), and neutron activation analysis (NAA) have been applied to accurately determine trace noble metals in various samples. However, such methods suffer from several matrix effects, especially at the nanogram per gram or lower level of analytes found in the environmental samples ( Spectrophotometry based determinations have been reported as useful alternatives to the other techniques for the analysis of gold; however, these can also suffer from interferences. There is a vast range of reagents which can be used, including dithizone ( In the present work, the authors report a spectrophotometric method for the determination of gold (III) in aqueous samples based on a color reaction between 3,3′, 5,5′-tetramethylbenzidine hydrochloride (TMBH) and gold (III). All reagents were of analytical grade, unless otherwise stated. H Determination and identification of gold (III) were performed using a Spectrophotometer (UV–vis, Unicam, USA) with 1.0 A solution of 400 TMBH is more stable in air than other amines, less carcinogenic and its oxidation provides a high absorbing product (1.1 To examine the effect of pH on the reaction efficiency, samples with volumes of 5 For the determination of the molar ratio of TMBH to gold in the reaction, 5 To study the effect of time on the absorbance, reaction was carried out at 5, 10, 13, 16 and 20 The major cationic interference in spectrophotometrically determination of gold (III) is Fe The linearity; dynamic linear ranges (DLR); of the proposed method was checked using gold standard solutions of 100–2000 A novel spectrophotometric determination of gold (III) has been established on the oxidation-reduction reaction between gold (III) and TMBH. The method is simple, sensitive, cheap, without any solvent extraction, and was applied to the analysis of real samples with satisfactory results. It is interesting to note that, by combination of the proposed method of determination and preconcentration process (e.g. SPE) the detection limit of method can be lowered by a factor of ≈100 (