This paper focusses on investigating the classification behaviours of the components having different densities and flow characteristics then developing preliminary model structure where these properties are considered. Such a study can improve the prediction accuracy of the existing models since material characteristics are of crucial importance. Within the scope of this study, laboratory scale experimental tests were undertaken on clinker, copper ore, magnetite and coal samples, at different operating conditions. The results concluded that, increasing the density decreased the cut size in the meantime increased the bypass of the classification operation. In addition, the sharpness and the fish hook parameters were found to be correlated with the flow characteristics of the material e.g., the higher the fluidity the higher the sharpness and the lower the fish-hook. As a conclusion of the study, the correlations presented in the paper were integrated into an existing air classifier model and preliminary multi component model structure for air classifiers was developed.Air classification is a process of separating particles into two or more groups according to their shapes, sizes and specific gravities. The process has been utilized by different industries i.e., cement, food, coal, where water interaction is avoided. Up to date, different types of air classifiers e.g., static and dynamic classifiers, have been developed. Static air classifiers adjust the target product size only by changing the magnitude and the direction of the airflow. On the other hand, dynamic classifiers have a rotating cage that is used both to disperse the feed and adjust the product size distribution. Dynamic air classification technology has been evolving since 1885 when the first generation air classifiers were introduced. Briefly, first-generation classifier has a dispersing plate on which the material is poured then thrown towards the separator wall where the final classification is performed with the introduction of the air. Within the technology, air is generated inside the separator body. Following the first-generation technology, second generation air classifiers were developed. The second-generation classifiers are operated with cyclones in order to increase the fines collection efficiency. Additionally, fan that is generating air for the classification is mounted outside of the separator body that also improved the overall efficiency of the machine. Finally, the third generation air classifiers or high efficiency classifiers (HES) were introduced and improved performances have been reported ( During the classification operation of the HES, the particles are under the influences mainly of centrifugal (F  r ρ V: peripheral velocity of the rotor r: rotor radius c ρ: gas density V m: mass of particle g: gravitational constant. As can be understood from Eqs. The literature reports that the material properties have influence on the performance of the classification operation. It is a well-known fact that, different components exhibit different behaviours and the models should be developed accordingly so as to improve the predicting capabilities of the models. Within the scope of the study, density and agglomeration tendencies of the bulk material were considered in mathematical modelling of a laboratory scale air classifier. Initially, experimental studies were undertaken with different samples. Afterwards, mass balancing studies were performed and the size-by-size efficiencies were calculated then inputted to the Whiten’s efficiency curve equation (  E C: Fraction subjected to real classification; (100-Bypass) β: Parameter that controls the initial rise of the curve in fine sizes (fish-hook) β α: Sharpness of separation d: Size d Within the study, experimental tests were undertaken with Alpine 100 MZR Classifier ( The operational range of the classifier is reported as between 2 and 80 Experimental studies comprise the air classification tests that are followed by characterization works and the weighing of the fine and coarse products of the classifier. Within the context of the study, coal, magnetite, clinker and copper ore samples were subjected to the classification tests of which the test plan is given in Regarding to the characterization, the density and the particle size measurements were undertaken. Within the study, the densities of the feed samples were determined by pycnometer method ( The measured size distributions together with the weight of the samples were used to perform mass balancing studies hence the errors arising from the experimental studies were distributed. In this regard, JK-SimMet mass balance module ( Performance of an air classifier is evaluated by drawing the “actual efficiency curve” or “Tromp curve”, which indicates the percentage reporting to either the underflow or overflow streams for a given feed size ( So far, several mathematical expressions defining the Tromp curve have been developed. Within the study focus was given on the Whiten’s model ( Prior to performing the modelling studies, the efficiency curves of the classifier (  The cut size of the operation is mainly influenced by the wheel speed and the air flow rate of the classification process ( The literature reports that the bypass of the classification process is affected mainly by the dust loading of the classifier feed stream since the higher the dust loading, the higher the bypass fraction (  The shape of the efficiency curve is expressed by two parameters which are; the sharpness of separation (α) and the fish-hook (β). The sharpness parameter was correlated with the operating parameters and the design features of the classifiers (  t: Sieving time m: Cumulative passing (%) at time t f: Fluidity index U: Cumulative passing (%) at the maximum sieving time.  The modelling studies indicated that the variations in α and β parameters could be correlated with the fluidity indices. As seen in The variations of beta parameter with operating conditions are illustrated in Within the scope of the study, the developed multi-component correlations were integrated into an existing model structure proposed by This study showed that the parameters expressing the shape of the efficiency curve, which are α (sharpness of separation) and β (fish hook), could be correlated with the fluidity indices of the samples. Where; D: Classifier chamber diameter (m) DL: Dust loading of classifier feed (kg/m AF: Air flow used in the classification process (m RS: Rotor speed of the classifier (m/s) F: The amount of (−36 It should be emphasized that, the multi-component air classifier model structure proposed within the study needs to be verified with industrial data where different components are processed. This study initially aimed to show the influences of the material characteristics e.g. overall density, fluidization, on performance of the laboratory scale air classifier, then developing a model structure including these properties as well as the operating parameters of the classifier. Throughout the evaluations, the efficiency curve parameters i.e., bypass, corrected cut size, alpha and beta, were taken into consideration and correlated with the material properties. Within the context of the study, a laboratory scale air classifier was utilized and magnetite, copper ore, clinker, coal samples having similar size distributions were processed at different operating conditions. The study implied that depending on the change in the operating conditions of the air classifier, the efficiency curves of the classification operation varied hence correlations could be developed and the classifier could be modelled. In addition, the study showed that the material characteristics were also of crucial importance since it was proved that the variation in the density and the fluidity properties of the samples resulted in the change in the efficiency curves of the classification. The study indicated that the density had major effects on the efficiency curve since it changed the bypass and the corrected cut size parameters of the classification. It is a well-known fact that the cut size of the classification is influenced by both the rotor speed and the air flow rate. This study also showed that the variation in the densities of the samples had an influence on cut size parameter since it was concluded that increase in the density decreased the cut size owing to the improved effect of both gravitational and centrifugal forces. At the same operating conditions, d The shape of the efficiency curve is expressed mainly by its sharpness (α) and the fish hook (β) parameters. These two parameters were found to be dependent on the operating conditions as well as the fluidity characteristics of the tested samples. In order to determine the fluidities of the samples an approach proposed by