The distilled water productivity of the single basin solar still is very limited. Some methods have to be developed to improve this productivity. Using black rubber or black gravel materials within a single sloped solar still as a storage medium is examined in this work. To study experimentally the effect of different parameters such as rubber thickness and gravel size under the same operating conditions, four identical still units are designed and constructed. The experimental results showed that black rubber (10 mm thick) improves the productivity by 20% at the conditions of 60 l/m2 brine volume and 15° glass cover angle. Also, using black gravel of 20–30 mm size improves the productivity by 19% at the conditions of 20 l/m2 brine volume and 15° of glass cover angle.Egypt is considered one of the richest countries of the world in solar energy potential. Mosalam reported that, most of the Egyptian lands receive a considerable annual average of solar radiation, ranging between 5.6 kWh/m Four units of a single sloped solar still are designed and constructed to investigate the different design and operating parameters under the same weather conditions. Each unit consists of a metallic box (0.5×0.5 m To examine the effect of the black rubber thickness on the solar still productivity, three pieces of black rubber material with the thicknesses of 2, 6 and 10 mm as shown in The experimental work is extended to check the effect of black gravel on the solar still productivity. The same weight of different sizes of gravel is used. These sizes (7–12, 12–20, and 20–30 mm) as shown in The influence of the variation of the rubber sheet thickness on the still productivity is investigated in this section. The experimental results obtained during September 1998 are plotted as the accumulated productivity against the operating time for various values of rubber thickness (2, 6, and 10 mm). The results are shown in  The purpose of this section is to analyze the influence of variation of black gravel sizes on the still productivity. In fact, this analysis is identical to that presented in  The increasing percentage in the daily productivity due to employing black gravel inside the basin is calculated and the results are presented in The result to be concluded from Comparing the general behavior of The following points can be summarized from the experimental work presented in this paper: (1) Under the weather conditions of September 1998, the use of black rubber material 10 mm thick within the solar still basin increases the productivity by 20% at the conditions of brine volume 60 l/m (2) Under the weather conditions of October 1998, gravel with sizes 20–30 mm increases the productivity by 19% at the conditions of 20 l of saline water for unit basin area and 15° of the glass cover angle. (3) The black gravel absorbs and releases the incident solar energy faster than the black rubber.