In the present work, an interstitial free (IF) steel was subjected to friction stir spot welding (FSSW). The silicon carbide (SiC) nanopowders with the average diameter of 25nm were also added to the joints in order to enhance the mechanical properties and also to prevent the grain growth in the stir zone (SZ). The effects of tool rotating speed (800, 1250, 1600 and 2000rpm) and holding time (4, 6 and 8s) on the welds quality were studied. In addition, the influence of sheet thickness (0.7 and 1mm) on the welds quality was investigated. Optical microscopy (OM), scanning electron microscopy (SEM) and energy dispersive spectroscopy (EDS) studies along with the results of the microhardness measurements, tensile shear analyses and peel test revealed that adding the SiC nanopowders to the welds led to the significant decrease in the grain size of the SZ as well as the remarkable increase in the mechanical properties and hardness of the produced welds.Friction stir spot welding (FSSW) is a solid-state welding method used first in Mazda company in 2003 On the other hand, interstitial free (IF) steels are widely used in manufacturing the inner and outer parts of car bodies As for the nanostructured materials, they take advantage of the properties such as the high strength and ductility as well as excellent wear resistance required for car bodies. In addition, the metal matrix nanocomposites (MMNCs) are proved to be the most favorable approach to meet these requirements. By fabricating the MMNCs, improvement in the mechanical properties like hardness, Young's modulus, ductility, yield strength and ultimate tensile strength could be reached Although there are rare studies on the FSSW of IF steel, none of them investigated the effects of nanopowders, such as silicon carbide (SiC), on the FSSW joints. Bahrami et al. The purpose of present work was therefore to join IF-steel sheets by FSSW technique. The influences of welding parameters including rotational speed and holding time of tool were studied as well. Subsequently, the SiC nanopowders of 25 The composition and tensile shear strength of the studied IF steel are summarized in After finding the optimum conditions of welding in order to attain the highest tensile properties and also the finest grains, 0.002 The tensile shear test was carried out on the lap joints. Multiple identical specimens (at least three) were tested, and the average value of the tensile shear strength was taken. All the shear tests were performed at room temperature with the cross-head speed of 15  During the FSSW, the base material experiences severe plastic deformation at elevated temperature which results in the formation of fine grains in the SZ. During the processes like FSW/FSP, the responsible mechanism for grain refining is known as dynamic recrystallization (DRX) and/or dynamic recovery (DRV)   As hinted before in The grain size and the interaction between nanoparticles and matrix are the microstructural factors which play crucial roles on the mechanical properties of joints  In general, the microhardness of present welds with nanostructure is closely linked with the grain size, the distribution of reinforcement particles and the heat input  In the current work, three different failure modes were detected under tensile shear loading: i) interfacial fracture, ii) shear fracture, and iii) plug fracture Comparing the SiC-included samples ( In the present study, the FSSW was applied to the IF steel sheets under different welding conditions. The effects of SiC nanoparticles on the microstructure and mechanical properties of welds were also investigated. The sheet thickness was another parameter which was studied in order to survey its influence on the welds quality. For a constant rotating speed, by increasing the tool holding time, the UTS and YS of welds were significantly improved. Besides, increasing the tool rotating speed led to an increase in the grain size first, though beyond the optimum rotating speed (here 1250 Adding the SiC nanopowders caused approximately 100 Increasing the thickness of sheets from 0.7 The fracture mode of welds changed from interfacial to shear and plug mode as a result of enhancing the mechanical properties of welds. Special thanks to the Supplying Automotive Parts Company (SAPCO) for their cooperation. Moreover, the financial supports of