This paper presents the results of an extensive laboratory and pilot stirred milling testwork program conducted using different types of mills, fed with different types of materials and operated at different conditions. The results indicate that the slope of the product size distribution (PSD) curve remains relatively unchanged in the coarse product size range but decreases in the fine product range (less than about 20μm size), regardless of the type of stirred milling technology used for grinding. This work therefore confirms that a narrower product particle size distribution than the feed size can be achieved independent of the type of stirred milling technology used for fine grinding below 20μm. The change in the PSD width in fine grinding is due to the change in the material breakage properties and a change in the mill operating conditions which affect the breakage process. In the normal operating range of grinding media size, the effect on the PSD shape is not significant.Fine grinding is becoming increasingly more important in the minerals processing industry as new ores are predominantly fine grained and refractory. Besides minimizing energy consumption, a narrow size distribution is often desirable in the subsequent mineral separation stages. For the flotation separation the highest recoveries are obtained for the medium size range particles while there is a reduced recovery at both fine and coarse end of the size distribution. It is well established in conventional ball mill grinding that the shape of the product size distribution curve depends primarily on the properties of the material being ground ( For fine grinding using stirred milling, a number of studies suggest that the product size distribution (PSD) spread decreases as the product becomes finer. A study carried out using different types of horizontal stirred mills ( For the same material ground using the same stirred mill design. This paper presents an analysis of the particle size distribution (PSD) obtained from three different laboratory fine grinding stirred mills grinding different materials. The data analysed in this paper was collected from grinding testwork performed using three different types of stirred mills shown in Continuous (passagewise mode) grinding tests were carried out in a laboratory and pilot size Tower (1.5 Grinding tests were also performed using a variable speed (450 Power consumption and the grinding product’s size distribution were measured in all tests. Malvern laser sizer was used for measuring the size distribution of the grinding products. The effect of energy consumption, stress intensity and grinding efficiency on the product size P There are several ways that have been used to describe the particle size distribution (PSD) width. If the PSD follows the Rossin–Ramler distribution, then the exponent of the equation, representing the slope, can be used (     A general observation from the experimental results for all three mills and four different materials is that all the grinding tests exhibit a reduction in the PSD width when the particle size is ground to a P  The P There seems to be no significant difference when the Tower and SAM mill PSD results are compared. It can be observed that (P Contrary to findings by The test results presented in the previous section are in agreement with those presented previously in the literature and confirm that a reduction in the PSD width (narrower size distribution) is a common phenomenon in fine grinding, regardless of the stirred mill technology in use. This is contrary to that observed in conventional grinding in ball milling circuits where the PSD shape (slope) depends primarily on the properties of the material being ground ( It is speculated that this change in the PSD width observed when fine grinding is due to both a change in material breakage properties, and a, change in the mill operating conditions which affect the breakage process. For a particular material, the resistance to breakage in very fine particles increases several folds ( As the particle size decreases, the probability that a particle will be “selected” for breakage is reduced sharply. Therefore, the coarsest particles are preferentially broken. This effect is even more pronounced in fine grinding as the particles approach the size when their transport through the mill, residence time distribution and ability to be selected for breakage is dominated by the surrounding fluid ( An extensive laboratory and pilot stirred milling testwork program was carried out using a pilot Tower mill, Sala Agitated Mill and a laboratory pin attrition mill similar to the Metso SMD For the pin stirred mill, both ratios reduced as the product size became finer than P For the pilot Tower and SAM mills, the slope of the product size distribution described by the (P The particle size distribution width is dictated by the material properties. Hard materials such as silica (quartz) have narrower size distributions than soft materials (calcite). The grinding media size does not appear to have a significant effect on the PSD width in the range of normal mill operating conditions. This work confirms that a narrower product particle size distribution than the feed size distribution can be achieved when fine grinding below a P It is speculated that this change in the PSD width in fine grinding is due to a hardening of the material breakage properties in the fine sizes and changes in the mill operating conditions which affect the breakage process.