Calcific tendonitis of the rotator cuff is due to apatite deposits in the shoulder tendons. Patients affected by calcific tendonitis have chronic shoulder pain and disability. Although the disease is frequent, about 10 to 42% of painful shoulders, mechanisms leading to this pathological mineralization are still largely unknown. Research reported in the 1990s suggested that the formation of calcific deposits is linked to cells looking like chondrocytes identified around calcium deposits within a fibrocartilage area. They were considered to be derived from tenocytes but more recently, tendon stem cells, able to differentiate into chondrocytes, were isolated. The pro-mineralizing properties of these chondrocytes-like cells, especially the role of alkaline phosphatase, are not currently clarified. The calcium deposits contain poorly crystalline carbonated apatite associated with protein. Among these proteins, only osteopontin has been consistently identified as a potential regulating factor. During the disease, spontaneous resorption can occur with migration of apatite crystals into the subacromial bursa causing severe pain and restriction of movement. In in vivo and in vitro experiments, apatite crystals were able to induce an influx of leucocytes and a release of IL-1β and IL-18 through the activation of the NLRP3 inflammasome. However, mechanisms leading to spontaneous resolution of this inflammation and disappearance of the calcification still need to be elucidated.Calcific tendonitis (CT) is one of the most frequent causes of non-traumatic shoulder pain. CT is found in 10 to 42% of chronic painful shoulders In this review, we will first discuss the data available on the mechanisms and cells involved in the formation of the calcium deposits. We will next analyze the different steps associated with their disappearance. The hypothesis most frequently accepted was proposed by Uhthoff Normal tendons are composed of collagen, elastic fibers and a ground substance. The main component of tendons is type I collagen, which accounts for approximately 60–85% of the dry weight of the tendons. The remaining ground substance acts like anhydrophilic gel, which surrounds the collagen. It contains proteoglycans, glycosaminoglycans (GAGs), structural glycoproteins and a wide variety of inorganic components (calcium, magnesium, manganese, copper, zinc, phosphore…) Calcific tendonitis is characterized by the presence of calcium deposits, which appear as amorphous areas located within the tendon fibers ( Uhthoff and Uhthoff and Loehr assumed that the presence of chondrocyte-like cells in the tendon was explained by a metaplasia of tenocytes into chondrocytes Another hypothesis could be that these chondrocyte-like cells derive from mesenchymal stem cells. Several studies have demonstrated the existence of stem cells within the tendons (TSCs) Mineralization is an active and complex process involving protein and enzymes leading to crystal deposition. Matrix vesicles (MVs) are essential in the formation of cartilage, bone and dentin. These nano-vesicular structures, found in the extracellular matrix, are one of the sites of mineral nucleation that occurs in the organic matrix of the tissues. MVs are enriched in tissue nonspecific alkaline phosphatase (TNAP), phosphatidylserine, nucleotide pyrophosphatase phosphodiesterase 1 (NPP1) and phospho-1. Ca Others data suggest a crucial role of phospholipids released by cellular debris in pathological calcifications. Indeed, studying various pathological calcifications (fibrocartilage, kidney stones, tendon, skin and arteries), Boskey et al. observed a high Ca-PL-P complexes content (calcium acidic phospholipid phosphate) in tissues containing hydroxyapatite Overall, chondrocyte-like cells have clearly been identified around calcifications and probably have a critical role in the calcification process. However, cellular mechanisms involved in the deposition of apatite crystals are not well established. Discrepancies exist about their ability to produce mineralizing enzymes such as alkaline phosphatase. The characterization of the mineral composition of the calcific deposits could be helpful to better understand these mechanisms. Analyses of the calcific deposits aspirated during US-guided lavage allow the characterization of their crystalline composition. Scanning electron microscopy shows a powder with organic matter and a poorly crystalline phase containing ellipsoidal objects of sizes ranging from 5 to 200 one for arc or fragmented shapes; one for nodular shape; the last for the cystic shape. These three spectra were closely similar but they found a poorer crystallinity in the “arc/fragmented shapes” group than in the “nodular shape” group. Furthermore, they found different distributions of A- and B-type carbonated apatite according to the US shape. The three crystalline phases were correlated with the US morphology of calcific deposits and with pain intensity. These data suggested different stages of maturation in the calcification process and could be helpful for clinicians to manage patients suffering from calcific tendonitis. The organic phase serves as a scaffold for calcific deposits. In bone, for instance, proper crystallization of calcium/phosphate salt needs the presence of collagen fibers. The mineral particles align themselves with their long axes parallel to the fibril axis of the collagen. The apatite crystals appear to deposit first within the holes between the individual collagen molecules and then to spread throughout the matrix. The collagen and associated protein play an important role in determining nucleation, growth and proliferation of these crystals. A better characterization of the protein composition of the calcification matrix could help to better understand the processes involved in the formation of the calcium deposits. Raman and FTIR spectra analysis show the presence of protein associated with apatite crystals Bone morphogenic protein-2 (BMP-2) was also proposed as a regulator of tendinous calcification in in vitro studies. Indeed, BMP-2 was able to increase the osteogenic differentiation of tendon-derived stem cells Finally, Grases et al. To summarize the first part of this review ( Natural historical course of calcific tendonitis can end by an acute phase associated with severe pain leading to the resorption of the calcific deposit. Factors leading to this phase are still unknown. In the chronic phase, amorphous calcific deposits are surrounded by a fibrocartilaginous tissue without inflammatory cells or vessels and thus can be hidden from the immune cells (personal non published observation). Fragmentation of the calcification or even bursal steroids injection can lead to its disappearance due to the disruption of the fibrous tissue and activation of a local inflammation. During resorption, patients consult for severe pain but the lower prevalence of CT in the elderly than in the population between 30 and 60 suggests that asymptomatic spontaneous resolution could exist. Histological studies of calcific tendonitis retrieved during surgery have shown macrophages and multinucleated cells around broken-up calcium deposits, often accompanied by capillaries or thin-walled vascular channels. These cells have phagocytic capacities and might be responsible for the initiation of the resorption Then, diffusion of apatite crystals from the calcification into the subacromial bursa results in severe pain and restriction of movement. The factors that trigger this phase remain unknown. We will discuss below the mechanisms by which apatite crystals can induce an inflammatory reaction leading to the resorption of the calcification ( The air pouch model is the most frequent animal model used to explore the inflammatory response induced by crystals. This model has been more largely used to explore monosodium urate monohydrate crystal-induced inflammation. The model has been first described in 1981 by Edwards et al. Injection of apatite crystals in air pouch induces a local inflammation with massive cell infiltration throughout the pouch cavity and the membrane lining, accompanied by swelling of the surrounding tissues and vascular dilation To decipher the cellular mechanisms leading to the inflammatory response, these experiments have been pursued in vitro. Several authors have studied the impact of apatite crystals on the release of major pro-inflammatory cytokines (IL-1β, TNF, IL-6) by monocytes-macrophages. In the oldest studies, hydroxyapatite-stimulated human monocytes inconstantly release IL-1β Concerning macrophages, apatite crystals do not stimulate TNF-α secretion even after LPS-priming Other cells from the synovial tissue could be involved in the production of pro-inflammatory factors after stimulation by crystals. Thus, hydroxyapatite crystals were able to induce IL-6 production by human synoviocytes in vitro. Conversely, IL-1 was not detectable in these cells Overall, the study of mechanisms involved in apatite-induced inflammation showed the crucial role of IL-1β, produced after activation of the NLRP3 inflammasome pathway as observed with other in vitro crystals-induced response (monosodium urate or calcium pyrophosphate for instance). Priming of the cells by a first signal is also essential to induce a cellular response. Treatment targeting IL-1 (anakinra) has been evaluated to treat patients with acute refractory pain associated with calcification resorption After the disappearance of the deposits, we do not observe tendon sequela granulation tissue with young fibroblasts and newly formed capillaries; well-formed scars with maturing fibroblasts. In these areas, newly formed collagen fibrils were detected Mechanisms involved in the deposition of calcium in tendons are complex and not yet fully understood. Histological analysis of calcific tendonitis allowed the characterization of chondrocyte-like cells surrounding an amorphous crystal deposit. However, the origin of these cells and the cellular mechanisms involved in their mineralization capacities needs to be further explored. Their expression of alkaline phosphatase and the presence of matrix vesicles are controversial in the literature. Calcific deposits are composed of poorly crystallized carbonate apatite that is linked to an organic phase made of different protein. Osteopontin has been shown to be expressed in the organic phase but other protein need to be identified to better understand the mechanisms involved in the formative phase. The inflammation induced by the crystals and leading to their disappearance involved osteoclast-like multinucleated giant cells and cytokines from the IL-1 family such as IL-1β and IL-18. The NLRP3 inflammasome seems to have a critical role in the resorption. The factors involved in the occurrence of the resolution phase and the different steps leading from the resorption of the calcium deposit to the tendon healing also need to be better characterized. The authors declare that they have no competing interest.