In this work, BaTi1-xCoxO3 (BTCO) ceramics with x = 0, 2.5, 5, 7.5 and 10 mol% have been synthesized and their structural, electrical, magnetic and magnetoelectric have been investigated. Rietveld refinement of XRD data reveals that pure BTO has pure tetragonal phase. On the other hand, between 2.5 ≤ x ≤ 7.5, BTCO shows both tetragonal as well as hexagonal phases. At x = 10 mol%, BTCO shows only hexagonal phase. The grain size of the BTCO samples is found to increase with Co doping concentration. The ferroelectric polarization and relative permittivity of BTCO samples reduce with an increase in the Co concentration. A standard magnetization equation is used for fitting the magnetic hysteresis (M-H) curve, thus deconvoluting the ferromagnetic (FM) and paramagnetic (PM) components. The saturation magnetization (Ms) gradually increases from x = 2.5 to x = 10 mol%, the value being 0.8 memu/g and 8.92 memu/g respectively. The origin of magnetization is due to the oxygen vacancies and their associated exchange interaction. The magnetodielectric coefficient (MD) shows a reducing trend from 1.80 to 0.18 for x = 2.5 to x = 10 mol% respectively. The magnetoelectric coefficient 
                        
                           (
                        
                        
                           
                              α
                           
                           
                              ME
                           
                        
                        
                           )
                        
                      for x = 2.5 mol% is 3.399 mV/cm. Oe, while for x = 10 mol% it is 0.896 mV/cm. Oe.Nowadays, multiferroic materials are receiving a lot of attention due to their potential applications in magnetoelectric devices, sensors, memory devices, capacitors etc. Alternatives to BFO are being worked upon by at least two approaches. One route is to substitute suitable magnetic impurities into a ferroelectric host material In the present paper, the influence of the Co substitution on the structural, electrical, magnetic and magnetodielectric properties of BTO is investigated. The substitution of Co on the B site of BTO exhibits magnetism at room temperature. The origin of magnetism is explained based on defect formation. Further, to resolve the ferromagnetic and paramagnetic contributions in the BTCO samples, magnetic data has been fitted using a standard magnetization equation. Furthermore, magnetodielectric (MD) and magnetoelectric (ME) measurements have been performed. Co-doped BTO samples with 0 ≤ x ≤ 10 mol% were prepared by a conventional solid-state reaction method from the stoichiometric amount of BaCO  It is well known that hexagonal BTO phase can be obtained by annealing at 1400 °C or by intentionally creating oxygen vacancies in BTO ceramics. Co The Rietveld refinement of the XRD data is depicted in  The polarization vs. electric field (P-E) curves of Co-doped BTO ceramics at room temperature and 10 Hz are depicted in The variation of relative permittivity and tan δ of Co-doped BTO ceramics as a function of frequency at room temperature in the frequency range 100 Hz to 1 MHz is represented in A similar observation has been reported by Hang et al. The above equations are lead to the creation of oxygen vacancies that acts as a space charge species at low frequency. As the frequency increases, some of the dipoles are not capable of following the alternating field, contributing to a lower The ac conductivity of the Co doped BTO ceramics is shown in The magnetic hysteresis curves of BaTi  To confirm the coupling between ferroelectric and ferromagnetic domains, ME measurement have been studied. The ac lock-in technique has been employed to measure the magnetoelectric coupling present in BTCO samples at 1 kHz over a varying dc magnetic field up to 6 kOe. The change of It is noticed from Structural, electrical, magnetic and magnetoelectric properties of BaTi The authors would like to express their sincere gratitude to the MEMS department and IRCC at IIT Bombay for providing SEM analysis, SQUID and broadband dielectric spectrometer facilities.