Slag is an essential part of the blast furnace process. It absorbs gangue minerals present in the iron ore, and ash in coke/injected fuels, and impurity elements such as S and alkaline elements (K, Na) present in the burden. The slag must be fluid under all blast furnace operating conditions. The granulated slag must meet cement industry specifications so it can be sold as a by-product. Hot metal chemistry is strongly influenced by the slag composition. These competing requirements must be considered when designing a slag practice. To select the optimum slag composition, property data must be studied including liquidus temperature, viscosity, basicity, sulfur, and alkali removal capacity. Wet granulation, slag pelletizing, and air granulation are used to prepare blast furnace slag for cement industry clients. Slag cement specifications are described, and slags produced from selected blast furnaces are compared to these specifications.Blast Furnace Slag Requirements Slag Composition and Properties Slag Fluidity Lookup Tables to Estimate Slag Liquidus Temperature Lime Content Alumina Content Magnesia Content High Alumina Slag Slag Volume Hot Metal Chemistry Control Sulfur Silicon Phosphorus Alkali Removal Titania in Slag Candidate Fluxes By-Product Slag Sale Requirements Aggregate and Civil Engineering Applications Slag Cement Wet Slag Granulation Slag Pelletizing Dry Granulation Using a High-Velocity Air Stream Dry Granulation Using a Spinning Ceramic Cup Finding a Balance Among Competing Demands Competing Demands Summary Exercises References Further Reading  Remove gangue and ash contained in the ferrous burden, coke, and injected fuels. Create conditions for a smooth blast furnace operation and consistent burden descent. Have acceptable physical and chemical properties (viscosity and liquidus temperature) to ensure easy removal from the blast furnace. Provide the hot metal composition required for oxygen steelmaking. Remove unwanted impurities such as sulfur, sodium, and potassium in the burden materials and injected fuels. Meet the cement and other by-product specifications to ensure that the blast furnace slag can be sold at the highest profit margin. Each of these aspects is discussed below to better understand how to select the optimum blast furnace slag practice. Most gangue minerals added to the blast furnace must be removed from the process by the blast furnace slag. The main gangue impurities are silica (SiO Blast furnace engineers refer to slag properties based on the slag basicity or base-to-acids ratio. Slags are polymeric in nature; basic compounds are chain builders and acid compounds are chain breakers. In blast furnace slag, CaO and MgO are considered bases; SiO B2—this is a simple ratio of CaO to SiO B3—ratio of strong bases to acids B4—major slag forming compounds included Blast furnace slag must be fluid at ironmaking temperatures. The primary slag is generally fluid when formed due to its relatively high FeO content. Hearth slag must be designed and fluxes added so that the slag is easily tapped from the blast furnace under a variety of conditions and temperatures. The hearth slag physical properties most discussed are the liquidus temperature and viscosity. Increased basicity also lowers the hot metal S content. For this reason, many blast furnaces elect to work in a higher basicity range. Hearth slag can be based on the liquidus temperature only; the effects on viscosity do not usually create major operational problems except in abnormal situations. The liquidus temperature should be <1415°C, and the lower the better. The slag Slag viscosity must be low to allow suitable fluidity but not too low to create aggressive slags. Normal slag has a viscosity in the range of 0.2–0.5 Magnesia and alumina in slag effect slag viscosity, as indicated in Controlling slag MgO and Al Since reading the slag liquidus temperature from phase diagrams can be challenging, Lime (CaO) is the strongest fluxing compound that can lower the melting point of the gangue materials. The CaO-to-SiO At <10% Al When silicon is unexpectedly transferred from slag to hot metal, the slag liquidus temperature increases. For the slag with 8% Al Magnesia (MgO) may or may not be present in the ironmaking raw materials. MgO will most likely be associated with the iron ore - for example some magnetite ores found in the United States have very fine MgO present that is not easily removed in mineral processing. MgO is often added as a direct charged flux, as olivine or dolomite fluxed pellets, or as part of the sinter blend to improve the desulfurization capacity of the slag. With MgO added to achieve 10–11% MgO in slag, greater sulfur removal can be achieved at a lower B2 basicity as illustrated in At 10% Al While the increased MgO content can increase the slag liquidus temperature, the impact on the slag viscosity is very small with viscosity decreasing with increasing slag MgO content. In China, India, and other parts of Asia, the blast furnace burden often has a high alumina loading. This results from high alumina ores mined in Australia and high ash coals, especially in India. When faced with a high alumina burden, the blast furnace metallurgist must increase slag volume and basicity to dilute the alumina to a manageable concentration in the slag. This is created by adding fluxes to the sinter and decreasing its iron content and/or adding silica to the blast furnace using low-grade iron ore or silica sand. Due to the negative impact that increasing slag volume has on the blast furnace fuel rate, a blast furnace slag with a much higher basicity and alumina content is employed. The typical slag used with high alumina burdens is provided in The lower the slag volume, the more sensitive the slag composition, and liquidus temperature is to change in hot metal silicon content. The target basicity should slightly decrease at lower slag volumes. In contrast, the lower the slag volume, the lower the fuel rate. The slag volume and composition must be controlled at a level that optimizes both effects. The blast furnace slag design will influence the hot metal sulfur and silicon contents. Details are provided below. Estimations of hot metal sulfur content can be determined using the following equation This simple equation has a good correlation with blast furnace data from Dofasco, now ArcelorMittal Dofasco, before and after bauxite addition trials to increase slag Al Hot metal silicon is controlled by several variables including the hot metal temperature, blast pressure, cohesive zone position and Hot metal silicon is also affected by the slag chemistry as the hot metal and hearth slag react with each other: The exchange reaction is, in part, driven by the activity of silica (SiO Studying Eq. The main concern with changes in hot metal silicon is the resulting effect that this can have on the slag quality and fluidity as illustrated in Phosphorus is added through the raw materials as oxidized mineral compounds. Due to the strongly reducing conditions in the blast furnace, virtually all the phosphorus added with the burden is reduced to P in the hot metal. Typically, 97% of P leaves in molten iron, 2–3% in slag, and 0–1% in blast furnace dust. Since P can enter the blast furnace via recycled basic oxygen furnace (BOF) slag or dust, the P loading must be monitored to assure that this recirculating P load does not impact steel quality. Many blast furnaces with a high loading of P from the burden materials cannot recycle BOF slag or dust. Alkali elements, notably Na For alkali input, only K Geerdes et al. established standards for slag K The blast furnace slag alkali carrying capacity is also impacted by its Al When there is critical concern about alkali buildup, operating the blast furnace for 1–2 days at a low basicity can remedy the situation. Some operations will add a single low basicity charge burden 1–3 times per day to dissolve alkali buildups. This is known as a “cleaner” charge. Maintaining a good understanding of day-to-day alkali removal is paramount to prevent accretion formation and the related operational problems and refractory damage. Titania (TiO To properly engineer blast furnace slag, fluxes rich in CaO, MgO, and occasionally Al Most steelworks can access the required fluxes. Once the available fluxes are understood, the blast furnace metallurgist can design the slag to meet the many demands described in this chapter. Blast furnace slag is primarily used as a cement additive or as concrete aggregate; slag also has important usage for road bases and civil engineering applications. Blast furnace slag usage in Japan is presented in The environmental advantages of using blast furnace slag are significant. In 2007, 3.4 million tonnes of blast furnace slag were consumed for cement production and other applications in the United States. The following benefits were reported by the Slag Cement Association: An amount of 2.6 million tonnes of CO Avoided 13.7 Conserved 4.5 million tonnes of virgin materials. Four grades of blast furnace slag are produced; air or pit cooled, water granulated, expanded/pelletized, and dry atomized slag. The principle uses of air-cooled slag are road bases, asphalt, concrete aggregate, structural fill, railroad ballast, and mineral wool. Used as a raw material in cement production, blast furnace slag can produce very high-quality cement due to the slag’s latent hydraulic properties. Concrete made from slag cement mixtures with more than 60% blast furnace slag has a greater resistance to sulfate attack than concrete produced from Portland cement. A suitable hydraulic index expressed as:  Other slag cement specifications are: Rapidly cooled slag with a glass content >90%. This makes the slag more reactive, and it has better latent hydraulic properties when used in cement manufacture. Slag sulfide sulfur (S) to be 2.5% maximum. Slag color is important to cement producers; slag with a sandy color is preferred. A high SiO Blast furnace slag is used to prevent alkali-aggregate reactions in concrete. This occurs when siliceous aggregates react with alkaline compounds and form an expansive gel that can cause the concrete to crack. Slags with a low alkali content, expressed as Na Water granulated slag must be granulated with freshwater only, salt water is not permitted. Slag with alumina content 12–14% will optimize the compressive strength of the concrete produced as illustrated in Slag cement specifications for granulated blast furnace slag are provided in Wet granulation uses enormous quantities of water to quickly quench the molten slag into sand-like granules. Typically, wet slag granulation comprises two steps. In the first step, molten slag is poured onto high pressure water jets in a water channel. The slag is rapidly Slag pelletizing is accomplished by pouring the slag stream onto a rotating drum where In air granulation, the molten slag is poured into a high-velocity air stream where it is solidified. The air breaks up the slag stream into droplets and quenches the droplets into granules. Air granulation is a straightforward process which offers several advantages including water-free processing, potential for heat recovery, low-dust slag products, smaller footprint, and easier operations in winter climates. The granules are then sorted by size and sold. The air granulation process is shown in While wet slag granulation dominates the blast furnace industry, dry processes such as air granulation offer lower investments costs, the elimination of water, and its related handling plus easier winter operations. Growth of dry treatment technologies is expected, especially if heat recovery systems can be implemented for preheating of stove combustion air. Development projects to use a spinning disk or cup have been ongoing since the 1970s to process slag on a dry basis. The target is to meet cement industry quality requirements while also recovering the heat contained in the molten slag. In 2017, Primetals implemented a 2 Hatch assessed the conformance of the various blast furnace slags parameters with the slag cement specification, and results are shown in A comparison of the slag B3 basicity or European operators have stronger motivation to sell blast furnace slag as a by-product to the cement producers to avoid high disposal costs. While North American operators do sell slag to The blast furnace operator who wants to enhance slag for sale to the cement industry must operate as close to the slag cement specifications as possible without risking blast furnace process stability. This demands an operation with high slag basicity and the addition of alumina and magnesia-bearing fluxes to approach the slag cement specification. With a high basicity operation, the alkali input must be controlled to a lower level as the alkali removal efficiency will be reduced. Titania additions must be limited as increasing titania pushes the slag out of the cement specification. Good hot metal silicon and temperature control will allow the operator to operate with high B3 basicity and closer to the slag liquidus temperature. Such control is needed to avoid chilling and slag fluidity problems. Control strategies must be in place, such as having a high SiO Blast furnace slag design is a key aspect of purifying iron ore minerals into molten pig iron/hot metal. The slag absorbs the gangue minerals in the ore and ash from the coke and injected fuels. The slag must be formulated to absorb these minerals as well as remove unwanted alkali compounds and sulfur in the charge materials and injected coal. The slag must have tolerance to routine changes in hot metal silicon content and remain at a liquidus temperature <1415°C and with viscosity between 0.2 and 0.5 Blast furnace slag usage decreases the cement producer’s carbon footprint, energy use, and virgin raw materials consumption while producing cement that yields high-quality concrete with low cracking tendencies. To maximize the value of the blast furnace slag, an air or water granulation system with high availability must be implemented.  The four main constituents of slag are ( Hematite (Fe Alumina (Al Silica (SiO Magnesia (MgO) Lime (CaO) Manganese oxide (MnO) Wustite (FeO) Magnetite (Fe Based on the phase diagram in Can any inference be made from the melting point of a component of a slag system on the effect on the liquidus temperature of increasing its fraction in the slag? Based on slag cement specifications, why do the methods described for preparing slag for cement usage require the formation of pellets or granules during cooling? Why is the elimination of water by use of the air granulation process beneficial? Using