The exposure of sulfides, such as pyrite (FeS2) to water and air leads to the formation of acidic metal and sulfate containing waters, generally referred to as acid mine drainage (AMD). Under anaerobic conditions and in the presence of a suitable electron and carbon source, sulfate-reducing bacteria (SRB) can reduce sulfate to hydrogen sulfide which can precipitate metals as low-solubility sulfides. In the present study, a three-stage fluidized-bed reactor (FBR) system was operated at 35°C with ethanol as an electron and carbon source for SRB to sequentially precipitate Cu and Fe from synthetic AMD. The system consisted of two pre-settling tanks before a sulfidogenic FBR for the sequential precipitation of Cu and Fe with biogenic H2S gas and HS− containing effluent, respectively. Cu and Fe precipitation efficiencies were over 99% and sulfate and COD removals 60–90%. Biologically produced alkalinity increased the initial pH of the AMD from 3.0 to neutral values.The commercial exploitation of sulfide minerals for valuable metals results in the oxidation of the exposed iron and sulfur with air and water (reaction 1). This often leads to a production of acidic metal and sulfate containing wastewaters generally referred as acid mine drainages or AMD ( Other sulfide minerals are also oxidized in a similar way, releasing metals and sulfate in solution. This oxidation process forms AMD which may also contain several metals and metalloids such as Cu, Fe, Zn, Al, Pb, As, and Cd at high concentrations ( Sulfate reducing bioreactors have become an economically viable alternative to conventional chemical processes for the treatment of acidic and metal containing wastewaters ( In one-stage biological reactors operated at neutral pHs, metals can be precipitated as metal-sulfides. However, this kind of application does not allow selective or separate metal precipitation, which is important to produce pure metal-sulfides that can directly be used in smelters to produce metals. In a recent study, In the literature, although several studies has been conducted with one-stage reactor, limited information is available with two- and three-stage metal-recovering sulfidogenic bioreactors (see A laboratory scale reactor that could be operated as a two- and a three-stage FBR was used in the present study ( When operated as two-stage system, the system consisted of a Cu pre-settling tank and a sulfate reducing bioreactor ( In the 2nd stage of the study (days 229–254), the two-stage reactor was retrofitted as a three-stage-reactor system which consisted of two instead of one pre-settling tanks before the sulfidogenic FBR ( For the first 85 The three-stage-reactor system was fed with synthetic wastewater containing sulfate, ethanol, Fe and Cu ( Samples were centrifuged using Hettich Rotofix 32 centrifuge 3000 In the period 1, the reactor was fed with metal-deficient water at pH close 7.0 to enrich ethanol oxidizing sulfate reducers. The reactor started with approximately 40% sulfate reduction which progressively increased to approximately 75% within 30 In the periods 2 and 3, sulfate removal efficiency remained stable with average efficiencies of 76% and 74%, respectively. In period 4, the feed COD concentration was increased from 1340 to 1700 In period 5, the reactor was operated as a three-stage process to precipitate Cu and Fe separately. The feed Cu and Fe concentrations were 300 and 150 Sulfidogenic oxidation of ethanol to acetate does not produce alkalinity and acetate oxidation is necessary to produce sufficient alkalinity to increase the pH of AMD to neutral values. Alkalinity and pH variations for the feed and effluent of the FBR are illustrated in For the first 5 In period 4, the COD/sulfate ratio was increased (from 0.67 to 0.85) to test if the sulfidogenic process was COD limiting. This change had caused a significant increase in the dissolved sulfide concentration from about 100 to 400 The reactor was inoculated with a consortium sourced from a sulfidogenic ABR previously operated for more than 550 Throughout the reactor operation the electron flow to sulfate reduction averaged 70 Between periods 2 and 4, the reactor was operated as a two-stage process to recover Cu ( Copper was predominantly precipitated in the settling tank and it can be recovered without interrupting the bioreactor operation. Although by doubling the influent Cu concentration to 100 Although, two-stage processes are applicable for wastewater containing a single metal, three or more stages are required for poly-metallic wastewater if selective precipitation is required. In order to study separate removal of Fe and Cu, a three-stage process was initiated after day 230. Sulfide (H Similar to the two-stage process, in the three-stage process both total and soluble Cu concentrations were similar as CuS precipitates efficiently settled ( In the three-stage-reactor system, the influent Fe concentration was 150 In this study, sequential precipitation of Cu and Fe from acidic (pH 4) sulfate containing wastewater was achieved using an ethanol-fed sulfidogenic fluidized-bed reactor (FBR) system at 35 The authors wish to express their gratitude to Harran University Research Fund which supported this work (Project No. HUBAK 1006).