The results of investigations based on the tests with six mineral and one high density glass abrasives to identify the abrasive properties required for the optimum machining of ductile materials by abrasive waterjet cutting are presented. Equations derived from tests results for the rate of erosion and the abrasive mass flow rate, abrasive particle size, and abrasive particle density are presented. It is shown that above a certain abrasive density there is no improvement in rate of this type of erosion and that poly-crystalline abrasives are more effective than mono-crystalline abrasives of the same composition. There is also a linear relation between the Vicker's Hardness of an abrasive and the rate of erosion and that the more angular the abrasive particle edges, the greater the rate of erosion.
                  For the combined deformation mode and cutting mode erosion of abrasive waterjet cutting, the effectiveness of an abrasive depends upon its relative hardness to that of the material being machine and if the difference is sufficiently large, the form or edges of an abrasive particle used may be of greater importance in determining the maximum cutting depth obtainable than that of the other physical abrasives properties.Abrasive waterjet cutting (AWJC) is a method of cutting a wide variety of materials using abrasives entrained in a high velocity jet of water. This process has experienced considerable growth over the past two decades and has become a standard tool for many cutting applications. The increasing acceptance of abrasive AWJC for machining materials is due to the distinct advantages over other cutting processes for different types of materials as it does not induce thermal distortions in the workpiece that may alter its mechanical properties or visual appearance. Furthermore, it has: the capacity to cut virtually any material, is able to cut in any direction, and applies small cutting forces; and no burrs or rough edges are formed that otherwise may require subsequent removal. Major impediments to the application of this technology include: its high operating cost, the limited number of materials that can be cut economically; and very thick parts cannot be machined by AWJC and still hold dimensional accuracy. The high operating cost of AWJC is primarily due to the costs of the cutting abrasives utilized. The majority of AWJC machining is thought to be based on the use of almandine garnet as the cutting abrasive. Garnet abrasive consumption in AWJC was reported to constitute approximately 56% of the operating costs for consumables The effectiveness of AWJC is based on the erosion by abrasive particles incorporated by the waterjet impacting against the material being cut. In general, the harder the material to be cut, the slower the possible cutting rate and more abrasives consumed. Faster cutting rates are also generally obtained with coarser abrasives. If the part machined is too thick, dissipation of the jet may occur and cause it to cut on a diagonal, or to have a wider cut (kerf) at the bottom of the part than at the top. The thicker the material that is to be cut, the coarser the abrasive or higher the water pressure required. Similarly, the taper produced can cause product dimensional inaccuracy. Decreasing the speed of the waterjet cutting head or increasing abrasive particle size may reduce this, although it can still be a problem. Due to waterjet pump limitations, most of the AWJC tends to be limited to the use of garnet abrasives with particle sizes between 64 and 425 AWJC machine shop operators and manufacturers have indicated their need for lower cost abrasives for waterjet cutting but investigations to identify such substitutes are noticeably limited. Results of investigations for alternative AWJC abrasives include: olivine, quartz sand, glass, steel grit, ilmenite, staurolite, corundum, Cu-slag and ice These results have indicated that AWJC of ductile materials studies with glass beads, silica sand, garnet and silicon carbide for cutting a variety of materials shows that angular, hard abrasives performed best A synthetic, high density glass (HDG) abrasive under development produced for Antonio Miranda Rojas in Spain and reported to be under marketing studies by TRAXYS of Luxembourg With all other operating parameters being equal, it is the wear process and especially the effect of the abrasive on the type of material being machined which accomplishes the cutting. It is this process which might best be evaluated for optimizing AWJC and for identifying an alternative or the optimum abrasive for a given application. A number of studies have made reference to limited evaluations of other AWJC abrasives as alternatives for garnet but the conclusions derived are only tentative and generally indicate garnet to be the most effective abrasive for AWJC of metals The wear process resulting in cutting produced by AWJC using particles entrained in a high velocity water jet is complex. The AWJC based on the erosion of a material by the impacting of particles entails a number of different processes, all of which are not completely understood. The AWJC wear process has been described to include cutting or shearing, cracking, crack propagation, exfoliation, cavitation, and plastic deformation. The angle of impact of the abrasive particles with the material and the type of material being cut determine which or to what degree these processes are entailed. The processes involved are determined by the physical characteristics of the material being machined, the physical characteristics of the abrasives functioning as the abrasion medium, and the characteristics of the used water jet (water pressure and flow rate, nozzle diameter and form). Hashish The process of AWJC is based on particles impacting with the top of the machined surface but this is not an instantaneous operation throughout the entire vertical section being cut. Abrasives impact at increasingly steeper angles with depth in the cut as the waterjet is advanced over the machined material. It has been indicated A third zone of jet-upward deflection zone can occur when the depth of cutting of the target material is excessive for the operating conditions used. This latter condition results from the jet stream being dispersed or deflected and erosion of the target material to form a cavity. Machined surfaces are generally unacceptable if a jet-upward deflection zone occurs. Normally a smooth machined surface with the least variation in kerf width is preferred but in many instances a degree of waviness or kerfs in the cut surface may be admissible. The optimum machined surfaces correspond to the smooth zone of cutting where the steady cutting mode predominates and which relates primarily to the unit event wear of the cutting grains which is a function of the energy that they can effectively apply to the surface of the target material, their relative hardness and the abundance of cutting surfaces present. In the deformation mode where a rougher machined surface is frequently associated, it is related to the unit event wear of the impacting grains which is a function of the energy they can effectively apply to the surface of the target material (mass and resistance to fragmentation) and their relative hardness. Since optimization of the machined surface is one of the primary concerns in AWJC machine shop application, reducing the rate of cutting or in the case of low strength materials reducing the water jet pressure applied improves the formation of the preferred or optimum machined surface (smooth, upper zone) but at a cost of reduction in productivity. As such, tests were limited to evaluating those factors relating to the physical characteristics of abrasives (resistance to crushing or fragmentation, hardness, density and form) to optimize AWJC operations. There are a number of widely known interpretations or models of the material removal mechanism of AWJC for the impact of abrasive particles onto a machined material. Wear and erosion modelling to explain the material removal mechanism in AWJC have been traditionally based on Finnie's In the case of AWJC of ductile materials, logic indicates that the impact of abrasive particles against ductile materials should cause plastic deformation of them as gouging and shearing and if sufficient particle velocity is applied, the material may also suffer a lesser degree impact rebound exfoliation and stress cracking at points of impact. Shearing or cutting of materials by AWJC requires that the abrasive particles be harder than the material being cut. This type of erosion is probably the predominant erosion mechanism in the zone of cutting mode erosion. The deformation cutting section is probably produced primarily by the rebound of the impacting abrasive particles. It is generally assumed that during steady cutting mode AWJC the ability of a given abrasive to cut a specific material depends primarily on the hardness of the abrasive material used relative to the target material and the energy imparted onto the target material by a given impacting abrasive. The harder the abrasive used, the greater the cutting capacity. If the abrasive is not as hard as material to be cut, the rate of cutting will be low to minimal. In general, the harder the abrasive particle used, the deeper the AWJC is obtained The energy imparted onto the target material by a given abrasive depends upon its mass (size and density), velocity, and resistance to fragmentation. The mass of a particle and hence the energy imparted is a function of its size and density. The resistance of AWJC particles to fragmentation is an inherent factor since impact energy will be consumed in any reduction in size of the abrasive particles. This process can be especially energy intensive as the atomic lattices of the abrasives such as garnet have to be broken. The effect of an increase in depth of cut with increase in abrasive particle size is more notable for brittle materials than for ductile ones, and above a certain particle size the effect is the opposite Materials that are commonly used commercially for AWJC were not deemed adequate for the intended objectives of this investigation as they are limited in their grain size distribution and there are only minor differences in density and particle form. To evaluate the effects of these properties (form, grain size, hardness, compressive strength and composition) a variety of materials were selected from those stored from previous investigations of AWJC abrasives stored in the University of Oviedo mineral processing laboratory. Since garnet is the AWJC abrasive most extensively used, GMA 80 garnet was chosen as the reference standard abrasive for this investigation. The HDG designated 403/83 was developed to have a similar mass per particle distribution to that of the GMA 80 abrasive. To evaluate if the volume of material eroded in AWJC correlates to the mass of abrasive particles used The test materials selected are characterized in Particle Vickers Hardness (ISO 4516:2002) measurements in kg/mm When brittle particles are loaded in compression or by impact, such as that occurs in AWJC, substantial tensile stresses are induced within the particles. These tensile stresses are responsible for splitting failure of brittle particles. To optimize the energy imparted by the impacting grain, it is a priority that the grains do not fracture. Theoretical calculation of the tensile strength of natural materials using the strengths of atomic bonds is ineffective as it is about 2 orders of magnitude lower than those predicted theoretically. It has been proposed that this difference is due to microscopic, randomly oriented cracks (Griffith Cracks) in all solids and that fracturing is caused by the stress concentration around Griffith Cracks Statistical analysis of the effect of abrasive parameters was not used in the analysis presented here due to there not being available a sufficient variety of AWJC abrasives with different densities, hardness and particle forms for such a methodology to be valid. AWJC deformation mode erosion rates tests with the abrasives indicated in Based on the results obtained, preliminary AWJC tests were conducted to evaluate the relation between AWJC abrasive properties (especially particle form) and the hardness of the target material being cut. AWJC of granite, steel and aluminium blanks were conducted with HDG and GMA garnet abrasives having similar particle size distributions. The tests were conducted to identify maximum attainable kerf (cutting depth) versus abrasive mass flow rate of both abrasives when used under identical operating conditions (pump pressure, focusing nozzle orifice diameter and a standoff distance). Results of the tests conducted are reported in Comparison of the abrasive mass flow rates versus rates of erosion for the GMA 80 and 403/83 HDG ( The rates of erosion increase with feed rate up to a maximum and that above a certain feed rate no further increase in erosion can be obtained. That for a similar grain size distribution and abrasive mass flow rate, the garnet abrasive has a higher erosion rate than does the HDG. In order to standardize the results of the erosion tests to a common abrasive mass flow rate (100 The averaged equation Based on slow particle compression tests it has been shown that for natural materials the energy required to produce fracturing (specific fracture energy) increased with a decrease in size and when the size was less than 500 Based on this relation, the results obtained for the other abrasives were corrected and are listed along with the other abrasive particle properties in Analysis of the results derived show ( The Vickers Hardness is a measure of a material to resist plastic deformation while the BWI supposes that a material is not ductile and is a measure of a material's resistance to fragmentation. The greater these values, the more energy that a particle can transmit to the machined surface without undergoing permanent deformation. Analysis of the effect of the abrasive BWI and HV ( Of special interest is the erosion rate obtained with the HDG. This material has BWI and HV values below the general trend of the other abrasives. Its distinguishing characteristic is that of its extreme angularity typical of glass shards and implying that the abrasive particle form may also have a determining factor in results obtainable. The validity of the results for the PRC#3 abrasive is dubious as this abrasive is composed largely of particles with slightly greater angularity of the garnet present (26%) as compared to the GMA 80 product but also contains (19%) serpentine and carbonates which have hardness values much lower than the 316L stainless steel. This deficiency is offset by the amphiboles and pyroxenes present (39%) having well developed cleavage planes that ensure sharp particle edges whereas the TC-K1, TC-C1 and TC-TU abrasives are composed predominantly of grossular or hessonite garnet with more poorly formed edges. If the HDG and PRC#3 results are ignored, an erosion rate for semi-rounded to rounded abrasives relative to abrasive BWI ( Furthermore, if only the HDG results are ignored, an erosion rate for semi-rounded to rounded (i.e. semi-equidimensional) abrasives relative to abrasive HV ( The relationship between abrasive hardness and rate of erosion as shown here does not correspond to that reported by Hashish The rate of erosion increases with greater BWI values. For 316L stainless steel the increase in erosion rate is directly proportional with increase in BWI up to ≈35 The rate of erosion appears to increase in direct proportion with increase in abrasive hardness. Abrasives composed of an agglomeration of particles or crystals (poly-crystalline) have a greater erosion capacity than mono-crystalline particles even though they have a lower HV. The interpretation of the effect of poly-crystalline abrasives is based on the difference in results for the abrasives TC-K1 and TC-C1. Both having a similar mineral group composition, but TC-K1 contains a substantially greater content of poly-crystalline particles, and although being slightly softer demonstrated a greater rate of erosion. Composite (poly-crystalline) materials generally have a greater impact resistance than the mono-crystalline form as indicated by their higher BWI values. As such, they have a greater capacity to transfer energy to the target material for erosion. However, when poly-crystalline particles fragment, they generate more abundant, finer grained particles. This type of particle fragmentation should be less effective for deformation mode type erosion. Of potentially important significance to AWJC is the very pronounced erosion rates obtained with the HDG sample. This material yielded erosion rates comparable to other abrasives with much higher density, BWI and HV values. Its only distinguishing characteristic is that of being much more angular than any of the other abrasives, which suggests that the abrasive particle form may be a determining aspect in the productivity of AWJC. This interpretation is further supported by the results for the GMA 80 and zircon samples which show progressively greater degrees of sphericity and especially roundness. A subsequent AWJC test was conducted to compare the efficiency of the HDG abrasive with that of garnet (GMA 80) for conventional AWJC of granite, rolled stainless steel (1.4301) and rolled aluminium (AlMgSi1). The test was conducted at 300 It was found that for the same mass flow feed rate, the garnet abrasive produced substantially greater kerf depths in granite and stainless steel ( The degree of relative difference in hardness between the abrasive and the material to be machined, this remains to be determined. Understanding of this effect may also be of special significance in the reduction of waterjet nozzles wear as the use of abrasives with lower densities and hardness values but with an optimum angularity could result in lower nozzle wear while maximizing cutting rates. Although the results presented are based on a limited variety of AWJC abrasive physical properties, in the absence of a sufficient variety of available abrasives, it is tentatively suggested that in AWJC of materials by cutting mode erosion: There is a logarithmic relation between the rate of ductile erosion and both the abrasive mass flow rate and the abrasive particle size. The impact or contact number of abrasive particles is not as significant as the mass (size and density) of the particles. At the same abrasive mass flow rate, fewer larger particles erode more rapidly than a greater number of finer particles of the same composition do. The rate of erosion that can be obtained can be expressed as the sum of powers of the density of the abrasive particle feed multiplied by coefficients. This is a univariate polynomial relation where above a certain density no improvement in rate of erosion can be obtained. The optimum abrasive particle density is interpreted to vary according to the material being machined. For particles of similar form there is a polynomial relation between the abrasive BWI and the rate of ductile erosion. Particles with greater BWI values will have a lower tendency to fracture on impact with the machined surface and thus a greater capacity to transfer energy to the erosion process. For particles of similar form, there is a linear relation between the abrasive HV and the rate of erosion. This relation applies to mono-crystalline abrasives. The greater impact resistance of poly-crystalline abrasives as compared to the mono-crystalline form results in them having a greater erosion capacity. It is probable that there is an intrinsic relation between the hardness of abrasive mineral particles and their BWI value which is the basis of this observed relationship between HV values and erosion rates. The more angular the abrasive particle edges, the greater the rate of erosion. It is suggested that the results obtained in the tests with a zircon abrasive could have been significantly improved if angular particles had been used. The impact energy applied by a rounded particle must inherently be spread over a larger impact area than in the case of more angular particles of the same size. If the relative difference in hardness of the abrasive to that of the material being machined is sufficiently large, the form or presence of edges of the abrasive particles used may be of greater importance in the determining maximum kerf depth obtainable than that its other physical properties. AWJC abrasives produced such that the particles are derived by a size reduction process based on fragmentation should have more angular forms than those of similar composition that have that have been submitted to abrasion processes (e.g. crushed garnet as compared to alluvial garnet). This study indicates that the optimization of abrasives with an adequate density can be obtained by maximizing the particle size and BWI value or hardness. In most industrial machining operations the economics of the production rate requires optimization of the cutting speed which implies that both modes of cutting must be used. It is evident from the comparative test results of HDG vs. garnet AWJC of steel and aluminium that the combined deformation and cutting mode machining that particles form can be of greater significance if there is sufficient difference in hardness between the abrasive and material to be machined. This implies that subject to the hardness or ductile property of the material to be machined, low cost synthetic AWJC abrasives with inferior densities or hardness than those of established natural AWJC mineral abrasives have the potential for AWJC machining applications at significant operating cost savings and/or increased production rates.