In this study, enrichment and extraction of lanthanum from Belitung silica sand was carried out using heap leaching, precipitation and complexation methods. Complexation with phytic acid with impurities metal ions on pregnant leach solution (PLS) from silica sand at room temperature was also investigated. This method is cheap, practical, no destruction needed, and the preparation is simple and easy. The precipitation method using sodium sulfate was carried out to separate the metals and impurities present in the solution. The heap leaching of the metals was performed by varying the parameters such as acid concentration (0.001–3 M) and volume of sulfuric acid solution (50–250 mL). Concentration of lanthanide and composition of metal ions of samples were determined using Inductively Coupled Plasma-Optical Emission Spectrometry (ICP-OES). The optimum concentration and volume of H2SO4 as a leaching agent was 3 M and 250 mL, respectively, with the result of the lanthanum salt as high as 1.637 ppm. The hexaphosphate groups of phytic acid as active sites is favorable selective to bind with Al3+ metal ions, thus it is expected to have high effectiveness for lanthanum enrichment. From the ICP-OES results in the complexation using phytic acid, lanthanum was obtained of 0.709 ppm (11.29%) with its purity of ∼67%. These results suggested that lanthanum can be extracted from Belitung silica sand using the acid leaching, precipitation and complexation methods.Lanthanide elements are very important in wider industrial applications such as medicine, energy, computer monitors, fluorescence lamps, solar panels, the low carbon energy sector (magnets, wind turbins, batteries), catalyst, alloys, and oil refining Here, we found that one new source of lanthanides from Indonesia is silica sand. Based on our previous study, the Indonesian Belitung silica sand used in this study containing of SiO Phytic acid is known as a chelating agent which produces complexes with low solubility and resistance to heating, thus facilitating the separation process of lanthanides In this study, extraction of lanthanum from Belitung silica sand was carried out using heap leaching method with variations concentrations of sulfuric acid ranging from 0.001 to 3 M and volume of sulfuric acid in the ranges 50 to 250 mL. Furthermore, after the heap leaching process with sulfuric acid, it was then continued with the process of precipitation and complexing methods. The Na Silica sand was obtained from Belitung Island, Indonesia. Sulfuric acid (H Silica sand was crushed up to 48 mesh in size by a grinder, then characterized using X-Ray Fluorescence (XRF) instruments to determine the composition of metals. Schematic process is shown in To 10 mL PLS and the pH was adjusted to 2.5 by adding ammonium hydroxide (NH Pre-treatment preparation of silica sand was carried out before the heap leaching process of lanthanum. Silica sand was crushed using a grinder to obtain the particle size of 48 mesh. The smaller size of silica sand can increase the surface area in order to increase the interaction between silica sand and H Some leaching using acid such as HNO High sulfuric acid concentration of 3 M has a high diffusion ability transferring sulfate ions to silica sand, compared to low concentration of acid (see The addition of NH Based on the results of ICP-OES measurement from the precipitate formed by the addition of Na In this study, lanthanum has been successfully extracted from Belitung silica sand by heap leaching method using sulfuric acid as a leaching agent and complexation with a phytic acid as ligand has been investigated. The optimum concentration and volume of H Authors are thankful for the financial support from RISTEK-BRIN, Indonesia, through PTUPT Project-2020 entitled “Development of Extraction Methods of Rare Earth Elements from Silica Sand and Feasibility Study of Production in Indonesia”.