The experimental results for the solvent extraction of silver ions from acidic aqueous media with bis(2,4,4-trimethylpentyl) monothiophosphonic acid (Cyanex 302) and a mixture of mono and di(2-ethylhexyl) phosphoric acid and di(2-ethylhexyl)phosphoric acid (MEHPA) as the ligand, diluted with an industrial paraffinic solvent are presented. The effects of the influential parameters such as pH, contact time, extractant type, extractant concentration and temperature were investigated. The results of the solvent extraction of silver ions from the solutions showed that extraction of the silver ions increased with increasing pH, extractant concentration and temperature. The stoichiometry of the extracted metal species by Cyanex 302 and MEHPA with silver ions was 1.0:1.5 and 1.0:4.0, respectively. The results of solvent extraction showed that a quantitative extraction of silver ions was feasible in a single stage within 3min only at the condition of O/A=1, silver ions concentration of 0.035molL−1, pHeq
                     =7.0 for [MEHPA]=0.4M and pHeq
                     =6.5 for [Cyanex 302]=0.05M, respectively. The stripping of silver from the loaded organic carried out with nitric acid showed quantitative stripping for MEHPA (97.2%).
                  The composition of the extracted species in the organic phase was proposed to be AgL(HL)(4x
                        −1)(org) and AgL(HL)(1.5x
                        −1)(org), for MEHPA and Cyanex 302, respectively. The thermodynamic analysis of the temperature effects showed that the extraction processes were endothermic and standard enthalpy change for both extractants were positive.Silver is a relatively rare precious metal, with broad applications and growing demand as the natural sources of silver are decreasing. There is a great deal of interests in silver recovery for both environmental and economic reasons ( Each method has its own benefits and shortcomings. In cementation method, the recycled solution becomes contaminated by metal ions derived from the reducing agent ( Contrary to all of the above methods, solvent extraction using low-cost extractants is recognized as an emerging technique and a large variety of the extractants have been developed and tested for extraction of different metal ions ( Since the salts of metal ions of interest are insoluble in organic solvents, the extraction process requires the introduction of an extractant that will combine with the metal ions to form an organic soluble species ( The most frequently reported organic phosphorus extractants for the metal ions are bis(2-ethylhexyl) phosphoric acid (D2EHPA), bis(2,4,4-trimethylpentyl) phosphonic acid (Cyanex 272) and 2-ethyl hexyl phosphonic acid mono-2-ethyl hexyl ester (PC 88A). Sulfur substituted phosphinic acids like Cyanex 302, Cyanex 301 and Cyanex 923 are known to be employed as extractants for the transition metal ions ( Previous studies have been carried out on solvent extraction of silver ions from nitrate, sulfate or even chloride media using sulfur-containing ( It is well known that diluents play an important role in the solvent extraction of metal ions. In the field of solvent extraction technology, the diluent constitutes a rather important part in the economy of the process. The diluent has to be inexpensive, less toxic, should have almost negligible loss and give good solubility to the extractant and its various compounds. Hence, several properties need to be considered in selecting the suitable diluents ( In this study, two organic phosphorus extractants (MEHPA and Cyanex 302) were applied to study silver ion recovery from nitrate solutions. To the authors' knowledge, application of commercial MEHPA mixed esters for solvent extraction of silver ions from aqueous solutions is completely new. The influence of the concentrations of extractants and silver ions, temperature, contact time and pH of aqueous phase on separation efficiency was investigated. Important parameters in the design of solvent extraction process such as stoichiometry, distribution coefficient, extraction rate were compared for both extractants. Silver nitrate, nitric acid (69.1% purity) and sodium hydroxide (99.0% purity) were of analytical reagent grade from Merck, Germany. A mixture of mono and di(2-ethylhexyl) phosphoric acid and di(2-ethylhexyl)phosphoric acid – MEHPA – (a mixture of 55% monoester and 45% diester) was bought from Merck and bis(2,4,4-trimethylpentyl) mono thiophosphonic acid (Cyanex 302) was supplied from Sigma-Aldrich and were used without further purification. A new industrial solvent, which mainly consists of paraffinic and naphthenic hydrocarbons in the range of C The aqueous feed solutions were prepared by dissolving an appropriate amount of AgNO After the phase separation (around 20 The extraction of silver ions was studied by equilibrating solution containing 0.035 The pH-dependency of silver ions extraction by MEHPA and Cyanex 302 were determined at the equilibrium pH (pH In order to determine the stoichiometry for the formation of silver(I)-extractant complex during silver ions extraction, a thermodynamically ideal extraction system is assumed (activity coefficient In this equation, The extraction reaction for silver ions can be written as The equilibrium concentration of the organic phase ( From Eq. For the extraction of silver ions, the distribution coefficient ( By plugging Eq. Rearranging Eq. The plot of For MEHPA: and for Cyanex 302: The average value of K The concentration of silver ions was set at 0.035 High extraction efficiency was obtained for both MEHPA (> Temperature is possibly the most complex factor affecting the equilibrium state in the solvent extraction processes. Increase in temperature could improve the extent and the rate of complex formation. However, over a certain limit, it could lower the extraction efficiency due to decrease of the stability of the metal-ligand complex at these higher temperatures ( In the case of silver ions extraction by MEHPA and Cyanex 302, it was found that the effect of former is larger in the temperature range of 293–323 The enthalpy change (Δ   The kinetics for stripping of silver from loaded organic (Ag-Cyanex 302, Ag-MEHPA) was determined at 28 The optimization of stripping (aqueous phase) solution is an important parameter for economic considerations ( Solvent extraction of silver ions from nitrate solution with MEHPA and Cyanex 302 in MIPS has been studied. The influence of different process parameters such as pH, contact time, extractant concentration, and temperature was examined. The results of the fundamental studies showed that extraction efficiency increased with increase in feed pH, extractant concentration, and temperature. The study of the stoichiometry for the extraction by MEHPA and Cyanex 302 showed that the corresponding metal-extractant complexes were The stripping of silver from the loaded organic carried out with nitric acid showed quantitative stripping for MEHPA (97.2%), but in the case of Cyanex 302, the stripping of silver reached only 84%. The studies of temperature effect on the extraction efficiency showed that at high temperature the use of MEHPA was more feasible than Cyanex 302, and the opposite was observed at low temperatures.  Volumetric ratio of aqueous phase to organic phase, dimensionless Distribution coefficient, dimensionless Extraction percentage, dimensionless Hydrogen ion concentration in the aqueous phase Extractant concentration in the organic phase Extraction equilibrium constant, Metal ion concentration in the aqueous phase Metal–organic complex concentration in the organic phase Temperature (K) Initial concentration (mol/L) The metal ion concentration in the feed solution (mol/L) Standard enthalpy changes Gibbs free energy Standard entropy changes  Density of the organic phase, (g Viscosity of the organic phase, (mPa·s)  (2-Ethylhexyl phosphoric acid ester (a mixture of 55% mono and 45% diesters); C Bis(2,4,4-trimethylpentyl) monothiophosphinic acid; C16H35OPS