Introduction
                  Intramedullary nailing (IMN) has become the standard of care for the treatment of most femoral shaft fractures. Different IMN options include trochanteric and piriformis entry as well as retrograde nails, which may result in varying degrees of femoral rotation. The objective of this study was to analyze postoperative femoral version between three types of nails and to delineate any significant differences in femoral version (DFV) and revision rates.
               
                  Materials & methods
                  Over a 10-year period, 417 patients underwent IMN of a diaphyseal femur fracture (AO/OTA 32A-C). Of these patients, 316 met inclusion criteria and obtained postoperative computed tomography (CT) scanograms to calculate femoral version and were thus included in the study. In this study, our main outcome measure was the difference in femoral version (DFV) between the uninjured limb and the injured limb. The effect of the following variables on DFV and revision rates were determined via univariate, multivariate, and ordinal regression analyses: gender, age, BMI, ethnicity, mechanism of injury, operative side, open fracture, and table type/position. Statistical significance was set at p<0.05.
               
                  Results
                  A total of 316 patients were included. Piriformis entry nails made up the majority (n=141), followed by retrograde (n=108), then trochanteric entry nails (n=67). Univariate regression analysis revealed that a lower BMI was significantly associated with a lower DFV (p=0.006). Controlling for possible covariables, multivariate analysis yielded a significantly lower DFV for trochanteric entry nails than piriformis or retrograde nails (7.9±6.10 vs. 9.5±7.4 vs. 9.4±7.8°, p<0.05). Using revision as an endpoint, trochanteric entry nails also had a significantly lower revision rate, even when controlling for all other variables (p<0.05).
               
                  Conclusion
                  Comparative, objective comparisons between DFV between different nails based on entry point revealed that trochanteric nails had a significantly lower DFV and a lower revision rate, even after regression analysis. However, this is not to state that the other nail types exhibited abnormal DFV. Translation to the clinical impact of a few degrees of DFV is also unknown. Future studies to more in-depth study the intricacies of femoral version may lead to improved technology in addition to potentially improved clinical outcomes.Intramedullary nailing (IMN) has evolved into the treatment of choice for femoral shaft fractures in adults. Benefits of this closed technique over plate fixation include less extensive exposure and dissection, excellent healing rates, lower infection rate, and earlier weight bearing. Rotational malalignment is an undesired complication that may lead to functional limitations and unplanned revision surgery As technology and the understanding of the femoral anatomy has evolved over the years, the variations of nails has also followed suit Between 2000 and 2009, consecutive patients treated with IMN for diaphyseal femur fractures (AO/OTA 32A-C) were screened for inclusion. All operations were performed at an academic level 1 trauma center. Inclusion criteria for this study included complete baseline and demographic documentation as well as pre-operative films and post-operative CT scanogram (per institutional protocol) for version of both the nailed and uninjured femurs. Exclusion criteria included incomplete chart data, bilateral injuries, multiple ipsilateral lower extremity fractures, previous injury, and previous deformity. Institutional protocol dictated that one of the two following methods was used to determine rotation for all fractures in which it could not be assessed intra-operatively by cortical alignment due to comminution: (1) Pre-operatively, the contour of the lesser trochanter on the uninjured side was noted fluoroscopically with the ipsilateral patella facing directly anterior. This saved image was then used in order to match a similar lesser trochanteric contour on the injured femur or (2) the quantitative measurement test published by Tornetta et al. Regarding both methods, prior to the placement of the distal locking screws, proper rotational alignment was assured by rotating the thigh through the fracture until the proper view of either the lesser trochanter (on the AP view) or the calculated femoral version (via the lateral of the hip) was obtained, after which distal interlocking screws were placed. Post-operative femoral version of both lower extremities was measured on CT scanogram by an orthopaedic trauma fellowship trained surgeon based on previously published methods Standard descriptive statistics, including mean and standard deviation (SD), were used to report baseline and demographic data. Univariate, followed by stepwise, multivariate regressions were used to test for associations between all of the previously listed independent variables and our primary outcome variables (DFV). Ordinal regression analysis was used to test for associations between the previously listed variables and our secondary outcome, revision rates. Statistical significance was defined as p A total of 417 patients were screened for inclusion. Of the initial 417 subjects, 316 patients met inclusion criteria for analysis. Piriformis entry nails made up the majority (n Mean age for the 316 included patients was 31.1 Piriformis nails made up the majority of the study cohort (n In regards to overall revision rate, of the 316 included for analysis, 12 were revised (3.8%, Of the revisions performed for malrotation following piriformis IMN, mean DFV was 21.9 As femoral IMN was becoming popularized as an accepted treatment modality for femoral shaft fractures, malrotation was a true concern, with some reports exceeding rates of 25% However, in these older series, malrotation was attributed to several factors (i.e. lack of control of the distal fragment, rare use of distal locking screws) To our knowledge, we summarize the largest cohort of IMN for the treatment of femoral shaft fractures and when compared to the more recent reports, have a comparable, low revision rate A closer look at our regression analysis confirms some of the reported advantages of using a trochanteric entry nail. With a more lateral entry point, the significant correlation between BMI and trochanteric entry nails is intuitive, especially since most of our nails were placed in the lateral decubitus position on a radiolucent table (70%) Our study is not without its limitations. Retrospective in nature, there is the inherent information and accuracy bias that lies within data collection. Although data collection was standardized and performed by one person, much like all retrospective studies, data accuracy is always in question. We attempted to minimize this however, by excluding any patient with any incomplete chart, which may have compromised this large cohort regression analysis; although an intent-to-treat inclusion is required in prospective trials, including all comers in a retrospective analysis with incomplete data points can further confounding important outcomes. Another limitation is the use of a single observer to measure femoral version. Although a quantitative measure, variability lies within the anatomic area of measurement and can change depending on the experience level of the observer In summary, comparative, objective comparisons between DFV between different nails based on entry point revealed that trochanteric nails had a significantly lower DFV and a trend towards a lower revision rate, even after regression analysis. However, this is not to state that the other nail types exhibited abnormal DFV. Translation to the clinical impact of a few degrees of DFV is also unknown. Based on our subgroup analysis, the lateral decubitus position may be beneficial when using trochanteric nails, but a detriment when using piriformis nails. Future studies to more in-depth study the intricacies of femoral version may lead to improved technology in addition to potentially improved clinical outcomes.