The periostin is a matricellular protein present in the human periodontal ligament and human dental pulp-derived cells lines, that up-regulates the in vitro expression of some genes involved in the dentin mineralization, such as dentin matrix protein 1 and P2x7-ion channel receptor. Here we investigated the distribution of periostin in human teeth and periodontal ligaments, mapping in parallel the localization of dentin matrix protein 1 and P2x7-ion channel receptor to establish whether or not they are expressed in the same places as periostin. The periodontal ligament and the subodontoblastic layer of the dental pulp displayed strong periostin immunoreactivity, whereas dentin matrix protein 1 was detected in the periodontal ligament co-localized with periostin in the vicinity of the cement. The P2x7 ion channel receptor was regularly absent in both the periodontal ligament and dental tissues, but in some cases, it was observed in the odontoblasts. Present results demonstrate the occurrence of periostin in the healthy adult human tooth without co-localization with proteins involved in tooth mineralization, the expression of which it regulates. These results might serve as a baseline for future studies on pathological conditions.The periostin, also called osteoblast-specific factor 2 (OSF-2; Even since the periostin was discovered, research was focused on its distribution and function in tooth and surrounding tissues. During odontogenesis, periostin is expressed in the dental papilla and dental pulp cells, but is restricted to the periodontal ligament and gingiva in postnatal life ( DMP-1 is a non-collagenous ECM protein, member of the SIBLING family (small integrin-binding ligand N-linked glycoproteins; Since the localization of periostin in human teeth has never been investigated we used immunohistochemistry to map its distribution in adult tooth tissues, and in the periodontal ligament. Moreover, we have mapped the distributions of DMP-1 and P2rx7 in parallel to establish whether or not they are expressed in the same places as periostin. The study was aimed to increase knowledge on the distribution and roles of periostin in dental tissues. Teeth showing no evident pathologies ( Deparaffinized and rehydrated sections were processed for immunohistochemical detection of periostin using the EnVision Antibody Complex Kit (Dako, Copenhagen, Denmark), following manufacturer's recommendations. Two different anti-periostin rabbit polyclonal antibodies were used: one was raised against a synthetic peptide located between 251 and 300 amino acid residues of human periostin (LS- B6626, LifeSpan BioSciences, Inc., Seattle, WA, USA), and used at a dilution of 1:200; the other one was a rabbit polyclonal antibody to a peptide from fasciclin domain 1 of mouse periostin (LS-BL10443, LifeSpan BioSciences, Inc., Seattle, WA, USA), at a dilution of 1:200. The incubation with the primary antibody was carried out overnight at 4 °C in a humid chamber. For control purposes, representative sections were processed as above, but rabbit non-immune serum, or blocking buffer, was used instead of the primary antibody. Under these conditions no specific immunostaining was observed. To precisely identify cells displaying periostin immunoreactivity, as well as the possible co-localization periostin with DMP-1 or P2rx7, or of DMP-1 with P2rx7, double immunohistochemistry was performed following procedures as described elsewhere ( When two polyclonal antibodies raised in the same species were used in parallel (periostin, DMP-1 and P2rx7) the non-specific binding was reduced by incubation for 30 min with a solution of 1% bovine serum albumin in TBS. The sections were then incubated overnight, at 4 °C in a humid chamber with the first rabbit polyclonal antibody, then rinsed with TBS, and incubated overnight in Alexa fluor 488-conjugated goat anti-rabbit IgG (Serotec, Oxford, UK) diluted to 1:1000 for 1:30 h. This was followed by an incubation overnight with the second rabbit polyclonal antibody, then rinsing with TBS, and incubation with mouse anti-rabbit IgG (Thermo Scientific Pierce Antibody, diluted 1:100) for 2 h at room temperature, and finally with Cy™3-conjugated donkey anti-mouse antibody (Jackson-ImmunoResearch, Baltimore, MD, USA) diluted to 1:50 for 1:30 at room temperature. On the other hand, when a monoclonal antibody (vimentin) and a polyclonal antibody (periostin, DMP-1 and P2rx7) were used in parallel, the non-specific binding was reduced by incubation for 30 min in a solution of 1% bovine serum albumin in TBS, and then the sections were incubated overnight, at 4 °C with a mixture 1.1 (v/v) of both antibodies. Subsequently, sections were rinsed in TBS and incubated for 1 h with Alexa fluor 488-conjugated goat anti-rabbit IgG (Serotec), diluted 1:1000 in TBS containing 5% mouse serum (Serotec), then rinsed again, and incubated for another hour with Cy™3-conjugated donkey anti-mouse antibody (Jackson-ImmunoResearch) diluted to 1:50 in TBS. Both steps were performed at room temperature in a dark humid chamber. To ascertain structural details, sections were counterstained and mounted with DAPI diluted in glycerol medium (10 ng/ml). Triple fluorescence was detected using a Leica DMR-XA automatic fluorescence microscope (Photonic Microscopy Service, University of Oviedo) coupled with a Leica Confocal Software, version 2.5 (Leica Microsystems, Heidelberg GmbH, Germany) and the images captured were processed using the software Image J version 1.43 g Master Biophotonics Facility, Mac Master University Ontario ( For control purposes, representative sections were processed in the same way as described above using non-immune rabbit or mouse sera instead of the primary antibodies or omitting the primary antibodies in the incubation. The occurrence of periostin immunoreactivity in adult human periodontal ligament and the gingiva was previously demonstrated ( Within the tooth, periostin immunoreactivity was observed forming a meshwork in the subdentinal zones below the odontoblast layer, apparently in the so-called cell-free zone ( After the distribution of periostin in adult human teeth had been established, and based on previous data reporting a regulation of DMP-1 by periostin, we investigated whether these proteins could also be demonstrated. DMP-1 immunofluorescence was detected extracellularly in the periodontal ligament ( In no case was immunoreactivity for P2rx7 detected in the periodontal ligament (data not shown). In the dental tissues, most of the analyzed teeth also lacked detectable P2rx7 (11/16). Nevertheless, faint but specific immunoreactivity for P2rx7 was observed in the odontoblast layer and the initial segments of the odontoblast processes ( No differences were observed either in the pattern or in the intensity of immunostaining with the two anti-periostin antibodies used. This study was designed to investigate the distribution of periostin in adult human healthy teeth, and to establish whether or not it co-localizes with two proteins involved in tooth mineral metabolism (DMP-1 and P2rx7) the expression of which it has been shown to regulate In our study, periostin was found in both the periodontal ligament and some dental pulp, but never in the odontoblasts. Results regarding the periodontal ligament are in good agreement with previous reports in human ( We have found DMP-1 immunoreactivity in the periodontal ligament, extracellularly, and co-localized with periostin in the zone of insertion in the cement. Conversely we failed to observe DMP-1 in the predentin and dentin as has been previously reported ( Immunoreactivity for the ATP-gated P2xr7 ionotropic channel has not been reported earlier in human teeth. In our study, P2xr7 was regularly absent from the periodontal ligament and dental tissues, but it was occasionally detected in the odontoblast layer. The reasons for these differences are unknown at present. Recently, Regarding the function of periostin in the dental pulp, no data are available so far. Since this dental pulp is rich in type I collagen, it may play similar roles to those which have been observed in other tissues rich in this molecule, and could participate in mineralization processes. The process of mineralization of the dental hard tissues (enamel, dentin and cementum) occurs through successive ordered steps that include ECM secretion, enzymatic cleavage and assembly, and subsequent mineral deposition ( In summary, our study has demonstrated the localization of periostin in the ECM of the periodontal ligament and the subodontoblast zone of the dental pulp in adult human teeth. Although periostin regulates the expression of DMP-1 and P2rx7, these were not colocalized with periostin with the exception of the mineralization zone of the periodontal ligament. These results might serve as a basis for future studies on pathological conditions. This study was supported by