Single and multiphase inclusions in garnet porphyroblasts from the diamond-bearing pelitic gneisses were studied by means of combined Raman Spectroscopy and Electron Scanning Microscopy (SEM/EDX). They are either randomly distributed or with preferred orientation within the garnet host and their dimensions vary from less than 5 up to 60μm. In the single-phase inclusions quartz, rutile, kyanite and graphite dominate. Biotite, zircon, apatite, monazite and allanite are also common. Two types of multiphase inclusions were recognized, hydrous silicate (Type I) and silicate–carbonate (Type II) ones. The carbon-bearing multiphase inclusions predominantly consist of Mg-siderite+graphite+CO2
                     +muscovite+quartz formed by a high density carboniferous fluid rich in Fe, Mg, Si and less Ca, Mn, Al and K trapped in the growing garnet in a prograde stage of metamorphism at high-pressure (HP) conditions. The carbon-free multiphase inclusions predominantly consist of biotite+quartz+rutile±kyanite+muscovite formed through decompression-dehydration/melting reactions of pre-existing phengite. Single and multiphase inclusions are characterized by polygonal to negative crystal shape formed by dissolution-reprecipitation mechanism between the garnet host and the inclusions during the long lasting cooling period (>100Ma) of the Kimi Complex.Mineral inclusions in metamorphic minerals have been extensively studied as they are a useful tool for reconstructing the physicochemical conditions of the metamorphic evolution of the host rocks. Single solid inclusions provide information about strain directions and are used for geothermometry/geobarometry In ultrahigh-pressure metamorphic (UHPM) rocks inclusions (e.g. coesite) in robust minerals as garnet, zircon, pyroxene, epidote bear testimony of the UHPM stage. However, although the research to date has tended to focus on single solid and fluid inclusions, studies on multiphase inclusions have been limited. Multiphase solid/fluid inclusions in host minerals as garnet, pyroxene, kyanite in high-pressure (HP)/UHP metamorphic terranes may also provide valuable information about fluids/melts trapped during the (U)HP metamorphic stage or/and the possible partial melting of the (U)HP metamorphic rocks In this paper, we study single and multiphase solid and solid/fluid inclusions in garnets from the diamond-bearing garnet–kyanite–biotite gneisses of the Rhodope Metamorphic Province, NE Greece, in order to (a) study their distribution within the garnet host, (b) establish the textural relations between the multiphase inclusions and the host garnet as well as among the phases composing the multiphase inclusions and (c) combine all the analytical results provided to estimate the mechanism of their formation. The Rhodope HP province in the easternmost part of the Hellenic Orogen is an Alpine synmetamorphic thrust and nappe complex The UHP Kimi Complex ( Pressure–temperature ( The crustal rocks document UHP metamorphism with maximum SHRIMP ages, mineral inclusions and trace element contents from zircons from amphibolitized eclogites and garnet–kyanite pelitic gneisses constrain the UHP stage between 288 The rocks studied are garnet–kyanite–biotite gneisses with the mineral assemblage garnet Garnets are generally homogeneous in composition. Only a retrograde zoning is developed in the outermost rim with decreasing Mg and increasing Fe, Mn and Ca depending on the neighbouring mineral Multiphase inclusions in garnet porphyroblasts from the diamond-bearing pelitic gneisses were studied by means of combined Raman Spectroscopy and Electron Scanning Microscopy (SEM/EDX). Electron Scanning Microscopy was employed to study the type and the composition of the multiphase inclusions and gain information on the textural relationships between the mineral phases. Electron microanalyses were carried out at the School of Mining and Metallurgical Engineering of the National Technical University of Athens, Greece. All elements were analyzed by an electron-dispersive X-rays (EDX) using an EDS detector attached to a JEOL JSM 6380-LV SEM. Operating conditions were: accelerating voltage 20 Raman Spectroscopy was applied in order to (a) check the fluid phase being present in some inclusions, (b) study the crystallinity of graphite where present and (c) check the possible shift of the dominant bands of carbonates informative for their composition. Raman spectra were obtained with a Renishaw Ramascope RM1000 Garnet porphyroblasts are rich in randomly distributed single-, two-phase and multiphase inclusions. In most cases, inclusions occur mainly in the core of the garnet porphyroblasts whereas the garnet rim is inclusion-free. In the single-phase inclusions quartz, rutile and kyanite dominate; biotite, graphite, zircon, apatite, monazite and allanite are also common. Large kyanite inclusions show resorbed edges. Three types of rutile inclusions are present. Irregular grains up to 50 They are either randomly distributed or forming swarms, often accompanied by tiny trails within the garnet host. Two-phase inclusions as quartz In several cases, radial cracks or trails of <1 The two types of multiphase inclusions in garnet involve:  Inclusions of Type I consist of biotite The multiphase inclusions of Type I recognized are given in  Type II inclusions additionally contain carbon phases and consist of graphite The multiphase inclusions of Type II recognized are given in A luminescent phase, yet undetermined, additionally occurs in some inclusions mostly along with a carbonate phase and/or CO Garnet appears almost homogeneous. However, a decrease in MgO of the host garnet at the contact to the enclosed biotite (Alm Kyanite appears in the multiphase inclusions either as subidiomorphic to xenomorphic crystal grains up to ∼20 Steady-state luminescent properties of kyanite are connected with the presence of Cr Quartz is a common phase in single phase and in both types of multiphase inclusions. Its Raman spectrum shows two characteristic bands at ∼464–467 and 206–212 Raman measurements of 15 quartz crystals with rational faces with respect to the host garnet from single-phase inclusions and of 21 quartz crystals from multiphase inclusions gave Δ Although, much higher Δ Zircon is present as a single-phase inclusion and in both types of multiphase inclusions in garnet. Its Raman spectrum is characterized by the bands at ∼1008, 975, 439, 357, 223, 213 and 201 Carbonates in the multiphase inclusions of Type II have a size of <10 A representative Raman spectrum of a Mg-siderite inclusion is shown in Graphite flakes with a size of ∼<2–10 Muscovite inclusions have a size of ∼5 up to 30 Biotite is common in multiphase inclusions of Type I with a flake size ranging from ∼5 up to 40 A luminescent phase appears as part of the multiphase inclusions of Type II. When analysed with a red 632.8 Apatite inclusions have characteristic Raman bands at ∼428, 446, 578, 588, 608, 960 The only fluid phase recognized in the multiphase inclusions of Type II is CO The studied single and multiphase inclusions in garnets from metapelitic gneisses of the Rhodope Metamorphic Province, NE Greece, record various stages of their metamorphic evolution. Single-phase and Type I and Type II multiphase inclusions may occur in the same garnet host with an accidentally distribution suggesting different genetic relations. Single kyanite inclusions with resorbed edges and single biotite inclusions (TiO In Type Ia multiphase inclusions, biotite represents a daughter phase formed through the reaction of the enclosed muscovite (or phengite) with the host garnet during decompression as indicated by the replacement of muscovite (or phengite) wherever present by biotite. The rational interfaces between garnet and the inclusions ( Assuming that the white K-mica was a primary phengite inclusion in garnet, the breakdown of phengite during decompression liberated water triggering partial melting of the decomposition products (Mus The decrease in MgO of the host garnet at the contact to the enclosed biotite (Alm Type Ib multiphase inclusions contain in most cases 3 and rarely 5 solid phases with quartz dominating (>50% of the total volume). They lack any visible fluid phase. Rutile, kyanite and zircon are common phases. They represent incidentally trapped minerals in the growing garnet because of their non-systematic occurrence and variable size. Traces of a fluid phase may be assumed because of their polygonal to negative crystal shapes especially in the quartz grains, indicating a dissolution-reprecipitation mechanism for the garnet host and the inclusions to minimize the strain and the surface energy of the garnet and the enclosed phases. In Type II multiphase inclusions the solid phases occupy >80% of the total inclusion volume and the only fluid phase determined is CO Mg-siderite, graphite, CO The authors are grateful to A.V. Korsakov for his constructive comments.