For decades the optimal treatment of intra-articular calcaneus fractures has been debated in the literature with no definitive solution reached. Although improved implant design and surgical techniques have led some to advocate for operative treatment, high rates of wound complications, particularly with use of the extensile lateral approach, have been touted as reasons to avoid operative fixation of calcaneus fractures. Given the advent of newer lower profile implants, better fixation techniques and improved surgical approaches that preserve the lateral vascular supply to the calcaneus, fewer complications and improved functional outcomes are more commonly reported in patients with operatively treated calcaneus fractures. Minimally invasive approaches, including the sinus tarsi approach, are being frequently used to treat displaced intra-articular calcaneus fractures with promising results. The literature has shown that through the use of these approaches, there has been a decreased rate of wound complications, hematoma formation, surgical time, and equivalent functional outcomes to the extensile lateral approach. This article focuses on describing the sinus tarsi approach, surgical technique, and outcomes.The calcaneus is the most commonly fractured tarsal bone and accounts for 1%-2% of all fractures. Calcaneus fractures can be extra-articular or intra-articular; however, more than 70% of these injuries involve the subtalar joint. The optimal treatment of calcaneus fractures has remained controversial throughout the 20th century. In determining the need for surgical intervention, many surgeons will assess the degree of posterior facet settling (through Bohler’s angle [BA]), heal width, lose of height, and malalignment of the heal. In 1931, Bohler The surgical approach to manage calcaneus fractures has been changing over the recent years with the sinus tarsi and minimal invasive approaches (percutaneous, arthroscopically assisted, external fixation, transarticular and small medial, posterior or lateral incisions techniques) becoming more popular as surgeons look for alternatives to the extensile lateral approach. Currently, the extensile lateral approach, popularized by Zwipp, Bernishke, and others, is the most commonly used approach for ORIF of intra-articular calcaneal fractures. The sinus tarsi approach is indicated for ORIF of displaced, comminuted intra-articular calcaneal fractures and may be a better alternative than the extensile lateral approach for patients with comorbid conditions that would otherwise indicate these patients to nonoperative treatment. Given that the sinus tarsi approach allows direct visualization of the posterior facet but limited exposure to the calcaneal tuberosity, indirect reduction methods are additionally required if heel shortening or varus malalignment needs to be corrected. Joint depression fractures, such as Sanders II A and B type fractures, are most amenable to this technique given the location of the primary fracture line and the number of primary fracture fragments, but higher-grade injuries can be treated accordingly depending on surgeon familiarity. The patient is placed in the lateral decubitus position and a small bump of towels is placed under the foot. An incision of 3-4 Any number of reduction maneuvers can be used at this point, depending on the type of fracture treated, as previously discussed. Typically a freer elevator can be placed inferiorly below the posterior facet through this approach and used as a lever to elevate the facet. Not only is elevation and restoration of the posterior facet critical, but heel length and varus malalignment must be corrected. Once anatomical reduction is obtained, provisional K-wires are placed to maintain reduction, which is verified using intraoperative fluoroscopy. Heel width is generally improved with elevation of the posterior facet but can be further corrected by forceful manual impaction with the surgeon’s hands placed along the lateral and medial tuber or later with plate placement. Clamps can similarly be used, although the soft tissue envelope must be protected. If bone grafting or bone graft substitutes of the cancellous void are required, this can be accessed by further retraction along the inferior aspect of the approach. A senn retractor can be placed over the peroneal tendons and with retraction the void can be accessed and filled accordingly per surgeon preference. Once anatomical reduction is obtained, one or two 3.5-mm (or similar diameter) cortical screws are typically placed across the posterior facet to stabilize the articular fragment. The tip of the sustentaculum usually provides excellent screw purchase. If fracture comminution is minimal, they can be placed in lag fashion with overdrilling of the lateral fragment to allow compression between the articular pieces. Partially threaded screws can be used per surgeon preference. For more comminuted fractures (ie, Sanders III or IV type fractures), simple position screws should be used. Care must be taken to avoid overpenetration of the medial cortex, especially if the screw is not placed directly within the sustentaculum proper, owing to risk of iatrogenic injury of various neurovascular and tendinous structures. Smaller diameter screws, K-wires, or absorbable pins can be used depending on surgeon preference. As with the treatment of all articular fractures, once the articular surface is anatomically reduced, realignment and stabilization of the rest of the calcaneus is next required per the surgeon’s preference. Several fixation techniques can be used including plate and screw constructs or all screw constructs. Percutaneously placed screws can be used and do not require any further dissection. Under fluoroscopic guidance, a guidewire is placed from the posterior calcaneus toward the calcaneal cuboid (CC) joint. Joint penetration is discouraged. Once adequate position is verified on the lateral and Harris heel view, this is overdrilled and the authors’ preference is to place a fully threaded 6.5-mm cannulated screw. The guidewire is left within the screw as a reference for further screw placement. Next, additional 4.5 If plating is preferred, further dissection is performed. Several manufacturers have developed calcaneal plates, specific for sinus tarsi insertion. However, utility plates can be used and precontoured as needed, although insertion can be more difficult through the sinus tarsi approach. Using a wing-tip or Cobb elevator placed underneath the peroneal tendons, the subcutaneous tissues overlying the lateral wall are gently dissected off the bone. Care must be taken to dissect superficial to the lateral wall, which can be technically challenging. Although sharp dissection may initially facilitate elevation, care must be taken to avoid sharp dissection if direct visualization is limited owing to risk of iatrogenic injury to the overlying sural nerve or peroneal tendons. Once the overlying subcutaneous tissue is properly elevated off the lateral wall, similar blunt dissection over the anterior calcaneus is performed at the distal aspect of the incision. Typically, the elevator is left in place and a Harris Heel view is obtained to confirm extramedullary dissection ( If the surgeon encounters dislocated peroneal tendons, these must be addressed before wound closure. Ehrlichman et al The postoperative patient is initially placed in a well-padded postoperative splint for 10-14 days and made nonweight bearing. At their first postoperative visit, the wounds are checked. If there is any concern about wound healing, the sutures are left in and weekly wound checks are made. If there is no concern for wound healing, the sutures are removed and the patient is placed in a fracture boot. It is our preference to initiate touchdown weight bearing in the fracture boot, and gentle self-directed ankle motion is encouraged. If peroneal tendon relocation and repair of the superior peroneal retinaculum is performed, early subtalar and circular foot range of motion is discouraged. Gentle ankle motion is acceptable. Formal physical therapy is started 4 weeks postoperatively. Touchdown weight bearing is generally maintained for 6-8 weeks followed by gradual progression of protected weight bearing based on evidence of fracture healing. Diabetic patients are usually protected longer and nonweight bearing is usually prolonged, usually 8-12 weeks, given that this patient population has a well-documented longer time to union than nondiabetic patients. Recent advances in calcaneus fracture management are owing to various factors including a better understanding of the vascular anatomy of the calcaneal soft tissues, thus leading to more favorable surgical incisions. The sinus tarsi approach and minimally invasive surgery techniques are being used more frequently with reports showing equivalent functional outcomes and lower wound complication rates compared with the traditional extensile lateral approach. In 2011, Schepers et al performed a systematic review of the literature and reported the findings of 8 case series totaling 271 calcaneus fractures treated with the sinus tarsi approach. Minor wound complications occurred at an average rate of 4.1% and major wound complications in 0.7% of patients. The need for a secondary subtalar arthrodesis occurred on average at a rate of 4.3%. Overall good to excellent outcomes were achieved in 3-quarters of all patients. The authors concluded that functional outcome and complication rates of the sinus tarsi approach compare similarly or favorably to the extended lateral approach. Nosewicz et al examined 18 patients with 22 calcaneus fractures (Sanders type II and III fractures) treated using the sinus tarsi approach with plate and percutaneous screw fixation. Of these fractures, 16 had calcaneal‐cuboid (CC) joint involvement. Computed tomography scans were obtained immediately postoperatively and at a minimum of 1-year follow-up to evaluate articular congruity and changes in position of the posterior facet and CC joint. Postoperative posterior facet and CC joint reduction was good (step <1 Kikuchi et al examined 22 calcaneal fractures retrospectively to assess restoration of angular and linear dimensions of calcaneus fractures treated with the sinus tarsi approach. They found a statistically significant restoration of BA and calcaneal width with this approach. They had a 13.6% (3/22) rate of superficial wound infections and a revision owing to symptomatic hardware. There was no osteomyelitis, deep infection, malunion, or nonunion. Kline et al performed a retrospective comparative study examining 33 calcaneus fractures treated using the sinus tarsi approach and compared the results with 79 patients treated using the extensile lateral approach. The overall wound complication rate was 6% in the sinus tarsi group versus 29% in the extensile group with 30% of these requiring operative debridement owing to wound-healing complications. Radiographic analysis showed that both groups had 100% union rates, and no differences were noted in the final postoperative BA or angle of Gissane. Functional and clinical outcomes scores including SF-36, Foot Function Index, and visual analog scale scores were similar between groups. The authors concluded that minimally invasive approach had a significantly lower incidence of wound complications and need for secondary surgeries but equivalent functional outcomes compared with the extensile lateral approach. The sinus tarsi approach is a key surgical technique in the armamentarium for calcaneus fracture management. This approach minimizes soft tissue disruption, provides visualization of the posterior facet, and allows reproducible fracture reduction and fixation while protecting the lateral hindfoot angiosome. Current literature supports the use of this approach owing to improved wound complications rates and equivalent functional outcomes to the extensile lateral approach. Continued outcomes research will need to be performed for the sinus tarsi and other minimally invasive surgery approaches to truly understand their long-term outcomes, but currently research supports their use. The sinus tarsi approach is simple, reproducible, and a valuable method for treating intra-articular calcaneus fractures.