Objective
                  To assess the surgical technique and report the outcomes following fixation of PCL bony avulsions through mini-invasive posterior knee approach as described by Burks and Schaffer.
               
                  Methods
                  From June 2012 to July 2015, 27 patients enrolled in the study (21 males and 6 females). Fixation of tibial PCL avulsion fractures was done with one or two cannulated screws, or sutures through Burks and Schaffer’s approach. The mean interval before surgery was 16days (1–70) .Patients was followed up for an average of 51 weeks. The outcome measures evaluated at final follow-up were (1) clinical stability as assessed by posterior drawer test, (2) radiologic union, (3) functional assessment by Lysholm score, and (4) gastrocnemius muscle strength as a measure of morbidity.
               
                  Results
                  Average operative time was 43min. Improvement of both subjective Lysholm score (mean 93) and objective stability testing by posterior drawer test (returns to normal in 81.1% of patients) at the final follow-up. Good radiographic union at average of 5.6 weeks. No morbidity of the gastrocnemius with few complications.
               
                  Conclusions
                  The approach was fast and safe with excellent visualization. It allows surgeons to address other injuries in the same setting. It can be considered as a minimally-invasive open surgery without surgery-related morbidity. It is a reproducible technique that can be done at any trauma centre by surgeons with average experience. The subjective and objective results of the technique are excellent and comparable to the arthroscopic procedures that needs more specific centres with well-trained surgeons.Injuries of the PCL represent about 20% of all knee ligamentous injuries Unlike the controversies about the ways of repair, augmentation or reconstruction of the PCL substance tear For orthopaedic surgeons, the most common indication for posterior approach of the knee is bony avulsions of the PCL In our case series, we avoided these extensive approaches. We used a less-invasive approach that was first described by Burks and Schaffer in 1990. In their article, they started to use this approach is in only 2 patients The current study was conducted as a single center retrospective case series study. In the period between June 2012 to July 2015, 27 patients were enrolled consecutively (21 males and 6 females) .They were admitted to our hospital as tibial bony avulsion of the PCL. Among them 17 patients were admitted after road traffic accidents, the remainder were admitted after bicycle and tricycle accidents. Only 11 patients had isolated bony avulsion of the PCL. Three patients were initially overlooked due to other concomitant injuries. Another 3 patients presented 2 months after injury as an isolated PCL bony avulsion injuries in the hospital's outpatient clinic after they were treated initially as posttraumatic haemoarthrosis outside our institute. All participants were screened for eligibility by the first author. All were operated on consecutively by the first author 1–70  Male and female patients Clinical evidence of PCL laxity after examination of all cases by the first author Radiological evidence of PCL avulsion in x-ray and C-T scan. Additional MRI was requested in some patients only when other intra-articular derangement was suspected. Willingness to follow the post-operative instructions Capacity to provide informed consent  Avulsions of more than 3 months are excluded Presence of vascular injuries needed for repair Lacerations and open injuries in the posterior aspect of the knee and proximal leg Under spinal/epidural anaesthesia, a pneumatic tourniquet was applied and inflated. The patient is turned in prone position with the knee in mild flexion. An inverted L-shaped incision was done, the vertical limb on the medial border of the medial gastrocnemius muscle and the transverse limb over the posterior knee crease ( We used to put the patient in a posterior slab for 2 weeks. At 2 weeks we removed the sutures and put the patient in a plaster cast (10° flexion) for additional 4 weeks. We used thrombo-prophylaxis using low-molecular weight heparin for 4 weeks as a routine. The patients were followed −up for a minimum of 12 months. All patients were available at the final follow-up. Postoperative follow up was regular on 2 weeks interval till the cast is removed by the sixth week. After cast removal, physiotherapy with quadriceps strengthening and range of motion exercises were started. Full weight bearing was permitted only after having good evidence of bone healing in the x-ray. Then the patients were followed up every 2 months. Clinical examination was done on every visit and data were recorded. Assessment of the PCL stability by the standard posterior drawer test (PDT) was done on each visit by the single examiner (the second author). The results were graded by the relation of the proximal tibia to the distal femoral condyles. Normally, the anterior cortex of the proximal tibia lies about 10 The average time of follow up was 51 weeks (range 46–57). Patients assessment was done clinically, radiologically and using Tegner- Lysholm knee score Our patients were assessed both subjectively using Tagner- Lysholm scoring scale and objectively regarding the Posterior drawer test (PDT), range of motion (ROM) and radiological healing. Morbidity was assessed by gastrocnemius power and occurrence of complications. Our 27 patients included 24 patients who were operated in the acute setting, in addition to three other patients who were managed as late as 2 months. Despite of this, the operative time from skin to skin did not last more than 63 The mean Lysholm score was 93 with excellent and good results achieved in more than 85% of patients after 1 The posterior drawer test (PDT) at the final follow-up visit (minimum of 1 The range of motion at the final follow-up showed full range of motion in 23 patients (85.1%), despite of our conservative protocol of using plaster casts. The remaining patients showed differences between 5 and 15 26 patients had visible anatomical bone healing after 5–7 weeks postoperatively (average of 5.6 weeks). Bone healing was confirmed radiologically using plain x-ray. We had few complications in our series, a case superficial infection that was treated by dressing and antibiotics, and failure of fixation in another non-compliant patient. The later had poor Lysholm score, grade II PDT and 10 The entire patients were tested for the strength of the ankle plantar flexion. All had grade 5 motor power when examined in prone position against gravity and full resistance. They could stand on tip-toe independently by the end of follow-up. We could claim that our surgical approach did not leave surgical related morbidity affecting the gastrocnemius muscle. Utilizing the interval between the semimembranosus and the medial gastrocnemius head as described by Burks and Schaffer is considered as an efficient method that allows proper direct visualization of the bony avulsion of the PCL. This good visualization can be provided by other surgical approaches but with many drawbacks. Nicanrdi et al. in 2008 used the interval between the 2 heads of gastrocnemius during exposure as a modification of the standard posterior approach in ten patients with acute PCL avulsions. They had to explore and isolate the short saphenous vein, the medial sural cutaneous branch and the motor branch innervation from the tibial nerve to the gastrocnemius. They achieved good results with no morbidity to gastrocnemius. However, they didn’t report the operative time spent in the procedure and they did not mention if they were able to operate on any concomitant fractures in the same setting Attia et al. in 2014 made a case series of 12 patients using a posteromedial approach that involve splitting of the medial gastrocnemius muscle fibres along its direction. It is probably the Trickey's technique but, it was not mentioned clearly in the article. They reported a mean Lysholm score of 91 (excellent) but, there was no data concerning objective testing by PDT or the morbidity due to gastrocnemius splitting Few patient series were published using the same technique using the interval between the medial gastrocnemius head and the semimembranosus as a solution to surgical difficulties/morbidities caused by other open approaches. Piedade et al. in 2007, operated on 21 PCL bony avulsions with 6 initial cases utilizing the standard approach followed by 15 cases using Burks and Schaffer's approach. They reported the shorter time and the ease of the technique that made him to abandon the standard technique in the latter 15 cases. Surprisingly, unlike our results they concluded that the PDT was not negative at final follow up in 95% of cases. The main drawback in this study is the use of 2 different approaches that may affect and bias the results Utilizing the arthroscopy for fixation of the PCL bony avulsion was also described in literature with excellent results Surgical fixation of the bony avulsion of the PCL utilizing the interval between the medial gastrocnemius and the semimembranosus is simple, fast and safe with excellent visualization and direct reduction of fracture fragment. The procedure allows the surgeon to address any simultaneous ispilateral injuries in the same setting. It can be considered as a minimally-invasive open surgery without surgery-related morbidity. It is a reproducible technique that can be done at any trauma centre by surgeons with average experience. The subjective and objective results of the technique are excellent and comparable to the arthroscopic procedures that needs more specific centres with well-trained surgeons. The authors declare no conflict of interest. None of the authors received financial support for this study.