Polarization behaviour of Eu, Sm, and Gd was investigated in acidic sulfate solutions using Cu and Cu–Hg cathodes and electrolytic reduction–precipitation of europium from sulfate solutions was studied using a mercury-coated copper electrode. The effect of magnetic stirring, N2 gas sparging, and use of a cation permeable membrane on electrolytic reduction was determined. Europium recovery of 71.9% for magnetic stirring increases to 74.4% for N2 gas sparging and to 79.5% for N2 gas sparging+membrane system. The purity of the precipitated EuSO4 is 98.5%, 96.0%, and 94.4%, respectively.The separation of Eu from other semi-heavy group rare earths (Sm and Gd) depend mainly on the selective reduction of Eu The preferred method in the separation of Eu from Sm and Gd would be the combined reduction and recovery of europium directly from the acid processing solutions. The difficulty encountered in nitric acid solutions is the oxidation of cathodic reduction product Eu The possibility of the precipitation of bivalent europium sulfate from acidic sulfate solutions by electrolytic reduction using a mercury electrode at dilute europium concentrations was studied by The purpose of this study is to investigate the polarization behaviour of Eu, Sm, and Gd in sulfuric acid solutions, and determine the conditions of recovering europium from samarium and gadolinium by electrolytic reduction–precipitation using a mercury-coated copper electrode as cathode. Stock solutions of 0.5 M Eu and 0.3 M Sm and Gd were prepared from Eu Electrolytic reduction experiments were done at concentrations of rare earths, approximately the same as those of industrial solutions The concentration of rare earth elements and sulfate were determined using direct current plasma (DCP) and gravimetric methods, respectively. A thermostatically controlled, magnetically stirred, three-electrode glass cell (Parr 273 A potentiostat/galvanostat with 352 Softcorr II software) was used in potentio-dynamic polarization measurements. A Pt electrode was used as anode and the reference electrode was saturated calomel electrode (SCE) with saturated KCl solution in agar Luggin capillary tube. The electrolytic reduction–precipitation vessel was a 500 mL cell and an AMEL 553 potentiostat/galvanostat at potentiostatic conditions was used. Mercury-coated copper (Cu–Hg) cathode and stainless steel anode electrodes both with areas of 85 cm Rare earth solutions of 300 mL, containing 0.005M Eu, 0.023 M Sm, and 0.013 M Gd were used in the electro-precipitation tests. These tests were conducted for 24 h at room temperature and the [SO Cathodic polarization curves of potential vs. log In order to determine the reduction behaviour of Gd and Sm (each with 0.08 M) in Na Three electro-precipitation tests were conducted on Eu–Sm-Gd containing solutions at 1.3 V potential (vs. SCE) regarding the previous polarization tests. In these tests, magnetic stirring, N The thermodynamically expected predominant electrode reactions involved are: Experimental results show that the rate of reduction (or rate of precipitation) of europium has the lowest value in the magnetically stirred system. The rate increases correspondingly by use of N In the case of magnetic stirring being used with no membrane in the cell, reduced europium ions are reoxidized in accordance with The precipitates obtained were analyzed for Eu, Sm, and Gd to determine their compositions and europium recovery values were determined considering 24 h of treatment The recovery of europium increases in the order magnetic stirring<N