The influence of concentration and added chloride salts on the solution speciation of zirconyl chloride solutions, and the precipitate formed upon addition of aqueous ammonia, has been investigated. Crystalline zirconium oxychloride octahydrate samples available on an industrial scale were investigated using ICP-OES, XRD and SEM. The samples had a remarkably consistent level of the trace elements and LOI and contained approximately 2 wt.% hafnium. Zirconyl chloride solutions at industrially relevant concentrations of 0.81 and 1.62 M were studied by small angle X-ray scattering, and the particle radii were found to be unchanged within experimental error. Yttrium–zirconium mixed solutions relevant to the Solid Oxide Fuel Cell market (containing 3, 5, 8 and 10 mol% yttrium) were also investigated, and it was found that the added yttrium did not significantly change the particle radii or particle-particle distances.
                  Solutions at the same concentrations were then precipitated using a continuous double jet precipitation apparatus with aqueous ammonia as the base. Using DLS it was found that the zirconyl chloride solution at higher concentration yielded a larger precipitated particle size (1.0±0.1 μm, 4.2±0.1 μm). The yttrium–zirconium mixed solutions were found to give a consistent increase in particle size with increasing yttrium levels (2.0±0.1 μm, 3.7±0.2 μm, 4.5±0.1 μm and 4.9±0.2 μm). To investigate if the growth effect was most influenced by the cations or the increasing chloride concentrations, sample solutions containing mixtures of caesium chloride/zirconyl chloride and calcium chloride/zirconyl chloride with the same concentration of added chloride anions as that of the 8 mol% yttrium–zirconium sample were precipitated. The increased particle size was found to be most dependent on the type of cation and did not appear to be as significantly dependent on the concentration of chloride ions.Interest has been growing in zirconium and its behaviour, generated by the increased interest in Solid Oxide Fuel Cells (SOFC). The SOFC in its most basic form is a device for converting hydrogen and oxygen into water with a resulting electrical generation of power. The materials requirements of zirconia for the highly demanding Solid Oxide Fuel Cell (SOFC) market have been outlined in the literature The solution structure of zirconyl chloride is dominated by the cyclic tetramer [Zr The monoclinic polymorph is the most thermodynamically stable form of zirconia; a transformation to the tetragonal polymorph occurs at ~ The precipitate that is formed from most solutions containing zirconium by the addition of a base is described as a gelatinous white to clear amorphous product and is generally assumed to be ZrO(OH) Many authors assume a specific composition for the precipitate, but as Kirby These early studies also showed that solution composition influenced particle size of the precipitate. For example, Britton's electrometric studies of the precipitation of hydroxides found that the Cl to Zr ratio appeared to influence the size of the precipitates Samples of ZrOCl Solutions of 100 g/L and 200 g/L of ZrO Yttrium chloride was made by reacting HCl with yttria in a 1:3 stoichiometric ratio then diluting with milli-q water to a concentration of 100 g/l for the oxide. This solution was added to the zirconyl chloride solution to give 3, 5, 8 and 10 mol%. Both the caesium chloride and calcium chloride solutions were made from solid chloride salts and milli-q water to match the concentration of the yttrium chloride solution. The solutions were added to the zirconyl chloride to give the same total Cl ion concentration as that of the 8 mol%, yttrium–zirconium mixture. The ammonia solution was 28% AR grade. All solutions were aged for 10 days prior to use. Solutions were mixed to achieve the desired final compositions at least 24 h prior to use and left under agitation for that period using a standard laboratory magnetic stirrer and PTFE coated bar. The small angle scattering technique was employed using the NanoSTAR SAXS instrument at Curtin University of Technology. Two sample detector distances of 65.0 and 22.8 cm were used in order to provide structural information over a wide The SAXS sample solutions were contained within sealed glass capillaries with an external diameter of 0.5 mm and a wall thickness of 0.01 mm where the listed wall thickness variation was 0.01 mm. A long collection time of 18 h was used for each sample in order to increase the signal to noise ratio of the scattering pattern. A milli-q water sample (also in a 0.5 mm glass capillary) was used for the subtraction of the background scattering pattern. The raw 2-dimensional data files were background subtracted, and since they only displayed isotropic scattering were radially averaged over 360° in order to provide 1-dimensional data sets of the scattered intensity The SAXS data was analysed using the Irena 2 SAS modelling macros The system used was developed to approximate a continuous double jet precipitator, a typical industrial system ( The feed rate was controlled to give a constant pH of 6 with a variation of 0.5 of a pH point. The value of 6 was used as it was found through experimentation that this point was the easiest point to control the system and it is well above the reported precipitation point of pH 1.86 to 2.79 dependent on the free HCl in the solution The pH of the solutions was measured using an ORION model 720A Bench-top pH meter with a Hanna 0406A glass pH electrode. Prior to measurement the instrument was calibrated using pH 7 and 4 buffer solutions it was also checked against a pH 1 buffer solution. The reaction was commenced using a 50/50 mix by volume of milli-q water and ethanol, in the overflow vessel. The reaction vessel was initially charged with milli-q water that was agitated. The system was allowed to run to equilibrium over a period equal to 4 residence times to allow the system to come to process equilibrium. The overflow vessel was then emptied and replaced, and the system was run for a further 4 residence times. Samples for analysis were then collected from the overflow vessel. Ethanol was added at 10 min intervals to the overflow vessel so that a relatively constant 20% (by volume) alcohol to solution ratio was maintained. The particle sizing was determined using a Malvern Zetasizer nano series NANO-ZS instrument and associated proprietary software. Samples for particle sizing were sonicated in a Cole/Palmer 8891 sonic bath for 5 min, The refractive index used was that measured using a VEB Carl Zeiss Jena Abbe refractometer Model G, for a 20% alcohol/milli-q water mix. Images of particles were obtained using a Philips XL30 Scanning Electron Microscope (SEM). To allow for SEM investigation the solutions of precipitated hydrated zirconia were placed on stubs with carbon tape and allowed to dry under infrared light. Once dry they were carbon coated in a vacuum. Optical microscopy was conducted using a Nikon Eclipse Me600 microscope in reflected light with varying objective lenses. The possibility that process variations were caused by trace impurities in the supplied zirconyl chloride was investigated by analysing a number of batches by Inductively Coupled Plasma Optical Emission Spectrometry (ICP-OES) ( The ICP results indicated that industrially available zirconyl chloride supplied is remarkably consistent and shows that only limited trace elements (in the order of the limits of detection) are present. The impact of solution speciation upon subsequent precipitation processes of zirconyl chloride is not clear from existing literature. In particular, we aimed to determine if the introduction of yttrium resulted in any changes that might impact on the production of hard agglomerates. Johnson and Kraus conducted ultracentrifugation studies on zirconyl chloride and discussed the affects of ageing with the conclusion that ageing increases the degree of polymerization significantly  Generally the average Bragg like spacing between domains It appears that there is no significant change in the solution speciation of zirconyl chloride solutions, at least as reflected by the particle radius, with changes in concentration or addition of yttrium chloride. Our investigations thus moved on to the precipitation step of the process. The aim of this section of the work was to determine how solution composition might impact on the precipitation of the zirconyl oxyhydroxide upon addition of base. The experiments were designed to allow the precipitation to proceed for a certain residence time, after which the growth would be quenched by the introduction of ethanol. To assess and confirm the effect of ethanol in quenching the further growth of the particles, precipitation of a sample of 8 mole% yttrium doped zirconyl chloride was carried out with and without added ethanol in the overflow vessel. With the addition of ethanol the precipitate produced was well dispersed and appeared to be suitable for particle sizing even after standing for 24 h. In the absence of ethanol, a gelatinous cake resulted that was very dense and difficult to remove from the vessel. Only partial dispersion was possible, and optical microscopy showed many 20 to 30 μm spherical particles, in addition to a large number of smaller particles. The particles were soft and readily broken or deformed. These results indicated that the alcohol is acting as suggested in the literature and inhibiting growth and agglomeration The DLS particle sizing results are given in To support the DLS results optical and electron microscopy was performed to directly determine the size of the particles. Initially, the samples were washed with ethanol, and then resuspended in ethanol and deposited onto a slide for imaging. The samples were found to be hygroscopic, and this was ascribed to residual ammonium chloride, which has poor solubility in ethanol. The washing regime was thus altered to a mixture of 65% methanol, 20% milli-q water, and 15% reacted solution. The filtrate was then re-suspended in ethanol, and spin coated onto a glass slide. These particles were carbon coated and imaged using SEM. Imaging was complicated by the fact that the particles suffered from some transformation in the beam. The transformation is believed to be dehydration where the hydrated zirconium transforms to zirconia. A low beam current and accelerating voltage with large spot size and working distance was required, resulting in less than ideal images ( In A more remarkable result is the increase in particle size with increasing addition of ytrrium chloride ( Samples of industrially available crystalline zirconium oxychloride octahydrate were investigated. ICP-OES found that the major trace elements were only present at the limit of detection. SAXS investigation of solutions at two industrially relevant concentrations of zirconyl chloride (0.81 and 1.62 M) suggested that the zirconyl speciation was unchanged. Addition of yttrium chloride also had little effect on the SAXS measurement particle radii. Precipitation was performed using aqueous ammonia as the base. The precipitate particle sizes were measured by DLS with the 1.62 M solution found to have a significantly larger particle size than the 0.81 M solution (4.2 μm, 1.0 μm). The particle sizes were confirmed by electron microscopy, and were found to be in reasonable agreement. The effect on particle size of adding yttrium chloride was also investigated. Samples of 3, 5, 8 and 10 mol% yttrium–zirconium were found to have increasing particle size with increasing yttrium concentration (2.0, 3.7, 4.5, and 4.9 μm respectively). Experiments were carried out to determine if the change in particle size was predominantly a result of the added cations, or anions. Precipitations were performed with added caesium chloride and calcium chloride, such that the chloride concentration matched that of the 8 mol% yttrium–zirconium solution in each case. The precipitate particles sizes increased with the cation charge (ZrCs13, 1.8 μm; ZrCa4 2.6 μm; ZrY8, 4.5 μm), all being larger than the system with no additives (1.0 μm), despite the fact that the chloride concentration is constant. Thus, it appears from these data that the particle size increase is dependent on the charge of the added cation, and less so on the chloride concentration. From this work it is evident that the growth rate of precipitated particles for zirconyl chloride solutions is dependent on the concentration of the starting solution as well as the concentration of added cation and the type of cation present. Controlling these factors may enable optimisation of the precipitate particle size. The impact of added cations on properties such as particle surface charge, and on downstream processing of the zirconia is under investigation. CB, MO and GC acknowledge the financial support of the Australian Research Council (ARC). GC is the holder of an Australian Postgraduate Award, AINSE Postgraduate award and a Parker Centre Postgraduate Research Award.  Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at