The bonding of mandelic acid enantiomers has been studied on benzene–leucine, dinitrobenzene–leucine and dinitrobenzene–phenylalanine type chiral stationary phases connected to zeolite A supports. The π-donor, π-acceptor and H-bonding interactions responsible for diastereomer pair formations can be studied under quasi in situ chromatographic conditions by Fourier transform Raman and surface enhanced Raman spectroscopic techniques. Structural differences between diastereomer pairs result in observable spectral differences at a phase load of approx. 50%. It was shown that the decreasing π-acceptor character of the phase is associated with its increasing capability of H-bond formation. Correlating spectral data to chromatographic results it can be concluded that, in addition to H-bonding as well as to π-donor–π-acceptor interactions, steric hindrances due to bulky moieties of either the stationary phase or the analyte molecules are of importance in successful separations.The application of Early chromatographic works already paid attention to the formation of CT complexes during separation In order to understand the nature of chiral separations, the structure of the stationary phase–analyte complex, the connection of functional groups as well as the types of parameters influencing retention have to be known. Chromatographic investigations aimed at the understanding of these problems face with the difficulty that processes taking place in the chromatographic system as a “black box” can only be investigated indirectly from chromatographic measurement data. More recently, developments of surface analysis techniques – especially Raman spectroscopy and Raman microscopy – opened new horizons in the study of chromatographic systems as well. Since the Raman scattering of the support is negligible, the advantages of Raman spectroscopy in the study of CSP–analyte interactions can be exploited. The authors used Raman spectroscopy for the first time to investigate stationary phase–analyte interactions under quasi in situ chromatographic conditions Separation of mandelic acid enantiomers from an aqueous solution of the racemic mixture of 1 mg cm Since under realistic chromatographic conditions (with 0.1 m For surface enhanced FT-Raman studies 10-mg portions of the samples (with 1–2 μm CSP particle size) were mixed with 3×5 μl silver sol prepared after Lee and Meisel The FT-Raman spectra of the CSP–enantiomer complexes studied show significant differences in the In direct separations enantioselectivity is ensured by the stability difference between the CSP–analyte complexes. A complex is more stable if more and/or stronger interactions are formed between the functional groups due to symmetry and/or steric reasons. In the case of Pirkle type stationary phases the amide groups can form dipole–dipole as well as H-bonding interactions with the analyte molecules. π-Donor and π-acceptor interactions between the stationary phase and the analyte molecules are thought to be the most important during separation With the data of To demonstrate the role of steric hindrance during separation, the Surface Enhanced Raman (SERS) spectra obtained by a diode laser (785 nm) and a Nd–YAG laser (1064 nm) are given in In order to interpret the changes in band ratios, the connection of silver to the CSP–analyte complex should be considered first. It is commonly accepted that the SERS spectrum is the consequence of chemisorption between the silver surface and the nucleophilic moiety of the molecule, thus the spectral information is characteristic of the chemisorbed layer. Bands due to Ag–N and Ag–O bonds appear between 250 and 210 cm In accordance with the surface selection rule, vibrations having a component perpendicular to the silver surface are Raman active, only. In our earlier study structure estimation based on the calculation of conformational energy minima was made using the Desktop Molecular Modeler version 2.0 program Through the example of mandelic acid bonding on Pirkle type stationary phases it was demonstrated that the bonding mechanism can be studied with low energy excitation lasers and by the surface enhanced Raman spectrometric technique. The ability of H-bond formation of the stationary phase is increased with the decrease of its π-acceptor character. In addition to forces holding together the transitional complex, steric hindrances are of importance in successful separations. In the SERS spectra of the transitional complexes the relative band intensities of the ring out-of-plane vibrations show correlation with retention data. This work is part of the efforts aimed at the elaboration of a Raman spectrometric method capable of predicting information necessary to select/design suitable stationary phases. This work was supported by the Hungarian Ministry of Education under grant No. FKFP 0223/2000 The financial and infrastructural support of the Queensland University of Technology Centre for Instrumental and Developmental Chemistry is also acknowledged.