The attrition process of particles in conveying systems is a common problem in many industrial applications. The current study adopts a new approach to modeling particle breakage by implementing one-dimensional breakage algorithm (ODBA) in a one-dimensional flow model (Uzi et al., 2016). This method is used for the first time in two-way coupling, i.e. when the breakage affects the flow dynamics and vice versa. The one-dimensional flow model uses conventional balances of mass, momentum and energy. Moreover, the ODBA exploits empirical correlations for particle characteristics (i.e. breakage, equivalence and fatigue functions), and dynamic behavior (i.e. impact velocity and frequency) obtained from a coupled 3D CFD and Discrete Element Method (DEM) simulations. Both the dynamics of the particles and the attrition of the particles were validated using the proposed approach. A dilute pneumatic conveying system was considered, which comprises of 1in. pipe and 5 straight sections and 4 bends (R/D=1) with a total length of 14.5m. CFD-DEM results served as the basis for the velocity validation, satisfying a good agreement along the conveying line. In this system, the attrition of Potash particles was simulated and compared with the experimental measurements of Kalman et al. (2004), showing an excellent agreement. This comparison consists of inlet gas superficial velocity of 40m/s and is comprised of ten conveying cycles in order to emphasize the fatigue phenomena. The investigated case was also analyzed to provide the dynamic parameters of the two-phase flow with regard to the coupling with the breakage algorithm. It was well established that the flow parameters are sensitive to particle size. In the pressure variation, it was prominent that larger particles resolve a larger pressure drop, while the differences between the cycles in the velocity were more extensive. These differences were caused by the changes in particle size distribution and actualized due to the two-way coupling approach.Particle attrition during pipeline conveying is a major problem in many industrial applications. When solid particles are conveyed through pipelines, they are subjected to collisions with other particles and with the pipe wall, which may cause particle degradation, mainly in high conveying velocities when the flow is fully-suspended. Many experimental studies focused on the attrition phenomena in pneumatic conveying One possibility for overcoming this issue is the application of computational methods for predicting the attrition in a particular case of interest. Unfortunately, only several researchers (e.g. When simulating a degradation process, the model must account for the particles' dynamics and exploit the dynamics data to determine the particle breakage. One applicable approach that was developed for this purpose is a combined Computational Fluid Dynamics (CFD)-Discrete Element Method (DEM) An alternative approach is modeling the flow with a simplified macroscopic model, i.e. a zero-dimension or one-dimensional two-phase flow model, and applying another model to account for the breakage process. Such an approach is beneficial, since it is much faster than CFD-DEM, yet it is less accurate than the DEM approach. Chapelle's model is one example for such an implementation on a large-scale pneumatic conveying line The objective of the present study is to take into account all of the above-mentioned effects for simulating breakage in pneumatic conveying. Our model uses a conventional one-dimensional two-phase flow approach for calculating the two-phase flow dynamics, as well as a one-dimensional breakage algorithm (ODBA) to account for breakage. The ODBA concept was first introduced in Uzi et al. For the purpose of simulating attrition in pneumatic conveying, the ODBA approach has different advantages over other existing models. This model allows to emphasize the fatigue phenomenon, accounts for particle-particle interactions as well as particle-wall interactions, both in straight pipes and in bends, and it is much faster than the full CFD-DEM breakage simulation. The ODBA was recently implemented in one-way coupling for dilute-phase pneumatic conveying In the current study, we aim to address this gap by modifying the coupling method of the ODBA with the one-dimensional flow model, from one-way coupling to two-way coupling. This coupling between the two-phase flow model and the ODBA allows examining attrition as well as the flow dynamics of both the gas and the particles over a long range of conveying pipelines, in which particle degradation plays a significant role, in a short computation time. The novelty of this implementation is its emphasis on the effects of particle breakage on the flow field and vice versa, which, despite their immense importance, are rarely analyzed or considered in the literature. Particle attrition is strongly affected by the particles' properties (i.e. strength, density, size etc.), carrier fluid properties, fluid flow dynamics and the conveying line's geometry. The two-phase flow model and the ODBA together function as an adaptive tool that can be modified easily to account for these effects along with attrition assessment. The one-dimensional two-phase flow model and the ODBA are used in the present study to predict attrition and to account for the effects of particle attrition over fluid dynamics. It is important to mention that when the fluid dynamics calculations are influenced by attrition, this directly affects the breakage calculations themselves, and therefore the influence is mutual. The ODBA utilizes the comminution functions The pneumatic one-dimensional flow model is described in detail in our previous publication In dilute phase conveying systems, when the particle phase is fully suspended, the particles can be modeled by a homogenous suspension. In the one-dimensional flow model, the steady-state balance equations of mass, momentum and energy are solved to predict the two-phase flow dynamics. According to the previous study The breakage model combines statistics from CFD-DEM simulations and empirical particle characterization. The ODBA is coupled with two-phase flow dynamics (supplied by the one-dimensional two-phase flow model) in a two-way coupling. In the two-phase flow model, the pipeline geometry is divided into equally sized numerical cells, and the model is then solved in order to obtain the steady-state two-phase flow dynamics. From this solution, the mass of the solid phase in each numerical cell along the pipeline is established. However, in this model, the particle size distribution is not known. Thus, the main goal of the current study is to predict the changes in particle size distribution along the pipe and to exploit these changes in order to understand how they impact flow dynamics (pressure drop, particle velocity) and vice versa. Therefore, the ODBA starts with a defined particle size distribution at the inlet and modifies it by choosing a ‘tracking mass’ and accounting for the attrition of this tracking mass along the flow. The tracking mass is a constant scalar that represents a certain amount of particles. It is constituted from discrete entities, each with its own properties: id, diameter, next collision time and strength (defined by empirical strength distribution In order to account for the breakage along the pipe, collisions during the solid particles' transport are obtained by utilizing a frequency function to find every particle's next collision time within the domain. On the other hand, the time spent by the tracking mass inside every element is known from the flow model, which calculates the velocity of the particles phase. In correspondence with the discrete representation of the particles in the tracking mass, the tracking mass within the continuous flow model domain is: Once the flow model has finished its computation, the result is used to compute the mean volume fraction at the current element, i.e. within the estimated element. Thereafter, the element size is recalculated for the ODBA with respect to the current mean particle volume fraction to receive more accuracy: It is worth mentioning that an iterative procedure is recommended if the difference in the estimated element size obtained with Eqs. Once the flow parameters and the element size are known at the current location, the residence time within the current element can be calculated. The time of the particle phase is calculated in the flow model by integration into the following equation: Where The collisions within the current element should occur between the time the tracked mass enters the element until the time it exited. Every particle in the tracked mass is checked to establish whether its next collision with the wall or with another particle occurs at the period of time spent in the current element, while the collision time is generated by the frequency distribution function. If a collision is found, the impact velocity is calculated from the velocity distribution function. Then, the equivalence function By applying the frequency function, the next collision time of every particle is established. Therefore, when a particle travels along the pipeline with a known velocity, it will collide when its traveling time equals the time determined by the frequency function. For straight pipe sections, the residence time is known from the one-dimensional flow model. However, one of the limitations of one-dimensional flow modeling is the inability to forecast the dynamics inside bends. To overcome this issue, the residence time inside bends was utilized from DEM results (the time it takes a particle to travel from the bend inlet to the bend exit). This residence time is calculated by exploiting ‘equivalent non-dimensional bend length’, ( With this method, each particle in the tracking mass is calculated discretely. Hence, the particle size distribution in the tracking mass can be obtained for every element along the pipeline, thereby producing a steady-state representation of the particles' population. The machine functions, namely frequency and velocity distribution, were developed in our previous study by running CFD-DEM simulations and analyzing the recorded collision data This means that if, for example, we consider particles at the smallest size range (0.5–1 In pneumatic conveying, the particles might be subjected to major changes in their velocity. One of the reasons for this is the acceleration of the gas along the pipeline. This occurs when the pressure drops and as a result the density is damped. This triggers a positive gradient of the velocity due to the mass balance. Another issue, which generates the opposite trend, is the impact of the particles inside bends, causing a velocity damping. It is therefore a considerable challenge to model the particles dynamics along the pipeline in one-dimensional two-phase flow model. In the present study, we consider a full two-way coupling between the ODBA and the flow model. This means that the particle degradation affects all the dynamic parameters. The flow model utilizes the median diameter from the particles in the tracking mass when solving the conservation equations, where the tracking mass is composed of discrete entities, each of which have a particular size. Obviously, the particles phase diameter varies according to the ODBA calculations, and therefore we define a distance at which the particle phase diameter is updated from the ODBA calculations. This distance is constant and is defined prior to the simulation. In this case, we considered it to be 50 times the fluid cell size, One of the shortcomings of the one-dimensional model is that it cannot forecast the bends' inner dynamics. In order to overcome this issue and predict the bend outlet particle velocity, the one-dimensional model diminishes the particles velocity artificially by multiplying their bend inlet velocity with a factor. This factor was found by analyzing the velocity reduction in bends from the DEM results, and it agrees with the value of 0.6. In order to validate the flow modeling, the one-dimensional particles axial velocity is compared against the 3D CFD-DEM results (without breakage), using the same boundary conditions, and neglecting breakage. We used the simulated CFD-DEM data from our previous study The one-dimensional results (indicated by a black line in This study investigated the influence of the attrition process over the flow parameters by applying the ODBA coupled with the one-dimensional flow model for the same conveying system. Ten conveying cycles were simulated, emphasizing the fatigue phenomenon and the degradation of particles along the conveying line. Every cycle consisted of a single transport of the tracked mass through the conveying system, i.e. from the inlet to the filter at the outlet (see The same boundary conditions that were used for validation were used for the ODBA simulation, excluding the gas superficial velocity and the initial particle size distribution. This was done in order to satisfy the conditions that were measured in the experimental system We considered potash particles as the solid phase, and air at standard conditions as our carrier fluid. The initial cumulative number based size distribution is presented in The number of particles shown in Analyzing the broken ratio results provides a good estimation of the amount of fatigue experienced by the particles. The particles are conveyed through the system, colliding with the pipe wall and with one another many times, but only a fraction of them break while the rest are damaged. The damage is in fact impact energy that is absorbed in the particles, causing fraction evolvement within the material. The fractions expand due to repeated collisions until the particle breaks. The existence of the fatigue phenomena is prominently demonstrated in  The predictions of the flow dynamics using the two-phase flow model are significant when implementing the ODBA. This dictates the time spent by the particles at every section, and therefore influences the number of collision events each particle experiences (with respect to the frequency function). The conservation equations are solved for the compressible air while the particles are also considered as Eulerian phase in the two-phase model. The results of the two-phase dynamics along the simulated system are presented in Although the pressure drop is similar in some of the cycles, this does not entail that the dynamics are the same. Examining the axial velocity of the particles shows that there is a remarkable change between the cycles, as presented in On the other hand, it is evident that the gas velocity does not significantly vary between the cycles. The pressure drop is mainly a factor of the gas velocity and the friction of the particles with the wall. In our model, we adopted the friction factor of Breault and Mathur In this model, the friction factor has an inverse relationship to the particle's velocity. The product of the friction factor and the particle's velocity square is equivalent to the particles' shear stress with the wall. Thus, the shear stress and the pressure drop depend linearly on the particle velocity. The dependence of the gas shear stress on the velocity is: Computation time plays a significant role in determining whether a specific model is feasible for a specific system. One of the key reasons for developing the ODBA was to reduce computational cost. Therefore, as the DEM breakage simulation is the more accurate version of the ODBA as well as the default choice to model particle breakage, the advantage of the ODBA in this regard should be emphasized. Nevertheless, DEM breakage simulation was not conducted in this study and the computation time can only be estimated. DEM computation time greatly depends on a large number of parameters, such as the computing type (number of CPU's/GPU), coding algorithms, time step, particle size, number of particles, DEM grid size, particle stiffness, etc. Despite the many uncertainties and complexities involved in estimating the computation time in a DEM breakage simulation, a useful, though perhaps uncertain, analysis can be done, using these parameters that are known in order to compare this method with the ODBA two-way coupling approach. The CFD-DEM one-way coupling simulations that were conducted without breakage before running the ODBA code for the purpose of developing the machine functions had the largest portion of the overall computation time in the scope of the ODBA. Computing 0.5 Alternatively, two-way coupling CFD-DEM breakage simulation is much more time consuming. One reason for it is that in two-way coupling the Eulerian phase is computed at every time step, and the source terms are exchanging between the gas and the particles. Another reason for increasing the running time is that in DEM breakage simulation the number of particles is expected to increase dramatically (found to be about 3.3 times the number of particles in the DEM without breakage in our case). In addition, the DEM time step is dictated by the smallest particle size (Δ The current study presents a new implementation of particle attrition coupled with two-phase flow dynamics. We adopted the ODBA as our breakage tool The model was validated for both dynamics calculations and for the breakage predictions. The CFD-DEM results were assumed to provide the basis for the velocity validation against the two-phase flow model. It was found that the one-dimensional two-phase model satisfies a relatively similar trend to the one the CFD-DEM results suggest. Additionally, the experimental measurements of Kalman et al. The investigated case was analyzed to provide the dynamic parameters of the two-phase flow with regards to every conveying cycle. It was well established that the flow parameters are very sensitive to particle size. In terms of pressure variation, it was prominent that larger particles resolve a larger pressure drop, but the differences between the cycles in terms of velocity were much more extensive. The largest size distribution initially exists at the inlet of the first cycle. The particles break as they are conveyed, thus reducing the size of the particles to smaller fragments. In the next cycles, the size distribution in the inlet was always smaller than the previous cycle, but the median size at the inlet was always above 2 In this study, the ODBA two-way coupling approach was shown to be an excellent tool to predict both dynamics and attrition in a pneumatic conveying line, despite the complexity of integrating numerous sub-models in order to account for the complete physics. Furthermore, simulating attrition using a two-way coupling approach disclosed that the two-phase flow dynamics are very sensitive to the changes in particle size, even if the variation is small. It was also prominent that fatigue modeling plays a significant role in correctly predicting the attrition. Therefore, the ODBA two-way coupling is an especially applicable tool for long-range systems and for optimization purposes, due to the fast calculation procedure using a one-dimensional model, while still accounting for all major affects during breakage and pneumatic conveying.