Background
                  Clavicle fractures are among the most common upper extremity injuries. Traditionally most clavicle fractures have been treated non-surgically, but during recent decades the surgical treatment of clavicle fractures has increased. The purpose of this study was to assess the numbers and trends of surgically treated clavicle fractures in Finland between 1987 and 2010.
               
                  Methods
                  The study covered the entire adult (>18 years) population of Finland over the study period. Data on surgically treated clavicle fractures was collected from the Finnish National Hospital Discharge Register. We assessed the number and incidence of surgically treated clavicle fractures annually.
               
                  Results
                  A total of 7073 surgically treated clavicle fractures were identified in the register over the study period. Three-fourths of the surgically treated patients were men and one-fourth was women. The incidence of surgical treatment increased nearly ninefold from 1.3 per 100,000 person years in 1987 to 10.8 per 100,000 person years in 2010. The increase in the rate of surgical treatment was especially notable in men.
               
                  Conclusions
                  A striking increase in incidence of surgically treated clavicle fractures was seen from 1987 to 2010. Although the actual incidence of clavicle fractures is not known, we assume that the proportion of patients receiving surgical treatment has increased markedly without high-quality evidence. Since recent reports have suggested similar functional results between operative and conservative treatment critical evaluation of the treatment policy of clavicle fractures is warranted.Fractures of the clavicle are common injuries and typically fall-related. Previous epidemiological studies have estimated that clavicle fractures encompass up to 4% of all fractures Clavicle fractures are common in young male individuals, but the incidence of the injury increases in both genders with age Most clavicle fractures regardless of the fracture site are treated non-surgically, usually by primary immobilization with a sling or figure-of-eight – type of bandage and progressive mobilization. According to a recent review indications for primary surgical treatment of clavicle fractures include open fracture, damage to neural or vascular tissues, fractures that threaten the skin, multiple trauma and floating shoulder. Relative indications for primary surgical treatment may include the treatment of a young, active patient with considerable shortening of the fractured bone and displacement of the fracture. A number of different surgical approaches have been described including fixation with screws, pins, wires or plates and external fixation. Bone grafting has also been used, especially in fractures with non-union Traditionally most of the middle-shaft clavicle fractures have been treated non-surgically and the literature describes that conservative treatment gives good results In general, it seems that surgical treatment of clavicle fractures has gained increasing popularity. However, the literature is scarce concerning prospective, randomized clinical trials on treatment of clavicle fractures and thus strong treatment recommendations are difficult to give To the best of our knowledge, no population-based studies on the incidence of the surgical treatment of clavicle fractures have been made. In our previous studies of other upper limb fractures, we found that after the introduction of locking plates in Finland, surgical treatment of these injuries gained popularity Patient data was collected from the Finnish National Hospital Discharge Register (NHDR) between 1st of January 1987 and 31st of December 2010. Only adults 18-years-old or older were included in the study. The Finnish NHDR was founded in 1967 and provides a reliable database for epidemiologic studies of injuries with excellent coverage and accuracy The main outcome variable for this study was the number of patients undergoing surgical treatment of clavicle fracture. Patients were included in the study if either primary or secondary diagnosis was clavicle fracture (ICD-9 codes 8100A, 8101A or 9052A in 1987–1995, and ICD-10 code S42.0 in 1996–2010). Procedures were also registered according to ICD-9-coding between 1987 and 1997 and ICD-10 coding from 1998 to 2010. The procedural code during the ICD-9 coding was 9128 (open reduction and osteosynthesis) and during the ICD-10 coding NBJ53 (open reduction of clavicle fracture) and NBJ92 (other fracture surgery of clavicle). For the purpose of analysing the trend of all surgically treated clavicle fractures from 1987 to 2010, ICD-10 procedures NBJ53 and NBJ92 were pooled for the analysis. To calculate the incidence ratios of surgically treated clavicle fractures, the annual mid-population of Finland was obtained from the Official Statistics of Finland, a statutory electronic population register of the country. The rates of surgically treated clavicle fractures (per 100,000 persons) were based on the entire adult (18-year-old and older) population of Finland rather than sample or cohort -based estimates and thus, in full agreement with our previous studies A total of 20,486 hospitalizations with a diagnosis of clavicle fracture were registered in the Finnish NHDR during the 24-year study period. The number of hospitalized patients was 325 in 1987 and 1163 in 2010. The incidence of hospitalization following clavicle fracture increased from 8.6 per 100,000 person-years in 1987 to 27.2 per 100,000 person-years in 2010. The incidence of hospitalization in men was 10.2 in 1987 and 38.5 in 2010, both per 100,000 person-years. The corresponding figures in women were 7.0 in 1987 and 16.5 in 2010. During the study period, altogether 7073 clavicle fractures were operated and registered into the NHDR. The number of surgically treated clavicle fractures increased from 48 in 1987 to 462 on 2010. The total number of surgically treated clavicle fractures was 5243 (74%) for men and 1830 (26%) for women. The mean age for the surgically treated men was 39.0 (SD 13) years while the mean age for surgically treated women was 42.9 (SD 15) years. The age distribution curve of the surgically treated patients is shown in The incidence for surgical treatment of clavicle fractures was 1.3 per 100.000 person years ( As the recording of all surgical procedures in the NHDR is mandatory in Finland, an analysis based on the operating unit and type of hospital stay was also made. Hospital stay type was categorized either as inpatient or outpatient. The hospitals were categorized as public or private, and the analysis was possible from 1997 (type of hospital stay was not recorded before 1997). 5,359 surgical procedures were included in the analysis. Most of the surgical procedures ( A difference was seen in surgical treatment between public and private hospitals. In public hospitals 3417 (96%) men were treated as inpatients and 127 (4%) as outpatients. In private hospitals, the corresponding figures were 181 (40%) as inpatients vs. 276 (60%) as outpatients. Concerning women in public hospitals 1174 (97%) patients were treated as inpatients and 42 (3%) as outpatients. In private hospitals the corresponding figures were 71 (50%) as inpatients vs. 71 (50%) as outpatients. The mean hospital stay for men was 2.0 days in public vs. 1.1 in private hospitals. Corresponding figures for women were 2.1 vs. 1.1 days. Our nationwide study allowed us to analyze the incidence and trends of surgically treated clavicle fractures in the entire adult Finnish population. Over the 24-year study period we noticed a significant increase in the number and incidence of surgical treatment of clavicle fractures. The magnitude of the finding is somewhat surprising even though we hypothesized that a clear increase would be found. The overall incidence of surgical treatment of clavicle fractures increased ninefold but the increase was notably steep in men where the incidence of surgical treatment increased nearly elevenfold. Among men the increase was clear in all other age groups except for men over 60 years of age. The increase in the incidence of surgical treatment was swift for men till the late 1990s after which the incidence stayed quite constant until a new rise in the middle 2000s. In women, a more moderate rise in the incidence of surgical treatment was seen till the late 1990s, but unlike in men, since then the incidence has remained quite constant. The reasons for the increased surgical activity are unknown. Clavicle fractures are typically fall-induced and therefore unintentional. Unfortunately the NHDR is unable to give exact information on the type of the incident and therefore it cannot shed light on the true reasons of the underlying fracture. According to our results the surgically treated adult patients are mostly young or middle-aged and therefore the increase in the surgical incidence cannot be explained via population ageing. It is possible that Finnish middle-aged people are nowadays more active and therefore more injury-prone during their leisure time. However, the authors are not aware of any scientific evidence supporting this assumption. It may also be that the new hardware, especially locking plates, which allows better grip to comminuted bone, have encouraged surgeons to operate. The rigorous marketing of new fixation materials may also play a role. This is of interest because no radical changes on the national treatment recommendations of clavicle fractures (changes that would have favoured surgical treatment over conservative treatment) have been made. A limitation of our as well as any previous register-based study is that the overall incidence of clavicle fractures can not be assessed using the data on NHDR, because conservatively treated clavicle fractures are often treated in emergency rooms only, or outside hospitals in community health care centres and private outpatient clinics thus falling outside the NHDR. However, a ninefold increase in the rate of surgical treatment cannot be based solely to an increase in the actual incidence of clavicle fractures, but is due to an increase in surgical treatment. It seems that the literature is rather uniform in stating that different types of fractures (e.g. lateral vs. diaphysis vs. medial) should be handled and treated as separate entities. Therefore it is surprising that the version 10 of the International Classification of Diseases (ICD-10) recognizes only one diagnosis, S42.0 for the fracture of the clavicle. ICD-9 recognizes complicated (8101A) and non-complicated (8100A) fractures and additionally fracture consequences (9052A). This leads to an obvious limitation of our study: we were unable to differentiate the anatomical sites of the clavicle fractures included in this study. During the 24-year study the increase in surgically treated men is puzzling. The steepest rise in the incidence of surgical treatment for men was seen up till the end of the 1990s, which probably reflects the literature and common practice over that period. In their work Hill and co-workers found a high rate of non-union (15%) in conservatively treated mid-shaft clavicle fractures. Even though the combined rate of mal- and non-union was high (27%) in their work, Nordqvist and co-workers reported a low rate of patient discontent. Although the demand for better functional outcome is clear with younger men, the rise in incidence was nearly similar in the age groups 40–59 years old. Robinson and cowriters found advancing age, female gender, displacement of the fracture and fracture comminution as risk factors for non-union A recent review suggests that conservative treatment is still the first treatment option for primary clavicle fractures regardless of the site of fracture Strength of our study is the excellent national coverage of surgically treated clavicle fractures, because all public and private hospitals must register their procedures into the NHDR In conclusion, we found a marked increase in the number and incidence of surgically treated clavicle fractures over the 24-year study period in Finland. The change has mainly occurred in men less than 60 years of age. Although the true incidence and trend of all clavicle fractures are not known, we conclude that the increase of surgical treatment has been remarkable. However, there is no high-quality evidence supporting this type of radical change in the treatment recommendation of clavicle fractures. High-quality research is needed to see whether a similar change has occurred in other countries. Additionally we feel that as the different types of clavicle fractures are separate entities, they deserve to be recognized with separate codes in the future versions of the International Classification of Diseases. All authors of this reported paper declare no conflict of interest.