Brazil has many mineral resources, one of them being phosphate rocks. Established in 1978, the current main mineral-processing route for the Brazilian phosphate rock igneous deposits consists in a direct flotation using alkaline-saponified fatty acids as collector. Looking for new sources of reactants to be used in mineral processing, commercial baker's yeast cells (BYC) from Fleishmann were tested. Saccharomyces cerevisiae was chosen because it is relatively easy to grow industrially, has no biological risk, and can be found worldwide. Microflotation experiments were conducted in a modified Hallimond's tube with high-purity apatite samples in order to investigate the influence of the pH and the biocollector dosage on the apatite recovery. High saponification levels for the BYC occurred many hours after its saponification and an optimal 96h aging was established. The industrially adopted collector (Flotigam 5806 from Clariant) was used as collector benchmark. Apatite recoveries with the 96h-aged saponified BYC were higher than with Flotigam 5806 (above 95% in all tested pH for dosages of saponified BYC ≥200mg/L). Good results were found also at pH 7, which could lead to a reduction in the phosphate rock flotation pH in the future. No major differences were visually found between the 96h-aged saponified BYC and the Flotigam 5806 regarding the froth aspect and stability, suggesting that the biocollector possibly acted as a frother.Nowadays, Brazil's economy is strongly based on agricultural commodities The three essential elements for plant nutrition are nitrogen, phosphorus, and potassium. The Brazilian main source of phosphorous is phosphate rock from igneous deposits, which requires mineral processing to reduce the content of gangue minerals, such as quartz, chert, clay, feldspar, mica, calcite, and dolomite The application of microorganisms in mineral processing is not relatively new, but is still in the early stages The attachment of bacteria on the mineral surface occurs by a variety of methods such as the secretion of a slime layer, hydrophobic interactions, extracellular polymeric substances and other surface appendages, protein-binding receptors, chemical attachment, physical adsorption, and with the use of glycolyax  Blue crystals of igneous apatite from Ipira-BA, Brazil, were comminuted in a jaw crusher followed by a ball mill and granulometrically separated through wet sieving using a Tyler sieving series for 15 Dry BYC manufactured by Fleishmann were locally purchased in 100 A solution of 100 The saponification index (SI), which is the mass of potassium hydroxide (in mg) required to neutralize the fatty acids resulting from the complete hydrolysis of 1 Microflotation tests were carried out at room temperature (around 25 A first experimental campaign was carried out in order to study the influence of the saponified BYC aging on the apatite recovery, at pH 9 and biocollector dosage of 400 Five different dosages of aged saponified BYC (50, 200, 400, 600, and 800    Regarding the Zeta potential measurements (  Apatite flotation test results using the 96 Average apatite recoveries above 95% were obtained for the 96 For the Flotigam 5806, the best results were obtained for dosages ≥5.0 The pH influence on Flotigam 5806 was also verified. An increase in the pH produced an increase in the apatite recovery when using Flotigam 5806, which agrees with industrial data and explains the adoption of pH around 10 in the phosphate rock flotation. On the other hand, for the 96 The high apatite recovery could also be related with other constituents of the BYC. Saponified fatty acids are well known as frother and ionized species can generate excessively stable froths A first attempt to use saponified BYC ( An inverse behavior regarding the pH change was observed between the Flotigam 5806 and the biocollector. An increase in the pH produced and the increase in the apatite recovery when using the Flotigam 5806 and a decrease when using the 96 More tests with phosphate rock are required to ensure the potential use of saponified BYC as an industrial biocollector. Proteins and nucleic acids were present in the saponified BYC solution and the interaction of these constituents with the apatite surface is not clear so far. Therefore, more studies are required to understand the adsorption mechanisms. The authors declare no conflicts of interest. The authors gratefully acknowledge the financial support of the Brazilian agencies CNPq, CAPES, FAPEG, and FUNAPE. In addition, the authors would like to thank Copebras, Labmic, UNIFESSPA, UFOP, UFG, and TU Clausthal.