A new method for total hydrolysis of cellulose using a chemo-enzymatic system to combine chemical depolymerization and enzymatic hydrolysis, is described in this paper. The approach described herein involves the dissolution of cellulose in an ionic liquid, depolymerization by acidic solid-catalyst, and use of an antisolvent to obtain the resulting cello-oligomers. These were subjected to chemical depolymerization, after which virtually all the soluble cello-oligomers were hydrolyzed to glucose by β-1,4-D-glucan glucohydrolase. This glucohydrolase is newly identified from a species of Paenibacillus (HPL-001), and is different from commercial β-1,4-D-glucosidase. Continuous recycling (99%) of ionic acid and organic solvent completely broke down the cellulose into cello-oligomers (soluble sugars) shorter than six anhydrous glucose units. The cello-oligomers of soluble sugars were easily connected to a new single-enzyme system for complete hydrolysis to glucose. The efficiency of this technology could solve the dissolution and selective deconstruction problem retarding the major production of glucose from cellulose, and could provide a crucial advance in the production of un-degraded glucose as final product. This approach provides an alternative techno-economic process to traditional, expensive, three-enzyme hydrolysis of cellulose.Biorefinery is a process utilizing integrated biological and chemical conversions to produce biofuels or platform chemicals from photosynthetic biomass. This is the only foreseeable, sustainable source of carbon fuels and materials available to humanity Enzymatic hydrolysis is still not feasible due to the price of enzymes, despite the high specificity of enzymes for polysaccharide substrates Thus, a different strategy has been proposed: the pretreatment of lignocellulose using ILs (ionic liquids). This methodology can effectively remove the lignin and reduce the crystallinity of the cellulose to permit enzymatic hydrolysis at high solid loadings and low enzyme concentrations. Thereby, it substantially accelerates the rate of enzymatic hydrolysis and increases the yield of fermentable sugars Apart from cellulose dissolution, the traditional hydrolysis of cellulose involves the synergistic activity of endo-β-1,4-glucanases (EC 3.2.1.4, EG), exoglucanases [including both cellobiohydrolases (EC 3.2.1.91, CBH) and sometimes glucohydrolases (EC 3.2.1.74)] and β-glucosidases (EC 3.2.1.21). All three enzyme classes must be present in this system in order to produce glucose. A model for total cellulose hydrolysis by herbivorous terrestrial crustaceans has been published and it is capable of producing glucose from crystalline cellulose without requiring a CBH. This contrasts with the traditional model for cellulose digestion, known from fungal cellulase systems With this as background, we now are seeking to develop an alternative approach for complete cellulose saccharification to glucose, using a chemo-enzymatic technology and green chemistry. Chemical depolymerization could replace the EG and CBH roles of decreasing the DP over the course of traditional enzymatic hydrolysis for cellulosic substrates. After depolymerization of the cellulose, single-enzyme hydrolysis could then complete the total saccharification of the cello-oligomers without other by-products. Furthermore, the key point for using IL technology in cellulose saccharification is complete and economical separation of sugars from the reaction mixture. The question then, is how to combine chemical depolymerization with enzymatic hydrolysis. In this study, we suggest a new concept for total hydrolysis of cellulose using a chemo-enzymatic system of a solid catalyst in an ionic acid, and a single enzyme (Ggh), instead of the traditional three-enzyme system, for cellulose hydrolysis. Cellulose was purchased from Sigma-Aldrich. BMIMCl (1-n-butyl-3-methylimidazolium chloride) was purchased from BASF (Ludwigshafen, Germany) and used without further purification. Cellulase (CTEC 2) was obtained from Novozyme. All other reagents were of analytical grade and used without further purification. A weighed amount of IL (1-butyl-3-methylimidazolium chloride) was added to clear glass vials with magnetic stirrers and placed into a heating water bath at 95–105 °C. A 5% (w/w) cellulose solution was prepared by combining 50 mg of cellulose with 950 mg BMIMCl in a 5 mL autoclave vial. The mixture was stirred for dissolution until the solution was nearly transparent. The solution of cellulose in IL was sucked out in a pipette and blown into water to form a solidified thread. The solid phase cellulose was thereby obtained in the form of regenerated cellulose and dried in an oven at 60 °C for 24 h before being used as a starting material. In this way, the regeneration of cellulose was obtained at room temperature. Untreated or regenerated cellulose was hydrolyzed using the same cellulase (6%, CTEC 2) in 2 mL vials at a constant temperature of 50 °C, stirred at 200 r/min in a shaking incubator, to provide a time-based reaction. The untreated cellulose controls were run concurrently with all regenerated cellulose hydrolysis experiments to eliminate potential differences in temperature history or enzyme loading. The glucose released from untreated cellulose (reagent) and IL-treated cellulose, regenerated by an antisolvent after dissolution in an IL [BMIMCl], was determined using an HPLC (Younglin Instrument Acme 9000, Korea). The total reaction period was 366 h, and samples were taken at 1, 2, 4, 8, 12, 24, 48, 72, 96, 120, 144, 168, 216, 288, and 366 h after reaction. All experiments were carried out in triplicate. Each value recorded is therefore the arithmetic mean of three experimental data sets (data shown as mean value ± standard deviation). The catalytic material Amberlyst 15DRY (Aldrich) was stirred twice into methanol (99.9%, Aldrich) for 15 min, and then dried overnight at 100 °C. The solution of cellulose in 1-butyl-3-methylimidazolium chloride (BMIMCl) was prepared by dissolving 5.00 g of Sigmacell cellulose in 100 g of BMIMCl at 100 °C with mechanical stirring. Subsequently, 1.0 g of Amberlyst 15DRY (AMB) was added to the mixture containing cellulose. The depolymerization of cellulose was carried out at 100 °C for 2 h. Residual cellulose and soluble cello-oligomers from the reaction mixture were precipitated by the addition of chloroform (25 mL) and separated by centrifugation or filtration. The solid portion of the depolymerized-cellulose was dissolved in distilled water and the insoluble cello-oligomers were separated by filtration. The aqueous solution of cello-oligomers was collected and stored at −20 °C for a posterior DNS assay and HPLC analysis. The total amount of reduced sugars was determined by reaction with 3,5-dinitrosalicylic acid (DNS) at 100 °C. The color formation was monitored at 550 nm using a StellarNet, Inc., EPP 2000 UV–Vis spectrometer. The amount of total reducing sugar (TRS) was determined using a standard curve obtained with glucose. Soluble sugar precipitation was confirmed with standard sugars by the same method. The solution of glucose and other sugars in 1-butyl-3-methylimidazolium chloride (BMIMCl) was prepared by dissolving 1.00 g of glucose, xylan, arabinose, mannose, dextrose, galactose, fructose, and xylose in 100 g of BMIMCl at 100 °C, with mechanical stirring at 100 °C. Subsequently, 100 mL of chloroform was added to a flask containing one sugar in a BMIMCl solution. Glucose and other precipitated sugars were separated from the aqueous solution by centrifugation or filtration at freezing temperature. Glucose and other sugar precipitates were dried overnight at 100 °C overnight, and held for HPLC analysis. The amount of sugar precipitated was determined by optical density (OD) using a spectrophotometer at 600 nm. The cellulose oligomers, depolymerized by a solid catalyst in an ionic liquid, were precipitated by the addition of chloroform to the cellulose/BMIMCl solution. Among the precipitated cello-oligomers, the soluble portion was separated by dissolving in water. This aqueous solution of cello-oligomers was hydrolyzed using 50 μg of purified glucohydrolase in 2-mL vials at a constant temperature of 40 °C, with a stirring rate of 200 r/min, in a shaking incubator, to provide a time-based reaction (0, 10, 20, 30, 60, 120, 180, or 360 min). Each portion of 10-μl sample was analyzed after clean-up with boiling water for 5 min and filtering with a 0.2 μm syringe filter. An HPLC (Younglin Instrument Acme 9000, Korea) analysis was conducted as mentioned above. The conversion of cellulose to soluble cellodextrine was calculated from the sum of cellodextrine, using a standard curve. Hydrolysis products were measured as substrates of cellobiose, cellotriose, cellotetraose, cellopentaose, and cellohexaose with the purified enzyme Ggh, at a constant temperature of 40 °C, and stirred at 200 r/min in a shaking incubator, to provide a time-based reaction. An HPLC analysis (Younglin Instrument Acme 9000, Korea) was conducted using a Shodex Asahipak column (NH The enzymatic conversion rate was compared to that of the standard cellulose (without IL-pretreatment) and IL-cellulose reconstructed using an antisolvent after dissolution in an ionic liquid. The examination reveals that the IL-cellulose was more quickly and completely hydrolyzed to glucose by commercial cellulases than was the IL-untreated standard cellulose. The enzymatic conversion ratio from IL-cellulose to glucose steadily increased until reaching 100%. The conversion ratio was sharply increased to 85 ± 5% for 8 h hydrolysis and saturated after 24 h of reaction period. However, without IL-pretreatment, the conversion rate from standard cellulose to glucose showed a pattern of very slow increase, and reached only 83 ± 5% after reaction for 366 h ( Cellulose is efficiently protected against chemical hydrolysis by the tight packing of cellulose chains in micro fibrils. Consequently, hydrolysis of cellulose typically requires extreme pretreatment processes that utilize a dilute acid, steam explosion at a high solid concentration, a hydrothermal (hot water) process, ‘organosolv’ (organic acid solvents in an aqueous phase), ammonia fiber explosion (AFEX), or strong alkali. Mechanical treatments such as hammer and ball milling are also used As an alternative strategy, the pretreatment of cellulose using an IL can effectively reduce the crystallinity of the cellulose to permit enzymatic hydrolysis at low enzyme concentrations; hence, it substantially accelerates the rate of enzymatic hydrolysis and increases the yield of fermentable sugars Reconstruction of the cello-oligomers, followed by precipitation with the aid of an antisolvent (chloroform), revealed that the yield of soluble cello-oligomers from cellulose depolymerization was 81.1% under 81.3% conversion, and that recovery was 99.8% when treated with 1.5% AMB at 100 °C for 1 h ( If the process is terminated at the right time, cellulose undergoes selective depolymerization to yield cellulose fragments ideally suited for further processing by such as enzymatic hydrolysis. However, if the reaction is continued over too long a time, the soluble cello-oligomers are further broken down. This results in a variety of by-products of small molecular size because the solid acids are powerful catalysts for the hydrolysis of cellulose dissolved in an ionic liquid. Hydrolysis of cellulose requires severe conditions, such as the use of dilute sulfuric acid at high temperatures. However, cellulose Hydrolysis of cellulose requires severe conditions, such as physical (mechanical comminution and hydrothermolysis), chemical (ozonolysis, acid hydrolysis, alkaline hydrolysis, oxidative delignification, and organosolv process), combined (acid catalyzed steam-explosion, ammonia fiber explosion, and CO Various types of resins functionalized with sulfonic groups (-SO However, the high solubility of sugars in ionic liquids makes sugar extraction extremely difficult, which is a severe disadvantage for practical application of the system using homogeneous conditions Cello-oligomers precipitated by the addition of chloroform without water to the cellulose/ionic liquid solution, contains glucose polymers of various lengths. If the cello-oligomers are dissolved in the water, cello-oligomers longer than seven anhydrous glucose units (AGU) should be precipitated from the water but glucose and cello-oligomers of 2–6 AGU will remain dissolved in the water The amount of glucose continuously increased via intermediates during the entire reaction time, and the degradation profile of total cello-oligomer was monitored using HPLC analysis after final saccharification by the single enzyme β-1,4- Moreover, when the amounts of substrates supplied were equal supplication, the enzyme β-1,4- In the case of enzymatic hydrolysis with provision of the same amount of substrate, the substrate was hydrolyzed to glucose by only this enzyme (the new glucohydrolase) without cellobiohydrolase or exocellulase. At the beginning of the reaction, the enzyme released detectable levels of glucose within 10 min, regardless of the oligosaccharide substrates. When incubated with cellotriose, both glucose and cellobiose were released within 10 min. As the incubation progressed to 360 min, 1.081 mg of cellobiose was subsequently hydrolyzed to 0.979 mg of glucose (90.5%). The 1.339 mg of cellotriose was then hydrolyzed to cellobiose, and the cellobiose to 1.216 mg of glucose (90.9%). After 360 min, 83.9, 86.5, and 85.9% of the cellotetraose, cellopentaose, and cellohexaose, respectively, had been reduced to glucose in the same manner. HPLC results reveal increasing glucose and decreasing substrate quantities via intermediates ( The body of scientific information on cellulose-hydrolyzing enzyme systems has expanded dramatically in recent years. The β-glucosidases have some activity on substrates longer than cellobiose, and the enzyme was classified as a glucohydrolase as it showed a preference for larger substrates The suitability of Ggh for cellulose degradation has been reported Traditionally, three enzyme classes must be present in the cellulose hydrolysis system in order to produce glucose. According to the standard endo-, exo-synergy model, EG acts randomly along the chain, producing new attack sites for the CBH to act as exo-enzymes, liberating cellobiose as their main product. Then, β-glucosidases convert the intermediate cellobiose into two glucose molecules by hydrolysis of β-glucosidic linkages One model, characterized by the wood-eating cockroach In this study, we proposed a method for extraction of sugar from an ionic liquid using the antisolvent chloroform. All of the cello-oligomers precipitated by an antisolvent can be used as substrates of the traditional three enzyme system (endo-, exoglucanase, and β-glucosidase). Also, all of these cello-oligomers provide an ideal entry point into advanced value chains for biorefinery, starting from cellulose as a sustainable feedstock available in most parts of the world in very large amounts. In addition, optimizing the recycling system of the ionic acid could reduce production costs because the ionic acid is very expensive. This is the primary reason for limiting the use of ionic acids despite their beneficial characteristics (powerful solvent and electrically conducting fluid). Various types of ionic acids might be applied to this system because they can be tailor made Nevertheless, further research for recovery and reuse of all components of the reaction system (i.e., IL, enzyme, catalyst), including operational stability studies, should be conducted We developed a new concept for chemo-enzymatic saccharification of cellulose using solid catalyst in ionic liquid followed by treatment with a single enzyme. This research improves the core technology for depolymerization and hydrolysis of cellulose as the first step in biorefinery This study was supported by grant