Cobalt and manganese have been the subject of individual separation studies because their fields of application are different. However, this study shows that high-value products can be manufactured in the form of a cobalt-manganese-bromide (CMB) liquid catalyst by simultaneously recovering cobalt and manganese. Na-bis-(2,4,4-tri-methyl-pentyl)phosphinic acid was employed in order to manufacture the CMB liquid catalyst from the spent catalyst generated from petroleum chemistry processes. The pH-isotherm, degree of saponification of solvent and separation factor values were investigated. ΔpH50 and separation factor values show that Co and Mn can be separated from impurities such as Mg and Ca. Further, the extraction stages and organic/aqueous ratio isotherms were investigated using counter-current simulation extraction batch tests. To prepare CMB from a loaded organic phase obtained in a stripping study using hydrogen bromide, the Co and Mn were completely stripped and concentrated by a factor of 6 using a 2M hydrogen bromide solution. When compared with manufactured and commercial CMB, the CMB liquid catalyst could be produced by supplying a shortage of Mn in the form of manganese bromide. Finally, the method of manufacture of CMB was subjected to a real pilot plant test.Many researchers have been interested in the recovery of cobalt from secondary resources such as spent catalysts or Li-ion batteries containing cobalt because of the economic value of cobalt and from an environmental perspective considering cobalt toxicity. However, spent catalysts or Li-ion batteries contain not only Co but also Mn and other metals. It follows that individual separation and recovery of Mn and Co are not easy because their physical and chemical behaviors are similar. The acid extractants typically employed in hydrometallurgy, such as di-(2-ethylhexyl)phosphoric acid (D2EHPA), bis-(2,4,4-tri-methyl-pentyl)phosphinic acid (Cyanex 272) and 2-ethylhexyl phosphonic acid mono-2-ethylhexyl ester (PC88A), preferentially extract manganese rather than cobalt CMB liquid catalysts containing cobalt, manganese and bromine are used for the catalytic oxidation of The sample, which was precipitated through a series of processes, was kindly supplied by the CMB manufacture plant in Korea ( The commercial extractant bis(2,4,4-trimethylpentyl)phosphinic acid (Cyanex 272) was supplied by Cytec Inc. and was used without further purification. Commercial grade extra-pure kerosene (bp 180–270 To prepare the feed solution, leaching tests were conducted at different concentrations of H The two phases were brought into contact by rapid stirring, and the pH (measured by a Thermo ORION 5 STAR instrument) was controlled by small additions of 5 In the countercurrent extraction and stripping experiment, a shakeout test was carried out using a separation funnel, and the raffinate and stripping aqueous samples were analyzed. All analyses of aqueous samples were performed using an atomic absorption spectrometer (Perkin Elmer Model 400), and bromine was analyzed by ion chromatography (Dionex ICS-3000). In the real pilot plant test, a leaching test was conducted with 1 As seen from The composition of the spent CMB precipitate is listed in The pH isotherm results show the extraction behavior of metals and the degree of separation at different pH values. In this experiment ( However, it is known that extractants such as phosphoric, phosphonic, phosphinic and carboxylic acids undergo polymerization or self-association in organic diluents. Thus, the extraction reaction of divalent metals by Cyanex 272 can be represented by Eqs. The distribution and separation factor values were calculated on the basis of results obtained from the reaction between metals and saponified solvent. The distribution coefficient values are listed in The separation factor values ( The Mc Cabe-Thiele diagram, obtained from O/A ratio isotherm experiments, shows expectations and requirements for the extraction stage and for mass balance. In this study, the extraction stage required two stages for the recovery of Co and Mn, with O/A Based on these data, in terms of the expected mass balance in the mixer-settler in the first of stage of extraction, 8.2 To confirm the predicted result of the McCabe-Thiele diagram, counter-current batch simulation extraction tests were carried out with 0.88 To re-manufacture CMB liquid catalysts, stripping experiments were conducted using HBr. Based on the batch test, the method of manufacture of CMB was subjected to the real pilot plant test. In the leaching process, the leaching reactor was 1 In the solvent extraction process, the mixer-settler was composed of a 10.5-L mixer zone and a 62.8-L settler zone. The operating conditions are listed in From Mn was completely extracted in the third stage, implying that Cyanex 272 prefers Mn to Co. Interestingly, the concentrations of Ca and Mg were higher than Ca and Mg in the feed solution at the first, second and third stages. This implies that Cyanex 272 prefers Co and Mn to Ca and Mn, and the capacity of Cyanex 272 to extract valuable metals at different concentrations of solvent and pH was limited. Thus, at the third stage, the organic phase containing 4271 The re-manufacture of CMB liquid catalyst from spent CMB generated in the petrochemical industry, was investigated by a hydrometallurgical route. To manufacture CMB, the pH isotherm and saponification study showed that Co and Mn could be recovered from Ca and Mg, as the ΔpH A feature of this study is the simultaneous recovery of Co and Mn. This process is very simple and easy, as many researchers have reported the recovery of Co and Mn by solvent extraction, even though these are individual recoveries of Co and Mn. Thus, this study shows the utility of Co and Mn for high-value products such as liquid catalysts by simultaneously recovering Co and Mn without individually recovering Co and Mn. Additionally, the real pilot plant test demonstrated the re-manufacture of the liquid catalyst from the spent CMB catalyst. Therefore, this study presents a new method of recovery and a new field of applications of Co and Mn from the point of view of industrial waste. This study was supported by the R&D Center for Valuable Recycling (Global-Top Environmental Technology Development Program) funded by the