Copolymers based on d,l-lactide (D,L-LA) and ethylene brassylate, with EB molar contents ranging from 3 to 39%, were synthesized by ring-opening polymerization at 130 °C using triphenyl bismuth. The poly (D,L-LA-co-EB) presented a random distribution of sequences (R→1), resulting in a fully amorphous structure with TgS between −17 and 43 °C that exhibited upgraded thermal stability and a final degradation temperature of ∼450°, which was approximately 100 °C higher than that observed for PDLLA. The incorporation of EB led to mechanical behaviour with improved flexibility and ductility, compared to polylactides. Moreover, the impact was greater than that provided by other monomers such as ε-caprolactone or δ-valerolactone. A macrolactone molar content of only 5% was enough to increase the elongation at break from 2 to 87% but its elastic modulus remained around 1 GPa, whereas the copolymer with 16% EB (Tg at 17 °C) displayed a clear elastomeric curve with secant modulus of 2.0 MPa and a tensile strength of 0.3 MPa at 1400% of strain (when the specimens did not break). Likewise, the disordered chain microstructure distribution of these copolymers with short sequence lengths of L-LA, D-LA and EB allowed high degradation rates (KMw) in the range of 0.055–0.062 per day, with a maximum KMw for the copolyester containing 9% of EB. In contrast, PDLLA and the 97:3 D,L-LA-co-EB copolymer, owing to their high resistance to water uptake and their packed and rigid amorphous phase, showed degradation velocities of only 0.012 and 0.021 per day, values that are slightly higher than that of poly (l-lactide) whose rate is 0.011 per day.Of all polylactides, poly (D, The most common strategy to enhance the ductility of inherent brittle polylactides is through copolymerization with a complementing monomer that brings flexibility to the polymer chain and disrupts the arrangement of the lactide blocks. Mainly ε-caprolactone Up to nowadays the copolymerization of ethylene brassylate has been barely studied. PEB was first synthesized in 1999 using lipase enzymes but low molecular weights were obtained In addition, films of D,L-LA-co-EB copolymers with lactide molar contents ranging from 100 to 61% were prepared for mechanical testing at room temperature (21 °C) and at human body temperature (37 °C). Finally, an  Statistical copolymers from Proton and carbon nuclear magnetic resonance ( 200-300 μm films were prepared by pressure melting at 175 °C followed by water quenching. From these films repetitive square samples for the The mechanical properties were determined via tensile tests with an Instron 5565 testing machine at a crosshead displacement rate of 10 mm min Static contact angles were recorded on the films using a VCA 2500 XE system (AST, Billerica, MA, USA) before carrying out the degradation study. At least five nanopure water drops (5 μL) were deposited on different parts of each sample. For the The exponential relationship between molecular weight and degradation time for biodegradable polyesters degrading under bulk degradation was used to compare the degradation rate of the studied copolymers: The surface erosion of one of the materials (D,L-LA-EB 93) during the first 56 days of the study was investigated by means of Field Emission Scanning Electron Microscopy (FE-SEM). The dry samples were sputter-coated with a thin layer of gold in an Emitech K550× and observed in a Hitachi SEM S-4800 N. The voltage used was 15.0 kV and the working distance was 7.6 mm with a magnification of 100 × . The molecular weights of the polymers were determined by GPC using a Waters 1515 GPC device equipped with two Styragel columns (10 The thermal properties of the polymers were studied on a DSC 2920 (TA Instruments). Samples of 6–9 mg were heated from −50 °C to 125 °C at 20 °C min Thermal degradation was studied under nitrogen by means of thermogravimetric analysis (TGA) into a TGA model Q50-0545 (TA Instruments). Samples of 10–15 mg were heated from room temperature to 500 °C at a heating rate (β) of 5 °C min  As can be seen in The calculus of the molar composition of the   Three or four peaks can be distinguished in the DTG curves of the D,L-LA-co-EB copolymers. The first peaks found under 350 °C were attributed to the decomposition of lactide-rich sequences but most of the ethylene brassylate was degraded during different stages of depolymerization at 360 °C and 425 °C, which is in accordance with the trend observed for the EB homopolymer. Reports state that PEB degrades within a range of 350 to 480 °C The mechanical properties of the 200–300 μm thick films obtained from the It is worth mentioning the curves of D,L-LA-EB 95, D,L-LA-EB 93 and D,L-LA-EB 91, which belong to the compositions that underwent the most important changes in mechanical performance. Hence, just a 5% increase in EB was enough to raise the elongation at break of the copolymers to 87%, but a macrolactone molar content of 7% brought about an increase in strain recovery from 56.6% to values higher than 94%. With regard to D,L-LA-EB 93, it displayed secant modulus of 385.2 MPa, ultimate tensile strength of 6.8 MPa and 284% of elongation at break. Meanwhile, D,L-LA-EB 91 underwent an appreciable drop in its stress related properties (22.2 MPa of secant modulus, no yield point was observed and it had a tensile strength at break of 3.5 MPa). Likewise, it must also be stated that at EB contents higher than 9% the ductility of the copolymers was significantly high with all the materials showing elongations at break higher than 623%. The flexibility and ductility provided by the ethylene brassylate units were higher with respect to other lactones such as ε-caprolactone (ε-CL) or δ-valerolactone (δ-VL) The mechanical testing results at 21 °C together with the results of the D,L-LA-co-EB copolymers at 37 °C are summarized in An With short average sequence lengths of EB, L-LA or D-LA, the polymers in this study, just as poly (D, Throughout the entire study, D,L-LA-EB 84 and D,L-LA-EB 91 presented a single T The enthalpic relaxation peaks observed in the D,L-LA-co-EB copolymers with lower contents of ethylene brassylate are characteristic of polylactides. The polymer chains of poly (D,   The degradation kinetics of polyesters are dominated by water attacking the ester bonds so the polymers that displayed the lowest values of water absorption usually experienced the slowest degradation rates. The Poly (D, The ethylene brassylate units, with a lower proportion of hydrolyzable ester groups, are more hydrophobic than the lactyl ones. However, all the poly (D,L-LA-co-EB) displayed faster degradation rates than PDLLA owing to their higher degree of chain mobility in the amorphous phase and their more disordered chain microstructure, with shorter unit average sequence lengths. Therefore, D,L-LA-EB 97 presented a K The changes in thermal properties, water uptake and molecular weight loss of the polymer films were reflected in the morphological appearance of the degradation remnants. Finally, it should also be highlighted that major differences were found between the sample morphologies of PDLLA and the ethylene brassylate copolymers. In this research study ethylene brassylate has been introduced as a comonomer to lactide in order to obtain copolymers with enhanced thermal resistance, biodegradability and mechanical compliance, when compared to polylactides. In this study, poly ( The D,L-LA-co-EB copolymers showed a random distribution of sequences ( The authors are thankful for funds from the The following is the supplementary data related to this article: Supplementary data related to this article can be found at