Periostin is a 90kDa secreted protein, originally identified in murine osteoblast-like cells, with a distribution restricted to collagen-rich tissues and certain tumors. In this paper, we first analyzed the expression of periostin mRNA and protein in human fetal osteoblasts (hFOB) and human osteosarcoma (hOS) cell lines by RT real-time PCR and Western blot, respectively. The hFOB 1.19 and three hOS (MHM, KPDXM and Eggen) showed highly variable periostin mRNA levels and protein. Second, we showed that the expression of periostin mRNA was inversely related to the cells' abilities to differentiate and mineralize. Then, we investigated the regulation of periostin mRNA in hFOB after siRNA treatment and in mouse primary osteoblasts (mOB) treated with PTH. Knock-down of periostin mRNA, down-regulated PTHrP, but did not affect the expression of other important markers of differentiation such as RUNX2. In addition, periostin mRNA was transiently up-regulated in osteoblasts by PTH. Finally, the localization of periostin and its partially co-localization with collagen 1a1 mRNA and protein was studied in mouse embryos and postnatal pups using in situ hybridization and immunohistochemistry, respectively. In conclusion, the present study provides novel observations related to the expression, distribution and regulation of periostin in bone cells and extracellular matrix.Bone remodeling is dependent on the specific activity of osteoblasts that deposit bone and osteoclasts that resorb it ( Periostin (POSTN/OSF-2), is an 811 amino acid 90 The aim of the present work was to complement and extend previous studies on periostin, regarding pre- and postnatal expression, and to compare its distribution in mouse and in human cell lines. In addition, we studied periostin expression in osteoblastic cell cultures during mineralization and the possible effect of its knock-down on relevant osteoblastic markers. We also studied the regulation of periostin by PTH, since our previous data showed an increase of periostin mRNA in bone biopsies from patients with primary hyperparathyroidism ( RT real-time PCR and Western blot techniques were used to analyze periostin mRNA and protein expression in KRIB, 788T, KPDXM, Eggen, TPXM, MHM and SaOS-2 human osteosarcoma (hOS) cells and in the human fetal osteoblast (hFOB) 1.19 cell line. The use of RT real-time PCR demonstrated no expression of periostin mRNA in KRIB, 788T, TPXM (data not shown) and SaOS-2 cell lines and consistent differences in the mRNA levels in Eggen, KPDXM, MHM and hFOB 1.19 cells. More specifically, Eggen, KPDXM and MHM expressed periostin mRNA 2, 4 and 7 times higher than hFOB 1.19, respectively ( A possible correlation between the periostin mRNA expression and the mineralization ability of different osteoblastic cells was investigated using the von Kossa (VK) (mineralization nodules) and Alizarin red (AR) (calcium content) staining comparing the positive cells with the total number. The results are shown in Due to the limited life span of transfected siRNA, we used the hFOB 1.19 cell line to study the effect of the down-regulated periostin mRNA after incubation for 3 We also observed in primary mOB a transient, but significant (*p-value < The periostin ( Earlier studies of periostin ( As a unifying hypothesis, we suggest that periostin is necessary in bone to retard premature deposition of mineralization nodules on collagen I before it is modified/remodeled. An early ossification in the absence of periostin in genetically modified mice will disturb the normal growth and result in dwarfism as it will impair tooth eruption, because the periodontal ligament is not remodeled. We also wanted to study the down-stream effects of periostin silencing using the siRNA technique. Due to the short period of siRNA efficacy within the cells, we decided to knock-down the periostin mRNA in hFOB 1.19 instead of human osteosarcoma cells since the first mineralized spontaneously within days in a temperature-dependent manner, while the second required at least 3 Since we found that periostin is regulated by PTH in mouse osteoblastic cells and in humans ( Integrins are receptors able to mediate signaling to the nucleus upon ligand binding and thereby regulate expression of other genes ( Precise anatomical localization of periostin may help to understand functionality and it is consistent with the present hypothesis of the role of periostin in bone. We therefore studied the periostin mRNA localization by A late differentiation marker like the alkaline phosphatase (ALP) does not co-localize in P3 old mouse sections ( In conclusion, our studies show that periostin is a PTH regulated ECM protein, partly co-localizing with collagen 1a1, and we hypothesize that periostin enables collagen to be modified/remodeled so that the mineralization process is not started prematurely. C57BL6 mice were kept in local animal facilities following FELASA guidelines, and all animal procedures were approved by the Committee for Animal Research in Norway. Primary mouse osteoblast (mOB) cultures were derived from P3 mice of both genders and prepared following a protocol described by The hFOB 1.19 and SaOS-2 cell lines were purchased from ATCC (LGC Standards AB, Borås, Sweden), while the KPDXM, Eggen, TPXM, KRIB, 788T and MHM human osteosarcoma (hOS) cell lines were obtained from The Norwegian Radium Hospital, Oslo. All hOS, except KRIB, were cultured in RPMI 1640 medium supplemented with antibiotics, 2.5 Total RNA was isolated from cell cultures using TRIzol® Reagent (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA) and further purified using the RNeasy kit (Qiagen, Solna, Sweden) to remove genomic DNA and organic components. The RNA quality was checked using the Bioanalyzer and verified by agarose gel electrophoresis. 1 Total proteins (20–40 hFOB 1.19 and four human osteosarcoma (hOS) cell lines (KPDXM, Eggen, MHM and SaOS-2) were plated in 9.6 Four siGENOME™ SMART pool® siRNA duplexes specific for periostin were designed and purchased from Dharmacon (Lafayette, CO). Sub-confluent cultures of hFOB 1.19 were seeded into 6-well plates and grown at 34 Primary mOB were cultured as in Bodies from embryonic day (ED) 16.5 mice were fixed in freshly prepared 4% paraformaldehyde, (PFA)-phosphate-buffered saline (PBS, pH 7.4) by standard procedures for paraffin embedding. Tissue sections (5 Bodies from mouse postnatal day 3 (P3) were fixed in freshly prepared 4% PFA and cryoprotected in 20% sucrose before sectioning. Cryosections were prepared using a Leica CM3050S cryostat (Leica Microsystems GmbH, Wetzlar, Germany) and stored as floating sections. All sections were subjected to 1% H Cryostat sections were rinsed in PBS and incubated in 1M ethanolamine (pH 7.4) for 10 All experiments were carried out three times in triplicates and the results are expressed as mean We are grateful to Dr Ø. Bruland (The Norwegian Radium Hospital, Oslo) for kindly providing us with the 788T, TPXM, KPDXM, Eggen and MHM human osteosarcoma cell lines. This work was financially supported by the 