The conversion of biomass to polymers has considerable economic and environmental value. Range of advanced methodologies to produce polymers has been investigated. This allowed redesigning of new value chains starting from the desired product properties and resulting in a great potential for sustainable production processes and products. Lignin, hemicellulose, and cellulose are the three most important plant-derived raw materials since their waste streams can be utilized. Depending on the type, range of processing technologies such as fractionation, gasification, and fermentation can be implemented as standalone or as a combination to convert monomers into polymers.
               This chapter will discuss concept of biorefinery and other processing approaches to process a range of biomass-derived polymers.The conversion of biomass to polymers has considerable economic and environmental value. Range of advanced methodologies to produce polymers has been investigated. This allowed redesigning of new value chains starting from the desired product properties and resulting in a great potential for sustainable production processes and products. Lignin, hemicellulose, and cellulose are the three most important plant-derived raw materials since their waste streams can be utilized. Depending on the type, range of processing technologies such as fractionation, gasification, and fermentation can be implemented as standalone or as a combination to convert monomers into polymers. In recent times, the concept of biorefinery has simplified bioconversion of biomass. A concept of biorefinery came into existence in which a biomass is treated and converted into its end products. This approach supports the development of technology that can minimize or eliminate waste resulting from biomass processing, and thus converting each waste stream into a by-product stream. A biorefinery approach involves multistep processes [ Step 1: involves treating the precursor-containing biomass to make it more amenable for further processing. This step is conventionally referred as pretreatment. Step 2: Following pretreatment, the biomass components are subject to a combination of biological and/or chemical treatments. Step 3: The outputs from this pretreatment step (specialty chemicals or reducing sugars) could be further converted to chemical building blocks for further processing uses. Lignocellulosic biomass is the most abundant and biorenewable biomass on earth and has a critical importance. It has been projected as an abundant carbon-neutral renewable source, which can decrease CO Lignocellulosic biomass is mainly composed of three polymers as shown in Cellulose Hemicellulose Lignin together Depending on the type of lignocellulosic biomass, these polymers are organized in complex nonuniform three-dimensional structures to different degrees and varying relative composition [    Lignocellulosic biomass consists of 35%–50% cellulose, 20%–35% hemicellulose, and 10%–25% lignin. Proteins, oils, and ash make up the remaining fraction [ The purpose of lignocellulosic feedstock biorefinery is to refine lignocellulosic biomass into intermediate outputs to be processed into a range of products and bioenergy. Lignocellulosic processing consists of following steps [ Pretreatment of biomass source Fractionation Classical chemical methods Fermentation Ionic liquid-phase reaction Enzymatic transformation During the pretreatment step, native lignocellulosic biomass is converted into cellulose form where hydrolysis is effectively achieved. Pretreatment of lignocellulosic biomass yields materials that can be characterized by cellulose substrate redistribution either as an increase in the accessible cellulose surface area and/or the solubilization of lignin [ Pretreatment approaches can be classified into four categories: Physical Chemical Physiochemical Biological Physical pretreatment techniques include mechanical comminution and ultrasound. This step is of typically lower performance and higher cost. Chemical pretreatment consists of a high degree of selectivity for the biomass component as they degrade but also involve relatively harsh reaction conditions. These conditions may not be ideal in a biorefinery setup due to possible effects on downstream biological processing. Some of the chemical pretreatment processes include: Ozonolysis Dilute and concentrated acid Alkaline and oxidative H Organosolv Physiochemical pretreatment is a combination of physical and chemical steps. In this stage, milder chemical conditions are used but under more extreme operational conditions. This adds to the cost of implementing these techniques in a biorefinery scheme. Some of the different physiochemical pretreatment techniques are as follows: Liquid hot water such as hydrothermolysis, uncatalyzed solvolysis aquasolv Steam explosion such as autohydrolysis with and without chemical addition Ammonia fiber explosion (AFEX) Carbon dioxide explosion The last step is the biological pretreatment route which offers significant advantages such as low chemical and energy use, mild operational conditions, and ease of integration into a consolidating bioprocessing setup [ In this stage, the pretreated biomass feedstock is separated into its core components (cellulose, hemicelluloses, and lignin) such that each individual component may be processed or functionalized. Implementation of cost-effective methods to release soluble sugars from lignocellulosic biomass at an industrial scale is a significant challenge [ It has been shown that cellulose solvents such as concentrated phosphoric acid can completely dissolve cellulose fibers and disrupt the hydrogen bonds that hold together crystalline cellulose, which in turn increase the accessibility of cellulose to cellulase enzymes. Cellulose solvent-based lignocellulosic fractionation (CSLF) technique uses a cellulose solvent, volatile organic solvent, and water to separate lignocellulose at relatively low temperatures and pressures [ The process fractionated lignocellulosic biomass components are based on the difference in solubility of cellulose; hemicellulose; and lignin in the cellulose solvent, organic solvent, and water, respectively. The goal of CSLF technique is the: Decrystallization of cellulose fibers Partial removal of lignin and hemicellulose from the cellulose fraction Relatively modest reaction conditions Ionic liquids (ILs) are organic salts that exist as liquids at low temperatures, often well below 100°C. They have tuneable physiochemical properties, very low vapor pressures, good thermal stability, and unlimited combination of anions and cations that can be used to synthesize ILs. Recent research has shown that both cellulose and lignin can be dissolved in a variety of ILs, and, perhaps more importantly, easily regenerated from these solutions. The regenerated cellulose microstructure can range from amorphous to crystalline based on the regeneration process [ This regenerated cellulose has the same degree of polymerization and polydispersity as the original cellulose. The regeneration of the solute is achieved by precipitation in the presence of an antisolvent (water or methanol) due to preferential solute displacement. This antisolvent can then be stripped from the IL and recovered for reuse. Regenerated cellulose exhibited a significant improvement in hydrolysis rate and glucose formation over untreated cellulose. The improvement in hydrolysis rates is attributed to the slight decrease in the degree of polymerization of both cellulose and hemicellulose, the decrease in the crystallinity of the cellulose, and an increase in accessibility due to lignin separation [ Classical chemical methodology is a chemical approach to build range of block polymers from the biomass sources that will play a significant role in the development of future biorefineries. These methods to derive polymers from biomass involve the conversion of biological fatty acids to polymer building blocks. Cargill, in conjunction with the Kansas Polymer Research Centre, has chemically converted triglyceride carbon-carbon double bonds to alcohol and methoxy groups, leading to a bio-derived polyol (BiOH). This methodology can be applied to derive other industrial chemicals: Levulinic acid is industrially prepared from biotechnology-based routes, using wood processing and agricultural wastes via conversion of hexose sugars in acid Lignin can be converted to xylene, benzene, toluene, or other aromatic compounds Classical chemical methodology includes: Catalysis Condensation polymerization Catalysts are used to transform biomass into range of high-value chemicals. There are processes that involve use of catalyst. One such process involves the use of Fischer-Tropsch chemistry on pyrolyzed biomass. For example, catalysts, including Fischer-Tropsch synthesis, have been used in the production of biofuels from palm. Additionally, platinum catalyzed aqueous-phase reforming of glycerol has demonstrated high yields of hydrogen fuel, with low CO content, for use in fuel cells. Biocatalysis is also widely used in the production of high-value products such as fine chemicals and pharmaceutical products. In this process, the biocatalysts undergo selectively catalyzed reactions depending on the desired products. They also help reduce energy consumption and waste generation while synthesizing products that are not possible via chemical reactions as well as development of specialty chemicals [ Condensation polymerization is used to polymerize bio-derived monomers using immobilized enzyme catalysts. Polycondensation of sorbitol or glycerol with diacids is performed using commercially available lipase catalyst. This reaction can be either chemically or biologically derived. By using this approach it has been demonstrated to reduce reaction temperatures and energy consumption, relative to traditional chemical polymerization processing, while also controlling branching during polymerization [ Fermentation is a widely used technique to produce industrial chemicals. An increasing push to integrate into biorefinery to move this technology forward is becoming a reality. One example is the production of succinic acid through fermentation. Salts of succinic acid can be derived through the fermentation of glucose, which fixes carbon dioxide. Since most microorganisms used in industrial fermentation are not tolerant of acidic conditions, the process is neutralized. These salts then undergo more conventional chemical processing such as separation and recovery where they are separated from the microorganisms and then dissolved in an acid solution to form succinic acid [ Other example includes production of 1,3-propanediol through the fermentation of glycerol. Corporation such as Genencor is developing low-cost route of producing 1,3-propanediol by modifying natural routes. 1,3-propanediol is a key building block in production of polypropylene terephthalate [ Another example is the production of polymerized esters. They are typically used in adhesives and coatings. Lactic acid, which can be chemically converted to several important chemicals including methyl lactate, lactide, and polylactic acid, can be produced through fermentation. The hydroxyl and carboxyl groups present in lactic acid make it amenable for conversion into a wide range of value-added products [ Ionic liquid-phase reaction in biomass processing has the potential for functional additives to be added directly in solution via dissolution or dispersion before or after cellulose dissolution. For this reason, incorporating this technology into biorefinery will help in reducing the number of processing steps and the corresponding cost and power requirements. The ionic liquid-phase has also been used to stabilize catalysts during reaction. Additionally, polymerization reactions involving cellulose and ILs have been reported in recent literature. The IL has served both as a means to prepare a cellulose-derived initiator for atom-transfer radical polymerization, as a medium for cellulose polymerization reactions, and as a polymerizable composite with cellulose in radical polymerization [ Extraction is a useful tool to synthesize value-added products within biological species, both plant matter and microorganisms. There has been significant development in efficient extraction technologies which needs to be implemented into biorefineries early on to allow for extraction before further processing. For example, commodity chemicals have been directly extracted from biomass via conventional chemical extraction techniques. One of the most notable chemicals derived in this manner is ferulic acid, extracted in high percentage yields from corn fiber. Ferulic acid is a chemical feedstock used in the production of fine chemicals such as vanillin and guaiacol. DuPont has been able to extract a monomer from tulips, α-methylenebutyrolactone or tulipalin A, which polymerizes in a manner similar to methyl methacrylate and also has favorable durability and refractive index [ Direct biological conversion is a significant factor producing polymers completely within microbial cells. Family of polyhydroxyalkanoates (PHAs) is a very good example. This technology is incorporated into a biorefinery as a separate processing stream. Carbon-limited feeding strategy in some organisms can be utilized to produce PHA without limiting essential growth nutrients. There are other areas which have seen increase in the development of enzymatic transformation activities by: Genetically modifying plants for direct PHA production. Advances in genome sequencing provide the foundation for optimizing PHA synthesis and for developing the ability to produce PHA polymers with a range of properties. Recent studies have reported that PHAs can be synthesized using a forestry-based biorefinery approach with lignocellulosic process streams, including hemicelluloses hydrolysates, levulinic acid derived from cellulose, and tall oil fatty acids from kraft pulping, being employed as the carbon sources for the bacteria As an alternative, use of microbial consortia to produce PHAs from different carbon sources has been researched. For example, industrial waste from methanol-enriched pulp and paper mill foul condensate, fermented municipal primary solids, and biodiesel have been shown to yield PHAs when passed through batch bioreactors containing a mixed microbial consortium from municipal activated sludge [  Biogas is a mixture of gases produced from biomass in an anaerobic process. It is composed of methane (50%–80%), carbon dioxide (15%–40%), nitrogen (4%), and hydrogen sulfide (1%) with traces of hydrogen, oxygen, and carbon monoxide. Anaerobic digestion consists of four steps [ Hydrolysis: This is the an anaerobic digestion phase where complex organic molecules are broken down into simpler organic molecules. Acidogenesis: This is where simple organic molecules are converted into fatty acids. Acetogenesis: This is where fatty acids are converted into acetate. Methanogenesis: This is where molecules that have been converted into a suitable food source for methanogenic microorganisms that are converted into methane by those organisms. A typical biogas plant is shown in Liquid manure storage and feeding system for solid biomass Disinfection unit if necessary Pit storage digesters with stirrers and foil covering Storage tank or lagoon Motor or cogeneration unit At this step, following are the list of activities: Slurry and small amount of solid biomass are stored temporarily in the liquid manure storage and if necessary they can be diluted or mixed. Codigestion plants feeding liquid material and a high amount of solid biomass need special feeding systems depending on the solid materials. The liquid material is pumped from the liquid store into the digester. Recommended that the feeding takes place continuously. At this step, animal by-products or food wastes that are used gets disinfected. The recommended time is for 1  The heated digester is the main item of the plant. The digester must be water and gas proof and opaque. Special mixers be installed that will ensure a well-mixed and homogeneous material in the digester so that bacteria and substrate are in close contact to get a high gas yield. An over and under-pressure protection system and foil covering should be integrated in the digester. The storage digester should be covered with a foil to utilize further produced biogas.  When the substrate is digested, it is pumped to the storage tank and can be perfectly used as a fertilizer for farmland. The produced biogas is cooled and cleaned from biogas ingredients such as hydrogen sulfide. Cooling and cleaning is highly recommended because hydrogen sulfide when interacts with water can produce highly corrosive sulfuric acid. The last unit is the motor or cogeneration unit. Here, the gas is finally used to produce electricity and heat constantly. There are two important process parameters that indicate technical and biological stability of the biogas plant [ Hydraulic retention time (HRT) Volume load or organic loading rate Hydraulic retention time HRT is the average time the added material remains in the fermenter before being pumped in the storage tank. It is calculated by the utilizable volume of the digester and the amount of organic material loaded daily. The recommended retention time is typically 35–80 days, depending on the substrate and plant components. Volume load or organic loading rate Volume load also known as the organic loading rate is weight of the organic dry solids loaded per digester volume and unit of time. The organic loading rate is important for the plant components especially, mixer and for the bacteria. Organic loading rate greater than 4.0 Syngas is a gas that contains hydrogen (H The conversion of biomass into a combustible gas is a two-stage process: In the first stage, pyrolysis takes place at temperatures below 600°C. This is when volatile components contained within the biomass such as organic compounds, hydrogen, carbon monoxide, tars, and water vapor are released. Pyrolysis also leaves a solid residue called char. In the second stage, the char generated during the first stage is reacted with steam or burnt in a restricted quantity of air or oxygen to produce further combustible gas. Mixture of carbon monoxide, carbon dioxide, methane, hydrogen, and various hydrocarbons are produced by the gasification process. These can be used directly in gas turbines, and boilers, or used as precursors for synthesizing a wide range of other chemicals. These gases can also be further treated to result in high purity gases that can be burned directly for cooking or heat supply, or used in secondary conversion devices, such as internal combustion engines or gas turbines, for producing electricity or shaft power [ Ethanol is the most important C2 platform molecule produced from biomass. Ethanol is significantly used as biofuel; either directly blended with gasoline or after conversion of ethyl-tert-butyl ether (ETBE) using iso-butene as a reactant. Ethanol is also used as a solvent, a disinfectant, and as a platform molecule to synthesize chemicals. Ethanol is produced by a fermentation process using mono-, di-, and polysaccharides as the feedstock. Monosaccharides such as glyceraldehyde, xylose, ribose, glucose, and fructose consist of single sugars bound together. One molecule of disaccharide results from a chemical reaction in which a new bond is formed between two monosaccharides after removal of one molecule. Polysaccharides are chains of bonded monosaccharides molecules, which result from dehydration synthesis. Polysaccharides composed of similar subunits known as monomers. Starch and cellulose are polymers composed of monomers of glucose. Polysaccharides must be decomposed in disaccharides and/or monosaccharides through hydrolysis before fermentation to ethanol [  Batch fermentation involves adding hydrolysate, yeasts, nutrients, and other ingredients at the beginning of the step. Batch process involves adding one or more inputs as fermentation progresses. In a continuous process, ingredients are constantly added and the products are removed from the fermentation vessels [ Fermentation of sucrose is performed using commercial yeast such as Then, another enzyme, zymase, also present in the yeast, converts the glucose and the fructose into ethanol and CO The remaining flow from the distillation column, known as vinasse or stillage, can be valorized to produce coproducts, which may include process steam and electricity, products for feeding animals, and other valuable by-products. High viscosity of oils causes operational problems in the diesel engine when it is used as fuel. They are therefore converted to biodiesel, bringing their kinematic viscosity closer to fossil-based fuel [ Transesterification is the reaction where triglycerides are transformed into biodiesel [ A schematic of biodiesel production from low free fatty acids (FFA) containing feedstock via base catalyst transesterification is shown in Quality of the biodiesel depends on: Quality of the feedstock Materials used in the process Transesterification process Efficiency of transesterification process depends on moisture content in alcohol and feedstock. It is recommended that the moisture content should be less than 0.5% of FFA. Moisture in alcohol can lead to a reaction with alkyl esters, triglycerides, diglycerides, and monoglycerides further forming FFA. These fatty acids would then need to be pretreated before transesterification process. Otherwise, during transesterification, they can form soap and causes separation problems in the biodiesel production process [ There are several technologies available for the conversion of lignocellulosics to fuel ethanol. Fermentation can follow the hydrolysis or can be simultaneous to it. The main hydrolysis fermentation processes are as follows: Separate hydrolysis and fermentation (SHF) Simultaneous saccharification and fermentation (SSF) Simultaneous saccharification and cofermentation (SSCF) Consolidated bioprocessing (CBP) In the SHF process, pretreated lignocelluloses are hydrolyzed to monosaccharides and subsequently formed to ethanol in separate reactors shown in This mode of operation makes it possible to perform hydrolysis and fermentation at their own optimum conditions. The optimum temperature for cellulase is usually between 45°C and 50°C, whereas that of fermenting microorganisms is between 30°C and 37°C [ There are certain disadvantages with this process: Inhibition to cellulase activity by the released sugars, mainly cellobiose; β-glucosidase is, on the other hand, inhibited by released glucose. Prone to microbial contaminations during the hydrolysis process if cellulase preparations are not sterile. In a SSF process, the glucose is consumed immediately by the fermenting microorganism present in the culture. There are several advantages of SSF compared to SHF: SSF avoids end product inhibition since the inhibition effects of cellobiose and glucose to the enzymes are minimized by keeping a low concentration of these sugars in the media. Consequently, results in higher ethanol yields compared to SHF SSF requires lower amounts of enzyme and shows a lower risk of contamination due to the presence of alcohol There are several issues with SSF scheme: There is difference between the optimum temperatures of the hydrolyzing enzymes and fermenting microorganisms Impossible to achieve high substrate loads because of difficulties with mechanical mixing and insufficient mass transfer SSCF is a variation of SSF in which the fermentation of both five- and six-carbon sugars to ethanol is carried out in the same bioreactor as shown in The hemicellulose hydrolyzed during pretreatment and the solid cellulose is not separated after pretreatment. This allows the hemicellulose sugars to convert into ethanol together with the SSF of the cellulose. CBP is a process in which cellulase production, substrate hydrolysis, and pentose and hexose fermentations are accomplished in a single step by cellulolytic microorganisms shown in Some of the CBP are [ Lower production costs, lower capital investment, and higher conversion efficiency Higher hydrolysis rates Ethanol made by fermentation is the most commonly used fuel in transportation. However, a relative high production cost limits its extensive applications [ The concept of high gravity (HG) ethanol fermentation was proposed in the 1980s and successfully applied thereafter, allowing drastic increase of final ethanol concentration from the previous level of 78% (v/v) [ Development of high-performance processes that uses starchy materials consists of the fermentation of HG mashes. During HG fermentation, the solid concentration in the medium exceeds 200 