The presence of aluminosilicate minerals adversely affects the floatability of copper during processing of Sarcheshmeh porphyry ores. In this work, ores containing different types and quantities of aluminosilicate minerals, as well as copper sulfides (i.e., chalcopyrite and chalcocite), were examined in the laboratory to determine how aluminosilicate minerals affect the floatability of copper and to find ways to decrease their unwanted effects. It was shown that ore types that contain muscovite and vermiculite have the greatest effect on the floatability of copper sulfides. To overcome this problem, two reagent strategies were used: (a) dextrin at 100, 200, and 600g/ton and (b) a mixture of dextrin, sodium silicate, and sodium hexametaphosphate (20%, 40%, and 40% by weight, respectively) at 200 and 300g/ton. The reagent mixture (case b) at a dosage of 200g/ton improved the copper recovery and decreased the grade and the recovery of Al2O3 and SiO2 in the flotation concentrate. As an alternative solution, flotation at reduced pulp density (24%) improved the grade and the recovery of copper and molybdenum and decreased the grade and recovery of Al2O3 and SiO2 in comparison to the currently used pulp density (29%) in the Sarcheshmeh flotation plant.Porphyry copper deposits are the world’s main source of copper, molybdenum, and rhenium. They are also a significant source of gold, silver, tin, and a range of by-product metals ( Despite extensive studies of the influence of aluminosilicate minerals on coal flotation ( The presence of aluminosilicate minerals in copper flotation causes different problems, such as (a) loss in recovery, possibly due to the presence of slime coating on air-bubbles or on the mineral surfaces; (b) increases of reagent consumption by fine particles; (c) the transfer of large quantities of slimes/clay minerals into the concentrate during the roughing and scavenging flotation stages, which subsequently requires higher temperatures in the smelting process and difficulties in discharging the slag; (d) increase in the quantities of fine particles in the crushing and grinding circuits; and (e) the flocculation phenomenon in the froth zone (   Sarcheshmeh is a major porphyry copper deposit located in Kerman Province in the southeastern part of Iran. Geologically, it is divided into three zones: oxide, supergene, and hypogene ( The clay minerals that resulted from alteration, along with copper sulfide minerals, are the major mineral phases that are fed to the copper concentrator plant ( In the concentrator plant, after three stages of crushing, the ore is fed to ball mills in closed circuit with cyclones to produce 70% of the product finer than 75 To separate and recover the molybdenite mineral from the copper concentrate, copper sulfide and iron sulfide minerals are depressed and the molybdenite floats. The molybdenite concentrate with the grade between 53% and 55% Mo and the copper sulfide concentrate with the grade of 31% Cu (chalcopyrite chalcocite, and covellite) are recovered as final concentrates with an efficiency of 83-87%, depending on the ore type and the operating conditions ( It is known that aluminosilicate minerals adversely affect the flotation of copper sulfides in the Sarcheshmeh flotation plant; the maximum grade levels of Al The copper ore samples used in this study were prepared from working benches of the Sarcheshmeh copper mine. They represented a range of different alteration and aluminosilicate minerals as well as different feeds to the plant. The samples were divided into four groups based on the amount of Al Crushing with a laboratory Jaw crusher was performed to achieve a product with 100% minus 10 mesh (2000 The first stage of the flotation tests were conducted in a 2.5 In the second stage of the flotation tests, in addition to the reagents used in the standard test, two different reagent strategies, i.e., (a) dextrin with the dosages of 100, 200, and 600 Finally, in the third stage of the flotation tests, different pulp densities were examined to evaluate their effect on Al Wet sieving was used on grinding products and log-linear plot of cumulative% passing versus size was prepared. The results are shown in     According to the above-mentioned results, sample no. 4, which produced high levels of Al Dextrins are water-soluble polysaccharides. They are intermediate products that result from the hydrolytic breakdown of the starch. The adsorption mechanism of starch-type polysaccharides on mineral surfaces is not well understood. It has been proposed that chemical interactions and some type of hydrophobic bonding is responsible for the adsorption of dextrin on mineral surfaces ( In the second stage of the flotation tests, the flotation conditions were adjusted according to the standard flotation tests. Different dosages of dextrin, i.e., 100, 200, and 600   Entrainment is a non-selective process resulting from the recovery of water into the froth concentrate. Fine particles (<30 According to the above-mentioned results, adding dextrin at a dosage of 200 Sodium silicate is used extensively in mineral flotation as a depressant, a dispersant, and as a controlling agent for some soluble ions, such as calcium (  In this stage of the flotation tests, a mixture of dextrin, sodium silicate, and sodium hexametaphosphate reagents (20%, 40%, and 40% by weight, respectively) at 200 and 300    Finally, the optimum dosage of mixed reagents for improving copper recovery and decreasing Al One of the important variables in flotation circuits is pulp density. Although changing the pulp density can affect the capacity of the plant, it may also be effective for decreasing the unwanted effects of aluminosilicate minerals on the flotation circuit. For this purpose, flotation tests at standard reagent dosages and with pulp densities of 29% (Sarcheshmeh rougher flotation plant condition) and 24% were performed. The results are shown in According to  Copper ore that contains aluminosilicate minerals, such as vermiculite and muscovite, can produce a concentrate with low levels of copper grade and recovery and high levels of Al Dextrin at a dosage of 200 The mixture of dextrin, sodium silicate, and sodium hexametaphosphate at a dosage of 200 Reduction of pulp density from 29% to 24% decreased the Al As demonstrated in the current work, dextrin on dosage of 200 Trials using mixture of reagents on the other three samples used in this study (sample nos. 1–3) should be conducted to verify the results. The authors gratefully acknowledge the financial supports provided by R&D division of Sarcheshmeh Copper Complex and Science and Research Branch of Islamic Azad University.