The Density Functional Theory (DFT)-based leaching efficiency of impurity boron from metallurgical grade silicon (MG-Si) by HCl, HNO3, and H2SO4 was investigated. The boron-doped Si(110) surface was selected as the interaction interface, and respective interactions of Cl−, NO3
                     −, and SO4
                     2−
                      with boron were performed. The principle of boron removal by hydrometallurgy was discussed in the context of a theoretical model and a comprehensive explanation for changes in the density of states (DOS) and bond population was provided. Based on the analysis of the effect of interactions on the electronic structure and properties of the boron-doped Si(110) surface, it was found that all three types of acid ions interact strongly with boron and NO3
                     − registers the strongest interaction. The analysis of the bond population of Si–B showed that these bonds are more easily broken by NO3
                     − than by either Cl− or SO4
                     2−, and the formation of B–O bonds is promoted. Furthermore, the effects of the three types of acid agents on the removal of boron from MG-Si were discussed. Acid leaching of porous silicon was performed and the results from inductively coupled plasma (ICP) analysis indicated that the removal efficiency of boron follows the order of HNO3
                     >H2SO4
                     >HCl. In addition, the experimental results concur with those of the calculations.Solar grade silicon (SoG-Si), with higher than 99.9999% purity, is an important material for the production of solar cells. Boron, as an impurity element, reduces the photoelectric conversion efficiency of SoG-Si by accelerating the auger recombination and reducing the lifetime of minority carriers ( Hydrometallurgical purification of MG-Si is an important pretreatment method. The acid leaching efficiency depends strongly on the composition and location of the impurities in the microstructure of the treated silicon. Impurity elements that are located at the grain boundaries are easily removed with hydrometallurgy. However, a previous study ( Unfortunately, these studies did not investigate the interaction mechanism of boron removal. In addition, the existing form of boron in MG-Si is difficult to characterize since the corresponding amounts (typically 10 In this study, the interactions between boron and Cl All calculations were performed using the Cambridge Serial Total Energy Package (CASTEP) based on the Density Functional Theory (DFT) ( Geometry optimizations were performed using the Broyden–Fletcher–Goldfarb–Shanno (BFGS) method ( MG-Si kindly provided by a silicon factory in Yunnan province of China was selected as the starting raw material. Bulk MG-Si was crushed and pulverized by jaw and roll crushers, and then sieved to a size of < To expose impurity boron from the bulk to the surface, MG-Si powder was immersed in a solution of HF, then gradually added HNO Hydrochloric acid (HCl), hydrofluoric acid (HF), nitric acid (HNO Leaching experiments were performed in a glass that was placed in a water bath. 10 The geometric structures of Si(110) B with Cl The interactions of boron with Cl In order to obtain further information about the effect of interactions on the electronic structure and properties of the boron-doped Si(110) surface, the density of states (DOS) and partial DOS (PDOS) were calculated and are displayed in The total density of states (TDOS) and partial DOS (PDOS) of the boron-doped Si(110) surface are shown in  It follows from It can be seen from Comparing The electronic structure of the boron-doped Si(110) surface after interactions can be further analyzed by examining the bond length and population. The Mulliken overlap population is useful in evaluating the nature of bonds in a compound ( It can be seen from The SEM image of the microstructure of the MG-Si before and after etching is shown in The main impurity concentrations in porous silicon powder after leaching are listed in In summary, the experimental results show that HNO The reaction mechanism of boron removal by hydrometallurgy was investigated. A boron-doped Si(110) surface in a MG-Si was chosen as the reaction interface. Interactions between Si(110) B and Cl The effects of using three types of acids – HCl, HNO The work was financially supported by the