Prior studies on synthesis of nanocrystalline elements have discussed the effect of ball milling on lattice parameter, crystallite size, and micro-strain. For elemental milled powders, the anisotropic peak broadening does not change with increasing milling time. However, the effect of alloying addition on the anisotropic behavior of ball milled nanocrystalline powders remains an unexplored area. Here we report the effect of chromium and aluminum addition on the anisotropic behavior of iron in nanocrystalline Fe–20Cr–5Al (wt%) alloy powders synthesized by ball milling. The experimental results show that the anisotropic behavior of iron changes towards isotropic with milling. This change was also correlated to the theoretically calculated anisotropic factor from the change in elastic constant of iron due to milling. Addition of alloying elements exhibited a monotonic rise in the lattice parameter with crystallite size, which was attributed to the excess grain boundary interfacial energy and excess free volume at grain boundaries. Transmission electron microscopy image confirmed the crystallite size and nature of dislocation obtained using modified Williamson-Hall method.In recent years, nanocrystalline materials are being widely investigated due to unique properties like mechanical, physical, and corrosion resistance Nanocrystalline materials, produced by severe plastic deformation such as high-energy ball milling, have shown non-monotonous changes in lattice parameter with crystallite size, an initial lattice contraction followed by a lattice expansion The effect of chromium and aluminum addition on anisotropic behavior of iron in nanocrystalline Fe–20Cr–5Al (wt%) alloy powder synthesized by ball milling is reported in the present study. The WH technique was used to verify the anisotropic behavior of the alloy whereas the crystallite size was determined by modified Williamson-Hall (MWH) method. The change in lattice parameter of alloy with its crystallite size was calculated and this change was correlated with the excess GB interfacial energy and the excess free volume developed in the alloy at grain boundaries owing to nanocrystallization. The nanocrystalline Fe–20Cr–5Al alloy powder was prepared using high-energy planetary ball mill (Pulverisette P-5; Fritsch GmbH, Germany). The starting materials, iron powder (99.9% purity and average particle size < 37 μm) and chromium powder (99.9% purity and average particle size < 28 μm) were obtained from Alfa Aesar while aluminum powder (99.9% purity and average particle size < 1.3 μm) was procured from Hunan Jinhao Aluminum Industrial Co. Ltd, China. As-received powders were milled for composition Fe–20Cr–5Al at 250 rpm for durations up to 20 h, using toluene as the inert medium. The ball-to-powder weight ratio was maintained at 10:1. Mill was periodically stopped for 15 min after every 1 h of milling to avoid excessive temperature of the tungsten carbide vessel. Powder samples were collected at 2, 5, 10, 15, and 20 h of milling to characterize the microstructural changes during milling. As received iron powder was annealed at 900 °C for 10 h into a convention tubular furnace (Model No. HCS/HTF/1000/90-900, Supplier: Heat & Control Systems, Mumbai, India) of capacity 1000 °C and the forming gas (95% Ar + 5% H The microstructural changes in iron at different milling times were determined by XRD, using Rigaku–Smart Lab system (Rigaku Corp, Japan) with Cu Kα radiation (λ = 0.154056 nm), with a step size of 0.01  The grain refinement and development of micro-strain/lattice distortion, due to defects, leads to XRD peak broadening as visible in The elastic modulus of pure iron has identical value of 221 GPa in [100], [112] and [220] crystallographic directions, whereas the elastic moduli in [200] and [310] crystallographic directions are 132 GPa and 154 GPa, respectively The change in elastic modulus of iron due to alloying addition can be ascertained using WH technique. Considering classical WH method, the total peak broadening due to crystallite size (d The effect of alloying element addition on anisotropic behavior of iron can be explained by anisotropic factor, A = 2C Estimation of average crystallite size from WH plot requires drawing a linear fit for the data points in The MWH plots for milled Fe–20Cr–5Al alloy powder after 5 and 20 h of milling are shown in The formation of nanocrystalline Fe–20Cr–5Al alloy powder after 20 h of milling is also confirmed by TEM studies ( The formation of nanocrystalline alloy powder during ball milling is associated with excess interfacial energy due to large grain boundary fraction and excess free volume owing to the growth of vacancies, vacancy clusters, and dislocation density at grain boundaries Nanocrystalline Fe–20Cr–5Al alloy powder was synthesized using high-energy ball milling of elemental powders. The formation of solid solution of aluminum and chromium with iron was observed during ball milling. This led to change in the elastic modulus of iron and, consequently, the anisotropic behavior of iron has tended to transform into isotropic by addition of chromium and aluminum. In addition, it can say that 20 wt% Cr along with 5 wt% Al would not sufficient to change anisotropic behavior of iron into isotropic. XRD analysis of the milled powder using MWH technique illustrated a gradual drop in the average crystallite size to 13 nm and the development of pure edge dislocation in the nanocrystalline alloy powder with milling time. The crystallite size and nature of dislocation, estimated using XRD, for the alloy after 20 h of milling were also confirmed by TEM. A monotonous variation in lattice parameter was observed with crystallite size in nanocrystalline Fe–20Cr–5Al alloy powder.