This paper deals with two separate case studies investigating the froth phase performance and characterisation of two industrial rougher/scavenger flotation circuits. Froth phase performance was quantified using a mass balance approach to estimate froth zone recovery. Measured characteristics of the froth phase included frother solution concentration determined by gas chromatography, and the time taken for an equilibrium froth sample to decay to one-half of its original froth height. The latter measurement is referred to as the ‘froth half-life’ and is strongly linked to froth stability. Special methods and techniques developed to preserve frother in solution and to measure froth half-life are briefly described. The frother type in the first case study was a mixture of straight and branched alcohols, whilst the frother type in the second case study was a mixture of alcohols, aldehydes and triethoxybutane. The first case study focussed on a flotation circuit treating a low grade ore containing only a small fraction of floatable copper sulphide minerals, while the second case study focussed on a flotation circuit treating a higher grade complex sulphide ore containing significant quantities of chalcopyrite, galena, sphalerite and pyrite.
                  It was found that froth zone recovery of valuable mineral generally decreased down-the-bank of the two industrial rougher/scavenger circuits. Moreover, decreases in froth zone recovery significantly limit the overall cell recovery of valuable mineral achievable from the plant scavenger cells. However, the decrease in froth zone recovery could not be linked to the removal of frother from the pulp solution to the concentrate product in the preceding rougher flotation stages. Measurements of residual frother in solution suggested that, approximately, only 5–10% of the added frother was removed into the rougher/scavenger concentrate, with the remainder appearing in the scavenger tailings. This finding suggested there was apparently adequate frother in solution in the scavenger stages.
                  There was, however, a correlation to the froth half-life, with the froth half-life also generally decreasing down-the-bank. A simple, empirical model, based on the froth half-life and froth residence time of gas, is proposed here to predict froth zone recovery. Further, it is proposed that the froth stability, as measured by the froth half-life, is strongly linked to the presence of particles in the froth, with poorly mineralised scavenger froth characterised by a short half-life and, potentially, a low froth zone recovery. The importance of particles on froth stability was confirmed in separately conducted laboratory experiments. These experiments also demonstrated the wide variation in froth stability behaviour between different frother types.In flotation, the transport of hydrophobic particles attached to bubbles from the collection zone of the cell, where particle collection by bubbles occurs, to the concentrate launder is of key importance. Transport takes place via a froth phase in froth flotation. Frother surfactants are principally added to a flotation pulp so that a transient, mineralised froth is formed at the top of the flotation cell, forming the so-called froth phase. A transient froth is a prerequisite for the successful transport of mineral laden bubbles from the pulp zone/froth zone interface to the concentrate launder. It is desirable that the mineralised froth breaks down (i.e., the bubbles collapse or coalesce), once the froth reports to the concentrate launder. A froth which is overly unstable may cause significant loss of valuable mineral from the froth to the pulp phase and, subsequently, to the cell tailing stream. Conversely, an overly stable froth will cause problems in pumping, and may adversely impact mineral separation in subsequent flotation stages. Our research here is focussed on controlling froth stability to allow particle transport to take place, while also ensuring the froth breaks down once it enters the concentrate launder. The recovery of particles attached to bubbles across the froth phase is referred to as froth recovery. Froth recovery can be defined in several ways. However, it is now accepted that the recovery of attached particles across the froth zone is best expressed in terms of the first order rate constants ( This definition also provides an experimental approach to the measurement of froth recovery in which the overall flotation cell rate constant is determined as a function of froth height, or the froth residence time (FRT) of gas ( Both the physical scale of the froth (defined here by FRT) and froth type, exemplified by the froths stability, may control the froth recovery of attached particles. Froth residence time and froth height characterise the physical scale of the froth, whilst the frother type, frother concentration as well as the particle characteristics in the froth (e.g., particle size, particle contact angle, particle loading in the froth) may all control froth stability ( It is the purpose of this paper to determine if decreases in froth recovery in a continuous, industrial flotation separator may be linked to changes in froth stability, and to determine reasons for the change in froth stability with flotation cell number. Froth stability is used here to describe the general phenomena of thin film rupture, bubble coalescence and loss of froth volume. In this work, both the effect of particles contained within the froth, as well as frother type and concentration on froth stability has been investigated. In recent years there has been strong interest in modelling froth zone performance in laboratory flotation cells, in scale-up to a continuous flotation process, and in froth phase assessment in plant cells. Froth phase performance is better understood here in terms of froth recovery, A series of comprehensive sampling surveys were performed at two different major sulphide mineral concentrators located in Australia (Cu circuit— In each case, the objective was to assess froth zone performance, with the sampling conducted in Circuit A in 2001 and Circuit B in 2002, respectively. Briefly, plant flotation cells in the rougher and scavenger banks were operated at different froth depths classified as shallow, intermediate (baseline) and deep, corresponding to short, intermediate and long froth residence times, respectively, through Eq. In addition to the comprehensive sampling surveys, the metallurgical performance of a single flotation cell in the lead/copper rougher flotation bank of Circuit B was also investigated. Three different froth depths, three different air flow rates and three different frother concentrations were employed in the flotation bank in these investigations. The frother concentration in Circuit B was varied from the baseline plant frother addition rate to high and low additions, in order to determine the overall effect of frother concentration on froth recovery. The flotation rate constant, The objective of the flotation bank surveys was to characterise froth performance down-the-bank under standard operating conditions, and to obtain a data set for a single flotation cell under different operating conditions in Circuit B only. The data is used to explore relationships between performance and conditions, i.e., between froth recovery and froth depth, air flow rate and frother concentration. The surveys involved collection of samples from all the major streams down the respective rougher and scavenger flotation banks. Sample collection was performed over a 2-h period, during which four increments were taken at each sampling point. The samples collected from each cell during each survey, included: (a) the feed to the flotation bank (i.e., feed to rougher cell 1), (b) the combined concentrate of the flotation bank, (c) the tailings from the flotation bank, (d) timed lip concentrates from individual cells in the bank, and (e) tailings from each cell in the tested bank. Pulp chemical surveys were also performed in parallel with the main metallurgical surveys to determine frother concentrations in solution in major streams, as well as the distribution (or recovery) of frother down-the-bank. This information is used to complement the metallurgical assessment. Surveys involved collection of samples from all the major streams, which was also extended to both the rougher and cleaner banks of both circuits. Frother in solution in aqueous samples was measured using gas chromatography with flame ionisation detection. Frother balances were made using all the measured chemical assay data, % solids, measured frother assays and, taking as the reference, the feed to the flotation bank. Flowrates of the various slurry streams were obtained by computation. Individual adjustment of the standard deviations of frother assays was necessary to aid the balance and to check the quality of the data. Preliminary work showed that the relevant frothers were stable in solution after sampling, provided the samples were stored in the absence of oxygen and at temperatures less than 3 Froth stability generally refers to the foam decay process, during which time there is no further generation of gas bubbles. Froth decay is indicated by some visible occurrence such as froth volume variation, bubble collapse, or change in the bubble size. In order to quantify the global change of the froth, froth volume variation is recorded as a function of time. The faster the change, the less stable the foam. The simplest method of estimating the stability of a foam is to measure the change in volume (or height, A series of experiments was designed in both plant and laboratory flotation cells. Plant tests were performed in situ of different rougher cells (cells 1 and 4) of the lead/copper rougher flotation bank in Circuit B to highlight differences in froth stability, due to differences in particle type and solids loading in the froth. A 500-mL cylindrical column (1.5 Froth decay experiments were also carried out in a graduated multi-holed sparger column (1.5  The superficial gas velocity values are also shown for reference in The copper flotation rate is plotted as a function of froth depth for rougher cell 1 and scavenger cell 3 in The decrease in froth recovery may be linked to the particle type and concentration that reports to the froth phase. There is a decrease in solids loading in the froth from ∼48% w/w in the rougher cells to ∼27% w/w in the scavenger cells, i.e., particle floatability decreases down-the-bank ( Froth recovery ( In a similar approach, the froth recovery–froth residence time relationship was explored in the lead/copper rougher flotation bank of Circuit B. In this circuit, the focus was on assessing the effect of frother B concentration and froth depth on lead recovery in a set of surveys in a single cell (cell 3) of the first rougher bank. Changes in froth depth, but without an accompanying change in frother concentration (in surveys 3, 6, and 7), gave changes in froth recovery that were explicable in terms of froth residence time changes only ( The preceding discussion implies that both chemical (e.g., frother type and concentration) and physical conditions (froth depth, aeration rate, etc.) may be manipulated in flotation systems to achieve a desired froth zone recovery. However, the particle characteristics and their influence on drainage, stability and frothing phenomena, need also be considered as they play a significant role in controlling froth zone recovery. The stability of froths generated in cells 1 and 4 of the rougher bank in Circuit B is shown in Frother type and concentration are likely to control the foaming properties in the presence of particles through a number of mechanisms. In cases of low froth recovery and stability, it had not, to this point, been established whether there was sufficient frother in solution to create a stable froth and effectively transport particles from the collection zone to the concentrate product. A pulp chemical survey was performed in both Circuits A and B under normal operating conditions (i.e., at normal plant frother concentration), to determine the distribution of frother across the plant cells. Chemical sampling of plant cells was made from key sample points, with feed, concentrate and tailings samples collected from each major unit stream. The deportment of frother to the flotation products was subsequently determined using the mass balanced flows of water. A summary of the mass balance of residual frother in solution as a percentage of the frother recovered in the flotation products of each unit is shown in The percentage of water that reports to the concentrate may be calculated from  The exponential decay of froth recovery with an increase in froth retention (residence) time is well known and useful in terms of froth modelling ( By taking into consideration differences in froth stability it is possible that different frother types and/or concentrations may show similar dependencies of froth recovery on the ratio of the froth residence time to froth half-life. For each survey condition, the exponential model according to Eq. It is apparent from the different values of froth half-life in This work has shown that the froth phase has a pronounced influence on the overall flotation rate in industrial flotation circuits. The overall cell rate constant can be reduced to less than 25% of the collection zone rate constant due to inefficiencies of the froth phase. This is particularly pronounced for scavenger cell froths in which the low stability of the froth apparently limits froth recovery and the overall cell rate constant. Because of the complexity and interactive nature of processes occurring within the froth phase, an important first step towards optimising the froth phase recovery depends upon determining practically useful froth parameters, such as the froth residence time and froth stability, which may then be correlated with froth recovery. Two separate industrial case studies were targeted to investigate froth phase performance and quantify the measured characteristics of the froth phase. Froth phase performance was defined by the froth zone recovery and the measured characteristics of the froth phase including frother concentration and froth stability. Froth zone recovery was found to generally decrease down-the-bank in Circuit A, with decreases in froth zone recovery limiting the recovery achievable in the plant scavenger cells. The decrease in froth zone recovery could not be linked to the removal of frother from the pulp solution to the concentrate product. However, there was a correlation of froth recovery to froth stability, as measured by the froth half-life. This parameter is strongly linked to the presence of particles in the froth, with a wide variation in froth stability between cells and feed types, which may help to explain the low froth recovery of poorly mineralised scavenger froths. These particular froths are characterised by short half-lives and low froth recovery. A simple exponential model, based on the froth half-life and froth residence time of gas, is proposed to predict froth zone recovery, however its significance or usefulness has not yet been completely defined. Further research is continuing to determine if observations regarding the relationship between froth recovery and froth stability may be applied generically to all plants. It is suspected that froth instability contributes to low recovery in scavenger stages generally, particularly for feeds containing low quantities of the mineral to be floated. Methods to counter froth instability are also being researched. These aspects are being studied in the new AMIRA International project, P541B “Optimising Froth Zone Performance in Mineral Flotation”. The authors wish to gratefully acknowledge the sponsors of the AMIRA International project P541A “Particle and Frother Interactions in Flotation Froths” including Anglo Platinum, Cytec, Newmont (Golden Grove Operations), Ok Tedi Mining, Rio Tinto, Teck Cominco and the Australian Research Council. The authors also wish to thank the P9 project “Mineral Processing” for the froth recovery measurements in Circuit A. This paper was first published in