Polysaccharides traditionally used in PGM flotation have molecular weights (MW) varying from 150,000 to 600,000 as measured using gel permeation columns (GPC). In recent years polysaccharides at the lower end of the range (MW of 100,000–150,000) have been used effectively. This work evaluates the use of a modified starch depressant with a much lower average MW of 20,000 as a depressant and compares its performance on two Merensky ores to that of depressants currently used in industry, namely guar gum and carboxymethylcellulose (CMC). The UCT batch flotation system was used to assess the performance of the starch as a depressant of naturally floatable gangue (NFG) as well as its effect on sulphide mineral recovery at low and high dosages. Determination of the amount of polymer adsorbed was also done by assessing polymer in solution at various concentrations using the Du Bois method. PGM assays were carried out on one ore sample. Results indicated that this starch is an effective depressant of NFG.Polysaccharides that have been used to reduce the naturally floatable gangue (NFG) in the recovery of platinum group minerals (PGM) from the Merensky Reef by flotation have had average molecular weights (MW) varying from 150,000 to 600,000 as measured using gel permeation columns (GPC) ( The batch flotation system developed at The Centre for Minerals Research, University of Cape Town (CMR, UCT) provides an ideal system to do such a comparison as the amount of NFG reporting to the concentrate can be separated from the amount of material entrained ( Two ore samples, weighing approximately 200 Modal analyses of the gangue minerals and BMS present in the ores are shown in The frother used for all the batch flotation tests was DOW 200 at a fixed dosage of 40 The collectors SIBX and Senkol 5 were supplied by Senmin. The CMC depressant, Depramin 267, was supplied by Akzo Nobel Functional Chemicals and the modified guar depressant, Stypres 504 as well as the starch depressant, Stypres 301U, by Chemquest. The frother, DOW 200, was supplied by Betachem. All the chemical salts used in making up the synthetic plant water, as well as the CuSO All batch flotation tests were conducted using synthetic plant water, whereby distilled water is modified by the addition of various chemical salts to contain total dissolved solids of 1023 The 1 The air supply to the flotation cell was maintained at a flow rate of 7 Copper and total nickel analysis of all samples was done using a Bruker XRF. Some of the nickel is associated with the gangue minerals present in these ores and recoveries have been based on the total nickel value. As a result the sulphide nickel recoveries would actually be higher than the total nickel recoveries reported here. Sulphur analysis was carried out using a LECO sulphur analyser. PGM assays were carried out on the concentrates collected from the batch flotation tests conducted on ore A by an independent laboratory. The method set up at UCT for measuring depressant concentration in solution was used in all the batch flotation tests conducted. A sample of the slurry was drawn from the flotation cell at the end of each test using a syringe. This slurry was centrifuged for 10 The three depressants were characterized in the UCT Depressant Research Facility and the results are shown in A summary of the results from the batch flotation tests is shown in A better assessment of the extent of depression of the NFG can be obtained by separating the floating gangue from that which was entrained as described in the earlier work ( The amount of floating gangue recovered as a function of the water recovered is shown in The best comparison of the efficacy of the three depressants can be obtained by comparing the amount of NFG recovered under similar frothing conditions. This is shown in The effect of the depressants on the recovery of the sulphide minerals (as indicated by copper, nickel and sulphur grade and recovery) are shown in The grade–recovery curve for sulphur is shown in For ore B the grade–recovery curve for copper ( The grade–recovery curve for sulphur is shown in It was only for ore A that there was sufficient mass (by combining the individual concentrates from the duplicate floats) to determine the effect of the three depressants on the recovery of the platinum group elements (PGM). The effect on increasing the dosage from 100 to 300 Most descriptions of the forces involved in the adsorption of such polymers have implied the forces are of a physical nature rather than a chemical nature and therefore imply that for such an adsorption an isotherm can be obtained in which the adsorption density would depend on an equilibrium solution concentration ( The amount of CMC and guar in solution at all three dosages was close to zero and implies that the adsorption, particularly in the presence of Ca and Mg ions was relatively strong and almost all the polymers were adsorbed even at a dosage of 300 The low molecular weight starch depressant (MW 20,000) has been shown to be an effective depressant of NFG in the recovery of valuable minerals from the Merensky Reef at lower dosages. Its efficacy would, however be dependent on the type of ore used. At a dosage of 300 High dosages of the low molecular weight starch had the least depressing effect on PGM recovery when compared to the CMC or the guar for the particular ore analysed. The analysis of the depressant in the flotation solutions indicated that even at a dosage of 300 The rapid dissolution and low viscosity of this modified starch would make handling and distribution on a plant scale simpler and easier. 1. Chemquest for giving permission for this work to be presented at Precious Metals 07. 2. Rene van der Merwe, research assistant at UCT for performing the tests using the du Bois method to determine depressant in solution. 3. Impala Platinum and Lonmin Platinum for supplying the ore samples used in this study. 4. The members of the UCT Depressant Research Facility: AngloPlatinum, Impala Platinum and Lonmin Platinum for their continued support.