Kinetics of pressure filtration of dilute slurry has been measured experimentally and analyzed theoretically as a function of relevant inputs and operating parameters. A method based on sequential stage-wise batch filtration is proposed to mimic on the laboratory scale the continuous filtration process on the plant scale. A kinetic model is developed, which simulates the stage-wise test closely. Based on tests for filtration of dilute alumina suspension, a correlation is proposed for specific cake resistance as a function of pressure, initial solid loading and initial suspension height. The model is employed to search for optimal conditions of pressure and slurry concentration for maximizing the throughput of the clarified liquor.Solid–liquid separation is an important unit operation in many mineral and chemical industries. Of the various solid–liquid separation processes available, pressure filtration in particular has remained the focus of sustained research for modeling, simulation and optimization of the process. Much of this effort has been directed at pressure filtration of concentrated flocculated suspensions Our objective is to establish the kinetics of filtration of a dilute slurry on a laboratory scale. The test involves a sequence of batch filtration runs that are seamlessly joined. The whole process is modeled by a set of difference equations which, after model verification, is employed to demonstrate the possibility of liquor throughput optimization for a class of slurry clarification processes. The feed slurry was prepared by stirring SR-Alumina (Indian Aluminium, Belgaum) in 5 N NaOH solution followed by sonification. The BET surface area of the Alumina was 0.71 m The relevant inputs for the filtration test are filtration pressure, initial solid concentration and initial slurry height in the chamber. Note that the slurry height at the start of each stage is kept same only to simplify the structure of the kinetic model.  Uniform specific cake resistance in the growing cake results in a parabolic law for filtration kinetics, which is normally observed during the cake formation stage of concentration suspensions. The deviation from parabolic kinetics in filtration of concentrated suspensions, in the initial stages at least, has been attributed to contribution of the filter medium resistance to overall resistance to fluid flow At any instance of the actual filtration time If the concentration of residual solid in the filtrate is In each set of experiment in  The variation in the filtration rate in In the plant practice, the overall throughput depends upon the filtration time In an industrial operation, The authors gratefully acknowledge the financial support from the Department of Science and Technology (DST), Govt. of India for this work.