LaFeO3 is a multiferroic with multiple functionalities. It demonstrates room-temperature magnetism. A prime interest in this material is to introduce formidable ferroelectricity in LaFeO3 that may improve its functionalities with magnetoelectric properties. Ti4+ has a higher charge and smaller ionic radii. Such changes may modify bond lengths, bond angles, octahedral tilting and oxygen content. As a result, the nature of crystallinity can be modified. As a consequence, the electronic properties like the band gap, transport properties may get influenced. Titanate perovskites are known to be ferroelectric materials. Intending to strengthen the ferroelectric properties of a magnetic LaFeO3, this work investigates the structural, vibrational and electronic properties of LaFe1-x
                     Ti
                        x
                     O3 (0 ≤ x ≤ 0.50). The novelty of this work is on an in-depth study of the bond lengths and bond angles correlated with BO6 octahedra and La8O6 cage distortion. Ti substitution affects the entire perovskite structure by introducing a vertical flattening of the BO6 octahedra as well as the La8O6 cage. The strong hybridization of Ti4+ with O2− may be responsible for such modifications. The locus of octahedral apical oxygen fluctuates, influencing the tilting angle of the BO6 octahedra. This may be a result of the nature of the substituted cations and the oxygen acceptability limit of the lattice. The phonon modes and their modification have been correlated. The transport properties are modified with an external magnetic field.Lanthanum ortho-ferrite (LaFeO B-site modification in LFO leads to enhanced IR emission by Mg addition [ Ti is an important B-site element in ABO Hence, Ti-substitution is an interesting subject of study in LFO. The changes in structure and related distortion can open new answers to the origin of enhancement of electrical properties like dielectric constant and ferroelectricity. Ti-substitution at the B-site of LFO has been studied [ Nanocrystalline powders of LaFe The precursor solution of La was prepared by dissolving La A Bruker D2-Phaser diffractometer was used for X-ray diffraction (XRD) studies. A Cu-anode produces X-rays (Cu K The total energy calculations of LaFeO The powder X-ray diffraction (XRD) pattern reveals a single phase for LaFe The deviation from perfect crystallinity leads to a broadening of the XRD peaks. From peak width, one can assess the (a) crystallite size [ Glazer expressed the octahedral tilting for the The La–O bond is a result of hybridization between the empty La-4f and O–2p states [ In Note that the tilt of all the octahedra will be the same for an entire sample, although the direction of the tilt will change in between two adjacent octahedra. The angle B The horizontal face contains two sets of adjacent similar La–La bonds. The two larger bonds are La For the horizontal face, out of the four La-O The possible reasons behind such non-uniform changes in the deviation angle may be factors related to the varying sizes and charges of the B-site cations. The B-site host ions, i.e., Fe For the four La ions of a horizontal face, it is observed that all the four La–B bond lengths are different, which modifies with substitution ( For a vertical face, there are four different La-O For the BO All these changes in bond length and bond angle can be related to the internal lattice strain due to a smaller sized Ti Raman spectroscopy is sensitive to changes in structure, distortion and motion of oxygen, especially in complex structures like perovskites [ Out of these 24 Raman modes, around 10 to 18 modes are reported as experimentally observed modes for LFO samples [ Known modes of pure LaFeO The The The The B The The Amongst these, the The The The The The The optical properties of LaFe La has an electronic configuration of (Xe)5d However, it is noteworthy, that the width of defect bands, generally related to the strained electronic states are related to the Urbach tail states. The Urbach energy, E Current-voltage (I–V) measurements were measured for sintered dense pellets of all the LFTO samples in the voltage range 10 ≤ V ≤ 20. A two-probe setup in the surface mode was adopted. The pellet thickness, electrode length and electrode separation were kept similar to minimize ambiguities in the measurement of the transport properties. The conductance of the materials were calculated using these values. For Ti substituted samples, the conductance was lesser than the pure LaFeO It has been already discussed that Ti substitution has led to changes in bond length, bond angles, octahedral tilting and electronic band structure. Hence, an appropriate change in transport properties commensurate with these changes is understandable. Remarkably, an analogous change is observed in both the transport properties and the bandgap of these materials. It was discussed that with higher charged Ti The magnetic spin component of the cations can also actively modify the transport properties. The modifying oxygen content in the lattice can be argued from the modifying nature of the vibrations of the It is not unlikely that the band structure and, therefore, transport properties will also be affected by an externally applied magnetic field. The conductance studies of these materials [ The average crystallite sizes of sol-gel prepared, single-phase, orthorhombic ( The electronic transport properties have been correlated with oxygen vacancies and a similar trend has been observed in the electronic band gap of the material. In this study, the oxygen octahedral tilting is found to be a determining factor in tuning the properties in LaFeO This is an in-depth study of bond-lengths and bond-angles due to Ti-substitution of Fe at the B-site of LaFeO  The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. The authors acknowledge the Indian Institute of Technology Indore for providing research infrastructure. They also acknowledge the The following are the Supplementary data to this article: Supplementary data to this article can be found online at