The effect of a thermal pre treatment on the leaching behavior of a low-grade nickeliferous laterite ore, obtained from the north of Colombia, was investigated. The lateritic ore was first calcined at different temperatures, and then leached for 48 h in 3.2 M hydrochloric acid. An increase in nickel extraction from 15.8% to 57.1%, 98.0%, 91.9% and 26.1% was achieved in the leach, when the ore was previously calcined at 250 °C, 430 °C, 550 °C and 800 °C for 2 h, respectively. The increased nickel extraction from the pre-treated ore was believed to be partly due to increased surface area created through water removal from the goethite structure during the dehydroxylation process. Nickel showed congruent dissolution with Fe, indicating that Ni was uniformly incorporated into the iron oxides structure. Consequently, the use of calcination as a pre treatment can enhance the nickel extraction and significantly decrease the time required for the atmospheric acid leaching step.Nickel naturally occurs in sulfides or laterites. According to the U.S. Limonites refer to laterites with high iron contents (at least 40% by weight) and low magnesium contents (0.5–5%). In these, divalent iron has been oxidized and precipitated as microcrystalline ferric (oxy)hydroxides (predominantly goethite [α-FeOOH] with lesser amounts of hematite [α-Fe Different publications ( Due to the removal of free and combined moisture and to the partial collapse of the phase structure, a calcination step could alter the mineralogical composition of the ore and increase the surface and porosity of the raw ore, thus making it more amenable to leaching ( In this study, a calcination step at different temperatures has been employed to evaluate its benefit on the leachability of nickel from a low-grade Colombian laterite. This work describes the effects of prior heating of the limonitic ore on the mineral structure and the dissolution rate of Ni in 3.2 M HCl solution. A low-grade nickel laterite ore from the north of Colombia was used for this study. Chemical and mineralogical compositions of laterite were analyzed by atomic absorption (AA), X-ray diffraction (XRD) and scanning electron microscopy (SEM). The chemical analysis result of the sample is presented in The mineral sample contains iron in the form of goethite (FeO(OH)), wustite (FeO) and chromite (FeCr For the thermal pre treatment, approximately 50 g of particles, passing 37 μm, was placed on a ceramic plate. The plate was placed in a furnace, pre-heated to the selected temperature (250 °C, 430 °C, 550 °C and 800 °C), for 2 h. The furnace was opened at specified times to perform mixing of the charge. After roasting, the samples were removed from the furnace and allowed to cool to room temperature. Thermogravimetric and differential thermal analysis were conducted on the original sample in air using a PIRYS Perkin Elmer equipment. The temperature was scanned between 30 and 800 °C with a heating ramp of 10 °C/min. In addition a Brunauer-Emmett-Teller (BET) analysis was made in order to determine the specific surface area for all samples calcined and uncalcined. For leaching tests, 1 g of calcined or uncalcined sample was transferred into a leaching reactor containing 100 mL of 3.2 M HCl at room temperature (25 °C) and atmospheric pressure (Patm = 79 kPa). Magnetic stirring was sustained at a constant rate at 300 rpm for a period of 48 h in all experiments. The reaction temperature was maintained constant during the dissolution process by placing the reaction vessel in a water bath. Successive 1 mL aliquots of the suspension were withdrawn at set times (1, 3, 5, 7, 9, 12, 24 and 48 h) using a 3 mL plastic syringe, and filtered through a 0.20 μm Millipore filter. Samples of the leached solution were analyzed for Ni and Fe by atomic absorption spectrometry (Varian, SpectrAA 220 fs). From the results of thermogravimetry (TG) and differential thermogravimetry (DTA) analysis shown in The weight-loss measurements from TGA over the temperature range of 110 to 400 °C were approximately 12% and mostly represented the loss of structural water (i.e. bound OH In order to better understand the results of the TG/DTA, an XRD analysis was also carried out. The aim was to observe the structure evolution of the ore as a function of the calcination temperature. The effect of calcination on mineral transformation of laterite ores at different temperatures is shown in X-ray diffraction indicates that, on heating at 250 °C for 2 h, goethite started to alter to hematite. This is consistent with thermal analysis results (  The effect of thermal pre treatment on nickel and iron extraction by hydrochloric acid is shown in When the sample was previously calcined at 250 °C, 430 °C, 550 °C or 800 °C for 2 h, nickel extraction was enhanced significantly from the untreated sample at 15.8% to 57.1%, 98.0%, 91.9% and 26.1%, respectively after 48 h of atmospheric leaching. This increase can be attributed to the increase of the surface area, reflecting the development of micropores in the particles. A greater porosity and the change in the reactivity of the mineral, due to high density of structural defects in the newly transformed and poorly ordered hematite, make the resulting solid more amenable to leaching, even from the initial moments ( To verify this assumption, calcined and uncalcined samples of the mineral were subjected to a Brunauer-Emmett-Teller (BET) analysis ( Comparing the leaching results of uncalcined and calcined ore at different temperatures, calcinations at temperatures up to 430 °C appears to provide the optimum nickel extraction; on the other hand, higher temperatures are detrimental to iron, as well as nickel extraction. On heating to 800 °C, hydrohematite transforms to well ordered (stoichiometric) hematite [Fe As may be observed in The duration of the calcination process was also evaluated in order to analyze its effect on the nickel extraction during the leaching step. As is shown in These results may be related to the specific surface area of the particles. It is possible to observe in This difference can also be attributed to the stability of the phase; longer times allow the structure to stabilize, increasing the probability that nickel is included again into the iron oxide during recrystallization ( Different authors have used the congruency of metal dissolution to provide information on the location of metal substituents in iron oxide crystals. As mentioned above, in most cases nickel is associated with iron oxides in limonitic ores. If iron and nickel dissolve at identical rates, it suggests that the metal is uniformly distributed throughout the iron oxide crystals ( According to The slopes of the congruency of dissolution graph (Ni versus Fe) are approximately 1 for each calcination temperature except for 800 °C and the intercepts ranging from 1.5% to 10.8% (See The large slope obtained for the nickel to iron dissolution for the sample calcined at 800 °C (∼ 5) confirms that most of the nickel is associated with the iron oxides (mainly goethite); at this temperature, they are converted to a well-formed hematite, reducing its specific surface area to 77 m A low-grade nickel laterite from a Colombian deposit was chosen to investigate the effect of calcination on the recovery of nickel, prior to a leaching step. The results suggest that calcination time and temperature significantly affect the extraction rates of both nickel and iron; this increase is due partially to the increased surface area and a greater porosity created through the thermal pre treatment. Increasing calcination temperature up to 430 °C appears to provide the optimum nickel recovery, although further heating is detrimental to the subsequent leach. Nickel dissolved congruently with iron, indicating uniform incorporation of Ni in the iron oxide minerals. The use of calcination as a pre treatment can enhance the nickel extraction and significantly decrease the time required for the atmospheric acid leaching step, proving to have great potential for the extraction of nickel from low-grade laterites, which, in some cases, are considered, uneconomical to process by hydrometallurgical processes due to the high acid consumption and the low recovery rates. The authors wish to thank the Universidad Nacional de Colombia and the Hydrometallurgy laboratory at the Universidad Autónoma Metropolitana-Iztapalapa for the financial support and facilities, scientific and technical assistance. A. Garces-Granda is grateful to the Administrative Department of Science, Technology and Innovation (COLCIENCIAS) for the postgraduate scholarship received.