Different types of minerals in varying amounts are used in paint formulations depending on the paint characteristic. While titanium dioxide (TiO2) is used as a main pigment to improve the paint properties, some minerals such as calcite and calcined kaolin are used as a filler to decrease the cost of the paint, and in some cases as a substitute for TiO2. An important criterion for developing paint formula, especially for architectural ones, is to load maximum amounts of mineral pigments or fillers as much as possible to satisfy the rheology of the paint. Appropriate type and amount of dispersants is crucial at this stage to get the proper flowability at high amount of pigment and fillers.
                  Polyacrylic acid sodium salt (NaPAA), a well-known dispersant, is generally used as a commercial dispersant in various paint formulations. Interaction of NaPAA with a group of minerals as single or mixture will be rather different. In the case of paint, as a variety of minerals and reagents are available in a mixture, in order to improve the paint formulation, this complex system should be revealed step by step. In the present study, the interaction of single minerals, titanium dioxide (TiO2), calcined kaolin (C.Kaolin), ground calcite (GCC) and their mixtures as TiO2 + GCC, TiO2 + C.Kaolin and TiO2 + GCC + C.Kaolin in the presence of NaPAA was investigated in terms of adsorption, rheology, and electrokinetic phenomena. The results showed that adsorption plateau, zeta potential and viscosity values of the mixtures were very close to the arithmetic mean of the individual minerals of the mixtures. The most attractive mineral ingredient for NaPAA was TiO2, followed by GCC and C.Kaolin. The mixture of minerals behaved differently at the same dosage of NaPAA compared to the single minerals. It is thus important to adjust the minerals mixtures and dispersant type and dosage to closely tune the paint properties. This study clearly revealed that it is more viable to adjust the desired paint properties using a mixture of minerals of different surface properties than a single mineral.A typical paint is a mixture of pigment particles, polymers, polyelectrolytes, and surfactants with complex colloidal properties. While surfactants are usually used to control the flocculation and wetting properties, polymers are used to control rheological properties [ The interaction of surface active materials in paint media can be both physical and chemical in nature. Knowledge of adsorption properties of polyelectrolytes and surfactants onto particles is crucial to reveal their interactions. Any interaction of such ingredients in a mixed form is more complex than a single system as it probably involves synergistic effect among chemical additives and/or particles. It is well known that adsorption mechanism of a polymer used as a dispersant on an inorganic mineral can be affected both positively and negatively by another polymer or a surfactant that would be present in the media [ Bing et al. [ Although adsorption and interaction studies of polymers and surface active agents on a single particle have been largely performed, interaction of the same species with a mixture of more than one type of particles is rare in literature. It should be noted that mixture of mineral particles are very common in a variety of applications such as paint, plastics and paper. Li and Tripp [ The contribution of individual and mixture of particles using sedimentation, viscosity, and liquid-limit tests was shown by Palomino et al. [ Although competitive adsorption of different surfactants or polymers was investigated, understanding of adsorption of polymers or surfactant onto different mineral particles used in paint formulations is still not well advanced to reveal the complex interactions in paint media. In this study, the adsorption of NaPAA onto TiO Three different kinds of minerals, TiO TiO GCC (N95) and C.Kaolin (Microbrite® C80/95 C1) were obtained from Som Group Inc. and Microns Inc. in Turkey, respectively. GCC is a natural ground calcium carbonate without any surface treatment. Its Natural pH of C.Kaolin is 6.4 and its isoelectric point (iep) is 3.8 as presented in Sodium polyacrylate or sodium polyacrylic acide (NaPAA) (2100 g/mol) were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich as powder. Hyamine 1622 and sodium citrate used for the quantitative determination of NaPAA were also purchased from Sigma-Aldrich. Distilled water with a specific conductance of 1.4 μmho/cm was used in all experiments. Single and mixed mineral suspensions were prepared at 30% wt. for the adsorption, zeta potential and viscosity measurements. In mixed particles systems, each mineral were mixed in equal proportion on the basis of weight. Temperature controlled vibratory incubator was used for mixing and shaking of the samples. Adsorption density of NaPAA on various mineral particles was determined using the supernatant of mineral suspensions [ The zeta potential of the samples was measured using Zeta Meter 3.0 + . Specific surface area of the particles was measured by BET method using “Monosorb” instrument. Particle size distribution of the samples was determined by Mastersizer 2000 (Malvern Instruments Ltd.). Paint production and its detailed analysis are given elsewhere [ As shown in Changes in yield stress values against pH of the suspension are also shown in Zeta potentials and viscosities of suspensions were simultaneously measured for characterization of the system at natural pH values, 30% solids by wt. and 25 In Adsorption of poly acrylic acid (PAA) and polyvinyl pyrrolidine on unmodified TiO Calculated thermodynamic quantities, (i.e., the free energy of adsorption, the heat of adsorption, and the entropy) using the modified Frumkin model indicate that the adsorption process is physical in nature and mainly controlled by the entropic contribution [ Zeta potentials of particles in a suspension determine the stability of a system. The lower in magnitude in zeta potential, the weaker in stability of suspensions is. In this regard, the point of zero charge (zpc) or isoelectric point (iep) of suspensions, at the same time, identifies the critical collapse point of particles where they tend to aggregate at the highest magnitude. Zeta potential values of various systems against NaPAA concentration are shown in It is also evident in Similarly, the largest decrease in apparent viscosity was shown in TiO Similarly, dispersant with different functional groups such as hydroxyl ( It is clear from adsorption, electrokinetic and viscosity studies presented in Suspension properties of the particles characterized in single and mixed systems led to the production of a series of paints using TiO In paint production, particles should be first wetted and then dispersed. These are achieved using appropriate type and amount of surfactants and polymers. However, wetting and dispersing are not enough to get the high quality paint. Dispersion should be stabilized and pigment flocculation and crowding effect should be avoided during drying the paint film. Especially, extenders such as C.Kaolin and GCC can be used to physically inhibit the TiO Different types of minerals and particles can be used in mixed form for replacing TiO There are considerable studies on the adsorption effect of more than one surface active agent or polymer in literature, however, there are limited studies about the adsorption and corresponding suspension properties in the case of more than one type of solid particles in the system. Shao et al. [ The number of ingredients in a regular paint recipe makes it very complex system in terms of revealing the interaction mechanism of materials in paint systems. It is therefore imperative concentric research efforts are needed to develop methodologies to identify the behavior of complex systems such as paint. In this study, different types of minerals were used in single and mixed form to identify the synergy of mineral mixture on NaPAA adsorption and stabilization. The results demonstrated that the most attractive mineral for NaPAA was TiO Interaction of solid particles with a dispersant (NaPAA) in a water borne paint recipe showed that particles acquire different surface properties as if a new material of unique surface properties were formed. These new properties present the paint formulators an opportunity for improving their recipes by adjusting the type and amount of particles used in paint. In this study, an optimum mineral particle mixture was found as 16% TiO