The hyperbolic Radon transform plays an important role in seismic data processing for its ability to focus seismic events in the transform domain. Traditional algorithms based on direct implementations, however, are inefficient with limited applications for processing large data sets. A new algorithm is presented for fast computation of the hyperbolic Radon transform and its sparse calculations. It uses interpolation procedures to stretch the data along time axis and efficiently computes the summation paths in the new coordinates via the chirp-z transform which is carried out by fast Fourier transform (FFT). The proposed fast algorithm is then used within the deconvolutive form of the Radon transform and iterative sparse algorithms for effective decomposition of CMP gathers with an improved temporal resolution, compared to the traditional Radon transforms. The effectiveness of the new algorithm are confirmed on sparse velocity-stack inversion, primary and multiple separation, high-quality stacking, and automatic velocity model building. The tests show that sparse velocity-stack inversion using the new algorithm is even more efficient than the traditional velocity scan, both in resolution and speed. Furthermore, numerical tests show the superiority of the proposed algorithm over the state-of-the-art fast algorithms, based on butterfly scheme and log-polar convolutions, demanding less computational complexity.The Radon transform (RT) has successfully been used in seismic data processing, whereby the seismic gathers in the time-offset domain are mapped into a new transform (Radon) domain where seismic events can be separated more easily. According to the moveout of the seismic events which are to be mapped, different RTs have been developed such as linear RT or slant stack Hyperbolic RT, however, is time-variant and computationally much more challenging compared to the time-invariant counterparts. It has been successfully used to attenuate multiple reflections and fill in the offset gaps in CMP gathers Hampson In this paper, we develop an alternative fast algorithm for hyperbolic RT. It is based on the The generalized deconvolutive Radon transform allows the representation of a 2D seismic signal The (adjoint) forward and inverse hyperbolic RT (or DecRT for Let us assume regular sampling of the curvature parameter, such that The main remaining problem is to compute According to the above, the mathematical model of the proposed fast (adjoint) forward hyperbolic RT is presented in Apply a Fourier transform the resulting data along time axis via an FFT algorithm. We take the number of FFT samples For each frequency slice, Multiply by Multiply by the chirp signal Multiply by an FFT of Multiply by Perform an inverse FFT of size Undo the According to the analysis above, the computational complexity of the proposed fast algorithm is The algorithm presented above ( We present several numerical examples from simulated data to show the performance of the proposed method in the sense of accuracy and computation time. The two recently developed fast algorithms, butterfly and log-polar based algorithms which also run in complexity We provided a synthetic CMP gather ( We also applied these methods to transform data sets of different sizes. The computation time, speed-up, and RMSE of each algorithm is reported in We continued by using our fast algorithm for high-resolution velocity-stack inversion of a 3D CMP gather. We first constructed a surrogate 2D gather from the 3D gather by sorting its traces according to their distance from the origin. Then we used the proposed algorithm for 2D data to perform the transform. We performed 30 iterations of FISTA to get high-resolution coefficients for both RT and DecRT and compared the resulting RT panels with that of the conventional low-resolution RT obtained via direct summation (conventional velocity scan). High-resolution velocity-stack inversion minimizes the energy contained in the difference between the actual CMP gather and the modelled CMP gather while increasing velocity resolution by decreasing the number of nonzero coefficients. The resulting RT plane can be used for effective elimination of multiples energy, high-quality stacking, and automatic velocity analysis In this section a real data set is used to demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed method in high-resolution processing of a field data set from North Viking Graben area of North Sea. The data consists of 1001 shot records, each having 180 traces which have been uniformly sampled on We have presented a fast algorithm for the implementation of the hyperbolic deconvolutive Radon transform (DecRT). It uses interpolation procedures to map reflection amplitudes along hyperbolic events to those along parabolic events and then perform the summations in the new coordinates via the chirp-z transform, which is calculated based on FFT. Therefore, the computations involved in the proposed algorithm are mainly based on interpolation and FFT, making the algorithm very efficient for processing large seismic data. Numerical tests demonstrated superiority of the new method over alternative fast methods, both in accuracy and speed. The new algorithm was used within iterative sparse solvers for sparse inversion of DecRT and was applied on synthetic and field data for multiple attenuation, high-quality NMO-free stacking, and automatic velocity model building. The results demonstrated reasonable accuracy of the proposed method while speeding up the calculations. None declared.