Equal channel angular pressing (ECAP) was used to realise solid-state recycling of pure titanium machining chips. Fully dense bulk Ti with ultrafine grain sizes was obtained after ECAP at 450°C although the grains were coarser at the higher consolidation temperature of 590°C. The yield strength of the recycled Ti obeys the Hall–Petch relationship and reaches 650MPa after consolidation at 450°C for two passes. The strengths achieved are comparable to those observed in other Ti produced by ingot metallurgy with similar grain sizes. Analyses show that the strengthening is primarily due to grain size refinement rather than oxide dispersion, and low angle grain boundaries make significant contributions especially at the lower processing temperature.Although machining has been regarded as an expensive and thus undesirable manufacturing process, it is indispensable when precision is the primary concern. For example, machining is widely used in the aerospace industry for titanium manufacturing. One factor contributing to the expense is the high proportion of waste generated. Machining chips can account for a significant proportion of the titanium material consumed for making a component, up to 80% in the case of complex shapes for aerospace and biomedical applications On both accounts, a solid-state process has advantages over that based on remelting and casting. Conventional plastic deformation processes can be effective in recycling both ferrous and nonferrous metals, resulting in dense bulk material with good mechanical properties. Hot extrusion has been investigated for the recycling of magnesium alloys (e.g. AZ91 In the present investigation, Ti machining chips were solid-state recycled using ECAP with the application of a back pressure. Further to the previous report Commercially pure (CP) Ti (ASTM grade 2) chips were obtained by dry milling. The chips appeared as thin flakes. The two channels of the ECAP die intersect at 90° with round cross-sections of 11 In preparation for microstructural characterisation, samples were sectioned along the transverse plane (with respect to the extrusion direction). Electron backscattered diffraction (EBSD) was used for the measurement of grain sizes and misorientations between grains. Metallographically prepared samples were electropolished in a solution of methanol (600 Full density (>4.50 The EBSD microstructures for samples subjected to various consolidation conditions are shown in Increasing the ECAP temperature to 590 The good quality of the recycled Ti manifested itself in enhanced mechanical properties. The compressive 0.2% proof stress values for the various materials are presented in However, the applicability of the Hall–Petch relationship, which is based on observations on well annealed, coarse grained metals whose strength is governed by HAGBs, deserves further analysis. In the current study, the Ti materials were heavily deformed during ECAP at elevated temperatures and as such developed a substructure of LAGBs, particularly at 450 The analysis of the contributions by LAGBs could also shed light on the trend that the experimentally observed strength decreases with increasing number of passes, even when the grain sizes based on HAGBs appear to be the same. For example, the experimental strength following 2 passes at 450 In addition to grain size, the potential strengthening contribution from particle dispersion due to the presence of oxide on chip surfaces should be considered. After ECAP, the total oxygen content in various samples ranged from 0.16 to 0.23  High resolution EBSD has been used to characterise the microstructure of bulk CP-Ti recycled from machining chips using equal channel angular pressing. An ultrafine grain structure resulted at the lower processing temperature of 450 The correlation between the ultrafine grain sizes resolved by EBSD and yield strengths follows the well-known Hall–Petch relationship although with significantly greater The strength of the recycled material is comparable to that observed in Ti with similar grain sizes but produced by ingot metallurgy. Strengthening is derived primarily from the refined grain structure (mostly from HAGBs but also significantly from LAGBs). The amount of surface oxide on the chips is very small and thus does not provide any significant strengthening through dispersion. The investigation has demonstrated that ECAP is a promising process for solid-state recycling of Ti machining chips. The relatively simple and effective ECAP process compares favourably to those based on hot extrusion, for example. The authors would like to acknowledge the support of the