Eclogites documenting two orogenic cycles not only contain essential information on subduction and exhumation mechanisms during the most recent orogenic cycle, but can also provide insights into the earlier cycle. Such rocks are ideal for deciphering the tectonic evolution of orogenic belts with a multi-orogenic history. This is the case for the North Qaidam orogenic belt (NQOB) in northwest China where, for the first time, we have discovered eclogites that preserve a record of two orogenic cycles. The first orogenic event occurred at ca. 929–916 Ma and the second at ca. 439–430 Ma. The metamorphic P–T conditions of these two events were 5.0–7.0 kbar/616–669 °C and 29.0–32.5 kbar/620–670 °C, respectively. Zircon U–Pb dating yielded protolith ages of 1280–1070 Ma for these eclogites, which are much older than the protolith ages for other eclogites in the NQOB. The eclogites exhibit chondrite-normalized rare earth element patterns that are flat or depleted in light rare earth elements, similar to present-day N- and E-MORB. Magmatic zircon cores from the eclogites have high ε
                     Hf(t) values of 8.4 ± 4.0 to 18.1 ± 1.1, comparable to depleted mantle within uncertainty, and indicating a juvenile crustal origin. Our data show that the eclogite protoliths were probably pre-Rodinia Mesoproterozoic oceanic crust that was emplaced in an active continental margin during oceanic subduction, and experienced Neoproterozoic metamorphism related to the amalgamation of Rodinia and early Paleozoic continental deep subduction. Using published data for all eclogites and their host gneisses, we reconstructed the Mesoproterozoic to early Paleozoic tectonic evolution of the NQOB. Given the similar Meso–Neoproterozoic evolution of the NQOB and adjacent Tarim Block, we suggest that the Qaidam Block was the eastward extension of the Tarim Block during the Neoproterozoic.Eclogite is a special type of metamorphic rock that forms under high-pressure (HP) to ultrahigh-pressure (UHP) conditions in subduction zones (e.g. Most eclogites worldwide have been found to record only one orogenic event. However, new analytical techniques, such as high-resolution accessory mineral U–Pb dating, have identified a few eclogites in some orogenic belts with a multi-cyclic orogenic history, such as the Alps in Europe ( The North Qaidam orogenic belt (NQOB) in northwest China is considered to be an early Paleozoic UHP metamorphic belt, consisting predominantly of gneisses with minor eclogites, garnet peridotites, and marbles. A number of studies on eclogites have shown that the NQOB records an entire Neoproterozoic–Paleozoic Wilson cycle of continental rifting (850–750 Ma) related to the breakup of the supercontinent Rodinia, and later ocean floor spreading, oceanic subduction, and subsequent continental deep subduction and collision ( In this contribution, we document four eclogite samples from the NQOB, which have protolith ages of 1280–1070 Ma and mid-ocean ridge basalt (MORB)-like geochemical and isotopic signatures. More importantly, the eclogites recorded Neoproterozoic amphibolite-facies metamorphism prior to early Paleozoic UHP eclogite-facies metamorphism. These eclogites provide unique insights into the Proterozoic history of the NQOB. Combined with published data for eclogites and gneisses, we reveal the two orogenic cycles of the NQOB (Meso–Neoproterozoic and early Paleozoic) and the relationship between the Qaidam and Tarim blocks during the Neoproterozoic. The NQOB is located at the northern margin of the Tibetan Plateau, at the junction of the North China, Yangtze, and Tarim cratons in China ( The NQOB is considered to be an early Paleozoic continental-type UHP metamorphic belt, consisting predominantly of orthogneisses and paragneisses, with minor eclogites, garnet peridotites, and marbles. These rocks are unconformably overlain by, or locally in fault contact with, lower Paleozoic arc-related volcanic and sedimentary rocks of the Tanjianshan Group and Devonian molasse sediments, and are intruded by early Paleozoic–Mesozoic granites ( Eclogites in the NQOB can be divided into three types based on protolith ages and geochemical signatures, despite their similar metamorphic ages, as follows. (1) Neoproterozoic continental-type eclogite is the major eclogite type in this belt and is widely distributed at Yuka–Luofengpo, Xitieshan, and Dulan. It yields protolith ages of 850–750 Ma and within-plate basalt (WPB) or continental flood basalt (CFB) geochemical signatures, and is proposed to have been formed in a continental rift or mantle plume setting related to the dispersal of Rodinia ( Orthogneiss represents >80% of the rocks in the NQOB and hosts relatively minor eclogite, peridotite, and paragneiss blocks. The orthogneiss has a protolith age of ca. 1030–890 Ma and is considered to have formed in an active continental margin or Four representative eclogite samples were collected from the Yuka–Luofengpo terrane in the northwestern NQOB ( The kyanite-bearing eclogite sample 15QH11 was collected on the northern side of the Yuka River ( The epidote eclogite sample 17QHR18 was collected on the southern side of the Yuka River ( The bimineralic eclogite sample 15QH28 was collected from a fresh 0.3 × 1.0 m boulder in a valley in the Luofengpo area. The rock has a massive structure and consists of garnet (50–65 vol%), amphibole (20–25 vol%), omphacite (10–15 vol%), epidote (<5 vol%), quartz (2 vol%), and rutile (1 vol%) ( The bimineralic eclogite sample 09QH30 was collected from another fresh 0.5 × 1.0 m boulder in the same valley as sample 15QH28. Unlike sample 15QH28, this sample is heterogeneous, comprising omphacite- and quartz-rich domains. The omphacite-rich domain is composed of garnet (50–55 vol%), omphacite (35–45 vol%), amphibole (5 vol%), quartz (1 vol%), and rutile (1 vol%) ( Zircon grains from the four eclogite samples were separated by heavy liquid and magnetic techniques, followed by handpicking under a binocular microscope. Selected grains were mounted in epoxy resin and polished down to expose grain centers. The internal structures were examined by cathodoluminescence (CL) imaging. Mineral inclusions within zircon grains were identified using a Renishaw laser Raman spectrometer (Invia model) at SKLCD. The Raman microscope was equipped with a 514 nm diode laser (100 mW power; Quantum Tech), an automated confocal microscope (Leica DMLM) with a software-controlled x–y–z stage, and a Peltier-cooled charge-coupled device (CCD) detector. The frequencies of the Raman bands were monitored by the 520 cm For eclogite samples 17QHR18 and 15QH28, zircon U–Th–Pb isotopic and trace element data were acquired simultaneously with a laser spot diameter of 24 μm using an Agilent 7500a ICP–MS coupled to an excimer laser ablation system (193 nm; Geolas 200 M; Lambda Physik). The zircon 91,500 was used as an external age standard with a recommended For eclogite samples 15QH11 and 09QH30, zircon U–Pb dating was conducted with a Cameca IMS 1280/HR SIMS at the Institute of Geology and Geophysics, Chinese Academy of Science, Beijing, China. The elliptical analytical spots were about 10 × 15 and 20 × 30 μm in size, respectively. The zircon Plešovice was used as an age standard with a recommended Zircon Lu–Hf isotopic compositions of samples 15QH28, 17QHR18, and 09QH30 (the kyanite-bearing eclogite 15QH11 was dated by Zircon grains from the kyanite-bearing eclogite are prismatic and 50–100 μm long. Most grains are characterized by dark magmatic cores with straight and wide oscillatory growth zoning, surrounded by narrow structure-less rims. Garnet, omphacite, talc, epidote, rutile, and quartz inclusions were found in the rims ( Zircon grains from the epidote eclogite are prismatic to anhedral, colorless, and 50–100 μm long. Based on CL images, three types of zircon were recognized. Type I zircon is characterized by a moderately luminescent core surrounded by a narrow and highly luminescent structure-less rim. The cores show faint oscillatory zoning ( Twenty-four analyses on type I zircon cores yielded Sixteen analyses on type II zircon cores yielded Six analyses on zircon rims and type III zircons yield low Th (0.23–7.71 ppm), U (21.2–449 ppm), and REE (3.84–22.2 ppm) concentrations, with very low Th/U ratios of 0.01–0.03. They are characterized by flat HREE patterns and no Eu anomalies ( Zircons from the bimineralic eclogite 15QH28 are transparent, prismatic or ellipsoidal grains of 50 to 100 μm in length ( A total of 47 analyses were conducted by the LA–ICP–MS method. Eight analyses on type I zircon cores yielded Given that most zircon rims were too narrow to be analyzed by LA–ICP–MS, only four rim analyses were obtained, which yielded Zircons from the bimineralic eclogite 09QH30 are colorless, prismatic, ellipsoidal or near-spherical, and 100–250 μm in length ( A total of 26 spots were dated with the SIMS method, from which, 22 analyses on zircon cores and rim-free grains yielded Nine analyses on type I magmatic zircon cores from the epidote eclogite 17QHR18 have high Five analyses on type I magmatic zircon cores from the bimineralic eclogite 15QH28 yielded high The zircon rims from the bimineralic eclogite 09QH30 were too narrow to analyze. Eighteen analyses on metamorphic zircon cores and rim-free grains yielded Bulk-rock major and trace element analyses were undertaken at the SKLCD. Approximately 1 kg of fresh chips of the eclogite samples was powdered to 200 mesh using a tungsten carbide ball mill. Major elements were determined with a RIX-2100X X-ray fluorescence (XRF) spectrometer. Loss-on-ignition (LOI) was determined by placing 1 g of sample powder in a furnace at 1000 °C for several hours and then reweighing. Trace elements were determined using an Agilent 7500a ICP–MS utilizing USGS standards BHVO-2, AGV-2, BCR-2, and GSP-2, and their recommended concentrations from the GeoRem database ( The kyanite-bearing eclogite 15QH11, epidote eclogite 17QHR18, and bimineralic eclogite 15QH28 have narrow ranges of SiO The kyanite-bearing eclogite 15QH11 and epidote eclogite 17QHR18 have similar trace element compositions. They are light REE (LREE)-depleted and show no obvious Eu anomalies, similar to present-day N-MORB ( The bimineralic eclogite 09QH30 has a variable trace element composition. Some samples (type I) show slightly LREE-depleted patterns, similar to present-day N-MORB, whereas other samples (type II) display moderate to strongly LREE-depleted patterns ( Previous studies have identified that a few paragneisses in the NQOB experienced not only early Paleozoic UHP metamorphism, but also Neoproterozoic metamorphism related to the assembly of Rodinia ( The development of an internally consistent thermodynamic dataset ( The epidote eclogite 17QHR18 was selected for phase equilibrium modeling for two reasons: (1) the Neoproterozoic metamorphic zircon growth in this sample contains the most diverse mineral inclusions; and (2) this sample probably did not experience partial melting during the Neoproterozoic and early Paleozoic metamorphism, and thus has a relatively unmodified bulk-rock composition. The calculation was performed using THERMOCALC 3.45 ( The pseudosection calculated using the measured bulk-rock composition is shown in Determining the protoliths of eclogites is important for deciphering the tectonic evolution of orogenic belts (e.g. Zircon U–Pb dating of the kyanite-bearing eclogite 15QH11, epidote eclogite 17QHR18 and bimineralic eclogite 15QH28 yielded protolith ages of 1280–1070 Ma ( Given that a protolith age for the bimineralic eclogite 09QH30 was not obtained and its bulk-rock composition was modified during later metamorphism, we cannot clearly identify the protolith of this eclogite. However, it experienced Neoproterozoic (916 Ma) and early Paleozoic (437 Ma) UHP metamorphism ( Polymetamorphic events reflecting multiple orogenic cycles recorded by a single sample have been reported in several orogenic belts such as the Alps in Europe ( Zircon geochronology has shown that three eclogite samples in the Yuka–Luofengpo terrane underwent two metamorphic events in the Neoproterozoic (929–916 Ma) and early Paleozoic (439–430 Ma). For the Neoproterozoic metamorphic event, we obtained peak The early Paleozoic metamorphic event recorded by these eclogite samples clearly represents continental deep subduction, although their protoliths are fragments of oceanic crust. Key factors for such a conclusion include: (1) these eclogites occurring as lensoid blocks in orthogneisses and paragneisses, similar to the Neoproterozoic continental-type eclogites; (2) phase equilibria modeling and Grt–Cpx–Ph–Qtz/Coe geothermobarometry yielding clockwise Due to the strong overprint by early Paleozoic UHP metamorphism, evidence for the Meso–Neoproterozoic evolution of the NQOB is rare. Previous published zircon U–Pb age data have shown that Neoproterozoic granitic gneisses, which are widely distributed in the NQOB and are the major host rocks of the eclogites, have protolith ages of 1030–891 Ma ( Both the Neoproterozoic metamorphism and magmatism ended at ca. 890 Ma ( Subsequent continental rifting related to mantle plume activity and the breakup of Rodinia occurred at 870–750 Ma, forming mafic dikes that intruded Neoproterozoic granites and interlayered sedimentary rocks and basalts ( The Tarim Craton is a basin in the northwestern Qaidam Block that is covered by a thick succession of Paleozoic to Mesozoic strata resting on Precambrian basement, which is interpreted to be a fragment of Rodinia. Previous studies have identified a significant E–W-trending gravity–magnetic anomaly belt in the center of the Tarim Craton ( In the eastern NQOB, the Wanggaxiu arc-type gabbro of the Tanjianshan Group has an age of 522–468 Ma ( Early Paleozoic oceanic-type eclogites found in the Dulan area have metamorphic ages of 462–424 Ma, but a few samples experienced two stages of eclogite-facies metamorphism at 462–448 and 425–424 Ma ( The subducting high-density oceanic lithosphere is the main driving force for continental subduction. Then, once slab breakoff occurs, the deeply subducted and buoyant continental slab is rapidly exhumed to crustal levels ( Some Neoproterozoic continental-type eclogites and their host gneisses have metamorphic ages up to 458 Ma ( The eclogites and metapelites, which record both the Meso–Neoproterozoic and early Paleozoic orogenies, yield early Paleozoic metamorphic ages of 460–424 Ma ( Breakoff of the South Qilian oceanic slab from the subducted continental lithosphere occurred at about 420 Ma, leading to exhumation of the buoyant continental crust and formation of the present-day North Qaidam UHP metamorphic belt, which comprises different types of eclogite, garnet peridotite, gneiss, and arc/back-arc-related volcanic rocks (  The protoliths of the Yuka–Luofengpo kyanite-bearing eclogite, epidote eclogite and bimineralic eclogite were Mesoproterozoic pre-Rodinia oceanic crustal slices, which underwent two phases of metamorphism (i.e., Neoproterozoic amphibolite-facies and early Paleozoic UHP metamorphism). The NQOB records two orogenic cycles. The earlier cycle was related to the assembly and breakup of Rodinia during the Proterozoic, and the later cycle was an early Paleozoic (Caledonian) Wilson cycle involving ocean floor spreading, oceanic subduction, and continental deep subduction and collision. The Qaidam Block was probably the eastern extension of the Tarim Craton during the Proterozoic. Financial support for this study was jointly provided by the Supplementary data to this article can be found online at The following are the Supplementary data to this article:     