Laterite ores account for >60% of the world's nickel resources. This ore contains considerable amount of scandium, a strategic material in increasingly high demand in various industries. Here, an innovative two-step process was developed in which scandium is first concentrated in a slag phase using carbothermic reduction and then is leached using NaOH cracking process. The byproduct of the first step is metallic iron enriched with nickel and cobalt (ferronickel alloy). The carbothermic reduction process was performed at 1400–1600 °C using lignite as a reductant and calcia and/or silica as a fluxing reagent. A systematic study was carried out using a fractional factorial design methodology to investigate the quantitative effect of four variables. Utilizing the results, an empirical model was built to optimize the process for maximizing scandium concentration. Under the optimum conditions, scandium was successfully concentrated in the slag phase >14 times compared with that in the feed material, while at the same time a high-grade ferronickel alloy was produced. Furthermore, fundamental investigations were performed to elucidate the carbothermic reduction reaction mechanism. For NaOH cracking process, the investigated operating parameters were baking temperature, NaOH-to-slag ratio, baking time, and liquid-to-slag ratio. After optimization, 88% of scandium was recovered, indicating the predictability of the empirical model for scandium recovery.Lateritic nickel‑cobalt ores, which form as a result of intensive weathering of ultrabasic rocks in tropical or sub-tropical regions, are important deposits in terms of their nickel and cobalt content, as they account for >60% of the world's nickel resources ( Laterite ore contains iron, aluminum, magnesium, manganese, nickel, cobalt, and in some cases scandium. One main characteristic of laterites is the correlation between nickel and ferrous iron, which is also observed between scandium and ferrous iron. Scandium is a rare and expensive metal; the current price of Scandia (Sc One of the main applications of scandium is its alloying into aluminum and magnesium products, to make them weldable, more corrosion resistant, and stronger ( One of the main processing routes for laterite ore is ferronickel smelting process which involves dewatering, calcination, reduction, and molten ferronickel refining ( In this study, a two-stage pyro-hydrometallurgical process was investigated to extract scandium from a laterite ore. The first stage of the process involves carbothermic reduction in which iron, nickel, and cobalt contents of the ore are reduced with carbon at 1400–1600 °C and separated as a metallic phase. This process is similar to the conventional smelting process for the production of ferronickel from nickel laterites in a DC-arc furnace ( In the second stage of the process, a two-step alkaline cracking process was utilized to extract Sc from the slag phase. The slag phase is mostly composed of silicates that are not soluble in acid; therefore, sodium hydroxide (NaOH) is utilized as the lixiviant ( In the current study, a modified two-step version of alkaline cracking was developed. In the first step, the slag was mixed with 50 wt% NaOH and the mixture was baked in a furnace at 200 to 400 °C, to convert Sc into water-insoluble hydroxides. In the second step, the baked sample was leached in an acidic solution at pH below 3. The final leachate enriched with Sc was separated from the residue by filtering. This two-step alkaline cracking offers the advantages of lower NaOH consumption, faster kinetics during the acid leaching step, and higher scandium extraction (>88%). This work is devoted to finding the optimum operating conditions of carbothermic reduction, alkaline cracking followed by acid leaching and to elucidating the carbothermic reduction reaction mechanism using systematic experimental and fundamental approaches. The two-step process developed offers the advantages of concentrating Sc >14 times in the slag phase with high final Sc extraction (>88%) along with producing ferronickel alloy (similar to the one obtained in the conventional ferronickel smelting as mentioned above) as the by-product which brings additional economic benefits to the process. A ground nickeliferous laterite ore was obtained from New Caledonia. Coal (Lignite), sulfuric acid (95.0–98.0% Assay), and nitric acid (68.0–70.0% Assay) were purchased from VWR (Radnor, PA, USA). Calcium oxide (99.5% Purity, −325 mesh) was purchased from Materion (Mayfield Heights, OH, USA). Silicon dioxide (99.5% Purity, −10 μm) and discandium trioxide (> 99.9% Purity) were purchased from Alfa Aesar (Haverhill, MA, USA). Sodium hydroxide was obtained from Caledon Laboratories Ltd. (Georgetown, ON, Canada). Graphite crucibles and porcelain crucibles were supplied by Amazon (Seattle, WA, USA) and VWR, respectively. The standard stock solution of Sc (100 mg/L) and base metals (Fe, Cr, Ni, Co, Mn, Al, Mg, Si, Ti, and Ca) (1000 mg/L) were purchased from Inorganic Ventures, Inc. (Christiansburg, VA, USA). The ground laterite ore samples were dried in a gravity convection oven at 50 °C for >24 h. The dried ore was mixed with appropriate amounts of lignite and flux (CaO and/or SiO For the mechanistic investigation of the carbothermic reduction process, three experiments were conducted using scandium oxide (Sc For the carbothermic reduction process, four operating parameters, namely smelting temperature (X Two 2 Morphological characterizations of the samples were obtained with scanning electron microscopy energy dispersive spectroscopy (SEM-EDS, Hitachi SU5000, Krefeld, NRW, Germany). The mineralogical analysis of the sample was investigated with X-ray diffraction (XRD, Rigaku MiniFlex 600 Diffractometer, Akishima, Tokyo, Japan). Electron probe microanalyzer (EPMA, JEOL JXA8230 5-WDS Electron Microprobe, Peabody, MA, USA) was utilized for the compositional analysis, elemental mapping, and phase mapping. For compositional analysis, microwave digestion was conducted by digesting samples in 20 mL of aqua regia solution at 220 °C (MARS 6 Xpress system, ramp-up time of 40 min, holding time of 40 min, CEM Corporation, Matthews, NC, USA). The concentration of Sc in the digested samples was measured by inductively coupled plasma – mass spectrometry (ICP-MS, Thermo Scientific iCAP Q, Waltham, MA, USA). The concentration of base metals (Fe, Cr, Ni, Co, Mn, Al, Mg, Si, Ti, and Ca) was measured with inductively coupled plasma – optical emission spectrometry (ICP-OES, PerkinElmer Optima 8000, Waltham, MA, USA). To quantify the silica content of the solid samples, X-ray fluorescence spectrometer (XRF, Bruker S2 Ranger, Billerica, MA, USA) was utilized. The chemical composition of laterite ore was analyzed to provide a basis for process efficiency calculations. The main constituent of laterite ore is Fe (41.89 wt%); it also contains Al (2.16 wt%), Mg (1.75 wt%), Ni (1.22 wt%), Mn (0.85 wt%), and Co (0.08 wt%) ( The crystal structure of laterite ore was characterized by XRD and it was found that it contains goethite (FeO(OH)), talc (Mg Carbothermic reduction experiments were carried out on the basis of the 2 As can be seen in Flux type (X Flux-to-ore mass ratio (X As can be seen in As can be seen in On the basis of the factor effect coefficients, an empirical model of the form shown below was prepared for Sc composition in the slag phase (R The optimum conditions for obtaining maximum Sc composition were calculated using Eq. The metallic samples obtained after the carbothermic reduction were characterized with XRD and SEM-EDS. The metallic phase of run 10 (high levels of X The rate of this reaction depends on the cooling rate and the presence of certain elements such as Ni, Al, C, and Si. The size and distribution of the graphite flakes determine the mechanical properties and applications of the product (  In To validate this hypothesis, carbothermic reduction experiments were conducted using Sc To investigate the mechanism of scandium carbide formation from scandium oxide and graphite, EPMA analysis was carried out on the sample smelted at high carbon ratio of 0.5 ( As can be seen in For the second step of the process, i.e., NaOH cracking, Sc-rich slag was produced under the optimum conditions (run 8) of the carbothermic reduction process. As can be seen in Similar to carbothermic reduction process, a fractional factorial design methodology was utilized to design the 2 The negative effect of liquid (acid)-to-slag ratio (X Under acidic conditions, silica easily converts to silicic acid ( The extraction behavior of Al, Mg, Mn, and Si followed a similar trend to Sc extraction, although the significance and magnitude of each factor effect was slightly different (Supplementary material Fig. S10). The next step will involve the separation and purification of Sc, which is the subject of a future study. To predict the extraction of Sc under certain conditions, an empirical extraction model for Sc (R Based on this equation, the optimum operating conditions to maximize Sc extraction from slag were determined to be high levels of baking temperature (X The baked slag samples and the residue after the leaching step were characterized using XRD and SEM. After baking at 400 °C with 1 mL After the leaching process, the residue is composed of thenardite (Na As can be seen in In the present study, a two-stage process was developed to concentrate and extract scandium from nickeliferous laterite ore while producing ferronickel alloy as a by-product similar to conventional ferronickel smelting process. The carbothermic reduction process was performed at 1400–1600 °C using lignite as a reductant and calcia and/or silica as a fluxing reagent. A systematic study was carried out using a fractional factorial design methodology. On the basis of the results, an empirical model was built to optimize the process, maximizing Sc concentration in the slag phase. The optimum conditions were determined to be high smelting temperature and low carbon ratio, without flux. Under these conditions, Sc was successfully concentrated in the slag phase, to >14 times the concentration of the feed laterite. Furthermore, fundamental investigations were performed to determine the effect of each variable and to elucidate the carbothermic reduction reaction mechanism. Following carbothermic reduction, a two-step NaOH cracking process was performed to extract Sc from the slag phase. Under the optimum conditions found (high baking temperature, high NaOH ratio, long baking time, and low liquid ratio), 88% of the Sc was recovered from the slag. An empirical model was successfully fitted to the measured results. Fundamental studies demonstrated that during the baking step, slag reacts with NaOH molecules forming sodium sulfate and silica. It was also shown that the gelation of silicic acid in the leaching step could hamper the recovery of target elements from silicates. Future studies would focus on the separation and purification of Sc from the leachate. There are no conflicts to declare. The authors would like to acknowledge the financial support provided by  Supplementary data to this article can be found online at