This paper presents a model to simulate the monotonic and cyclic behaviours of weakly cemented sands. An elastoplastic constitutive model within the framework of bounding surface plasticity theory is adopted to predict the mechanical behaviour of soft sandstone under monotonic and cyclic loadings. In this model, the loading surface always passes through the current stress state regardless of the type of loading. Destruction of the cementation bonds by plastic deformation in the model is considered as the primary mechanism responsible for the mechanical degradation of loosely cemented sands/weak rock. To model cyclic response, the unloading plastic and elastic moduli are formulated based on the loading/reloading plastic and elastic moduli. The proposed model was implemented in FLAC2D and evaluated against laboratory triaxial tests under monotonic and cyclic loadings, and the model results agreed well with the experimental observations. For cyclic tests, hysteresis loops are captured with reasonable accuracy.This paper focuses on the constitutive model and degradation behaviour of cemented sand/soft sandstone under monotonic and cyclic loadings. Two main approaches for the study of weak sandstone degradation behaviour caused by repeated loading include laboratory testing by conducting cyclic loading tests and the development of cyclic plasticity theories. The majority of the studies in the area of cyclic loading of sandstone or cemented sand are limited to earthquake (dynamic) type of loading. Few studies have characterized the deformation properties of sandstone under slow cyclic loading both theoretically and experimentally. In general, the behaviour of geomaterials under cyclic loading is remarkably complex. This may be due to the dependence of the constitutive relationship on pressure and void ratio as well as the nonlinear behaviour of the sand matrix ( Most models for slow cyclic loading have been proposed for cohesionless soils and few studies have been conducted on sandstone behaviour in response to slow cyclic loading. Thus a model that could capture soft sandstone response under slow cyclic loading would be a significant advancement. The particular difficulty in the integration of the critical state concept in cyclic modelling is noted in the literature ( The traditional plasticity theory appears to be unsuitable for modelling cyclic loading since it predicts a purely elastic response during unloading and reloading within the yield surface. That is, no plastic deformation is predicted for unloading and reloading unless the stress path reaches the yield surface again ( The effect of non-uniform deformation at different stages of loading and unloading can be illustrated using a friction block model. Uniform deformation is analogous to a single block as shown in Non-uniform deformation in a material can be conceptually represented by a series of blocks as shown in If If As demonstrated in this simple system of blocks, the hysteresis effect is a result of non-uniform mobilization of frictional forces under the blocks since they are connected by deformable springs. If the blocks are connected by rigid springs, the hysteresis effect will disappear. In the case of a real material, since the stresses and strains in the material are generally non-uniform at the mesoscopic scale, it will give rise to the hysteresis effect much like the series of blocks connected by deformable springs. Therefore, energy dissipation occurs during the unloading and reloading process below the latest yield point. The shortcomings of the classical plasticity theory led to extensive research, beginning in the 1960s, on developing more sophisticated plasticity models to capture the cyclic behaviour of geomaterials ( Note that for our target material (i.e. naturally or artificially cemented sand), few constitutive models have been developed to simulate cyclic behaviour. For instance, The aim of this paper is to present a continuum elastoplastic constitutive model within the framework of bounding surface plasticity to model cyclic loading of frictional and cohesive material. A critical state constitutive model proposed by Cemented soils and weak rocks constitute an intermediate class of geomaterials from a mechanical standpoint and are classified between soil and rock. They are often considered as non-textbook materials ( Cementation in naturally cemented sand originates from the precipitation of cementing agents like silica, carbonate minerals (especially calcite), clay minerals and iron oxides onto the surface of sand particles ( Cementation in artificially cemented sand comes from an externally added cementing agent such as Portland cement ( It is believed that the shear stress–strain curve for (artificially or naturally) cemented sand will eventually approach that for uncemented sand at a critical state which is associated with zero dilatancy rate (see The detailed description of the original model can be found in The CSL in many proposed constitutive models for sand is used as a reference state to which various states of the soil are compared. Difficulty in determining the CSL position and the uncertainty of its position when the soil is loaded in different directions of shearing are the major setbacks for this approach. Errors in the determination of the CSL in these models can result in inaccuracies in the predicted behaviour ( The yield function of the original model is expressed as ( The parameter When the stress path is at the peak of UESP, it is found from Eq. Isotropic nonlinear elasticity is adopted in the original model as Following the work of Similar to how In line with the general tendencies to use as many simplifying assumptions as possible and to predict the stress–strain relationships using the simplest possible approach ( To account for non-uniform deformation during cyclic loading, kinematic/anisotropic hardening parameters (i.e. The bounding and loading surfaces are assumed to have the same shape for simplicity. In terms of the conventional triaxial parameters, the bounding surface To ensure that the current stress state will not cross the bounding surface, it is assumed that the initial ratio of size of the two surfaces remains constant during the shearing process. It is also assumed that the components of the kinematic hardening tensor always coincide with the two surfaces, i.e.  Destruction of the bonds between sand grains due to plastic deformation is assumed to lead to only the changes in the size of the loading and bounding surfaces. Their shapes, however, are supposed to remain unchanged. To consider this destruction process, the following simple linear relationship is assumed: Note that the origin of plastic deformation of sand under low shear stresses mainly comes from grain crushing at the particle contact. Gross slippage at the particle contact, however, is responsible for plastic deformation under high shear stresses because the mobilized shear stresses are sufficient to overcome the resistance of the contact ( The nonlinear kinematic hardening law of The parameters The definition of the elastic moduli in the original model is modified similar to This definition provides two important features of the bonded geomaterials: (a) extra initial elastic stiffness due to bonding; and (b) the progressive reduction of elastic moduli due to the breakage of bonding during plastic straining ( The elastic properties for unloading conditions with a slight modification are given as Suggestion of these expressions for the unloading elastic moduli comes from experimental observations. That is, the stiffness shows a sudden increase immediately after the inception of unloading accompanied with a sudden decrease when soil undergoes further unloading ( Experimental observations suggest that dilatancy is affected by the degree of cementation between sand particles. Most of studies have shown that an increase in the cement content gives rise to an increase in dilatancy and subsequent decrease in compression ( By incorporating cohesion for compression, Rowe's stress–dilatancy relationship can be calculated by ( Clearly, when cohesion approaches zero, the original Rowe's stress–dilatancy relationship for cohesionless soils is recovered. The plastic potential function ( Consistent with Constitutive equations are governed by the following equations in line with incrementally linear stress–strain relationships:    Due to the decrease in the stress ratio, higher plastic strains are predicted for a given total strain increment with advancement of unloading during one-way cyclic loading, which is in accordance with experimental observations. The parameters Initial value of Initial value of tensile strength to evaluate Decay parameter of bond strength Cohesion Rate of degradation of cohesion Anisotropic hardening parameters Ratio of unloading plastic modulus to that of loading The initial value of The parameter The parameter The parameter The anisotropic hardening parameters The parameter The performance of the proposed model is examined first against two sets of triaxial monotonic loading tests. Then, it is assessed against two triaxial one-way cyclic loading tests. All simulations performed by FLAC are based on axisymmetric conditions. As seen in  The model was next examined against the cyclic triaxial data ( The model was then assessed against cyclic triaxial data of the rufous sandstone, which is a slightly weathered rock (  A continuum elastoplastic constitutive model has been presented in this paper to investigate the degradation of weak artificially and naturally cemented sand under monotonic and one-way cyclic loadings. Destruction of bonds between sand particles due to plastic deformation has been considered as the reason for mechanical degradation under applied loads. Several triaxial monotonic and cyclic compression tests on both artificially and naturally cemented sands have been chosen to assess the model performance. A comparison between the predicted and observed behaviours shows reasonably fair agreement. Hysteresis loops have been captured with reasonable accuracy too. However, the observed softening response cannot be reproduced by the model well. Moreover, the increase in volumetric strain (i.e. further compaction) upon unloading cannot be modelled by the proposed constitutive model. Modification of the stress–dilatancy relationship under unloading conditions appears to be a potential candidate for addressing this shortcoming. The authors wish to confirm that there are no known conflicts of interest associated with this publication and there has been no significant financial support for this work that could have influenced its outcome. Funding for this project has been provided by