Background/Purpose
                  This served as the first report from our locality to evaluate the modified Stoppa approach, via a low-midline wound, for treating pelvic–acetabular fractures.
               
                  Methods
                  A total of 17 polytrauma patients with pelvic and/or acetabular fractures were consecutively treated using the modified Stoppa approach. They were followed up for at least 1 year postoperatively for radiographic and clinical assessments, which included the Modified Merle d’Aubigne Score, Harris Hip Score, and pain visual analogue scale.
               
                  Results
                  Among the 17 patients, 11 had pelvic ring fractures, two had isolated acetabular fractures, and four had a combination of both. Excellent and anatomical reduction was achieved in 73.3% of pelvic fractures and 71.4% of acetabular fractures. Functional outcomes simulated a bimodal distribution. Age of patient and Injury Severity Score were significant predictors for functional results, whereas fracture characteristics and quality of reduction were not correlated with clinical outcomes in this series. We experienced a low complication rate.
               
                  Conclusion
                  Excellent exposure for fracture reduction and fixation with low complication rate was achieved with the modified Stoppa approach. We were encouraged by the results of this preliminary series for treating pelvic–acetabular fractures in polytrauma patients.Since its first description by Cole and Bolhofner Favourable results, in terms of both radiographic and clinical outcomes, with the use of the modified Stoppa approach have been increasingly described by the literature worldwide, Patients with pelvic–acetabular fractures frequently suffer from hypovolaemic shock on arrival, as a result of profuse fracture bleeding into the pelvic cavity. A low-midline incision and subsequent retroperitoneal packing, with or without immediate upward extension for standard laparotomy as indicated, remains one of the standard measures to resuscitating these victims of high-energy trauma. The aim of this study was therefore to evaluate the midterm radiographic, functional outcomes and associated complications of pelvic–acetabular fractures fixed with the modified Stoppa approach, with a focus on patient demographics and fracture characteristics, as well as the need for additional surgical windows for definitive fixation. An attempt was also made to identify potential predictive factors for better clinical and operative results. Between May 2010 and May 2014, a total of 17 consecutive patients with 18 pelvic and/or acetabular fractures (1 patient having bilateral involvement) received definitive fixation by the modified Stoppa approach. All of them were primarily admitted into a single trauma institute of the locality. A minimum follow-up period of 12 months postoperatively was required for every patient included. Preoperative data including patient demographics, mechanism of injury, Injury Severity Score All of our patients were polytrauma patients who suffered from high-energy injury. They all received retroperitoneal packing via a low-midline incision as part of the emergency life-saving treatment for their pelvic and/or acetabular fractures, as part of the management protocol of our institution. Subsequent definitive fixation surgery using the modified Stoppa approach was performed by one of the two senior authors. Perioperative data including operating time, blood loss, and need of additional surgical window were documented. Postoperatively, reduction quality of the fractures was assessed by using the above-mentioned standard plain radiographs. Reduction of the pelvic ring fractures and acetabular fractures was evaluated separately using the criteria put forward by Matta All patients were followed up at 6 weeks, 3 months, 6 months, and 12 months after initial surgery. The same set of standard radiographs were taken at each time point for detection of (1) loss of reduction; (2) unusual progress of fracture union; (3) implant failure; (4) heterotopic ossification; and (5) osteoarthritic change using gradings again defined by Matta. Complications were recorded with special attention to occurrence of infection, neurovascular injury, fracture nonunion, and breakage of implant. Statistical analysis was completed using SPSS for Windows version 21.0.0 (SPSS Inc., Chicago, IL, USA). Pearson’s χ All operations were performed with the patient lying supine on a flat radiolucent table, permitting fluoroscopic guidance of reduction and fixation. The entire abdomen and ipsilateral lower limb were draped mobile, with the hip and knee flexed with bumps to relax the iliopsoas muscle and external iliac vessels ( As all our patients had received retroperitoneal packing with low-midline approach as initial emergency management, we utilised the same incision for our modified Stoppa approach. The incision was from a point just distal to the umbilicus down to the level of pubic symphysis. The anterior rectus sheath was opened vertically in midline by incising the linea alba ( Reduction of fractures was done using reduction forceps or special pelvic clamps. Fixation of fractures was typically achieved using a 3.5-mm pelvic reconstruction plate or 6.5-mm cannulated screws. The quadrilateral plate fragment was fixed by an overbent 3.5-mm reconstruction plate that acted as a spring plate. After thorough irrigation and haemostasis, suction drains were placed at the retropubic space and the internal iliac fossa (if lateral window was used). Wounds were closed using polyfilament absorbable sutures for fascia plus subcutaneous layers, and nonabsorbable monofilament sutures for skin. Among the 17 patients in our series, there were 11 men and six women. Their detailed demographic characteristics and perioperative data are shown in Eleven patients had pelvic ring fractures and two patients had isolated acetabular fractures. The remaining four patients had combined pelvic ring and acetabular fractures; one of them had a pelvic ring fracture (Tile B3) plus bilateral acetabular fractures (right transverse; left anterior column), as shown in A total of eight cases required an additional surgical window during fracture reduction and fixation. Most of the patients (75%) had a lateral window of ilioinguinal approach added, while the remaining required a Kocher–Langenback approach as well for treating associated posterior column acetabular fractures. The presence of fracture involvement of the acetabulum, be it isolated or combined, strongly predicted the need for an additional window during surgery ( The radiographic results were overall satisfactory ( Most of the patients enjoyed reasonable ambulation after completion of rehabilitation. More than 70% of them were able to either walk unaided or with the help of a stick. Up to 35% managed to regain their premorbid ambulatory status. The mean score for pain using VAS of 0–10 was only 2.8. The mean modified Merle d’Aubigne score was 15.5 (standard deviation, 4.4), with 58.8% of patients attaining excellent/good clinical outcomes according to the MDA grading. Nevertheless, patients with poor MDA grade also accounted for a significant portion (29.5%). The average Harris Hip Score was 66.8. We also tried to delineate a possible link between the preoperative characteristics, quality of reduction, and clinical outcomes of our patients ( Similarly, the extent and multitude of trauma suffered were also predictive of the functional outcome. A higher ISS correlated significantly with a poorer MDA score (Spearman’s correlation coefficient −0.55, The complications encountered in our series are summarized in This serves as the first retrospective study from our locality about the use of the modified Stoppa approach for fixation of pelvic–acetabular fractures. A preliminary series of 17 patients were operated upon; all being high-energy trauma victims who incurred multiple injuries with high ISS. Our centre began to use the modified Stoppa approach in 2010. It is undeniable that a steep learning curve was initially experienced for this anterior intrapelvic approach, in terms of the technical steps of dissection as well as difficulty to manipulate and temporarily hold the reduction of the quadrilateral plate. Nevertheless, we could fully appreciate the good visibility of the pubis, supra-/infrapectineal surfaces of the ilium that this approach offers. The quadrilateral plate can be assessed with the surgeon standing on the contralateral side of the operating table. To add on, advantages reported by previous literature, including reduced risks of vascular injury In contrast to the original Pfannestial type of incision, we made use of a low-midline incision to perform the modified Stoppa approach in all our patients. If exposure to the contralateral pelvic ring was warranted, we extended the dissection to the opposite side via the same incision. This permitted our access to the entire pelvic ring except the posterior wall of the acetabulum. One of our patients, a 59-year-old pedestrian who was hit by a motor vehicle, had a Tile B3 pelvic ring injury together with bilateral acetabular fractures. We managed to fix her bilateral fractures via one single midline incision ( In most of our patients, we were able to attain satisfactory to excellent fracture reduction, as presented in Regarding the clinical outcomes of our patients, we observed good results in terms of their mobility status, as > 70% of them could ambulate either unaided or just with a stick upon completion of their rehabilitation. However, for the functional scores we measured in this study, that is, the MDA and Harris Hip scores, we could see a bimodal distribution among our patients. In our series of 17 patients, 10 achieved good or excellent grades for MDA score, while five out of the remaining seven patients actually achieved a poor grade. This made the percentage of patients having MDA > 14 low as compared to those reported by Sagi et al. In addition, we were unable to demonstrate any correlation between the accuracy of fracture reduction and final clinical outcome in this series. This was in contrary to Matta, Low complication rate was reported in our series. None of our patients developed deep vein thrombosis, despite a mean operating time of > 3 hours and no specific pharmacological measures taken for anticoagulation; this could be related to the overall lower thromboembolic risk for Asian people. There were several limitations to our study: (1) the case number was low and the study design was retrospective in nature; (2) there was a lack of comparison with results using the classic ilioinguinal approach; (3) heterogeneic fracture patterns and characteristics were observed among our patients, and some of them might have had an isolated pelvic ring or acetabular injury, whereas some had a combination of both; and (4) follow-up duration was limited as only patients followed for < 1 year were excluded. In conclusion, we experienced encouraging results with the use of the modified Stoppa approach for pelvic–acetabular fracture fixation, in terms of radiological and clinical outcomes. Instead of the classical Pfannestial incision, the use of a low-midline incision also enabled a safe and easy path for dissection during definitive fixation. The concern of deep infection using this wound packing can be minimised by meticulous dissection, stringent haemostasis, copious irrigation, use of suction drains, and appropriate antibiotic prophylaxis as demonstrated in our series. The combination of other operative windows extends its indication towards more complicated fracture patterns, including those with posterior column involvement. We hope for a larger cohort and a longer follow-up period to better examine our results for this approach. Despite the emergence of minimally invasive methods in pelvic–acetabular fracture fixation, for example, the use of three-dimensional computer navigation system, we believe that the modified Stoppa approach is still invaluable for treating fractures with significant displacement, comminution, quadrilateral plate involvement, and delayed presentation. The authors declared no potential conflicts of interest with respect to the research, authorship, and/or publication of this article.