A number of different laboratory wear tests have been undertaken to measure the wear resistance of a natural rubber and a eutectic and hypereutectic white iron under abrasion and erosion conditions. Laboratory work included two different slurry jet erosion tests, a Coriolis test and an ASTM dry sand rubber wheel test.
                  The laboratory results were compared with wear of the same materials in a centrifugal slurry pump application in a mineral processing plant. The pump application has been monitored for over 2 years and over 40 parts run to destruction. Analysis of the wear data shows a factor of almost 3 difference in wear rate between the rubber and the best white iron. Coefficient of variance of the data was in line with typical wear results from the field.
                  The laboratory wear tests were conducted with a silica sand slurry and average particle size range of 300–500μm to match the field conditions. The Coriolis and one of the jet erosion tests showed order of magnitude similarity with the field test results for the metals, but the other tests gave very different trends. The jet and Coriolis erosion tests on the rubber showed a much lower wear rate than seen in the field, while the DSRW test found that the eutectic white iron wear rate was lower than that of the hypereutectic iron (all opposite of the field test).
                  Explanation for the different wear rates between the laboratory and field tests was postulated to be non-representative wear mechanisms. This is compounded by the lack of understanding of specific wear conditions in the pump (local velocity, concentration, particle size, size distribution and particle shape) as well as microstructure of the samples.The wear of centrifugal slurry pumps in mill circuit applications in mineral processing plant is generally quite severe. Typical life of pumps is in the range 1500–4000 The mill circuit pump shown above has a number of key internal parts subject to wear. These include the rotating impeller that imparts energy to the fluid, the casing liner, the frame liner (or back liner) and the throatbush or inlet side-liner. The impeller and throatbush orientation is shown in Walker The type of wear that occurs on the throatbush is not well understood. It is hypothesised to be a combination of 2 or 3 body abrasion and mostly erosion. During operation with the above pump, the throatbush is adjusted regularly (often weekly) up to touch with the rotating impeller causing both metal–metal contact and wedging of any particles in the gap. There is however only a relatively short touching period and as both parts subsequently wear there is increased flow in the gap and erosion wear. As the gap increases there is less abrasion wear and more erosion wear. This cycle repeats with 8–10 adjustments not uncommon over the life of the part. The objective of the current research is to compare the wear life seen in the field application of the throatbush material with that of similar material in laboratory simulated wear tests. The laboratory tests included two tests in Australia (using the author's erosion jet tester and a commercial dry sand rubber wheel (DSRW) abrasion test at a technical institute) and two tests (slurry jet erosion (SJE) and Coriolis erosion) undertaken at research establishments in Canada. In the current work, the wear rate in mm/day is used as the base measure for comparison. This assumes a relatively constant mass flow rate through the pump for all data points. Wear depth on the throatbush was measured using a simple template as shown in A point to note in In examining data from different pump applications (including some mill circuit), Walker Given this sort of variability, it is essential that there is sufficient data to be able to statistically determine a wear rate, mean and standard deviation so as to meaningfully compare the different material performance. In field slurry applications (operating plants) this is generally far easier said than done, as many variables are not controllable and equipment often starts and stops to meet production or other equipment maintenance requirements. The current application is almost unique in the authors' 35 years experience. With co-operative plant personnel, a very consistent duty and multiple operating pumps on the same slurry it has been possible to accumulate a significant data set over a 2 year period. The slurry particle size analysis is shown in As mentioned in the introduction, an exact determination of the flow in the gap between the impeller and throatbush (and which is the primary influence on the wear of the throatbush) is difficult to determine. Further, the gap is changing all the time at a rate of up to 2 The other complicating factor for flow in the gap is determining a typical particle size distribution. Because of the strong centrifugal field due to the rotating impeller (at the impeller tip, tangential velocity is >25 The throatbush configuration is shown in  The very good performance of the 35% Cr iron is a function of the microstructure and increased volume of hard carbide phase relative to the 27% Cr iron. The 35% Cr is part of a unique family of hypereutectic white irons (tradename Hyperchrome®) that are inoculated to refine the microstructure during casting Given hypothesis that the throatbush wear is a mix of abrasion and erosion, the laboratory wear test results compared were a similar mix. Two different jet testers in different laboratories were used for erosion and a dry sand rubber wheel test (DSRW) for abrasion. Previously published results from a Coriolis test The jet test (eductor) is described by Walker and Bodkin Wear results from the original work The two metal samples were also tested using an ASTM G65 DSRW test under the conditions outlined in Each sample was tested twice, and the 35% Cr samples 4 times. Sample mass loss was measured relative to a K110 (heat treated steel) reference. Additional variants of each composition were tested–with and without heat treatment and with microstructural refinement for the 35% Cr material. Results are shown in As can be seen the 35% Cr material that performed so well in the field was the same as or worse in this test than the 27% Cr material. Heat treatment (and higher hardness) seemed to improve wear resistance, while the finer carbide 35% Cr iron performed better than the coarser carbide material (when both were not heat treated). The SJE is a recirculating slurry loop with an air operated diaphragm pump that is controlled to ensure constant velocity of flow through the nozzle onto the samples. Test conditions are shown in Sample volume loss is measured indirectly using a mass/loss/density calculation or directly using a non-contacting laser profilometer. A photo of the rig and typical sample profile are shown in Results for the SJE test are shown in The Coriolis test results are taken from the work of Llewellyn et al. Volume loss determinations for the wear scars were carried out with a non-contacting optical 3D surface imaging system. The vertical resolution of this instrument is 3 The wear test results are shown in For the rubber tests, the wear with the rounded sand particles was negligible. For the sharper particles the wear of the rubber was less than that of 27% Cr, with the softer 40 The relative wear rates for all the materials on different testers are shown in Mean particle sizes are similar for all laboratory tests (150–500 Whilst particle shape was not measured, it is obviously a major factor in the different results seen both between the laboratory tests and the laboratary and field tests. In the field test, the particles are angular, freshly crushed from the grinding and milling process. In the laboratory tests the SiC and Al The effect of particle shape and size has a marked impact on the relative rubber wear as seen with the jet and Coriolis laboratory tests. The rounded particles exhibited negligible wear, while the sharp particles of similar size had a much greater wear rate. Extrapolating this effect might go some way to explain the much lower rubber wear rates seen in the laboratory wear tests relative to the field test. The quantity of larger particles seen in the field test would certainly contribute to a higher relative wear rates for the rubber also. Particle hardness would have been similar for the siliceous ore of the field test and the sand laboratory tests, but the sharp SiC and Al Relative slurry velocities in the laboratory erosion tests (10–20 While the slurry concentrations of the laboratory tests (10 It is well known that the finer the microstructure, the smaller the inter-carbide distance, and the more effective the carbide volume can be in preventing wear As mentioned previously, Llewellyn et al. The worn 35% Cr iron throatbush surface from the field trial is shown magnified in The worn surface morphology of the DSRW and jet eductor test samples are quite different from the field test surface as can be seen in In the jet eductor test (  There is no carbide fracturing evident with the Coriolis test like that seen from the field sample (viz. Llewellyn et al. The challenge in using the jet test and the Coriolis test is to ensure that the particle size, shape and velocity are representative, so that ensuring the wear mechanisms with both white iron and rubber is similar to what is happening in the field. This seems to be particularly the case with rubber, where exceeding a threshold particle shape and size can radically alter the wear rate as contact conditions change from purely elastic collisions to cutting or tearing. The DSRW abrasion test does not appear to be that helpful in predicting predominantly erosion wear in a throatbush. The SJE recirculating slurry jet test is problematic due to the attrition of the particles over the test period. This results in much lower wear rates than would be seen in a field situation, particularly with rubber materials that have extremely low wear with rounded particles. The larger stand-off distance of the sample (100 A couple of final comments: Cast white iron microstructure is critical in determining wear rate and any laboratory sample must be the same as the field part to ensure reasonable accuracy of the laboratory tests (reducing carbide size and increasing carbide volume in hypereutectic white iron can reduce wear rate by up to 10× over that of standard eutectic white iron). Producing laboratory (small) scale samples of white iron automatically leads to finer microstructure than would be seen with large thickness cast parts. One of the major logistics problems with a laboratory wear test is trying to get a result in a reasonable period of time, particularly with elastomeric materials. Inevitably speeding up the test (by increasing velocity and using sharper, larger particles) changes the wear mechanisms, invalidating the result. The Coriolis test looks most promising in simulating the wear conditions but suffers because of the limit on maximum particle size (<1  The field test of a slurry pump throatbush found that the wear rate on natural rubber was 45% greater and the wear rate of a hypereutectic white iron was 43% less than that for a standard high chrome eutectic white iron (ISO21988/JN/HBW555XCr); coriolis and jet eductor lab wear tests gave same order of magnitude relative results as did the field test for the hypereutectic white irons; however accuracy was poor; the DSRW and SJE lab test found that 35% Cr hypereutectic white iron wear rate was higher than that of the standard 27% Cr eutectic white iron (i.e. opposite of the field trial); the SJE, Coriolis and jet eductor lab test found that the natural rubber wear rates were much lower than that of the standard 27% Cr eutectic white iron (i.e. opposite of the field trial); the differences in the laboratory wear test are largely attributed to the wear mechanisms not being representative of those seen in the field situation (due to particle impact energy and/or impingement angle and particle shape and/or size). The permission of The Weir Group PLC to publish this paper is gratefully acknowledged. Warman® and Hyperchrome® are registered trademarks of Weir Minerals Australia Ltd.