Grain-size control on sediment composition is investigated in modern proximal sediment from the Sila Massif, where basic to felsic intrusive rocks are exposed in a Mediterranean humid–temperate upland climate. Samples were taken from small creeks and weathering profiles from three areas reflecting different bed rock compositions. Samples were separated into eleven grain size fractions from very coarse sand to clay and analyzed by (i) X-ray fluorescence for chemical composition and (ii) X-ray diffraction and Mineral Liberation Analysis for mineralogical composition. The chemical composition vs. grain size relations were modeled by compositional linear regression. Mineralogical composition of selected samples is used to substantiate the interpretations based on geochemistry.
               
                  Results
                  reveal a high degree of chemical weathering with chemical index of alteration (CIA) up to 92. High CIA values are restricted to the fine-grained fractions, while sand-sized sediment average at low to moderate CIA values (~60). Although strongly weathered, the three sample suites reflecting basic to felsic plutonic bed rock can be effectively discriminated across all grain-size classes using trace elements such as V, Rb, and Sr. Linear trend modeling and mineralogical data reflect similar patterns for all sample suites implying similar processes independent of source rock composition. This includes overall decrease of quartz and K-feldspar over the full grain-size range from very coarse sand to clay, which is contrasted by overall increase of sheet silicates from coarse to fine. Among the latter, increase of clay minerals strongly outpaces the increase of micas in silt to clay fractions. A more complex behavior is shown by plagioclase, which is most abundant in intermediate grain-size fractions for all sample suites. This is likely caused by initial hydrolysis along cleavage and twinning planes and subsequent breakage of plagioclase crystals into smaller fragments. Towards finer grain size, intense hydrolysis has destroyed most feldspars.The chemical and mineralogical compositions of sediments and sedimentary rocks are strongly controlled by grain size (e.g. The high relevance of grain-size for analyzing sediment composition is contrasted by the fact that analyzing the entire grain-size spectrum is often impossible, due to limitations of the accessible rock record as well as specific methodological constraints (e.g., microscopic determination of framework grains or heavy minerals is restricted to certain grain-size ranges). Therefore, classic approaches to infer geological conditions from sediment composition typically rely on data obtained from a given narrow grain size range (e.g. The aim of the paper is to describe and quantify the effects of grain size and source-rock lithology on geochemical and mineralogical compositions of sediments in a specific case study. The samples were taken from three areas of the humid–temperate Sila Massif, southern Italy, composed of contrasting basic to felsic plutonic source rocks. A broad grain size spectrum covering more than three orders of magnitude from very coarse sand to clay is considered. Previous studies have documented significant chemical weathering of soils and sediment in the Sila Massif (e.g. The study is essentially based on geochemical data because they can be obtained easily and precisely for the full grain size spectrum from very coarse sand to clay, which covers > The study area is located in the uplands of the Sila Massif in northern Calabria (southern Italy) at altitudes between approx. 1150 and 1600 The Calabrian Massif constitutes an allochthonous crustal segment of the western Variscan belt in Europe, exposed in a structurally high position between the Alpine Mesozoic to Cenozoic sedimentary nappe piles of the Apennines to the North and the Maghrebides in Sicily to the Southwest ( The samples were collected in June 2010 (RT3) and September 2013 (RT4). They derive from three different areas of the Sila Massif, which were selected to represent the diverse range of the Sila Batholith from felsic to basic plutonic rocks. From north to south, the first area is located to the northeast of Lago Cecita and exposes felsic rocks of granodiorite to monzogranite composition (i.e. cordierite-bearing biotite–muscovite granodiorite to monzogranite according to Two types of samples have been collected: modern sediment from small proximal creeks (Sed, N Samples were separated in up to eleven grain-size fractions ranging from very coarse sand (1 to 2 Each sediment grain-size fraction was powdered, fused using lithium metaborate, and subsequently analyzed by X-ray fluorescence (XRF) method using a PANalytical AXIOS Advanced sequential X-ray spectrometer at the Geoscience Center Göttingen. All samples and grain size fractions were analyzed for ten major element oxides (SiO Each sediment grain-size fraction was powdered, fused using lithium metaborate, and subsequently analyzed by X-ray fluorescence (XRF) method using a PANalytical AXIOS Advanced sequential X-ray spectrometer at the Geoscience Center Göttingen. All samples and grain size fractions were analyzed for ten major element oxides (SiO Analytical precision is typically in the range of 1% for major elements and 5% for trace elements. Accuracy of measurements was tested against internationally certified reference materials with values for JB-3, JA-2, and JR-1 taken from Selected samples were analyzed by X-ray diffraction (XRD) for identification and quantification of mineral phases. Individual grain size fractions were wet milled with a McCrone micronising mill in distilled water, evaporated to dryness at 60 All Mineral Liberation Analysis (MLA) measurements were run on a scanning electron microscope FEI Quanta 650F equipped with two Bruker Quantax X-Flash 5030 Silicon Drift Detectors (SDD) and the specific software MLA Suite 3.1.4 for automated data acquisition. The MLA measurements were carried out at the Geometallurgy Laboratory at the Helmholtz Institute Freiberg. More detailed information about the functionality of the MLA system can be found in The statistical techniques applied are fundamentally based on the log-ratio approach to compositional data, as introduced by The variability of the major element oxide concentrations for the three sample suites B, F1, and F2 against the eleven separated grain-size fractions from very coarse sand to clay is illustrated in Trace element concentrations typically vary by an order of magnitude across sample suites and grain-size range ( Evaluation of the covariance structure of the dataset is performed using compositional biplots, which provide a 2D-representation of multivariate compositional data based on principal components (e.g. The major element biplot of the entire data set ( The mixed biplot of major elements and selected trace elements ( Comparing only the two granitoid suites F1 and F2 allows for focusing the biplot analysis on features controlled by parameters other than source rock, such as grain-size and/or sample type. A threefold structure becomes visible that is predominantly controlled by grain size ( The modeling has been restricted to the major elements (including LOI) and the intermediate to felsic suites F1 and F2, as only these provide reasonable numbers of samples. Constraints on the linear regression model like (i) similar slope over the full grain-size range and (ii) distinct steps at Φ The resulting linear trend indicates a reasonable fit to the compositional range of sample suites F1 and F2 for all major elements except for P The XRD analysis of three selected samples covers the grain-size spectrum from coarse sand to clay as well as all three sample suites B, F1, and F2. Inferred mineral compositions include quartz, K-feldspar (orthoclase, microcline), plagioclase (almost pure albite to Ca-rich varieties), amphibole (hornblende), pyroxene (enstatite, augite), Ti-phases (ilmenite, rutile), muscovite, biotite, chlorite, clay minerals (illite, smectite, kaolinite), and gibbsite. Quantitative phase models are well adjusted if the quality parameter 1–ρ of the Rietveld refinement is approx. 1%. This criterion is reasonably fulfilled for the sample suites F1 and F2 (1–ρ: 0.8%–3.5%) but less well for sample suite B (1–ρ: 2.5%–6.6%). For this sample qualitative analysis revealed a Mg-rich amphibole phase (e.g. cummingtonite) which could not be quantified by AutoQuan due to the lack of an appropriate structural model. As a consequence, the amorphous content in this sample is calculated to ~ In general, mineral proportions are highly variable with respect to both sample suites and grain size. As expected, clay minerals and mica increase from coarse sand to clay. Increase of clay minerals is strongest in the finest fraction (~ Results for Mineral Liberation Analysis (MLA) are restricted to the sand-sized fractions of samples RT4-3 and RT4-4 (F1) as well as RT4-7 (B). The mineral phases (or groups) identified and quantified include quartz, K-feldspar, albite, plagioclase, amphibole (mainly hornblende), pyroxene (augite, pigeonite), biotite, chlorite, muscovite, clay minerals, Ti-minerals (e.g. ilmenite, titanite, TiO Comparison of XRD vs. MLA data for samples RT4-3 (suite F1) and RT4-7 (suite B), for which both methods were applied on two grain-size fractions each, yields an overall good agreement of the respective mineral phases ( Chemical weathering of silicate minerals such as feldspar or chain silicates leads to exchange of cations of alkaline and alkaline earth elements for H Calculated CIA values for the Sila samples show a very wide range from 55 to 92, i.e. from almost “fresh” to heavily weathered materials ( The strong chemical weathering in the Sila Massif has long been known and is described elsewhere. It is characterized by the development of deep weathering profiles on granitoid bedrock (e.g. Grain size dependence of chemical weathering indices was described earlier, but has been typically restricted to broader categories such as sand(stone) vs. mud(stone) (e.g. The three sample suites B, F1 and F2 reflect marked contrasts in bedrock mineralogy and geochemistry. The question is whether the sediments reflect these contrasts across the full grain size range despite intense chemical alteration? Raw data concentrations and covariance structure suggest high discriminative potential for K Consequently, a very good discrimination of the three sample suites is achieved in the ternary diagram with trace elements Rb, Sr and V, where relative V concentration effectively discriminates sample suite B from all the other samples (probability > Biplot analysis of major and trace elements as well as the linear regression model reveals strong grain size control on sediment composition. In mineralogical terms the general trend from coarse to fine is accompanied by the increase of sheet silicates at the expense of quartz and the silicates. The increase of sheet silicates is twofold: (i) newly formed clay minerals are preferentially concentrated in the finest fractions due to intense chemical weathering of feldspars and other silicates, and (ii) micas are enriched in the finer fractions due to enhanced chemical alteration and mechanical comminution along cleavage planes, as well as hydrodynamic sorting. This is reflected in the ratios of quartz and feldspar over both micas and clay minerals, which strongly decrease from sand to silt-clay ( Chemically, sheet silicate enrichment is reflected by an overall decrease of SiO In the silt to clay range, the linear model is characterized by strong increase in LOI and strong decrease of CaO and especially Na Interestingly, the least changes in the linear regression model over the full grain size range (i.e. smallest slopes regardless of sign; Regarding trace elements, the Zr/Zn ratio provides a straightforward proxy for grain size, as already observed for basic and granitoid rocks in glacial setting ( In an analogous study, The comparison shows striking contrasts in the modeled linear regression trends of the major elements against grain size ( Initial plagioclase weathering through hydrolysis along cleavage and/or twinning planes causes breakage and preferential enrichment of plagioclase over quartz and K-feldspar from coarse sand to very fine sand, as reflected in Ca increase (observation ii) and some Si decrease (observation i). The effect may be supported by initial amphibole weathering in the case of F1. Intense chemical weathering mainly through hydrolysis leads to the almost complete removal of feldspar and chain silicates from the intermediate grain sizes (3 Enrichment of various Al- and/or Fe-rich sheet silicates (biotite, chlorite, smectite, illite, kaolinite) towards the finer and finest fractions as a consequence of process no. 2 (observation iv). Enrichment of K-poor clay minerals (kaolinite, smectite) relative to micas in the finest fractions (observation v). This reflects ongoing removal of potassium, which is essential to obtain the high CIA values. The combination of processes (1) and (2) causes the smoothed Ca ( For the fine fractions, the elements showing most contrast between the highly weathered and the glacial case study are Al Analysis and modeling of composition vs. grain size relations of proximal sediments in a highly weathered Mediterranean setting (Sila Massif) and its comparison to a previous study in glacial settings in the European Alps ( The chemical index of alteration (CIA) corroborates strong chemical weathering by individual values as high as 92 and average values of 84 to 88 for the finest fractions. Fractions coarser than coarse silt (i.e. Φ Although strongly weathered, the three sample suites reflecting basic to intermediate (B), intermediate to felsic (F1), and felsic (F2) plutonic bed rock can be effectively discriminated across all grain-size classes using trace elements such as V, Rb, and Sr. At least in the coarser fractions, major elements Mg, Ca, and K do so, too. The chemical composition vs. grain-size relations can be accurately modeled by linear regression only if different slopes are allowed for the sand (Φ The mineralogy behind the geochemical data reflects overall (i.e. valid for all three sample suites) decrease of quartz and K-feldspar over the full grain-size range from coarse to fine. This is compensated by overall increase of sheet silicates from coarse to fine, where the increase of clay minerals strongly outpaces the increase of micas in the silt to clay fractions (i.e. Φ Mechanical comminution, mineral durability, and inherited grain-size distribution were found to be relevant parameters in the glacial case study, responsible for peaking of, for instance, quartz and total SiO Given the constantly contrasting behavior of SiO The application of Mineral Liberation Analysis (MLA) yields some encouraging results, namely (i) the apparent compatibility with X-ray diffraction data for the main source-rock forming minerals quartz, K-feldspar, plagioclase, amphibole, and most sheet silicates, and (ii) the abundance and grain-size distribution of certain heavy minerals. The potential of the method with respect to the fine grain size ranges and especially highly weathered materials needs further exploration. The following are the Supplementary data related to this article. Supplementary data to this article can be found online at Salvatore Critelli greatly supported us during field work in the Sila Massif and subsequent discussions. Sample preparation and grain-size fractionation were performed by Cornelia Friedrich. Journal reviewers Abhijit Basu and Gert Jan Weltje and guest editor Eduardo Garzanti are thanked for their careful and constructive handling of the manuscript.