The series of the 4-vinylpyridine and divinylbenzene cationic polymers (4-VP/DVB) in the presence of toluene or toluene and heptane (100wt.% in respect to the monomers mixture) were synthesised in order to obtain weak base anion exchangers with gel or macroporous structure. The strong base anion exchangers were obtained by its quaternization with alkyl iodide: propyl iodide, butyl iodide and pentyl iodide.
                  The FTIR spectra of anion exchangers were useful to characterize resins and degree of quaternization. The sorption and desorption ability of rhenium, Re(VII), as perrhenate anion from acid solution (sulphuric or hydrochloric acid 0.1M) were tested in batch and dynamic methods. The sorption of Re(VII) from the solution of 50mg Re/L reached about 60mg/g of dry resin in batch method.
                  All the investigated anion exchangers characterize with high selectivity of perrhenate from multicomponent solution containing chlorocomplexes of PGM metals (Pt, Pd) and Au. The sorption ability of PGM metals and Re(VII) is on the same level as from the solution containing only one ion.
                  The dynamic method of sorption allowed to reach the sorption of Re(VII) up 200mg/g of resin. The desorption of Re(VII) by ammonium (5wt.%), with the yield about 97%, was possible only from the weak base anion exchangers, where the degree of sorption and desorption is on the same level in the second and other cycles. The sorption ability of Re(VII) on new anion exchanger is comparable to commercial anion exchangers, like Reillex HP.One type of polymers containing both hydrophilic cationic groups, i.e. pyridinium rings (VP) and hydrophobic nonpolar segments in the ligands are modified pyridine crosslinked copolymers. They are one charge per monomer unit, such as polyelectrolite and ligands without charges, substituting the nitrogen in vinylpyridine. However their charge density is low, they possess the common characteristic of being able to interact strongly with opposite charges Mailland-Terrier and Caze The group of Romanian scientists conducted research on polymerization of 4-VP/DVB gel copolymers There are no systematic works about the synthesis, modification and sorption of perrhenate on vinylpyridine resins. Kholmogorov et al. Peganov and Molchanova The anion exchangers having 4-vinylpyridine rings were used to concentration and sorption of platinum group metals from the diluted acid solutions. The properties and sorption ability of 4-VP/DVB resin can be modified according to changes in the morphology. Porous anion exchangers with the largest specific surface area reveal lower sorption ability of Cr The commercial, macroporous weak base anion exchange resin of 4-vinylpyridine and divinylbenzene is known as Reillex HP and strong base anion exchange resin with a partially quaternized of 4-VP/DVB copolymer – as Reillex HPQ The platinum group metals and rhenium were also separated from the radioactive materials, because pyridinium anion exchangers characterize with better thermo- and radiostability than styrene/DVB ion exchangers The aim of this paper is to study the applicability of 4-vinylpyridine and divinylbenzene anion exchangers for sorption of perrhenate ions in batch and dynamic methods and evaluate its selectivity from multicomponent acidic solutions containing Au, Pt, Pd, and Re (as tetrachloroaurate, tertachloropalladate, hexachloroplatinate, and perrhenate anions, respectively). 4-Vinylpyridine (4-VP) (Aldrich) was purified by the vacuum distillation and 80 A typical procedure of 4-VP/DVB copolymer quaternization was as follows: about 2 The centrifugation technique was used to measure the water regain in which about 1 Nitrogen content was determined by the Kiejdahl’s method applied to the polymers. The resin sample (about 250 FTIR spectra in KBr pellets were recorded on a Perkin–Elmer System 2000 spectrophotometer Standard stock solution of Re(VII) was prepared by dissolving of NH Before batch tests started, the kinetics of Re(VII) sorption by the resins was examined. The kinetic study of sorption was done by mixing of the resin with a solution of Re(VII) (50 The affinity of the resins towards rhenium (presented as perrhenate), PGM metals and Au (presented as chlorocomplexes anions) was determined by a contact of the resin samples with 0.24 The Re(VII) solution (50 The solution of 50 Rhenium (VII) can be sorbed as perrhenate ( The SEM microphotographs of macroporous and gel copolymers are presented in During modification with alkyl iodide: propyl iodide (J3), butyl iodide (J4) and pentyl iodide (J5) only copolymers 1VP, 4VP, 7VP with spherical particles were used, because residual resins 2VP, 3VP and 5VP displayed low mechanical strength. Theirs beads were irregular and breakable. The synthetic route to quaternization of resins can be described schematically as presented in The FTIR spectra of 1VP and 1VPJ5 anion exchangers are presented in The next strong bands at 1069 and 1962  Sorption of Re(VII) was carried from perrhenate solution in 0.1 Some difference between the sorption of metal anions from sulphuric divalent ionic species and hydrochloric acid monovalent are known Tetrahedral, monovalent perrhenate anion ( Kinetic studies are conducted to determine the time taken by resin to reach equilibrium with Re(VII) concentration in 0.1 The ratio of nitrogen to Re(VII) in solution is very important parameter as it can be seen in  The next criterion of sorption ability is value of distribution coefficients (log After the hydrometallurgy process of copper, rhenium as perrhenate is located in waste sulphuric acid. Among the others ions the noble group metals, for example Pt, Pd, and Au, can be presented in the solution. In hydrometallurgical method the precious metals are dissolved mostly in the form of chlorocomplex ( The reactivity of platinum group metals – PGM metals depends on the oxidation state of the metal and nature of the reactant ligands of the anion exchangers. The order of reactivity with soft donor ligands is directly related to periodicity, with second row PGM being more reactive than third row PGM. The PGM-chlorocomplexes reacted with each others and can change their valences Multicomponent solution containing Au(III), Pt(IV), Pd(II), Re(VII) (0.24 All the investigated anion exchangers are characterized by high selectivity of perrhenate sorption, the same as sorption ability from the solutions containing only one ion (1VP and 7VP), but smaller on porous anion exchanger 4VP ( When adsorbents with amine functional groups are used, both the ion exchange and the complex formation mechanisms can take place via nitrogen pyridine atoms The chlorocomplexes of investigated metals demonstrate different bonds configuration Sorption of Re(VII) was carried in swollen form of resin (about of 0.45 During first cycles of sorption near 4 In the next three cycles only 1 L of Re(VII) solution was pumped for each columns during each cycles. Rhenium sorption on the strong base resin having pyridinium rings decreases drastically. In the next cycles the Re(VII) sorption on the strong base anion exchangers declines, but on the weak base resins are situated in the same level. Sorption ability towards Re(VII) on the weak base resins during dynamic cycles S2–S4 is shown as a following direct: During dynamic desorption cycles DS1-DS4 with 5 wt.% of NH   The next interesting parameter is the volume of ammonia solution essential to desorption of Re(VII). The volume of ammonia solution (5 As is evident from the results shown in the dynamic processes that only weak base resins are suitable to Re(VII) sorption and desorption under trial conditions presented in the experimental section. The strong base resins investigated during this study exhibit largest sorption than weak base resins, but theirs desorption of Re(VII) is very low. Newly prepared the resins 1VP and 4VP explain comparable ability for Re(VII) sorption and desorption like commercial the Reillex HP resin. In the next prepared paper the influence of temperature on selectivity of these weak base anion exchangers will be presented. The estimation of anion exchangers suitability for Re(VII) recovery may be done only in the dynamic processes of sorption and desorption during repeated cycles. Newly prepared anion exchangers obtained from 4-VP and DVB are suitable for the sorption of Re(VII) from the acidic solutions, but only weak base resins are appropriate for rhenium total desorption with 5 We thank the