In this paper, the state estimation issue for a set of switched complex dynamic networks affected by quantization is studied, in which the switching process is assumed to follow persistent dwell-time switching regulation. Thereinto, the switching regulation aforementioned describes the switchings among different parameters on complex dynamic networks. Meanwhile, for the network-based model, in the communication channels from the sensor to the estimator, quantization is inevitable to be taken into consideration. To track partially inaccessible information in the target system, a state estimator is thoroughly reconstructed. Intensive attention is that a set of sufficient conditions can be derived by using some simple matrix transformation methods, linear matrix inequality and Lyapunov stability theory, to further assure the error dynamic obtained is globally uniformly exponentially stable and meets passive property. The serviceability of the state estimator gains solved is finally verified and the effectiveness of the proposed design approach is further illustrated.Complex dynamic networks (CDNs) consist of countless dynamic units, and each unit connects the others forming or exhibiting intricate dynamic behavior. Such networks include, but not restricted to, the neural system consisting of numbers of neurons, the ever-changing websites of the World Wide Web, and the social network As already indicated, to better analyze the systems, it is significant to gain accurate state information. However, in many physical applications, the system states are not always fully accessible and the obtained measurements are inaccurate resulting from large scale networks, strong coupling and the difficulties in modeling. To combat the issue, the technique of state estimation is developed, which implements the tracking of unknown states in terms of reconstructing the estimate system. So far, various estimators have been applied in control area and abundant achievements have been reported in Switched system is a kind of hybrid systems that own the switching property. Many networks with flexible structures can be classified as switched systems and there have been considerable works on the switched systems According to the discussion mentioned above, in this work, the authors focus on addressing the quantized state estimation issue for CDNs governed by PDTSR, in which such switching regulation is employed to draw the switchings among topological structures and parameters. The main contributions of this paper are listed below. (i) Persistent dwell-time, as a kind of switching regulation, is adopted in this paper to generate a set of switching sequences orchestrating which subsystem will be activated in the concerned CDNs. In comparison, the switching regulation aforementioned has manifest advantages over DT or ADT switching regulation. (ii) To accurately reflect the actual situations and to study the impact of network-induced phenomena in the target system, we take quantification into account in communication channels. (iii) A passivity performance is explored for the associated CDNs, some revelent criteria are established simultaneously to ensure the global uniform exponential stability of the error system with a prescribed passive property under a set of persistent dwell-time switching sequences. The rest of the content is summarized as follows.  A complex network model consisting of Besides, for the Furthermore, the ideal measurement of system model Meanwhile, the actual measurement Given a quantization function From For tracing some state information in By setting For brief, letting Moreover, some definitions and a revelent lemma should be introduced for subsequent instructions. Firstly, the definition of PDTSR is recalled as below. The switching signal There are two kinds of intervals. One is the interval whose length is longer than Any two consecutive intervals longer than  The PDTSR employed in this paper is a kind of switching regulation with a comparative advantage compared with the DT or ADT. As we know, the DT If there exist two positive constants For two known matrices  In what follows, two theorems and the corresponding proofs are presented. Concretely, the analysis on prescribed stability and passive property are presented in Letting the switching signal For the nonlinear vector-valued function The other is an elaboration on the quantization effects. Combine Next, we first present the analysis of the global uniform exponential stability when ϖ(ℓ) ≡ 0, and the passivity is analyzed for the nonzero exogenous disturbance ϖ(ℓ).  First of all, the analysis of the global uniform exponential stability is shown under the exogenous disturbance ϖ(ℓ) ≡ 0. If 0 < From Assuming that From the definition of PDTSR, we get some inequalities Additionally, The establishment of While the disturbance ϖ(ℓ) is nonzero, then we establish some conditions to ensure the concerned SEDs In view of The condition Based on the theoretical basis in  The aim is that the condition Setting Notice that there exist coupling terms between unknown matrix Ω In what follows, a numerical example is given to analyze the usefulness of the program by resort to MATLAB LMI toolbox. Moreover, some simulation results and corresponding analysis are displayed. To achieve quantitative analysis, ones consider the concerned CDNs under PDTSR containing three dynamic nodes and each node has two states. A set of switching sequences generated by the PDTSR are shown in Taking the following disturbances  Furthermore, the influence of two decay rates In this work, the issue of state estimation has been investigated for switched complex dynamical networks governed by the persistent dwell-time switching regulation. Specifically, as a kind of network-induced phenomenon, quantization, which resulted from equipment imprecision, sensor damage and so on, has been considered while analyzing the system. A set of sufficient conditions that guarantee the global uniform exponential stability of the state error dynamic with a passive property have been derived, then the mode-dependent estimator gains have been solved. Furthermore, some illustrative simulations have been given by resort of some obtained mode-dependent estimator parameters. Finally, the feasibility of the proposed approach has been ascertained. Additionally, for complex dynamic networks governed by persistent dwell-time switching regulation, time delays None.