A significant `size effect' is observed in tensile strength of solid particles, such as ice, rock, ceramics and concrete: the tensile strength is not independent of the fragment size, but decreases with increasing size. The Weibull statistical theory was universally used to calculate the size effect observed in solid particles. Recent developments in fractal theory suggest that fractals may provide a more realistic representation of solid particles. In this paper, the scaling phenomenon of ice mechanics is explained using the fractal model for ice particle fragmentation. The Weibull statistics is modified using the fractal crushing of ice, and is compared with the conventional one. Goodness-of-fit statistics show that the modified Weibull statistics fits the experimental data of ice much better than the conventional one. The modified Weibull statistics has only one parameter, the fractal dimension of the fragment size distribution, which has a general value of 2.50 for the ice fragmentations.Scaling is the essential characteristic of every physical theory. More than a dozen years ago, the observed effect of size on the nominal strength had generally been explained by Weibull-type theories of random strength. The Weibull statistics is usually applied to characterize the probability of fracture for solid particles (  A fractal is a shape made of parts similar to the whole in some way ( Let ( There are two approaches for predicting particle size distributions: constrained and unconstrained comminution models. Unconstrained models assume that each particle acts independently of its neighbours. In the constrained comminution model, all particles are not equally to fracture at any given time. Rather, a particle's fracture probability is completely determined by the relative size of its nearest neighbors. The fracture process thus tends to eliminate particles which have the same-sized neighbors. The final result is a distribution in which no two particles with the same size are neighbors at any scale. Such a distribution is fractal ( Generally, the operation to applying the generator consists of dividing the initiator into The probability The fractal model for the ice fragmentation can be validated from the mass-size distribution of ice particles after their crushing. It is natural to ask about a possible scale effect as a result of fractal geometry, because the concept of scaling is linked to fractal geometry through scaling laws. In general senses, a size effect is defined as a variation with size of physical and mechanical parameters, which “should not” depend on size according to classical theories or convention. It is widely accepted that the failure of approximately spherical particles compressed diametrically is in fact a tensile failure ( The intrinsic tensile strength The experimental data of the ice strength from ( The model for the particle fragmentation is popularly based on the Weibull statistics of fracture ( In fact, the ice aggregates are fractal bodies, and its fractal dimension can be determined from its fragmentation. For a fractal aggregate, the particle number varies with the aggregate size according to the following expression ( If the tensile strength is defined as a tensile stress at a standard probability of survival for various batches of particles with diameter The probability of survival for ice can be estimated from Eq. Ice particle aggregates are better represented by fractal bodies than by Euclidean bodies in the Weibull model for brittle fracture. Fragmentation for the ice particles with the nearly same initial size leads to the fractal distribution of the ice fragments. Modification of the Weibull model was carried out using the fractal model for the ice fragmentations. The modified Weibull model gave better fits to experimental data, and results in a more accurate prediction of the tensile strength and the probability of survival for ice particles than the conventional one. It is noted that scaling of ice mechanics chosen to study in this paper does not mean the fractal model for scaling is just suitable ice mechanics. The fractal model for scaling can be used to express the size effect of all solids with the fractal fragmentation. The fractal dimension of ice fragmentation has a nearly fixed value of 2.50, which can be used to predict the scaling of tensile strength and the probability of fracture of ice particles. The novel in this paper is to determine the tensile strength and probability of fracture of ice particles using the fractal model for the ice particle fragmentation. A simple and goodness-of-fit method is proposed to predict the tensile strength and probability of fracture of ice particles based on the Weibull statistics. The author would like to express his gratitudes to Prof. Hajime Matsuoka and Dr. De'an Sun of Nagoya Institute of Technology, for their valuable suggestions and great help in this study. The National Nature Science Foundation of China under Grant No. 40201024 and the Japanese Society for the Promotion of Science (JSPS) are also acknowledged for their financial support.