A critical aspect of geometallurgy is quantifying mineralogical and textural relationships that affect mineral processing (e.g., liberation and recovery) and it is vital that this information is included in the planning process for both mining and mineral processing. However, to date, this has been an expensive and time consuming venture and only minimal amounts of this type of data are available to be included in the planning process. Our research is focused on developing new methods that will produce the required mineralogical and textural data rapidly and inexpensively. These include obtaining quantified textural data, such as the size and distribution of the valuable phase and its association with other minerals, by extracting it directly from mineral maps. In addition, simulated breakage of drill core samples was used as a rapid way of looking at various particle sizes to determine potential liberation behaviour. The predicted liberation parameter compares favourably with results obtained from typical MLA recovery analysis, is spatially coherent and can be used to recognise domains of high and low liberation potential that are expected to affect the grade recovery curve. The flotation response was evaluated and the technique validated using a small scale test being developed at the Julius Kruttschnitt Mineral Research Centre, i.e. the JKMSI (mineral separability indicator).Practical geometallurgy requires a database of parameters that predict mineral processing performance. Obtaining this type of information rapidly and inexpensively is vital so that a representative number of measurements can be carried out and the results included in the planning process for both mining and mineral processing. Recent advances in digital photography, particularly in image processing software, have led to a resurgence of interest in optical microscopy mineralogy as a source of rock texture information. Our work suggests that optical techniques have a place in generating medium quality cost-effective microscale mineral maps with direct application to geometallurgy. In the examples presented here we have used mineral maps produced through optical mineralogy and automated mineral identification plus simulated breakage as a rapid way of looking at various particle sizes to determine potential liberation (and flotation) behaviour. This method does not mimic actual breakage but can provide a way of ranking samples in terms of their relative processing behaviour. Ninety-six 2 Automated mineral identification was facilitated via image analysis that was carried out using the sophisticated object-oriented multi-spectral software Definiens Developer 7 ( The chessboard segmentation algorithm available in Definiens Developer 7 was used to create simulated fragments from the mineral map of each sample. In this algorithm a square grid of fixed size, aligned to the left and top borders, is applied to the mineral map and the image is cut in squares along grid lines ( Statistics used in analysis of the particulate samples and simulated fragments were derived from data extracted from the mineral maps. Data extracted includes information based on the original particles, the simulated fragments and the individual “grains” of chalcopyrite. A series of summary properties were calculated based on this extracted data. These included width and length of chalcopyrite; relative area of each mineral phase within the sample (i.e., mineral map), within each simulated fragment, and within rims 5 pixels wide around each chalcopyrite “grain”; and proportion of chalcopyrite on particle rims and on the edges of simulated fragments. Mineral liberation analyser (MLA) extended back-scattered electron (XBSE) analysis ( The ore was dry milled and the +38–106 Data extracted for chalcopyrite in the particles include area and border length for all chalcopyrite found in the mineral map of each sample. Note, in the mineral maps it is not possible to distinguish true grain boundaries, thus, the area and border length do not refer to grains/crystals of chalcopyrite but to discrete patches of chalcopyrite which may contain a number of crystals. One approach to liberation potential is to use simulated fragments to give an estimate that allows the division of the ore deposit into liberation domains (e.g. low, medium, high liberation potential). A possible measure of liberation behaviour is the percentage of valuable phase, in this case chalcopyrite, that occurs on the edges of simulated fragments, i.e. is exposed. The simulated fragments were divided into liberation classes with 0, >0–10, >10–20 Other things being equal, i.e. reagents, hydrodynamic conditions for flotation etc., it is likely that a 75 Liberation potential estimates determined using the simulated fragmentation approach were compared to results for the same samples obtained using typical MLA methods. As can be seen in Liberation potential estimates determined using the simulated fragmentation approach were also compared to results determined using a small scale flotation device. A different way to show this “liberation index” is to plot the liberation potential against Cu grade ( The liberation potential of lower grade samples is highly variable and it is in this area that significant improvements in the prediction of recovery may be possible. If low grade samples with predicted good recovery have spatial continuity they may be a mineable resource. New research suggests that analysis of mineral maps is a viable way of rapidly and inexpensively producing data that can be used to rank samples with respect to liberation potential and hence recovery. This would allow sufficient volume of data to be collected to allow incorporation into mine and mineral process planning (e.g. in a block model) and scheduling. The trends obtained have been confirmed using a small scale, rapid flotation test (JKMSI). The validation of these measurements is continuing in addition to the development of techniques with less computational overhead. This research is part of a major collaborative geometallurgical project being undertaken at CODES and SES (University of Tasmania), JKMRC, BRC and CMLR (Sustainable Minerals Institute, University of Queensland) and Parker Centre CRC (CSIRO). The authors acknowledges financial support and permission to publish from industry sponsors of the AMIRA International P843 and P843A GEM Financial support is also being provided by the Australian government through the CODES ARC Centre of Excellence in Ore Deposits and CRC ORE. The analytical facilities at the Central Science Laboratory, University of Tasmania, were used for MLA measurements in this project. We thank two anonymous reviewers and the editorial staff for their input and comments.