A 66 year-old woman with a disproportionate dwarfism and who bore seven children was discovered at the Middenbeemster archaeological site (The Netherlands). Three are perinates and show no macroscopic or radiological evidence for a FGFR3 mutation causing hypo-or achondroplasia. This mutation induces dysfunction of the growth cartilage, leading to abnormalities in the development of trabecular bone. Because the mutation is autosomal dominant, these perinates have a 50% risk of having been affected. This study determines whether trabecular bone microarchitecture (TBMA) analysis is useful for detecting genetic dwarfism. Proximal metaphyses of humeri were μCT-scanned with a resolution of 7–12 μm. Three volumes of interest were segmented from each bone with TIVMI© software. The TBMA was quantified in BoneJ© using six parameters on which a multivariate analysis was then performed. Two of the Middenbeemster perinates show a quantitatively different TBMA organization. These results and the family’s medical history suggest a diagnosis of genetic dwarfism for this two perinates. This study provides evidence to support the efficacy of μCT for diagnosing early-stage bone disease.Hypochondroplasia and achondroplasia result from an autosomal dominant FGFR 3 ( An adult female with a form of disproportionate dwarfism was discovered at the post-Medieval archaeological site of Middenbeemster in The Netherlands ( Trabecular bone is ossified endochondrally at the epiphyseal growth plates, so any dysfunction of the growth plate cartilage should also be observable as trabecular bone microarchitecture (TBMA) abnormalities. Therefore, we hypothesize that TBMA analysis could provide evidence of a pathological condition useful in the present case for a diagnosis of GD for one or more of the Middenbeemster perinates. Humeri of the three perinates from Middenbeemster were analyzed and compared to the humeri of two additional individuals of comparable age who were included as controls for normal development. These control individuals did not suffer from diseases known to affect the endochondral growth process and do not demonstrate any macroscopic signs of other diseases. They come from known-age and –sex French skeletal collections of the Normal Anatomy Institute, Strasbourg University ( In archaeological sciences, micro-computed tomography (μCT) is one of the best alternatives to histomorphometry for studying bone microarchitecture, as it provides access to histological details but is neither destructive nor invasive (Coqueugniot et al., 2015; Immel et al., 2016). All μCT-scans were performed with a resolution ranging from 7 to 12 μm, depending on the specimen and the machine used ( For each humerus, three VOIs were selected from μCT-scans with TIVMI VOIs were imported into ImageJ to measure with the BoneJ 1.4.2 plugin ( First, descriptive statistics were calculated to characterize each variable, individual and VOI. Then, each perinate from Middenbeemster was compared to the controls. Finally, a principal components analysis (PCA) was performed using the R package FactoMineR ( All measurements for each individual and every VOI are listed in The PCA examines variation in trabecular measurements among all individuals and VOIs. The first and second principal components (PCs) explain more than 80 % of the total variation ( Three perinatal humeri were analyzed in comparison to a control sample of normal bones, without macroscopic signs of pathology, to determine if a pathological signature potentially attributable to GD are observable in TBMA. Because of the high variability in measurements of TBMA, univariate analyses of individual measurements are less informative than a multivariate analysis of the overall pattern of variability between two groups ( Numerous factors influence the variability of TBMA, including pathological conditions, locomotor behaviors ( TBMA data of fetus or perinates bones with a predominant growth in length are scarce in the biomedical and anthropological literature ( The TBMA of V0485 and V0884 appears to be constituted by higher bone volume for all VOIs as well as by a higher level of anisotropy. This pattern clearly distinguishes these two individuals from V0486 and controls. This peculiar microarchitecture can be explained by the specificity of endochondral histogenesis observed among individuals with achondroplasia. Indeed, the endochondral plate is characterized by larger-than-normal septa ( Even though the skeletons of V0485 and V0884 lacked pathognomonic signs of GD, they did present some suggestive pathological clues ( Therefore, we propose that these microarchitectural changes of the trabecular network are early markers of a functional defect of the growth plate in perinates and, given the pathological family context, could be linked to GD. Analysis of additional individuals for both normal and pathological developments, as well as those from other locales, will help further clarify the specific characteristics associated with GD and, potentially, other conditions affecting skeletal development. To our knowledge, only one biomedical study focuses on the link between TBMA and GD in humans ( GD related to FGFR3 mutations are well-known and well-studied, having a set of clinically specific criteria and are relatively common in the population with an incidence rate of 1 in 10,000 births ( Genetic analysis could aid in the diagnosis of GD, except that nuclear DNA is generally poorly preserved in ancient populations. Moreover, perinatal bones are more fragile and thus prone to taphonomic alteration than those of adults. DNA analysis requires partial destruction of skeletal remains whereas, μCT is not destructive either for bones or DNA ( We thank the