There are frequent anecdotal recommendations for the use of locally produced spent coffee grounds in urban agriculture and gardens, either through direct soil application or after composting with other urban organic wastes. This study investigates the scientific basis for direct application of spent coffee grounds (SCG) and the influence of different: (i) plant pH and nitrogen preferences, (ii) soil types, and (iii) application rates. We specifically consider impacts upon plant growth, soil hydrology and nitrogen transformation processes.
                  We grew five horticultural plants (broccoli, leek, radish, viola and sunflower) in sandy, sandy clay loam and loam soils, with and without SCG and fertilizer amendments. The same horticultural plants were grown in the field with 0, 2.5, 5, 10 and 25% SCG amendment rates. Plant biomass growth was related to soil pH, soil moisture, nitrogen concentration and net mineralization, as was weed growth after harvesting.
                  All horticultural plants grew poorly in response to SCG, regardless of soil type and fertiliser addition. Increasing SCG amendment significantly increased soil water holding capacity, but also decreased horticultural plant growth and subsequent weed growth. There was evidence of nitrate immobilization with SCG amendment. Growth suppression was not explained by soil pH change, or nitrogen availability, so is more likely due to phytotoxic effects.
                  Fresh SCG should not be used as a soil amendment in ‘closed loop’ urban food production systems without consideration of potential growth suppression. Further research is required to determine the optimal composting conditions for SCG and blends with other organic wastes.The global population is predicted to reach between 8 and 11 billion by 2050 and the proportion living in towns and cities is predicted to be 66% ( Organic waste represents nearly half of all global waste produced ( Soil organic amendments supplement existing soil organic matter (SOM) which constitutes (i) living microbial biomass, (ii) detritus, and (iii) humus. Increasing the proportion of humus in a soil can increase cation exchange capacity, so adding organic waste to soils with little clay or little SOM will theoretically have the greatest overall benefit. As organic matter decomposes in the soil, nitrogen (N) is made available through microbial mineralization processes. Ammonification transforms organic N to ammonium (NH Organic wastes can produce phytotoxic organic substances as they decompose aerobically, and the level and progression of phytotoxicity has often evaluated using seed germination bioassays ( Coffee is the number two world commodity after crude oil ( Many gardening and horticultural ‘grey literature’ sources encourage the use of SCG as a direct soil amendment ( This study aims to understand the impacts of using SCG as a direct soil amendment without prior composting in an urban horticultural context. Four specific research questions were posed within this study: How does direct SCG amendment affect the growth of common horticultural plants with varied nutrient and pH preferences when grown in different soil types? Do different rates of SCG amendment lead to different horticultural plant and weed growth responses? How do soil N dynamics change in response to direct SCG amendment? How does direct SCG amendment affect the hydrology and acidity of different soil types? SCG waste was collected from six Melbourne cafés to investigate the variation in chemical properties according to bean type, roasting and processing technique. The pH and EC was measured using a 1:5 vol. extract ( In a glasshouse trial, three soil types were used to investigate the interactions between soil texture and SCG soil amendment, as demonstrated through changes in soil properties and plant species biomass growth. The three soil types were: (1) sand, (2) sandy clay loam and (3) loam, representing soils with differing percentage clay, C and N contents ( To each of the three soils, four SCG soil treatments were applied, and five replicate pots were planted out for each of the five plant species (3 soil texture types Spent coffee grounds (SCG); 5% by volume Fertiliser (F); species-specific agricultural rate SCG Control (C); no SCG or F Each soil type and amendment combination (60L) was thoroughly mixed, and then evenly distributed into 22.5 Seedlings were transplanted (radish direct seeded) into the plastic pots on 23 May, 2014. Plant growth was under natural light conditions during winter. Mean daily minimum was 6–9 Plant harvest took place 75 days after transplant/direct seeding. Above ground biomass was oven-dried at 60 For moisture content, approximately 10 The same five plant species were grown in The University of Melbourne’s Burnley campus field station (37°83′S, 145°02′E), which has an alluvial sandy soil. A fully randomized block (n Fertiliser (F)       species-specific rate, SCG-2.5               2.5% volume, SCG-5                  5% volume, SCG-10                10% volume, SCG-20                20% volume, and Control (C) no SCG or fertiliser Based upon a mean bulk density of air-dried SCG (0.33 Five blocks of the six soil treatments for the five plant species, required 150 plots, each 38 After plant harvesting weeding ceased and weeds were allowed to establish and grow for a period of 50 days from 21 September to 13 November (springtime). On the 13 November, a 36 For the glasshouse trial, plant biomass (all species), WHC and NO For the field trial, plant biomass, pH, MC and NO The SCG collected from six cafés showed little variance in chemical properties. SCG pH ranged from 4.76 to 5.52; total C ranged from 47.85 to 49.10; total N from 2.03 to 2.19 and the C/N ratios were between 22.15 and 24.06 (data not shown). One café provided SCG for the subsequent glasshouse and field trial, and this SCG had a C/N ratio of 23.1 and pH of 5.5 ( The glasshouse trial indicated that the addition of SCG significantly reduced plant growth for all species, and in all three soil types relative to the C ( In the field trial, SCG also significantly reduced plant growth for all horticultural plant species relative to C (Supplementary material 1). There were no significant differences in plant biomass growth amongst the different SCG amendment rates, growth was equally poor in response to 2.5% SCG as it was for 20% SCG. Interestingly, after the harvesting of horticulture plants there was significant weed growth suppression, and there was a significant positive relationship between the degree of weed suppression and the rate of SCG amendment ( Soil NO In the field trial, there was a significant treatment effect upon soil NO In the sandy and sandy clay loam soil, all four treatments demonstrated net nitrification, whereas the loam soil both C and F treatments showed net NO A treatment and soil type interaction effect was found for WHC (viola pots only) in the glasshouse trial, indicating that SCG affected the WHC of the three soil types differently. Soil WHC increased significantly with SCG amendment relative to C and F in both sand and loam, whereas WHC was lower in SCG and SCG In the field trial, there was a significant ( The glasshouse trial indicated that soil pH increased (became less acid) with SCG amendment, whereas soil pH decreased (became more acidic) with F, relative to C ( In the field trial, all treatments showed an increase in soil acidity over time. There was a weak trend of decreasing soil pH for greater the SCG volume. There was a significant treatment effect as the four SCG treatments had significantly lower soil pH as compared to C, but not in comparison to F ( Both the glasshouse and field trial showed that the addition of SCG significantly decreased plant growth for all five species across all soil texture types, and regardless of the volume application rate. There were amendment x soil type interactions, but regardless of nitrogen demand or soil pH sensitivity all of the five horticultural plants studied (viola, radish, sunflower, broccoli and leek) responded negatively and significantly to SCG soil amendments. The small species differences across soil texture and treatment combinations, suggest that broccoli, sunflower and viola showed more resilience to the inhibitory effects of SCG when fertiliser was added. Viola is acid tolerant and has a low N demand so this resilience is logical. Sunflower is similarly tolerant of lower soil pH conditions and has a medium N demand. Broccoli, however, has a high N demand and generally favours only slightly acidic soil conditions of pH 6–7, so the fact that broccoli was also more resilient to the effects of SCG than radish and leek was more surprising. Soil amendment with SCG has been shown to inhibit or promote plant growth according to application rates (  No other studies have directly measured soil inorganic N concentrations after SCG amendment. Only C/N ratios have been used as an indicator of potential N immobilisation ( Soil amendment with 5% SCG in the glasshouse trials significantly increased sand and loam soil WHC. Similarly, in the field trail SCG amendments at 10% and 20% significantly increased soil MC. Clearly, SCG soil amendment can lead to soil hydrological benefits at application rates of 5% soil volume or more. Organic matter amendments can readily improve the WHC of soils with existing low WHC ( In the glasshouse trial, SCG amended soils were significantly less acidic than the control, whereas in the field trial soil pH of SCG amended treatments was significantly more acidic than the control. The significant soil texture interaction effect suggests that the sandy clay loam was more resistant to pH changes from SCG amendment than the sand and loam soil types. Soils with higher clay content are more resistant to changes in pH ( In a similar SCG amendment pot study conducted by Freshly incorporated SCG inhibited the growth of broccoli, viola, sunflower, radish and leek, even when applied at volumes as low as 2.5%. Subsequent weed growth was also suppressed, which emerged as a positive relationship between increasing SCG volume applied and increased weed suppression. Inorganic N pools and N mineralisation rates of SCG amended soils, with and without N fertilizer, suggest this plant growth inhibition was not the result of N immobilisation as has been concluded in other studies involving SCG. Evidence for improved water holding properties of sandy and non-sandy soils was suggestive but not conclusive, and further research should examine potential water holding property and plant growth improvements over subsequent cropping seasons. Consequently, the exact mechanisms for the observed SCG toxicity are not yet clear. Future research into sustainable urban application of SCG could investigate duration of composting required to break reduce phytotoxic effects, or the combination of SCG with other organic wastes to minimize N immobilization or phytotoxic impacts. Innovative and sustainable solutions are still required to deal with the increasing production of urban organic waste. As SCG can be separated easily from other forms of urban organic waste, they hold an advantage in streamlining collection systems and ensuring a consistent homogenous product. However, based on the present study it is not recommended that fresh SCG be applied as a soil amendment to plant production systems for ornamental or food productions purposes. We would like to thank several staff at the Burnley campus – Nicholas Osborne and Sascha Andrusiak in the nursery, Dr Peter May for his sage advice, Dr Claire Farrell for discussion about statistics and Prof. Stefan Arndt for comments on an earlier version of the manuscript. Sarah would like to thank volunteers for their assistance in the glasshouse and the field – in particular Jesse Kurylo and Peter Somerville. Also, the café owners and baristas that helped supply spent coffee grounds, in particular Roma café in Botannica, Richmond. This research was made possible through the financial support of the Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at The following is Supplementary data to this article: