In this work, the froth flotation of fluorite from an ore in China has been studied using an enhanced sodium naphthenate as collector and a salted copper sulfate as the depressant of phosphate minerals. The experimental results show that the enhanced sodium naphthenate is an effective collector in fluorite flotation at a low slurry temperature. The substitution of the enhanced sodium naphthenate for a commonly used fatty acid as collector in fluorite flotation not only greatly lowered slurry temperature in the system, but also increased the separation efficiency and reduced the reagent cost, resulting in significant economic benefits for fluorite flotation plants in northern areas. Also, it was found that the elimination of phosphate minerals from the fluorite concentrate could be successfully achieved using the salted copper sulfate as a depressant.Fluorite (CaF Most fluorite ores have to be upgraded before entering the fluorite market. The most commonly used beneficiation process is froth flotation, producing fluorite concentrates of up to 99% purity. Typically, fatty acid is used as collector in fluorite flotation, and water glass as a depressant of silicate gangues; the ore pulps are heated to 35–85 °C in the system ( Recently, there have been numerous reports on the modification of the chemical scheme in fluorite flotation, in order to increase the separation efficiency and lower the operation costs. China is the biggest exporter of fluorite concentrate in the world. There are many fluorite flotation plants, some of which are located in northern China, which has a long cold winter. In these plants, energy consumption from heating ore slurry in the flotation circuits plays an important part in the operation costs. Therefore, there is a great need to lower the slurry temperature in fluorite flotation by using a new collector to replace fatty acid. In this work, an enhanced sodium naphthenate was studied as collector to substitute for fatty acid in fluorite flotation, in order to carry out the flotation at ambient temperature. The study was performed on a fluorite ore from the Fenglin fluorite mine, located in the Hebei province of China (northern China). The objective of this work was to find a more effective collector for fluorite flotation, and thus reduce the operation costs of the flotation circuit. Also, a new depressant for phosphate minerals, namely salted copper sulfate, was tested on the fluorite ore in order to reduce the P The fluorite ore sample used in this work was collected from the Fenglin fluorite mine. It was crushed to −2 mm for the flotation tests feed using a jaw crusher. The ore sample consisted of fluorite, quartz, feldspar, kaolin, barite, apatite, mica and calcite, etc. The chemical analysis results are given in An enhanced sodium naphthenate with the commercial name of GY-2 was used as collector for fluorite flotation in this work. This was provided by the Wuhan Petrochemical Incorporation, and was made by mixing an oil refinery byproduct with a fatty acid aqueous emulsion. The main components of the byproduct were sodium naphthenates with various hydrocarbon numbers (C The oil refinery byproduct was distilled to obtain sodium cyclopropane carboxylic ((CH In this experiment, a salted copper sulfate was used as the depressant of phosphate minerals in fluorite flotation. It was prepared as follows: First, 1% copper sulfate (CuSO In this experiment, industrial pure water glass from Wuhan Chemical was used as the depressant of silicate minerals in fluorite flotation. The module (ratio of SiO The fluorite flotation tests were carried according to the flowsheet shown in   The effect of the hydrocarbon number of the sodium naphthenates (C The phosphor removal from fluorite concentrate as a function of the salted copper sulfate addition is shown in From the experimental studies in this work, a new chemical scheme for fluorite flotation, namely enhanced sodium naphthenate as collector and salted copper sulfate as the depressant of phosphate minerals, has been presented. This chemical scheme could allow fluorite flotation to be effectively achieved at ambient temperature and phosphate minerals to be deeply eliminated from fluorite concentrate. Enhanced sodium naphthenate, with the commercial name of GY-2, was found to be an effective collector in fluorite flotation at a low slurry temperature. There could be significant economic benefits if the reagent GY-2 is substituted for fatty acid as the collector in fluorite flotation, due to large savings in energy consumption due to the absence of slurry heating, a reduction in reagent costs and the increase in flotation efficiency. This economic benefit would be especially great for fluorite flotation plants in cold areas.