Dissolution of mechanically activated Panzhihua ilmenite in hydrochloric acid for the preparation of synthetic rutile was investigated. Both the dissolution and its coupled titanium hydrolysis were greatly enhanced by the mechanical pretreatment. Increases in the lattice strain and surface area of ilmenite induced by energetic ball milling were responsible for the enhanced dissolution. The rapid hydrolysis led to formation of quantities of the nanosized primary particles, giving rise to a solid/liquid separation problem. The 15 min milled ilmenite, however, yielded an easy-to-filter hydrolysate due to formation of porous, micron-sized, secondary particles during the dissolution. The crystallization and aggregation behaviour of the primary particles were probably related to both the surface property of the un-reacted solid and the ferric ion concentration in solution. The technology for preparation of synthetic rutile was systematically investigated. The optimum milling and dissolution conditions were as follows: milling in air for 15 min, hydrochloric acid concentration 20%, initial reaction temperature 100 °C, ilmenite/20% acid mass ratio 1 g:5.5 g, reaction time ≥6 h. The synthetic rutile prepared under the optimum conditions contained 92% TiO2 and 2.1% Fe2O3 as well as combined CaO and MgO of 0.28%. The results demonstrate that the mechanical pretreatment can take the place of the traditional high temperature pretreatment of ilmenite and avoid the dissolution being conducted under pressurized condition.In China, about 0.6 million tons of TiO Nowadays about 60% of the world's TiO In the past 10 years, mechanical activation has been reported to significantly accelerate the dissolution rate of ilmenite by increasing its chemical reactivity ( In this study, hydrochloric acid dissolution of mechanically activated Panzhihua ilmenite under industrially viable ore/acid ratios for the preparation of synthetic rutile is investigated. The effect of mechanical activation is discussed and the as-prepared hydrolysates and synthetic rutiles characterized. The ilmenite was obtained from Titanium Company of Panzhihua Steel & Iron (Group) Corporation, Sichuan, China. The particle size was 100–200 μm. The chemical composition of the ilmenite is shown in A vertical planetary ball mill (QM-1SP2, Nanjing, China) with a rotation speed of 200 r/min and a spin rate of 580 r/min was employed in the mechanical activation of ilmenite. Four milling cells were fixed on its platform. Each of the cells was ~ The milled samples were leached in a ~ In each experiment, 400 ml of hydrochloric acid solution was heated to the desired temperature in a thermostatically controlled glycerol bath, and then a definite amount of milled ilmenite sample was added. During the initial reaction stage, the temperature inside the reactor rose due to the exothermic reaction and the resulting temperature variation was recorded. About 10 ml of the slurry was sampled periodically to determine the titanium and total iron contents in the solution. The sampled slurry was rapidly cooled, weighed, filtered, washed and made up volumetrically with a 10 wt.% hydrochloric acid solution to avoid hydrolysis of the dissolved titanium. The titanium-rich residue was washed with distilled water, dried and calcined at 900 °C to dehydrate. The leach solution and synthetic rutile thus obtained were chemically analyzed and the synthetic rutile characterized. The titanium and iron contents in the leaching solution were directly determined by redox titration ( Ferrous iron content of the milled samples was determined by redox titration, the samples were dissolved in a hydrochloric and hydrofluoric acid solution under an oxygen-free atmosphere and then the ferrous ion was oxidized by a K XRD experiments were performed using an X'Pert Pro MPD, Philips, Netherlands. The voltage and anode current used were 40 kV and 40 mA, respectively. The CuK The morphology of the leached samples was investigated using a Hitachi S-4800 scanning electron microscope at an accelerating voltage of 20 kV. To reduce agglomeration the samples were ultrasonically dispersed in water for 15 min. An X-ray fluorescence (XRF) spectrometer (Swiss ARL Advant'XP+-405) was employed to analyze the chemical composition of synthetic rutile. The particle size analysis was carried out using a laser diffraction analyzer (China, JL-1178). A series of leaching tests were conducted on the 2 h milled ilmenite with HCl concentration varying from 10 wt.% to 25 wt.%. In these tests, dissolution was carried out at an initial temperature of 100 °C and HCl stoichiometry of 1.1. Under these conditions, the solid/liquid ratio (w/v) varied from 1:10.5 to 1:4. The leaching results are shown in The dissolution of ilmenite in hydrochloric acid is reportedly congruent with titanium and iron dissolving at their stoichiometric ratio ( As well known, the volatility of HCl increases with increasing acid concentration. Using an excessively high acid concentration did not improve the leaching operation, and moreover it would impose a heavy burden upon the HCl regeneration system. An acid concentration of 20 wt.% was suggested as an optimum condition. The effect of ilmenite/acid ratio on the dissolution of the 2 h milled ilmenite using 20 wt.% HCl solution was studied at an initial temperature of 100 °C. The applied ilmenite/20% acid ratio (w/w) ranged from 1:11 to 1:4.4, which corresponded to the HCl stoichiometry from 2.3 to 0.9. The leaching results are shown in As shown in On the other hand, during the leaching operation, the slurry temperature firstly increased, and then gradually reduced to the starting temperature (100 °C). The peak temperature induced by the reaction heat increased with increasing ilmenite/20% acid ratio, and a maximum peak temperature of 108 °C occurred at ilmenite/20% acid ratio of 1 g/4.4 g. In fact, the effect of temperature partially compensated the influence of low acid concentration on the dissolution in the high ore/acid ratio system. Relatively, high ore/acid ratio slowed down the leaching rate of titanium. The total titanium loss in the solutions varied only from 1% to 2%. Chemical analyses of the synthetic rutile prepared under different ilmenite/acid ratios are listed in Therefore, from viewpoint of the economy and product quality as well as the solid/liquid separation, an ilmenite/20% acid ratio of 1 g:5.5 g was suggested as an optimum condition.  Because the boiling point of a 20 wt.% hydrochloric acid solution is about 108 °C, further increase of temperature will result in the volatile loss of HCl. So, an initial temperature of 100 °C is suggested being the optimum initial temperature. The effect of milling time on the dissolution is shown in The TiO As mentioned above, the rapid hydrolysis led to formation of quantities of minute hydrolysate, bringing with the solid/liquid separation problem. The problem occurred almost in all the leaching experiments except when the ilmenite milled for 15 min was used. In this test, the Ti-rich hydrolysate formed was easy to settle, filter and wash. The leaching results showed that the milling significantly affected the dissolution of ilmenite and the hydrolysis of the dissolved titanium as well as the solid/liquid separation ability. To fully understand the milling operation and its effects the solids were characterised. The XRD patterns of ilmenite samples milled for different times are shown in The XRD traces of the hydrolysates obtained by leaching ilmenite samples milled for 15 and 60 min under the same conditions are also shown in The hydrolysates were calcined at 900 °C to give a TiO Mechanochemical oxidation of ilmenite during milling has been reported ( To estimate effect of the oxidation on the dissolution in this study, the oxidation extent of ilmenite was measured and shown in The particle size distributions of the ilmenite samples milled for different times are presented in The particle size distributions of the hydrolysate and the corresponding synthetic rutile obtained with the 15 min. milled ilmenite under the optimum conditions are also illustrated in The micrographs of the hydrolysates are shown in The synthetic rutile prepared under the optimum conditions using the 15 min milled ilmenite was subjected to a combination of chemical and XRF analysis. The results are listed in As shown in Milling led to an increase in the lattice strain of the ilmenite crystal, which is beneficial to the dissolution, and a change in particle size with first reduction and then increase, which, correspondingly, accelerated and slowed down the dissolution. At the same time, the milling also resulted in the oxidation of ilmenite, forming a more acid-resistant pseudorutile ( The mechanical activation enhanced the dissolution of ilmenite and, at the same time, accelerated hydrolysis of the dissolved titanium. The rapid hydrolysis led to formation of quantities of the dispersed nanometer crystallites, giving rise to a solid/liquid separation problem. The 15 min milled ilmenite, however, yielded an easy-to-filter hydrolysate due to aggregation of the nano-sized crystallites into the porous micron-sized particles in the solutions. At first this was inferred to be associated with the relatively slow hydrolysis rate of the dissolved titanium as shown in In present study, mechanical activation technique was first employed to enhance the dissolution of ilmenite in hydrochloric acid for preparation of synthetic rutile. A high quality synthetic rutile with TiO The particle size analysis shows that the Therefore, a schematic flowsheet for the preparation of synthetic rutile based on hydrochloric acid leaching of mechanically activated Panzhihua ilmenite was suggested in Synthetic rutile was successfully prepared from Panzhihua ilmenite through a new route. The process is composed of the mechanical activation of ilmenite, hydrochloric acid leaching at ambient pressure, solid/liquid separation, calcination, grain agglomeration, and HCl recycle. The optimum milling and dissolution conditions were as follows: milling in air for 15 min, hydrochloric acid concentration 20%, reaction temperature 100 °C, ilmenite/20% acid ratio 1 g:5.5 g, and reaction time ≥ The mechanical activation significantly accelerated both the dissolution of Panzhihua ilmenite and the simultaneous titanium hydrolysis in hydrochloric acid solution. The increasing lattice strain in the ilmenite crystal structure and the pulverization induced by energetic milling were responsible for the enhanced dissolution. The milling also affected the filterability of the reactive slurry. The crystallization and aggregation behaviors of the primary particles were probably related to both the surface property of the un-reacted solid and the ferric ion concentration in the solution.