The potential application of different cation collectors in the flotation concentration of mica, feldspar and quartz sand has been investigated. Raw materials (Bujanovac and Ub) from two localities in Serbia were used.
                  The results showed that for flotation of feldspars, Aero 3030C performed better than Flotigam DAT. Aero 3030C was more selective, and with its application a higher mass recovery of feldspar was obtained. In particular, the mass recovery of feldspar was 19.58% when Aero 3030C was applied and 7.58% when Flotigam DAT was used. However, the chemical compositions of the feldspar concentrates were not significantly different no matter which of these reagents was used.
                  For the flotation of impurities from quartz sand, Aero 3030C was better than a combination of R 825 and Armak C. When Aero 3030C was used, a higher quality of quartz sand concentrate was obtained than when a combination of these collectors was applied. The mass recovery of quartz sand was almost the same: 64.47% when Aero 3030C was used and 61.72% when a combination of Aero 825 and Armac C was used.The pegmatite ore of the white granite from Bujanovac contains K–Na feldspar (∼60%), quartz (∼25%), muscovite (∼10%) and impurities. At “FELDSPAT”, Bujanovac, concentrates of feldspar, mica and quartz sand have been produced from this raw material for industrial use. The deposit of quartz sand “Ub” contains quartz as the main mineral and feldspar, mica and heavy metal minerals as impurities ( The sample of quartz sand stone was taken from the plant “Feldspar” Bujanovac at the beginning of the milling operation. The size range −0.6 to +0.063 mm was used for further investigations. The sample is denoted as “Bujanovac”. The sample of quartz sand was taken from the “Kopovi”-Ub operation. The sample was wet sieved to obtain a −0.5 to +0.125 mm fraction. This grain size of quartz sand is required for the glass industry. The sample is denoted as “Ub”. Chemical composition of used samples: “Bujanovac”: 74.51% SiO The chemical compositions of these samples suggest that concentration is required to obtain quartz sand, feldspar and mica of high quality. For flotation concentration of minerals cationic collectors were used. AERO 3030C was supplied by Cytec Industries Inc., ( Three flotation tests were performed on sample “Bujanovac” and two flotation tests on sample “Ub”. Experimental conditions for flotation tests are given in Total balance of the products obtained in flotation tests on the sample “Bujanovac” is given in In all three experiments on sample “Bujanovac” (class −0.6 to +0.063 mm), in the first phase mica was floated, feldspar in the second. Quartz sand stayed in the underflow ( Two reverse flotation experiments were performed on sample “Ub” ( Comparing the results of laboratory research on the application of collector Flotigam DAT with results obtained with the application of Aero 3030C in the flotation concentration of feldspar and mica on sample “Bujanovac”, it can be concluded: For flotation of mica from raw material “Bujanovac”, collector Armoflot 64 or Aero 3030C may be used. The quality and recovery of mica in both cases are satisfactory. For flotation of feldspar better recoveries were obtained with the application of the collector Aero 3030C (19.58%) than with collector Flotigam DAT (6.18%). Furthermore, the quality of feldspar and quartz sand was satisfactory regardless of which reagent was used. For flotation of impurities in the reverse flotation of quartz sand from raw material “Ub”, with collector Aero 3030C, better results were obtained than with a combination of collectors R 825 and Armac C. In particular, when a combination of Armac C and R 825 was applied the quartz sand concentrate had the following content: SiO This work is part of the research activities on the Project “Development and application of novel technologies of preparation of raw non-metalic materials and revitalization of active industries” financed by Ministry of Science, Technology and Development of Republic of Serbia (2001–2003).