There is a paucity of information about phosphatidylcholine (PC) biosynthesis in bone formation. Thus, we characterized PC metabolism in both primary human osteoblasts (HOB) and human osteosarcoma MG-63 cells. Our results show that the CDP-choline pathway is the only de novo route for PC biosynthesis in both HOB and MG-63 cells. Both CK activity and CKα expression in MG-63 cells were significantly higher than those in HOB cells. Silencing of CKα in MG-63 cells had no significant effect on PC concentration but decreased the amount of phosphocholine by approximately 80%. The silencing of CKα also reduced cell proliferation. Moreover, pharmacological inhibition of CK activity impaired the mineralization capacity of MG-63 cells. Our data suggest that CK and its product phosphocholine are required for the normal growth and mineralization of MG-63 cells.Choline kinase (CK) is the first enzyme in the CDP-choline pathway for the biosynthesis of phosphatidylcholine (PC), the most abundant phospholipid in mammalian cellular membranes Although CK is not generally regarded as an important regulatory enzyme in the CDP-choline pathway, many studies have demonstrated that CK and its product PCho play essential roles in cell proliferation, transformation and human carcinogenesis The human osteosarcoma cell line MG-63 was purchased from the American Type Culture Collection and the cells were cultured in Dulbecco's Modified Eagle's Medium (DMEM) supplemented with glutamine (2 Osteoblast cells (~ Osteoblast cells were harvested and lysed in a buffer containing 10 Osteoblasts were harvested in tissue homogenate buffer as described above. The homogenates were centrifuged at 348,000 Total CK activity was determined in the cytosolic fraction as previously described with minor modifications Stealth RNAi™ siRNA specific for Total RNA was isolated using TRIzol reagent, then reverse-transcribed by oligo (dT) and Superscript II reverse transcriptase (Invitrogen). Quantitative real-time PCR was performed using a Rotor-Gene 3000 instrument and data were analyzed using the Rotor-Gene 6.0.19 software (Montreal Biotech). Cyclophilin mRNA was used to normalize gene expression. The primers were purchased from Integrated DNA Technologies (Coralville, Iowa, USA). Primer sequences for Cell lysates (100 MG-63 cells were plated at a density of 1 Mineralization was induced by culturing confluent MG-63 cells in osteogenic growth medium containing 50 MG-63 cells were washed three times with ice cold phosphate-buffered saline and scraped into a freshly prepared collection buffer (10 All statistical analyses were performed using the GraphPad Prism software 6.0. Graphs show mean values We studied the biosynthesis of PC in two commonly used human osteoblast models-primary human osteoblasts (HOB) and human osteosarcoma MG-63 cells. The incorporation of radiolabeled choline into PC was rapid and robust in both types of osteoblast cells; more radioactivity/mg protein was incorporated into PC in MG-63 cells than that in HOB cells ( In recent years it has been demonstrated that in addition to liver, bone is also a quantitatively important organ for the uptake of circulating lipoproteins PC biosynthesis in the osteoblasts was assessed by measuring the incorporation of radioactive choline into PC via the CDP-choline pathway. The incorporation of radioactivity into choline, PCho, CDP-choline and PC was measured. We next measured CK activity, as well as the amounts of CKα and CKβ proteins. The total CK activity in MG-63 cells was approximately double that in HOB cells ( The contribution of CKα and CKβ to total CK activity was also analyzed in the osteoblasts. CKα accounted for ~ Since CKα is the major contributor of total CK activity in MG-63 cells, we investigated the possible role of CKα in PC biosynthesis and osteoblast functions in these cells. To determine if Many studies have demonstrated that CK plays an essential role in tumor cell growth and proliferation Hemicholinium-3 (HC-3), a compound with a structure similar to that of choline, inhibits CK activity in many types of cells Currently, knowledge of PC metabolism in human osteoblast cells is limited, as is the potential relationship between CK and the function of osteoblasts. In this study, we characterized PC metabolism in two human osteoblast models, primary human osteoblast cells (HOB) and human osteosarcoma MG-63 cells. PC can be synthesized by either the CDP-choline pathway or via the sequential methylation of PE; the latter route of PC synthesis is believed to be quantitatively significant only in liver To obtain more insight into PC biosynthesis via the CDP-choline pathway, we performed [ Our experiments demonstrated that MG-63 cells have ~ Many studies have demonstrated that CKα and PCho play essential roles in human cell transformation and carcinogenesis We utilized a mass spectrometry to determine the pool sizes of choline metabolites and phospholipids in MG-63 cells treated with CHKA-siRNA. Silencing of CKα expression by ~ Silencing of The inhibition of CK activity by HC-3 decreased the mineralization capacity of MG-63 cells, probably due to the reduction of ALP activity ( We have characterized PC metabolism in human osteoblasts and shown that CK, particularly CKα, contributes to the growth and mineralization of human osteosarcoma cells. To our knowledge, this is the first study that reveals a connection between CK and the function/growth of human osteosarcoma cells. The possibility that inhibition of CK might be a useful therapy for bone cancer should be considered. The authors have no conflicts of interest or financial ties related to this manuscript. We appreciate the excellent technical assistance from Susanne Lingrell and Randy Nelson. We thank Professor Jean Vance for the helpful comments on the manuscript. M.H. is a fellow of the Sigrid Jusélius Foundation. This study was supported by a grant (