Elevated water temperature induces maldevelopment of skeletal tissues in poikiloterm species like Atlantic salmon. Management control of deformities and health in general demands precise tools to depict any problem as early as possible in the production line. In this work we have used molecular markers to follow the development of the skeletal system in Atlantic salmon at two different temperatures. Atlantic salmon fry was exposed to two different temperatures (10 vs 16 °C), designated high and low intensive group from start feeding until 20 g size. This experimental period corresponds to central ontogenic events of vertebral development, i.e. the segmentation and mineralization process of chordacentrum and the development of vertebral bodies from the segmented chordacentra. More than 2000 individuals were measured and X-rayed during the experiment. Phenotypically normal spinal columns from both low and high intensive groups were sampled and used for histological and gene expression analysis, such as real time PCR, in situ hybridization and microarray. The X-rays from phenotypically normal fish from low intensive group displayed denser vertebral bodies throughout the vertebral column compared to the high intensive group. High intensive group had a higher incidence of deformities and the spinal columns appeared less dense on the radiography. Real time data strongly indicated that elevated temperature treatment is severely affecting gene expression in osteoblasts and chondrocytes. Genes involved in bone matrix and mineralization; Col1a, Col2a, Col10a, ALP, osteocalcin, osteonectin and Decorin, were reduced in the high intensive compared to low intensive group. The spatial expression of these genes was also examined by in situ hybridisation to examine any differences in expression pattern between the two groups and to identify and confirm expressional similarities to other vertebrates. A mechanism that can account for the low radiodensity phenotype in high intensive group is a defect in the late maturation of osteoblasts to bone matrix-producing cells, accompanied by insufficient induction of bone matrix components such as osteocalcin and col1a. The expression of these genes showed significant downregulation in high intensive group. Our results showed that the analyzed genes are highly affected by temperatures and that the delicate architecture of the spinal column is easily disturbed by small variations in the expression pattern of these genes. 