Non-invasive techniques such as process tomography are beginning to make promising contributions to control systems and are well fitted for flow pattern identification in opaque pipes or conduits. Even though process tomography and electrical capacitance tomography are usually associated with imaging, the image in itself can very seldom be directly used for control purpose. The path to be followed from data collection to flow-pattern identification often involves an image reconstruction phase, followed by some form of image processing and analysis. When online control is concerned, this approach may be too time consuming. This paper proposes a direct approach that discriminates between an annular and stratified flow pattern without the need for imaging. The model relies on capacitance data collected from an experimental rig, and extracts the information content from these raw-data measurements. Flow-pattern identifiers are kept simple and are designed to be rapidly evaluated for online observation purpose. Additional information and monitoring, such as the phase distribution or the detection of a slug building process, can also be obtained from the data by using specific electrode pair combinations.characteristic speed of electromagnetic propagation in vacuum, 10 film thickness (annular flow pattern), m film thickness (annular flow pattern), m frequency, s capacitance value between electrodes electrical charge, C inner ring radius for idealised annular flow (simulation), m electrical potential, V height of flow in stratified flow pattern (simulation), m permittivity distribution, F electrical field, V Ratio of average capacitance values taken on Top electrode-pairs over average capacitance values taken on Bottom electrode pairs Variance of capacitance values taken on Second Adjacent electrode pairs Average capacitance values taken on Facing Electrode pairs Flow pattern identification in multiphase flow, and in particular gas–liquid flow as is the case in this work, is commonly thought as being related to an image reconstructed from data available from a sensor. Originally, the boundaries between various flow patterns (annular flow, separated, intermittent, etc.) were defined by flow maps, as discussed in the monography edited by Hestroni The aim of this paper is to present the design of a non-invasive and online method for outlining the boundaries between different flow regimes so as to take appropriate control actions for other operations down the line (like flow separation, mixing, etc.). The work is a case study of flow-pattern identification in horizontal piping involving known mixture contents and a given operational range. The approach given here for rapid flow-pattern identification allowing for online control is linked to a series of specific requirements regarding the process under review. The type of likely flow pattern is known beforehand and the identification must be used locally to study the separation ability of a T-junction used as a pre-separator module. The local nature of the requirement linked to flow-pattern identification rules out the use of pressure probes and flow maps to determine the flow pattern. Besides, the system must obey flexibility considerations to satisfy industrial concerns. In other terms, apart from the need for the information to be local, building the flow map for a whole industrial installation is not always possible, let alone desirable. This paper shows that if the gas/liquid mixture properties allow for electrical capacitance tomography (ECT) imaging to be used and the set of likely flow pattern is small––or if only a reduced set of flow patterns are of interest, allowing for others to be discarded––the reduced complexity of the problem can help the design of a simple and rapid flow-pattern identification process. On the practical point of view, the method is non-invasive, safe to use (low power voltage) and uses low-cost and relatively robust equipment. If the primary objective is to deliver images, the method is relatively fast as it provides up to 200 images a second. The work related to this paper makes use of the dielectric properties of the gas–fluid mixture to provide control information. Therefore the emphasis is given on ECT. More references on tomographic techniques can be found in the work of Williams and Beck Even though a flow pattern is more or less defined from an image, the information itself is coming from the capacitance measurements in the first place. The idea discussed in the present work is related to flow-pattern identification without the need of imaging. Certain types of flow-pattern exhibit symmetrical or other geometrical properties. By carefully selecting a certain type of electrode pairs and choosing to monitor specific statistic based identifiers associated with the raw capacitance measurements; it is believed that some sort of flow-pattern identification can be obtained. This is possible provided the set of identifiable flow patterns is small and these flow patterns show distinctive characteristics. This scenario would cut the time needed for decision making when a control loop is involved. Because it is one thing to collect the data and reconstruct the associated image and it is another to take a control decision from this image. In order to take a decision from an image, the image must be subject to an image processing treatment, to enhance identifiable patterns, and an image analysis step, to properly qualify (type of image), quantify (extract relevant metrics such as concentration) or identify (match with known pattern for instance) the end result. These image related treatments can represent a non-negligible time overhead in addition to the necessary data collection and image reconstruction steps. The non-imaging flow-pattern classification approach is to be used on an experimental rig dedicated to the study of gas–liquid separation processes (air–kerosene in the present case) using T-junctions separators. The requirements for the ECT based control system are as follow: flow-pattern identification (annular or stratified flow) and detection of slug flow, so that particular actions can be taken to prevent undesirable effects on sensitive pieces of equipment downstream. By designing a model to identify the current flow pattern from the raw data measurements, a more realistic approach to online monitoring of flow processes could be achieved. The aim of this paper is to describe such an approach for an air–kerosene mixture. First a brief introduction on the fundamentals of ECT is given to illustrate the different issues and problems to take into consideration when an image is needed. The typical flow patterns to be identified and the information needed for control make the third paragraph. The fourth part concerns the selection of the flow-pattern identifiers to be used for flow classification. This is to be followed by simulations of realistic flow patterns, these flow patterns are likely to be encountered on the experimental rig. Results from primary tests on the experimental rig when working with stratified flow patterns are given in The concept of ECT is truly non-invasive since the sensing devices, the electrodes themselves, are not even in contact with the medium under observation (as it is the case with resistance tomography). The imaging parameter, the permittivity, is the dielectric property of each of the component phases of the multiphase flow itself. ECT allows for the image reconstruction, corresponding to the permittivity distribution, from the measurements of electrical capacitance taken between all possible pairs of electrodes The measurement protocol is as follow: the electrodes are excited one by one, maintaining the others at reference potential ( The general idea for flow-pattern classification without the need of imaging relies on the finding of geometrical properties hidden in a frame corresponding to a set of capacitance measurements. It is important to stress that the decision is made on a one frame only basis to ensure the process to be as quick as possible, this point is discussed later with the description of the measurement apparatus. The two principal identifiers are proposed as follow: If the flow is annular, adjacent electrode pairs are likely to give similar capacitance measurements. This similarity can be related to the variance of these measurements. The balance between electrode pair measurements at the upper and lower section of the pipe provides information related to the classification of a stratified flow. Hence the later definition of a RTB factor. This section reviews the identifiable flow patterns and the limitations of the system regarding the type of flow that can be classified. In the case of an annular flow taking place inside a horizontal pipe, the thickness of the liquid layer on the pipe wall is affected by gravity as illustrated in Typically the layer thickness In the case of a stratified flow pattern, shown in Before considering the means of identifying the two type of flow-pattern introduced above, it is necessary to consider the limitations of the sensing equipment used to collect the necessary data. These limitations are related to speed and spatial resolution, even though image reconstruction is not the primary aim. One limitation to be accounted for is the fact that even if the current frame is given as a two-dimensional representation (as an image or as an identified flow pattern), it is related to a physical sensor three-dimensional in nature. From the very beginning, the capacitance measurements are indeed an average taken on the electrode length. The electrode length parameter introduces a paradox: on the one hand it must be short to allow for approximating a small volume as a two-dimensional slice. On the other hand, the electrode length Because the data collected from the sensor is in fact related to the average state of the flow passing through the pipe taken along the electrode length, very rapid change in the flow pattern cannot be noticed. The inside diameter of the sensor (pipe) is 38 mm, with the kind of flow rate expected to occur, the fluid velocity is around 1 ms Taking these limiting factors into account, two options are open for study: Flow pattern identification on one frame with a number of frames kept in a buffer to confirm the decision. Time series approach: several frames are stored and the data is processed by batch for a flow pattern classification on the average of Assuming the phenomenon being observed by the sensor is deemed overall detectable according to the acquisition time and electrode length restriction, both options have pros and cons. The first option has problems if the flow oscillates between “annular” and “stratified” identification tag every other frame. This would correspond to very thin slices, or plugs, perturbing an annular flow pattern or more likely correspond to a fast changing and erratic flow pattern that cannot be matched by the decision making speed. The second option would give a smoother answer, over a period of time, thus giving the average flow pattern corresponding to the sample taken. The drawback is that any change in flow pattern during the sampled time would be ignored. The first solution of identifying a flow pattern from one frame has been chosen because it allows for a better slug detection system since the time needed for identification is far closer to the data acquisition time than for the second proposal. The classification algorithm has been designed using idealised flow patterns to identify a reduce set of relevant and reliable shape identifiers. Once these identifiers were found, simulations of less idealistic flow patterns were used to set the decision thresholds for them. The calibration process is discussed in the next section. Capacitance measurements are simulated using a forward problem application designed under MATLAB When capacitance values are involved they are always normalised ( To check the existence of a flow-pattern identifier linked to the symmetry of a given set of capacitance measurements (adjacent electrode pairs for instance), an idealised flow pattern is used, as shown in The results for computed capacitances taken on electrode pairs of the same type (facing as well as first, second and third adjacent electrodes) show obvious symmetrical patterns. The corresponding graphs are omitted since their information content is minimal. For a given value of the geometrical parameter Based on the same principle as before, a typical idealised geometrical pattern is defined. The parameter The ratio presented in Once the flow-pattern identifiers have been found by using idealised flow patterns, the thresholds associated with them must be set to achieve a proper classification. Because of pre-calibration issues, a set of realistic flow patterns have been simulated to provide the necessary capacitance measurements.  The proposed identifiers are evaluated for all the test flow-patterns indicated above. Categorising annular flow pattern is better done using adjacent electrodes; whereas the grouping of the top and bottom electrode pairs respectively are best for noticing a stratified flow. This is because adjacent electrodes are more sensitive to what happens at the periphery of the tube and far less to the permittivity distribution in the centre area. As it can be seen from  The different thresholds and evaluations undertaken in the decision tree ( RTB=( VSA=variance( AFE=( The results given in this section are related only to stratified flow patterns because the experimental rig was not fully operational at the time of writing. The images correspond to the results obtained with the commercial imaging system in use (Process Tomography Ltd, PTL). The image quality would be higher with a more elaborate reconstruction algorithm than the one used in these examples, then again the aim is not to produce an image but to obtain a rapid identification of the flow pattern. The measurements, shown in The images are originally colour images. Here, the dark pixels correspond to the air phase and the light ones to the kerosene phase. The white line has been added to show the actual kerosene level in the pipe when the experiment was done––the sensor is not levelled. As it can be seen the images are more of a qualitative source than of a quantitative one. Even if the measured capacitances are being thresholded to fit in the [0,1] interval, as have been the simulated ones, obtaining a volume ratio value from the image by averaging the pixel values appears less reliable (even in the original colour images). In the case of the phase fraction being taken from the image, errors due to the image reconstruction are included. With the direct approach using only the capacitance measurements, only the inherent non-linearities affect the evaluation. The above examples of stratified flow patterns are taken from different runs, the important result here is to check the validity of the classification tree given on  The values of the variance identifier given in the decision tree ( All the data and flow-pattern identification values considered in this study are normalised and reset within the theoretical bounds [0,1] if necessary to cater for the inherent non-linearity of the physical problem. Linear approximations for the capacitance computations have been implied during the design of this application. For instance the ratio of the permittivity of kerosene to the permittivity of air is around 3 and is considered low enough for validating images from linear back projection (LBP) based algorithms, This section is an addition to the original article submitted to the proceedings of the 4th International Conference on Multiphase Flow (ICMF 2001) and addresses some phenomena concerned with the formation of annular flow as discussed in the work of Fukano and Inatomi A comparison The black and white images read as follow: the air phase is shown in black or dark tone, the kerosene phase appears slightly lighter. The interface, or undetermined pixels (due to limitations of the image reconstruction), shows in white. Again, the actual imaging system operates in colour. The image sequence corresponds to the formation and collapse of a slug flow with the following characteristic: gas velocity of 5 m/s and liquid velocity of 0.2 m/s, images are obtained at 25 fps (0.04 s interval). The associated classification results are given in Again the classification results are obtained from the capacitance measurements only and agree with the observed flow patterns. Frames 216 to 218 are evaluated as slugs because of the phase fraction. Frame 216 shows an unstable pattern, collapsing in the following frames and filling the pipe section. Slug-flow appears as follow: Frames 215 and 216 show the liquid creeping up the wall. Then the kerosene phase fills the pipe on frames 217 and 218. Frame 219 shows a very short annular flow pattern. Frame 220 returns to stratified flow. It should be noted that the slug formation process presents a short-lived annular flow pattern in front and at the back of the passing slug. In fact, it appears as if a bubble of air is trapped ahead and behind the slug under consideration. This observation concurs with the notion of a three-dimensional effect in flow inside a pipe as expressed by Benjamin The results obtained by imaging are also in accordance with the work of Fukano and Inatomi on the formation of annular flow. Their analytical simulations describe the formation of annular flow with the liquid creeping up symmetrically along the side of the pipe, as observed from the tomographic data. This formation pattern is observed with images taken close to the annular flow regime. It is interesting to note that it extends to the formation of slug flow. The material presented in this paper allows gaining advantages on two fronts, as far as flow-pattern identification for control purpose is concerned: More reliable flow-pattern identification by limiting the ill-effects of the limitations introduced by an image reconstruction algorithm. Gain in speed by by-passing the time-consuming image reconstruction step. Other technical points and limitations of the technique are expressed in A new method for rapid flow-pattern identification based on the capacitance measurements obtained from a sensor with eight distributed electrodes is presented. It has been shown that reliable information can be extracted from such measurements without the need for time-consuming image reconstruction and analysis. This answers the request for flow-pattern information upstream of a T-junction separator. The simulation part of this work can be seen as pre-calibration testing if for some reasons the control system must be functional without available on-site calibration procedures. It must be reiterated that this approach can work only for a very limited set of flow patterns and does not claim to provide any metrics associated with this set of flow pattern (like fluid thickness on the pipe wall). For more elaborate information, the image reconstruction step may have to be considered or an appropriate model-based approach developed. Identifiers to be extracted from raw capacitance data are likely to be `integral' parameters. One of these is the phase ratio, which is somewhat proportional to the total energy stored in the system (the energy is related to capacitance), refers to The spatial resolution of the current ECT system is sufficient for imaging the transitional phenomenon between various flow patterns. However, the study of the flow-pattern formation and the possible incidence on the separation ability of the T-junctions, should require another sensor design geared towards imaging, a device with more electrodes, probably 12. It must be noted that the flow-pattern identification and the influence of the characteristic of a slug-flow on the separation performance of a T-junction, are not approached in the same manner. The former is linked to a control information, which needs to be kept simple, reliable (annular/stratified/slug flow) and available online, the latter requires an acceptable imaging quality. In conclusion, the primary objective of rapid flow-pattern identification has been achieved. Work is currently under way to use the existing experimental layout to propose further study of slug flow formation for an air–kerosene mixture.