Recovery of germanium (Ge) from the fly ash produced as a by-product of the integrated coal gasification combined cycle (IGCC) may be a potential source of this valuable element. Water-based Ge extraction procedures are environmentally friendly but non-selective, and some impurities such as As, Sb, and Ni, are also extracted. The leaching of As, Sb and Ni in water Ge extraction was carried out using oxic conditions in different oxidising atmospheres. Experimental results showed that the oxidative aqueous leaching of IGCC fly ash diminished the leachability of these impurities without altering Ge extraction yields. Dissolved oxygen in aqueous leaching led to the formation of Fe-(oxy)hydroxides structures from the oxidation of Fe-sulphides contained in IGCC fly ash, which diminished the concentration of metals and metalloids in the leachates through co-precipitation, adsorption or ion exchange mechanisms. The oxidation of Fe-sulphides and the formation of Fe-(oxy)hydroxides proved to be the limiting step of the process. The oxidative leaching of As and Sb showed a similar trend, being subsequently removed in the neoformed structures. The removal process was less efficient for Ni. The most selective water extraction for Ge was obtained with pure oxygen at 90°C and a stirring speed above 750min−1.Germanium is a rare element that is chiefly found in ore deposits, either as a substitute of Zn in the sphalerite framework structure As a consequence of its relatively high concentration, coal combustion or gasification fly ash may be a potential source of valuable elements such as Ge, whose recovery commonly entails acidic and alkaline extraction procedures with negative environmental implications. However, owing to the totally different speciation of elements in gasification fly ashes compared to those generated in coal combustion power plants, water extraction methods are more feasible and environmentally friendly The 335 Up to 84% of the Ge content in the IGCC fly ash of Elcogas occurs as water-soluble hexagonal-GeO Previous research on the extraction of Ge from Puertollano IGCC plant fly ash demonstrated that high Ge extraction yields (up to 84%) could be achieved using pure water During the development of the ECSC project, different methods to enrich Ge in leachates were studied as well as their final selective extraction: re-circulation of leachates, liquid–liquid extraction, ion exchange using cationic and anionic resins, sorption onto activated carbon, ion flotation and selective Ge precipitation as sulphides and organic complexes According to ionic speciation using X-ray absorption fine structure (XAFS) spectrometry, which supply additional information with respect to the oxidation state and the predominant mode of occurrence, As is present in IGCC fly ash as As Despite the occurrence of NiAs in the sequential extraction of IGCC fly ash, arsenic is mainly associated with reducible and soluble phases. The fast oxidation of NiAs into soluble Ni arsenate results in the association of As with a soluble phase, whereas the occurrence of Fe arsenates and the formation of highly insoluble arsenates during the extraction lead to the association with reducible phases From the entire amount of fly ash produced under different operational conditions in the Puertollano IGCC power plant, a representative sample of a given operational conditions of 50:50 coal/petcoke blends and 2.5% limestone addition was selected for oxidative water Ge extraction tests. This fly ash sample is characterised by a high Ge content (420 A previous study at the lab scale The leaching experiments were performed in a 1 Regular time intervals were set for the removal of 5  The pH of the IGCC fly ash leachates ranged from 3.5 to 7.2 depending on the gas atmosphere, temperature and leaching time. As described elsewhere As shown in Similar results were obtained for Ni oxidative extraction. In Puertollano IGCC fly ash, Ni occurs mainly as fine reduced species, mainly Fe–Ni sulphide species, nickeline and breithauptite The leaching of As in oxidative atmospheres was totally different from those described above for Ge and Ni. Whilst As leaching in air or pure oxygen, with or without gas flow, fell from the maximum value, the leaching performed in a nitrogen atmosphere showed a slight increase during all experimental trials. As shown in According to Font As mentioned above, together with the oxidation of arsenides, some sulphides in the IGCC fly ash also underwent oxidation. Among others, high contents of arsenopyrite, pyrite and pyrrhotite were observed. Dissolved oxygen and Fe(III) have been recognised as the two most important oxidants of Fe-sulphides in aqueous oxidation On the other hand, it is very common to use lime (CaO) to treat industrial wastewater containing arsenic. In these cases, dissolved As can be precipitated as Ca-rich arsenates whose composition is related to the composition of the aqueous solution and can precipitate over a wide pH range As described above, the leaching of As from Puertollano IGCC fly ash consists of two consecutive steps. The first step comprises the dissolution of the soluble arsenate phases and nickeline oxidation and subsequent dissolution, which is faster than the oxidation of ferro-sulphides. The second one could generally be described as the precipitation of Fe-arsenates (and/or Ca-arsenates) and/or the adsorption of As into the neoformed iron hydroxides species. As depicted in  Concerning Sb (  Similar results were obtained for the leaching of Ni (results not shown). Again, slight differences were observed in the experimental trials performed in oxic conditions, attaining concentration values in the leachates of around 38  The leaching of Ni as a function of temperature in both atmospheres presented a different pattern than that of Ge. The concentration of Ni in the leachates obtained at 90 The leaching patterns of arsenic and antimony as a function of temperature are similar to that of nickel. The concentration of these metalloids decreases as leaching temperature increases. However, as seen in Moreover, the concentrations of arsenic and antimony were slightly lower in the leachates obtained at 25 Whereas the oxidation of nickeline was slightly affected by an increase in temperature, the oxidation of Fe-sulphides and/or the adsorption processes of metalloids into neoformed Fe-(oxy)hydroxide structures were strongly affected. Thus, it can be concluded that the decrease in As concentration in the leachates obtained at 90 The behaviour of Ni was different to both metalloids, mainly due to the low adsorption of this metal into the neoformed Fe-(oxy)hydroxides. Therefore, their release was less affected by temperature and the oxidising conditions of the medium. Finally, the concentration of Ge in the leachate was not significantly affected either by the oxygen partial pressure or by the temperature used. This fact is related to the occurrence of Ge in IGCC fly ash, which mainly occurs as soluble phases such as hexagonal-GeO The oxidative aqueous leaching of IGCC fly ash during germanium extraction reduces the presence of impurities in the leachates, such as As, Sb and Ni, that occur as soluble and oxidisable phases, without altering Ge leaching. Thus, a more selective aqueous extraction to recover Ge from IGCC fly ash helps the development of a low-cost and environmentally friendly process that significantly decreases the costs of subsequent processes for removing impurities and purifying Ge. Moreover, the use of oxygen and high leaching temperatures should not add any additional costs, since in the cited plant is used oxygen during the gasification process and the flue gas cooling system produces large amounts of hot water. The neoformed Fe-(oxy)hydroxide structures, which are abundant in IGCC fly ash and result from Fe-sulphides oxidation are recognised as the most effective mineralogical scavengers of dissolved metal and metalloid ions. In oxic conditions, the oxidation of nickeline, which is the main form of As, Sb and Ni, is much faster than that of the ferro-sulphides. Co-precipitation, adsorption or ion exchange on Fe-(oxy)hydroxide structures have been proposed as mechanisms for the removal of metals and metalloids. However, the oxidation of Fe-sulphides is the limiting step in removing impurities. In accordance with the results obtained in our trials, the leaching of IGCC fly ash carried out in pure oxygen at 90 The oxidation of Fe-sulphides declines by reducing the amount of dissolved oxygen in the aqueous slurry, as well as by decreasing both stirring speed and leaching temperature. As a consequence, the formation of Fe-(oxy)hydroxide structures and the removal of metal and metalloid ions are also diminished. The authors thank the European Coal and Steel Community (ECSC) and the Spanish Ministry of Science and Technology (ECSC 7220-PR145, REN2001-1728).