The main objective of this research was to investigate the oxidative destruction of free cyanide with hydrogen peroxide and copper-impregnated pumice as a heterogeneous catalyst. Original or copper-impregnated pumices added alone were not effective adsorbents of negatively charged cyanide ions due to incompatible surface interactions. Peroxide and original pumices added together were also ineffective in removing cyanide. However, for all of the three natural pumices tested with various particle size fractions, the use of copper-impregnated pumices and peroxide together significantly enhanced both the initial rate and extent of cyanide removal. Although copper-impregnated specific surface area was the major factor affecting the rate and extent of cyanide destruction for a particular pumice source with similar surface chemistries, the type of surface chemistry (i.e., specific functional groups) within different pumice sources also appears to be a very important factor. Lower rates and extents of cyanide removals were observed at pH 11 compared to pH 8 probably because of the negative impacts of alkaline conditions in terms of scavenging peroxide and forming more negatively charged pumice surfaces. Both the initial rate and ultimate extent of cyanide removals were generally higher at a temperature of 20°C compared with those found at 10°C. The use of copper-impregnated pumice as a light, cheap, readily available, natural, and porous heterogeneous catalyst either in completely mixed/suspended or fixed-bed reactor configurations may be an effective treatment technology for cyanide removal from solution. This new approach may minimize downstream metal removal problems experienced in conventional cyanide oxidation technologies.Several industries including mining, metal processing, electroplating, and organic chemicals production use cyanide in large quantities. It is used at nearly 90% of the gold mines worldwide and is potentially toxic ( Hydrogen peroxide can oxidize free and weakly complexed metal cyanides (i.e., nickel, copper, cadmium, and zinc cyanides), forming one or more less toxic compounds such as cyanate and, when added in excess, nitrite and carbonate and, eventually, nitrate ( It is a simple process producing environmentally acceptable effluents without increasing total dissolved solids as do other chemical processes. Metals complexed with cyanide are precipitated as metal hydroxides depending on the pH of the solution, with an optimum pH of about 9.0–9.5. However, the oxidation process may operate well over a wide pH range. Soluble copper catalysts generally increase cyanide destruction rates significantly. The copper catalyst can be either copper present in solution (from gold/silver cyanidation processes) or can be added as a reagent copper solution ( While significantly enhancing the cyanide destruction rate, addition of soluble copper as a catalyst requires concentrations as high as 30–50 Pumice is a light, highly porous (pore volumes up to 85%) volcanic stone. Pumice particles, resembling a sponge, consist of a network of irregular or oval-shape internal voids/pores or vesicles, some of which are interconnected and open to the external surface, while others are isolated inside the particle ( The high porosity of volcanic pumice rock and its richness in silica, alumina, and natural zeolites makes this material a promising candidate as a catalyst in reactions that require active centers or as a support for the metallic function required in isomerization or hydrogenation reactions ( Pumice stone has also been tested and used in various environmental applications mainly as an adsorbent, as filtration media and for biolfilm support. It was used successfully for slow filtration to remove pathogens from irrigation waters at low cost in horticulture ( The main objective of this work was to investigate the destruction of free cyanide with hydrogen peroxide and copper-impregnated pumice as the catalyst. The use of pumice for such purpose has not been investigated in the available literature. The impacts of pumice type and size, peroxide and pumice doses, pH, and temperature on the extent and rate of cyanide destruction were studied. For comparison, cyanide adsorption by original and copper-coated pumices in the absence of peroxide was also investigated. All experiments were conducted in distilled and deionized water (DDW) employing the variable-dose completely mixed batch reactor (CMBR) bottle-point method. Reagent grade sodium cyanide was used to prepare synthetic cyanide solutions in DDW with target initial concentrations of about 100 Kinetic experiments in CMBRs were performed with constant initial CN For each experimental matrix, after dosing hydrogen peroxide and/or pumice, the solutions containing cyanide in headspace-free CMBRs were kept well-mixed (100 Pumice samples were obtained from the Pumice Research and Application Center at Suleyman Demirel University, Isparta, Turkey. Pumices from three different sources (Isparta, Kayseri and Nevsehir) with varying physicochemical characteristics were used. The following codes for these pumices are used throughout this article: Isp: Isparta; Kay: Kayseri; Nev: Nevsehir. The raw samples were ground by a primary crusher (hammer type), and then sieved to four different particle size fractions (<63, 63–125, 125–250, and 250–1000 Pumice samples were impregnated with copper using reagent grade Cu(NO In the CN Copper concentrations were measured using atomic absorption spectrometry based on Standard Methods. A scanning electron microscope (SEM) (Philips XL 30S FEG) and SEM-EDX (energy dispersive X-ray spectrometer) (Philips CM 10) were used for observation of pumice morphology and identification of atomic elements and relative concentrations of elements in pumice samples. Operational conditions in SEM-EDX analysis were as follows: 15.0 Pumice surface chemistry was characterized in terms of point of zero charge (pH Physicochemical characteristics of the original (i.e., untreated) pumice samples are shown in The impact of copper impregnation on pumice surface areas was not consistent. While the surface area decreased significantly with copper impregnation for the smallest size fraction (<63 The original Isparta pumice has a higher pH SEM-EDX elemental analysis showed that for both particle sizes (<63 and 250–1000 The removal of cyanide by adsorption (i.e., no peroxide addition) by original or copper-impregnated pumices were generally less than 20% after 24  Impregnation of pumices with copper did not improve the removals through adsorption alone compared to those of original pumices (   The impact of copper-impregnated pumice particle size fractions on cyanide removals is shown in  In terms of the stability of the copper-impregnated pumices during mixing in batch experiments, it was generally found that less than about 4–7 The tested natural pumice samples and their particle size fractions varied in physicochemical characteristics including surface area, elemental composition, porosity, and surface chemistry, which may affect their reactivity if used as a support material, adsorbent, or filtration media. Copper impregnation significantly increased the copper contents of the pumices, suggesting an effective impregnation process. However, the impact of the copper coating on pumice surface area depended on the pumice source, pore structures and surface chemical characteristics. Kinetic and bottle-point equilibrium adsorption experiments indicated that natural pumices, either original or copper impregnated, are not effective adsorbents of negatively charged cyanide ions at pH values 8 and 11, probably due to incompatible surface interactions. The surfaces of majority of the pumices tested were dominantly negatively charged above pHs of about 7–8. However, the adsorption kinetics to achieve equilibrium was rapid (4–8 Peroxide and original pumice added together were also ineffective in removing cyanide. However, for all of the three natural pumices tested with various size fractions, the use of copper-impregnated pumices and peroxide together significantly enhanced both the initial rate and extent of cyanide removal, which increased with increasing pumice doses at a constant peroxide dose. These findings indicate that the impregnation of copper into natural pumice particles used as heterogeneous supports significantly catalyzes the degradation of cyanide and also enhance the ultimate removals through peroxide oxidation. Specific surface areas of the pumice samples were found to decrease with increasing particle size. Increased available surface areas coated by copper accelerated the kinetics of the heterogeneous catalytic surface oxidation of cyanide. However, although copper-coated specific surface area was the major factor affecting the rate and extent of cyanide destruction for a particular pumice source with similar surface chemistries, the type of surface chemistry (i.e., specific functional groups) within different pumice sources also appears to be an important factor. Lower rates and extents of cyanide removals were observed at pH of 11 compared to pH of 8 probably because of the negative impacts of alkaline conditions in terms of scavenging peroxide and forming more negatively charged pumice surfaces, thus hindering the interaction of cyanide with surfaces for its surface catalyzed oxidation. Consistent with many oxidation reaction kinetics, both the initial rate and ultimate extent of cyanide removals were generally higher at a temperature of 20 Soluble copper catalyst is used in industrial treatment applications to catalyze the degradation of cyanide by hydrogen peroxide or SO The authors thank Professor Lutfullah Gunduz in Pumice Research and Application Center of Suleyman Demirel University (Turkey) for kindly providing the pumice samples, Assistant Professors Erol Seker and Sait Sofuoglu in the Chemical Eng. Dept. of Izmir Institute of Technology (Turkey) for conducting the SEM and SEM-EDX analysis, and Graduate Research Assistant Savas Ozun in the Mining Eng. Dept. of Middle East Technical University (Turkey) for conducting the BET surface area analysis. We also thank Graduate Research Assistant Hasan Ciftci in the Mining Eng. Dept. of Suleyman Demirel University for his technical assistance during cyanide analysis.