A five-factor Central Composite Orthogonal Design was adopted to study simultaneous effects of some processing variables such as NaCl (0–2%), fat (10–30%), ascorbic acid (0–600ppm), cooking temperature (150–230°C) and cooking time (5–15min) on physicochemical properties and heterocyclic aromatic amine (HAA) contents of cooked beef patties. The HAAs analyzed were 2-amino-3-methylimidazo[4,5-f]-quinoline (IQ), 2-amino-3,8-dimethylimidazo[4,5-f]-quinoxaline (MeIQx), 2-amino-3,4-dimethylimidazo[4,5-f]-quinoline (MeIQ), 2-amino-3,4,8-trimethylimidazo[4,5-f]-quinoxaline (4,8-DiMeIQx) and 2-amino-1-methyl-6-phenylimidazo[4,5-b]-pyridine (PhIP), as quantified by high-performance liquid chromatography with photo-diode array detection (HPLC-UV/DAD). It was found that ascorbic acid decreased; however, fat, cooking temperature and time levels increased the contents of IQ, MeIQx, MeIQ and PhIP. In addition, estimated ridge analysis was conducted to find values of the processing variables that maximize and minimize the five HAA contents, revealing that the results obtained would be useful for meat industry aiming to decrease HAA content in cooked meat products.Heterocyclic aromatic amines (HAAs) that are mutagenic and/or carcinogenic compounds are formed in proteinaceous foods like meat at temperatures above 150 A large number of studies have investigated the effect of some natural antioxidants such as flavonoids, ascorbic acid and vitamin E; synthetic antioxidants such as butylated hydroxyanisole (BHA), butylated hydroxytoluene (BHT), propyl gallate (PG), tertiary butylhydroquinone (TBHQ) and some food ingredients such as cherry, polyphenolic compounds from tea, spices, oligosaccharides as well as inuline and olive oil on HAA formation in cooked meats ( Although relationship between intake of HAAs with foods and cancer risk was not fully understood ( In some studies, the effect of some processing variables on the formation and content of HAAs was investigated and their effects were individually tested; but, not in combination with each other. Therefore, from these studies, it has been not possible to understand the most optimum conditions leading to the minimum/maximum HAA formation content. However, it would be possible to reduce cancer risk by changing some processing conditions such as cooking methods and by finding the most optimum processing conditions leading to a minimum content of HAAs ( Beef aged for 24 The beef and obtained fat were ground through a 3 Protein (Dumas) and fat (ether-extraction) contents of the cooked patties were determined using standard methods of ( The method described by HPLC analysis was performed on an HP 1100 Series (Agilent Technologies, Palo Alto, California, USA), equipped with a binary pump delivery system (1100 series G1310A), a degasser (1200 series G1379B), an autosampler (1200 series G1329 A ALS), a column heater (1100 series G1316A) and a UV–vis Diode Array Detector (1100 series G1315 DAD). Separations were conducted at 30 Analytical quality was ensured in three steps. At the first step, the identities belonging to analyte peaks were established by comparing retention times of the analyte peaks with standard HAA solutions and HAA standard spiked samples. In this respect, The HAAs were quantified using different calibration curves. Linear regression analysis (nanogram of each compound against peak area) was performed to calculate coefficient of regression ( A 5-factor-5-level (5 The majority of generated models adequately explained the variation of responses with satisfactory The computational work, including the surface and contour graphical presentations of the response surface models, was performed using a Statistica for Windows software package (Statsoft, Version 5.0.1.a, SAS Institute. Inc. Tulsa, OK, USA). JMP statistical package software (Version 5.0.1.a, SAS Institute. Inc. Cary, NC, USA) was used to compute the estimated ridges of maximum and minimum response for increasing radii from the centre of the original design. Effects of the processing variables, e.g., NaCl, ascorbic acid and fat levels; cooking temperature and cooking time on pH, percent fat, percent protein and color ( Cooking temperature and time had significant ( The average extraction recoveries were determined to vary between 52.7 and 69.4%; namely, 63.2% for IQ, 52.7% for MeIQx, 69.4% for MeIQ, 64.1% for 4,8-DiMeIQx and 59.2% for PhIP. In the present study, LOD (limit of detection) and LOQ (limit of quantification) were detected as 0.004   Among the processing variables, cooking time and temperature had the most significant ( NaCl had an effect to increase only MeIQx content, as seen by its linear and quadratic effects ( It should also be noted here that increase in the fat content up to a certain level did not remarkably change the HAA content of the patties; however, further increase in the fat level added ( Ridge analysis is performed to determine the levels of independent variables that minimize and maximize the levels of the responses. Given the fact that, considerable efforts have been exerted so far in a great number of studies to find appropriate ways to decrease HAAs, thus aiming to decrease the intake of carcinogens and/or mutagens in foods, finding minimum and/or maximum levels of some processing variables that minimize and maximize the level of HAA content should be priority and ultimate goal for investigations studying the effect of some processing variables on formation rate of HAAs. In the literature, NaCl, fat, cooking temperature and cooking time are reported to be among the processing variables having considerable effects on the formation of carcinogenic/mutagenic HAAs. In this study, ascorbic acid was found to have a decreasing effect whereas increase in the fat level; cooking temperature and cooking time was found to have considerable increasing effect on the formation of IQ, MeIQx, MeIQ and PhIP contents. In addition, the levels of these processing variables that minimize and maximize the level of each HAA contents were determined, revealing that the results obtained would be useful for meat industry which should tend to decrease the HAAs content in cooked meat products to a level as low as possible. This research was supported by the