No cracking of the skin sheets Cracking of the PMMA core Skull injuries caused by trauma and pathologies, such as tumor, infectious diseases or congenital deformities, may result into serious functional, aesthetical and psychological sequels, requiring the reconstruction of complex craniofacial prostheses. In this field, the choice of suitable biomaterials is the main challenge. Currently, different classes of mono-materials, such as polymers, ceramics and light metals are employed to fabricate skull and mandible prostheses However, the mono-materials present many drawbacks, such as inappropriate mechanical properties or their high weight in the case of metals. For medical use, the discrepancy existing between the mechanical properties and the density of the implant and the bone to be replaced results in stress shielding which represents the most limiting factor for a successful substitute Although sandwich structures seem to be well adapted to the mechanical properties required in biomaterials, the use of an epoxy resin is a serious drawback for In general, the durability of a polymer-metal interface strongly depends on the adhesion strength between the two components. Since chemical bonds between metal and polymer are not spontaneously established, these layered hybrid polymer-metal materials often exhibit undesired delamination phenomena due to a weak interfacial adhesion between metal and polymer resulting in the premature failure of the entire system In this context, the idea of this work was to employ surface-confined polymers to fabricate biocompatible resin-free sandwich materials by sticking the polymer core on the metallic skins previously coated with grafted polymer chains. As proof of concept for biomedical applications, Ti and PMMA were employed and Ti/PMMA/Ti sandwiches produced. Indeed, despite the significant discrepancy between the mechanical properties of Ti and those of the surrounding tissues, which often results in a stress shielding PMMA foils (0.5 mm thick) containing BaSO PMMA chains were grafted onto Ti substrates using a three steps strategy previously developed After each step of the PMMA-coated Ti synthesis procedure (namely, the alkali treatment, the grafting of the initiator and the polymerization) the chemical properties of samples’ surfaces were investigated. In particular, attenuated total reflection Fourier transformed infrared spectroscopy (ATR-FTIR) analysis - performed with a PerkinElmer spectrometer with a resolution of 4 cm Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) was employed to follow the evolution of the surface morphology after each steps of the synthesis procedure and to investigate the resulting PMMA-coated Ti cross-section. In particular, the morphology after the alkali activation, the grafting of the initiator and the SI-ATRP reaction was imaged with a crossBeam® Workstation AURIGA-Zeiss 405 Microscope. Instead, the sample’s cross-section was firstly prepared using a ion beam cross-polisher (Hitachi IM4000+). The samples were cut with a metallographical saw and an edge from the backside was polished with a 25° bevel (SiC P1000 paper) to reduce the thickness of Ti to polish by the ion beam. The cross polishing was then performed from the back side (6 keV, Ar). By this way, the organic material was protected by the Ti itself and very few exposed to the ion beam. Then its features studied using SEM analysis conducted on a Zeiss Gemini SEM 500 SEM. Resin-free Ti/PMMA/Ti sandwiches of different sizes were produced by hot-pressing. A PMMA foil 0.5 mm thick, used as core material, was inserted between two PMMA-coated Ti sheets. Since the manufacturing process, regarding the bonding properties between metal and polymer, is independent from the thicknesses of the partners, and with the aim of firstly proving the feasibility of producing suitable resin-free sandwich materials, the combinations tested were chosen depending on the materials available. A layup of the three components was then hot-pressed together above the PMMA glass transition temperature and melting temperature (111 °C and 160 °C, respectively). Bonding was achieved by exploiting the interpenetration of the grafted PMMA chains into the chains of the adhering PMMA foil, which led to the formation of entanglements The main parameters involved in the hot-pressing process are time, temperature and pressure. The optimized combinations of these three parameters for the Ti/PMMA/Ti sandwiches production were assessed performing a parametric study. For each parameter, three values were considered as follows: T = 170, 180 and 200 °C, t = 30, 60 and 90 min and p = 0.1, 0.2 and 0.4 MPa. Thus, the maximum number of parameter combinations (i.e. possible experiments) was 3 The microstructure of the Ti/PMMA/Ti cross-sections were analysed by Optical microscopy. The samples were prepared by cutting, with a shear cutting bank, a small piece (20 × 10 mm The Ti/PMMA/Ti adhesion strength was evaluated performing pull-off tests. For these tests, sandwiches made of two (20 × 20) mm The shear resistance of the Ti/PMMA/TI sandwiches was evaluated performing single shear tests using a universal testing machine with an applied speed of 1 mm/min. Sandwiches of two PMMA-coated Ti sheets (25 × 100 × 0.4 mm The mechanical properties of the Ti sheets, PMMA foils as well as the ones of Ti/PMMA/Ti sandwiches made of two PMMA-coated Ti sheets 0.2 mm thick and a PMMA core 0.5 mm thick (here after noted as 0.2/0.5/0.2 sandwiches) were determined by uniaxial tensile testing. According to ASTM The forming behaviour of Ti/PMMA/Ti sandwiches were analysed performing three-point bending as well as deep drawing and Erichsen tests. These tests allow identifying and correlating the possible failure modes arising from forming such three-layered sandwich materials under different loading conditions. In principle, failure can be expected in the form of: 1) cracking of the outer Ti skin sheet, which is more probable for thin ones; 2) cracking of the core layer, especially if the core has brittle nature; or 3) interlaminar delamination in case of weak skin/core adhesion characteristics. To this purpose, combinations of sandwiches with different Ti size (20 × 60 mm The bending properties of the Ti/PMMA/Ti sandwiches were investigated performing three-point bending tests using punch sizes of 3 mm and 6 mm in diameter. In particular, the 3 mm punch was used to investigate the properties of the 0.2/0.5/0.2 and 0.4/0.5/0.4 sandwiches, while the 6 mm punch was taken for the asymmetric 0.2/0.5/0.4 ones. The test speed was kept constant at 0.3 mm/s. The performed test strategy was the following: Firstly, the maximum achievable bending angle, defined as the ones at which a visible failure of the systems (listed above) occurred, was determined. Secondly, to follow the development of the bent sandwiches’ strains as well as the degree of their springback, stepwise tests were performed using a 45° step sequence. For this, the test was stopped at the specified angle under load, the strain distribution and the springback were evaluated and documented, prior to carrying on the next step. It is noteworthy to mention that the bending angle was controlled by the previously determined bending displacement according to the controlling equation of DIN EN ISO 7438-2005. The strain field was determined using photogrammetry (GOM Argus) for the different successive steps. For this analysis and for a precise evaluation, fine dot pattern (0.5 mm point diameter with 1 mm distance of the adjacent dot centres) was etched on the Ti sheets by means of an electrolytic marking system (EU-Classic, Östling Marking Systems GmbH). Successively, a GOM Argus system was used to determine the strains. The results were obtained in terms of the distribution of the major strain in a section along the sample length; in addition, 3D photogrammetric images show the critical regions of the shaped samples. Whereas, the spring-back ratios (K) are determined based on the angle ratio between the angle after unloading (α A small spring-back is achieved if the K value is close to 1. The spring-back degree (K) is correlated to elastic modulus in the plane strain condition (E′) according to the geometrical and mechanical properties of the tested sheets In According to The possibility of shaping forms that are more complex was investigated by testing the forming properties of Ti/PMMA/Ti sandwiches with different thicknesses (0.2/0.5/0.2, 0.4/0.5/0.4 and the asymmetric 0.2/0.5/0.4). Deep-drawing tests were performed at room temperature (RT) until failure or complete cup drawing using a drawing ratio ß Erichsen tests – giving information on the stretching behaviour of sheet material - were carried out on 0.2/0.5/0.2 Ti/PMMA/Ti sandwiches. A standard 25 mm diameter semi-spherical punch was used. During the test, the punch displacement rate was kept constant at 0.5 mm/s. The forming limits were determined in terms of the corresponding punch displacement when cracking occurs (namely the Erichsen Index (IE)) and forming force could be determined. The cross-section of PMMA chains grafted on a Ti substrate obtained following a three-step strategy Additionally, the effect of using a shorter ATRP initiator (i.e., a commercial bromoisobutyrate-propyl-1-phosphonic acid, C Then, taking into account the difference in the number of moles produced by using shorter molecules, the reagents quantity required for the polymerization was recalculated in function of the initiator’s number of moles and the ATRP consequently carried-out. As previously underlined, the grafting reaction with the shorter initiator leads to a more open surface structure, which results in the growth of less densely packed PMMA layers ( Successively, a procedure to stick a 0.5 mm thick PMMA foil between two synthesized PMMA-coated Ti sheets was developed by replacing the epoxy-resin, usually employed in the fabrication of sandwich materials, with the previously grown tethered polymer chains. Thus, resin-free Ti/PMMA/Ti sandwiches were produced by hot-pressing. The best possible experimental conditions for the Ti/PMMA/Ti sandwiches production were assessed performing a parametric study using a design of experiments (DoE) method, adopting Minitab Inc. as tool for the data analysis. In particular, in order to reduce the number of the experiments to be performed, an optimal factorial DoE plan was applied by hypothesizing that the simultaneous interaction of the three parameters involved in the production (i.e. temperature, time and pressure) is negligible. In this way, 19 experimental combinations (listed in Then, the corresponding Ti/PMMA adhesion strength was evaluated performing pull-off tests using (20 × 20) mm The pull-off tests performed (as sketched in Moreover, the Ti/PMMA/Ti failure mechanism was identified by analysing the morphology and the chemical composition of the sandwich fracture surfaces after the pull-off tests (a representative image of which is shown in The results of three representative Ti/PMMA/Ti sandwiches are shown in In order to investigate both the mechanical properties and the forming behaviour of Ti/PMMA/Ti sandwiches, A6-sized Ti sheets (105 × 148) mm In order to study the mechanical properties of this system as well as the ones of Ti sheets and PMMA foils mono-materials, mini-tensile samples of Ti and Ti/PMMA/Ti sandwiches were prepared, according to ASTM The brittleness of the PMMA is expected to influence the stress-strain behaviour of the entire sandwich sheets under tensile loading as well as the forming behaviour under bending and deep-drawing loading conditions. In this regard, it was observed that the PMMA core cracks earlier than the pure Ti skin sheets in the sandwich (in strain range between 22% and 28%, red curves) with a strain difference of about 2% at the end of the tensile testing (see black arrows in Furthermore, using the RoM As stated before The capability of shaping Ti/PMMA/Ti sandwiches was investigated performing bending, Erichsen and deep-drawing tests. For this purpose, both, symmetric and asymmetric Ti/PMMA/Ti structures were analysed. The bending properties of the TI/PMMA/Ti sandwiches were investigated performing three-point bending tests using punch sizes of 3 mm and 6 mm in diameter. As reported in Moreover, the sandwich combination built-up using the thinner Ti sheets (i.e. the 0.2/0.5/0.2 sandwich), bent with 3the 3 mm punch showed a significant decrease of the forming limit (solid red line in The previous bending results can be further explained by analysing the strain field on the surface of the bent Ti samples. Additionally, the strain levels, using the 6 mm punch, are less, even at higher bending angles, because of the reduced load on the outside of the sheet. The springback ratios (K) of the Ti/PMMA/Ti sandwiches in correlation with the skin/core thickness and the bending angles (45°, 90° and 135°) using the 3 mm and 6 mm punch diameters are shown in Due to the high elastic/low plastic strain fraction existing at this angle for the first bending step (45°) lower K-values – higher springback angles - for all the sandwich results were observed. For the same sandwich sheets with the larger bending punch diameter, lower K-values resulted, too, which is in accordance with the fundamentals of springback properties (as shown in Moreover, for analysing the possibilities of shaping more complex components, deep drawing and Erichsen tests were performed. Due to the brittle behaviour of the PMMA (see Whereas, all the Ti/PMMA/Ti sandwich combinations (0.4/0.5/0.4 (black), 0.4/0.5/0.2 (red), 0.4/0.5/0.2 (green) in Nevertheless, in correspondence of a 6 mm punch displacement, a small decay of the force was observed, possibly indicating cracking of the polymer core. As no delamination occurred, the cracking of the polymer core was ignored with respect to the overall drawing behaviour of the whole sandwich. The drawing properties of the investigated sandwich combination are summarized in The cracking limit of the sandwich sheet (0.2/0.5/0.2, light blue curves in Surface-confined PMMA chains were successfully grown on large Ti substrates (up to DIN A6 size) through SI-ATRP coupled with a “grafting from” method using phosphonic acids as coupling agents to ensure the metal-polymer covalent bonding. They were used as adhesive layers for the fabrication of biocompatible resin-free sandwich materials produced by hot-pressing. In particular, tethered PMMA chains were used to replace the epoxy resin - usually employed in sandwich materials to stick the polymer core onto the metal skin sheets - and ensure the bonding through the formation of entanglements caused by the interpenetration of the tethered PMMA chains into those of the PMMA core. Ti/PMMA/Ti sandwiches were processed demonstrating that, for the sandwich production, tethered polymer chains can replace epoxy-resin. In this way, the optimum Ti/PMMA/Ti sandwiches hot-pressing parameters (temperature, time and pressure), delivering the highest Ti/PMMA adhesion, were developed using an optimal factorial experimental plan defined by the design of experiments method. With the optimum conditions (180°, 90 min and 0.2 MPa), a high bonding strength (pull-off strength higher than 20 MPa and a shear resistance of 10 MPa) and good forming properties could be achieved. The mechanical properties determined by tensile testing showed that the failure of the sandwiches mainly depends on the failure strain of the Ti skin sheets; whereas, the brittle failure nature of the PMMA did not remarkably influence the failure strain of the sandwich. Additionally, the rule of mixture was verified with the obtained stiffness- and strength-related properties (E, YS, UTS and ER10). Applying this rule, two sandwich combinations (symmetric and asymmetric) possessing mechanical properties - especially Young’s modulus - close to that of the cortical bone were proposed. Three-point bending and deep-drawing tests were performed to analyse the forming behaviour. In particular, despite the low ductility of the PMMA core, delamination-free bending operation up to 180° were achieved without cracking of the Ti/PMMA/Ti sandwiches made of thicker Ti skin sheets (0.4 mm) for both bending punches (3 mm and 6 mm in diameter). However, for the smaller bending punch the bending angle was limited to 80° if thinner Ti skin sheets (0.2 mm) were used. Furthermore, Ti/PMMA/Ti could be completely deep-drawn without visual cracking of the Ti skin sheets, thanks to the good forming behaviour of the metal. The same behaviour could be stated for the Erichsen test, where the brittle nature of PMMA has no negative influence on the forming limits or even on the Ti/PMMA interface quality, indeed no delamination took place. We gratefully acknowledge the financial support provided by the German Research Foundation: DFG, grant no. PA 837/44-1, by IDex Université of Strasbourg for “Post-Doctorants” (BMM/PN/AM/ 2016-096b) as well as Friedrich Gustav Theis Kaltwalzwerke GmbH for supplying us with the Ti sheets. The following additional analyses are included: The following are the Supplementary data to this article: