A froth-based flotation description is developed that combines the physical structure and the kinetics of flowing froths. Foam physics indicates that bubbles have a polyhedral shape and consist of lamellae between bubbles and Plateau borders. Hydrophobic material is attached to bubbles in the lamellae, while both entrained hydrophobic and hydrophilic solids are in the Plateau borders, which form drainage channels where three lamellae meet. Further, hydrophobic solids that have become detached from the lamellae through coalescence or bursting also enter the Plateau borders. The flow rate of hydrophobic solids and liquid associated with the interbubble lamellae can be quantified by the total surface area of the overflowing froth and the thickness and solids concentration of the lamellae. These can be measured directly by dynamic image analysis and froth surface sampling. The amount of solids carried in the Plateau borders by the overflowing froth is determined by the concentration in, and volumetric flow rate of these channels. The Plateau borders volume depends on the channel length, determined by the bubble size, and the channel cross-sectional area, determined by the fraction of unbroken bubbles in the overflowing froth. These can also be obtained from image processing. Therefore, the total flow rate of hydrophobic and hydrophilic solids and liquid have two contributions, firstly from the interbubble lamellae, and secondly from the Plateau borders. Mass flow rate equations have been derived for each of these three components in terms of the measurable variables which allow the unknown solids concentrations in the Plateau borders to be estimated. Experimental data from an industrial flotation operation have been interpreted using the proposed model.A number of phenomenological based flotation models have been proposed in the literature. Most of them bring together correlations and kinetic models for both froth and pulp phases to model the complex flotation system. Most of the flotation models are based on a chemical kinetic analogy. The recovery of valuable mineral from the pulp phase is adequately described by first-order kinetics, however, there are no general models to describe the collection of hydrophilic solids and water. In general, due to the lack of understanding of the phenomena occurring within the froth phase, the flotation process has been described using pulp-based models.  Modelling froth flotation considering froth structure and the mechanisms occurring within the froth can provide a better understanding of the process. However, this is complex since it is difficult to decouple the different effects that variables such as particle size, addition of chemicals and air flow rate have on the froth structure. Some semi-empirical models The objective of this work is to propose a simple model that combines a realistic froth structure with a phenomenological description of froth flotation, which can be used to describe the flotation process. The model links the performance of the process with the froth structure and allows us to study their relationship in terms of operational variables. The froth structure considers the froth to consist of polyhedral bubbles made up of lamellae and Plateau borders. The total amount of valuable material, gangue and water are quantified by two contributions; the first is the material carried in the lamellae, the second is the material present in Plateau borders. The performance of the process can be measured experimentally, whereas the froth structure can be described largely by means of image processing of the surface of the froth. In the following section, the relevant literature will be reviewed. Later, the model is proposed and described. Finally, industrial flotation data is interpreted using the model. Several authors have proposed empirical correlations to describe the flotation process in terms of operational variables such as air flow rate and froth height     The model proposed by  In the Woodburn model, the fluxes of entrained solids and water (Φ A two-phase foam consists of gas cells enclosed by liquid such that the gas and the liquid are the dispersed and continuous phases, respectively. In a typical foam, the bubbles take the form of polyhedral cells, in which the thin films or surfaces are the faces (lamellae) of the bubbles. The thin films meet in lines (Plateau borders) and the lines meet at vertices In a foam, the liquid is mainly found in the Plateau borders, which form a continuous network The processes taking place in a flowing foam are drainage, film rupture on the surface (bursting) and coarsening (coalescence and diffusion). The drainage of liquid from films and Plateau borders is influenced by the action of gravity and capillary forces. Liquid will flow from films to Plateau borders due to the difference in curvature and from there to the vertices. This produces film thinning that can result in rupture of the films leading to the coalescence of two adjacent bubbles. Gas diffuses from small bubbles with higher capillary pressure to large bubbles with lower capillary pressure     More recently, When there are big bubbles in the system, In simulations of Plateau border dimensions within the foam, Considering that the bubbles in the froth consist of bubble lamellae and Plateau borders as described before, it is proposed in this work that the total amount of material in the froth are from two contributions; one is from the lamellae (bubble shells) and the other from the Plateau borders Hence, the fraction of air that overflows the weir as unbroken bubbles The amount of material associated with the lamellae can be quantified by the total surface area of the froth overflowing the weir and their thickness. The flow rate of bubble surface area overflowing the weir is given by: The amount of material carried in the Plateau borders by the overflowing froth is related to the total volumetric flow rate of Plateau borders in the overflowing froth. Also, the volumetric fraction of Plateau borders in a given volume of froth can be obtained as: Therefore, the total volumetric flow rate of Plateau borders in the overflowing froth ( The flotation concentrate is considered to have three components: valuable material (v), gangue (g) and water (w). The mass flow rate of valuable material is: It is assumed that the mass flow rate of gangue is primarily due to the gangue present in the Plateau borders, that is, the contribution from the bubble shells is considered negligible. This does not imply that there is no gangue present in the lamellae but that the contribution from lamellae is much smaller than that from the Plateau borders (    Alternatively, if the cross-sectional area of Plateau borders ( These two values of Flotation of copper from a bulk sulphide ore containing primarily chalcopyrite (CuFeS The experimental cell is a 3.0 m The froth depth (0.20 m) and the feed flow rate (300 l/min) were kept constant in all the experiments. The solids content on the feed stream was constant and about 40% by mass. Samples of the feed, concentrate and tails were taken under steady state conditions. The solids concentration of each stream was determined. The samples were analysed for copper. The height of the froth overflowing was measured at the weir. Samples of the upper surface of the froth were taken onto a glass slide to determine the highest grade possible to recover if there is no entrainment A digital video camera and a high-intensity light were set up above the froth surface near the weir. Images were processed off-line using a customised flotation image processing software developed by From the image processing, the average bubble size, bubble size distribution, average diameter based on the bubble size distribution, foam velocity and flow rate of bubble surface area are obtained. The average bubble diameter and the foam velocity are used to describe the froth structure. These two variables determined the flow rate of bubble surface area. The average bubble size and the specific surface area are estimated using area-weighted averages by assuming that bubbles are ellipsoids and using the cross-sectional area and perimeter of the delineated bubbles There are limitations to the use of image processing to estimate bubble size distributions in froths. Often, the edge-detection algorithm does not perform well for either very small or large bubbles. Further, stereological difficulties make the interpretation of the 3-D froth surface as a plane inherently unreliable. In spite of these issues, and considering that excellent bubble segmentation was achieved in this case, the estimates of specific surface area using area-weighted averages is considered satisfactory for the purposes of this work. The model was used to interpret the experimental results obtained. The parameters measured experimentally were   The amount of gangue in the concentrate is related to the amount of water collected Froth stability is indicated by the fraction of air overflowing the weir. The complex relationship between the frother concentration and air flow rate, and  In contrast to the bubble size, There are two contributions to the total flow rate of copper and water; the first from the bubble surface area (lamellae) and the second from the Plateau borders. The amount of material that is recovered from the bubble lamellae is determined by the flow rate of bubble surface area which is obtained by image processing The flow rate of copper is also determined by the solids loading on the lamellae. The second contribution to the total flow rate of solids and water is from the Plateau borders. Using  The trends followed by the volumetric flow rate of Plateau border ( From the predictions of Plateau border volumetric flow rate  The contribution from the Plateau borders is always significantly higher than the contribution from the lamellae. This is due to the bursting of bubbles on the top surface of the froth. When film rupture occurs, solid particles in the lamellae enter the Plateau borders. The contribution of the lamellae to the total flow rate of valuable material increases when increasing air flow rate at standard frother concentration. As the air flow rate increases the amount of bursting on the top surface (1− At high frother concentration and high air flow rate, the rate of bursting at the top surface increases significantly and the contribution from the lamellae decreases. The major contribution to the flow rate of water comes from the Plateau borders which form the liquid network (continuous phase) of the froth. The volumetric fractions of each component ( All the components are present in approximately the same proportion under all conditions. As expected, the major contribution to Plateau border volume is water, followed by gangue and valuable material. Despite the fact that the fractions change only slightly with air flow rate and frother concentration, it is clear that as the air flow rate increases, the fraction of valuable material in the Plateau borders decreases, whereas the fraction of gangue increases. This is as expected. From the estimated Plateau border volumetric flow rate the cross-sectional area of Plateau borders ( The Plateau border area determined from The values of A model based on foam physics has been developed which could be used to interpret the effect of froth structure on flotation. The model links the flow rate of valuable material, gangue and water to the froth structure. The mass flow rate of valuable material, gangue and water are related to the flow rate of bubble surface area and the total volumetric flow rate of Plateau borders overflowing the weir. These last two can be estimated through analysis of the images of the overflowing froth. The froth structure considers the physical description of a foam, consisting of lamellae (bubble shells) and Plateau borders. The Plateau border length per unit volume of froth ( Experimental results from an industrial flotation cell were interpreted using the model. The model estimates realistic values for the contribution of the lamellae and Plateau borders to the total flow rate of valuable material and water. Additionally, the Plateau border volumetric flow rate predicted by the model follows realistic trends as do the volumetric fractions of valuable material, gangue and water within the Plateau borders. These parameters can be related to the rate of bubble bursting at the top surface of the froth. The more important contribution of this model is the incorporation of the Plateau border concept that offers a more realistic way to describe the froth-based flotation process. Although the model is able to adequately link flotation performance and froth structure, further research is required to describe the non-linear behaviour of this relationship. This model yields a more realistic approach in terms of froth structure and its link to flotation performance. cross-sectional area (m concentration in the overflowing froth (kg/m bubble diameter (m) gravity constant (m/s height of the overflowing froth at the weir (m) air flow rate introduced to the cell (m bubble radius or radius of the circumscribing sphere of a dodecahedron (m) specific surface area of the bubbles in the overflowing froth (m weighted average specific surface area of the overflowing froth (m superficial gas velocity of the air at the top of the cell (m/m total volumetric flow rate of the overflowing froth (m velocity of the upper surface of the overflowing froth (m/s) weir width (m) volume fraction of air that overflows the weir as unbroken bubbles bubble lamellae thickness (m) volumetric fraction in the Plateau borders volumetric fraction of air in the overflowing froth constant that accounts for the velocity profile of the overflowing froth length of Plateau border per unit volume of froth (m/m viscosity (Pas) density (kg/m total volumetric flow rate of Plateau borders in the overflowing froth (m mass flow rate (kg/s) flow rate of bubble surface area of the overflowing froth (m top of the cell gangue liquid mineral plateau borders slurry valuable material water bubble lamellae Plateau borders top surface of the froth