Iron(III) solvent extraction removal from zinc process solutions by OPAP (octylphenyl acid phosphate) and D2EHPA (di-(2-ethylhexyl)phosphoric acid) was studied from the standpoint of stripping with HCl such that a saleable waste-free iron product could be generated downstream using existing pyrohydrolysis technology. OPAP (0.95 F) at 20 °C was found to be an excellent extractant for the preparation of concentrated iron chloride strip solutions. Its major advantages included very low sulphate carry-over, reasonable zinc carry-over, very low chloride back-extraction, and economic iron build-up and acid balance when a ‘moderate strength’ HCl–FeCl2 strip feed (3.38 N HCl–58.5 g/L Fe(II)–9.7 g/L Fe(III)) was used. Major drawbacks with D2EHPA were identified which included significant sulphate carry-over and ineffective stripping and hence, poor iron build-up (≪ 100 g/L) with the ‘moderate strength’ strip feed. OPAP exhibited lower chloride back-extraction than D2EHPA. High molar ratio values of back-extracted chloride and unstripped iron(III) suggest a predominance of Fe(III)–chloro complexes in D2EHPA. OPAP stripping with 4 N HNO3 at 50 °C was found to be ineffective.Recently, OPAP and D2EHPA were each investigated for the extraction of iron(III) from strong ZnSO Research has historically over-emphasised extraction relative to stripping in iron(III) investigations. Effective iron(III) extractants typically form strong complexes, which render subsequent stripping difficult. This poor stripping behaviour is characterised by high iron(III) retention and a large number of required contacts in counter-current stripping circuits. This ultimately leads to inadequate concentration of iron(III) in strip solutions. Approaching stripping conceptually in combination with spray roasting or pyrohydrolysis necessitates the use of strong HCl solution as the stripping agent for OPAP and D2EHPA. Neither of these two candidate extractants has, if at all, been credibly investigated with HCl. The same can be said for A challenge exists to quantify the extent and manner to which extractants such as OPAP and D2EHPA succeed with strong HCl strippant and to attempt to enhance this performance using a reductive stripping technique ( OPAP and D2EHPA extractants, supplied by Albright and Wilson Americas, were prepared at concentrations of 0.95 F and 0.95 F/1.25 F, respectively. Each extractant solution contained as modifier 20% v/o (0.84 F) tridecanol from EXXON (‘EXXAL-13’: C All aqueous solutions were prepared using reagent grade chemicals. The standard aqueous feed consisted of 25 g/L iron(III) as Fe Stripping kinetics tests were performed with OPAP and D2EHPA which were pre-loaded by two consecutive contacts with fresh standard aqueous feed solution at 50 °C, O/A Stripping isotherm tests were performed with OPAP and D2EHPA that were pre-loaded as described for the kinetics tests above. The iron(III)-loaded OPAP and D2EHPA were contacted at variable O/A ratios with 6 N HCl or ‘moderate strength’ HCl solution (3.38 N, 58.5 g/L Fe(II)–9.7 g/L Fe(III)) at 20 °C and 30 min total contact time. All strip solutions were titrated for total iron content. Strip solutions from the kinetics tests were analyzed for residual zinc and sulphate by ICP. Stripped organic samples were diluted with kerosene–tridecanol solution and scrubbed by 50 g/L H OPAP and D2EHPA exhibit similar stripping kinetics. For brevity, the data is not shown. OPAP and D2EHPA required less than 5 min to attain equilibrium. D2EHPA's fast stripping kinetics was surprising considering the slow kinetics (> 30 min) reported by OPAP stripping efficiency at room temperature increased with increasing strippant concentration, while that of D2EHPA appears anomalous, following the opposite order. Thus, OPAP stripping efficiency followed the order: 4 N HCl On the other hand, D2EHPA followed a radically different order of stripping efficiency: 4 N HCl The iron extraction behaviour as a function of HCl concentration is illustrated in With regard to phase disengagement, all OPAP and D2EHPA test contacts under aqueous continuous conditions consistently gave secondary break times of 5 min or less. Organic continuous operation required much longer separation times for both extractants. Ten minutes or longer separation time was required for both OPAP and D2EHPA at O/A  The kinetics and isotherm tests were repeated, again using 6 N HCl, but this time in the presence of 30 g/L, 40 g/L, or 70 g/L iron(II) as FeCl With minor exceptions, phase separation characteristics were found to be identical to those observed with pure HCl strip feeds under similar conditions. However, there was a slight decrease in the separation time required for D2EHPA from 6 N HCl–70 g/L iron(II) strip solution under organic continuous conditions. Also, FeCl It was found that the presence of FeCl Stripping OPAP with 6 N HCl–70 g/L iron(II) at 50 °C gave no improvement within experimental error as compared to 20 °C operation. This shows that temperature has little effect on OPAP stripping, nor is it expected to influence D2EHPA stripping based on this and M2EHPA efforts ( Far from enhancing stripping efficiency, the presence of FeCl   OPAP is predicted to require four stripping stages in a continuous counter-current stripping circuit with an operating line of O/A Iron(III) build-up to or above 100 g/L could not be achieved with 6 N HCl strippant alone. A 6 N HCl–70 g/L iron(II) strip feed successfully achieved the required iron levels with OPAP, performing nearly as well with D2EHPA. However, the latter strip feed composition does not achieve the needed HCl balance between stripping and pyrohydrolysis, according to mass balance calculations ( Mass balance results indicated that any 6 N HCl(initial acid)–FeCl  Stripping isotherms at 20 °C were generated with 3.38 N HCl–58.5 g/L Fe(II)–9.7 g/L Fe(III) strip feed for 0.95 F OPAP and 1.25 F D2EHPA. Conditions were identical to previous stripping isotherm procedures. In addition, the OPAP O/A As shown earlier, regardless if FeCl  The experimental and mass balance results compare well using OPAP, but poorly using D2EHPA. For 1.25 F D2EHPA, the flatness of the stripping isotherm given in Despite the clearly superior performance by OPAP, compared to D2EHPA when using the ‘moderate strength’ strip feed, the former extractant nevertheless incurred a loss in iron(III) build-up relative to earlier 6 N HCl performance, as well as continuing to yield a high iron(III) retention. When comparing The strip solutions from the stripping kinetics tests conducted with 0.95 F OPAP and 0.95 F D2EHPA were analyzed for residual zinc and sulphate. These results allowed for the examination of zinc and sulphate carry-over to strip solutions from the unscrubbed loaded extractants. In addition to comparing the extractants generally in terms of carry-over, the effects of strip feed acid strength (4 N and 6 N HCl) and the presence of FeCl As described in the companion extraction paper ( Like zinc and sulphate carry-over to strip solutions (  OPAP exhibited significantly lower chloride back-extraction than D2EHPA, as shown in Relative chloride–iron(III) levels (on a molar basis) in stripped D2EHPA suggest a predominance of iron(III)–chloro complexes. Nitric acid stripping of loaded OPAP is expected to be poor based on previous D2EHPA performance ( With regard to phase disengagement, organic continuous separation times were very favourable. For O/A phase ratios 1–10, primary and secondary break times were 1–2 min and 3–4 min, respectively, for OPAP. The organic phase was very clear, exhibiting a dark rich red-brown colour throughout all contacts. All final strip solutions exhibited only a slight yellow tint. This latter observation alone suggests poor iron(III) stripping. Aqueous continuous contacts yielded similar separation characteristics, but only within 15 s. Consistent with the above observations, nitric acid was found to poorly strip loaded OPAP at 50 °C. Results were comparable to those for D2EHPA. As anticipated, 20% v/o (0.53 F) OPAP gave the same loading capacity as 20% v/o (0.62 F) D2EHPA, i.e. 11.3 g/L versus 11.5 g/L iron(III), respectively. A stripping study of OPAP and D2EHPA was performed within the context of an integrated iron(III) solvent extraction–iron chloride pyrohydrolysis flowsheet. The major findings are as follows. Iron build-up to or above 100 g/L could not be achieved with 6 N HCl alone. Strip feed containing 6 N HCl–70 g/L iron(II) was successful with OPAP, and performing nearly as well with D2EHPA. The requirement of FeCl According to mass balance calculations, a strip feed containing 6 N HCl–70 g/L iron(II) will not achieve the needed HCl balance between stripping and solution pyrohydrolysis. Instead, a ‘moderate strength’ acid strip feed, of composition 3.38 N HCl–58.5 g/L Fe(II)–9.7 g/L Fe(III), was both predicted and confirmed experimentally with 0.95 F OPAP to acceptably attain both total iron(II,III) build-up and zero net acid discharge/production. Under ‘moderate strength’ acid stripping conditions, OPAP exhibited much more favourable phase separation characteristics and exceptionally low chloride back-extraction compared to the 6 N HCl(–FeCl The presence of FeCl OPAP exhibited lower chloride back-extraction than D2EHPA. Relative molar ratio values of back-extracted chloride and unstripped iron(III) in D2EHPA suggest a predominance of iron(III)–chloro complexes in this extractant, i.e. extensive iron(III) back-extraction that explains the poor iron(III) build-up. Stripping OPAP with 4 N HNO The authors gratefully acknowledge the Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council of Canada for funding this work.