Fly ash particles from the combustion of solid-fuels together with disintegrated particles arising from iron-ore pellets result in accumulation of deposits on the refractory linings of the grate-kiln induration machine during the iron-ore pelletizing process. The deposits amass in the high-temperature regions of the induration furnace thus disturbing the flow of gas and pellets. Therefore, to tackle the above-mentioned issues, an understanding of deposit formation mechanism is of crucial importance. This study was conducted with the objective of addressing the effect of disintegrated iron-ore pellet dust on deposit formation and the mechanisms behind deposition (slagging) in the grate-kiln process. A comprehensive set of experiments was conducted in a 0.4 MW pilot-scale pulverized-coal- fired furnace where three different scenarios were considered as follows; Case 1 (reference case): Coal was combusted without the presence of pellet dust. Case 2: Natural gas was combusted together with simultaneous addition of pellet dust to the gas stream. Case 3: Coal was combusted together with the addition of pellet dust simulating the situation in the large-scale setup. Fly ash particles and short-term deposits were characterized and deposition was addressed in Part I of this study. In light of the experimental observations (Part I) and the thermochemical equilibrium calculations (Part II), a scheme of ash transformation during the iron-ore pelletizing process was proposed. The dissolution of hematite particles into the Ca-rich-aluminosilicate melt (from the coal-ash constituents) decreased the viscosity and resulted in the formation of stronger (heavily sintered) deposits. Overall, this pilot-scale work forms part of a wider study which aims at deepening the understanding of ash transformation phenomena during the large-scale pelletizing process.Iron ore pellets primarily consist of iron oxides with small amounts of various additives and a specific binder all of which are intended to improve the mechanical and metallurgical properties of the pellets. Unlike most of the pelletizing plants that use hematite concentrates, the Swedish iron ore company LKAB (Luossavaara-Kiirunavaara Aktiebolag) uses magnetite concentrates for production of commercial iron ore pellets. Finely ground moist magnetite concentrate (delivered from the on-site concentration plant) is shaped into small spherical pellets (green balls) of 10–14 mm in diameter in rolling drums. The two most widely-used processes in pelletizing include the travelling-grate process [commonly used for hematite (Fe One of the important aspects during fuel conversion is the transformation of ash-forming matter through which the formation of molten ash material can result in deposition of slag (deposits) upon the furnace wall. Deposit formation or slag formation is a challenging issue in the iron-ore pelletizing process and cause numerous complications for the pelletizing plants. Coal ash particles together with disintegrated iron-ore pellet dust particles amass on the refractory walls, resulting in the buildup of deposits, most drastically in the hot areas (e.g., fireside slagging closer to the burner, inside the rotary kiln, and the beginning of the cooler) [ The transformation of ash-forming elements in pulverized-coal combustion has been comprehensively studied [ In contrast to the limited understanding of ash transformation phenomena during the iron-ore pelletizing process, the mechanisms of fly ash formation in pulverized-coal combustion are extensively covered in the literature [ Compared to pulverized coal fired boilers, there are similarities as well as differences regarding ash deposition phenomena in the rotary kilns of iron ore pelletizing plants. In contrast to pulverized coal fired boilers, a grate-kiln process is characterized by a highly oxidizing atmosphere, a longer residence time, and the presence of recirculating alkalis and disintegrated iron-ore pellet dust in the flue gas. The interaction between fly ash particles from coal combustion with the intrinsic entrained Fe-rich particles (arising from the disintegration of iron-ore pellets) makes ash deposition - in a grate-kiln process - a much more complex phenomenon compared to that in ordinary pulverized coal-fired boilers. Moreover, ash deposition in a grate-kiln process is affected by several factors including the process conditions, the chemical properties of iron-ore pellets and coal-ash and their potential interactions with one another and with the refractory walls. Considering the foregoing, this study was initiated with the objective of investigating the effect of disintegrated pellet dust particles on melt formation (liquid slag) and, consequently, on deposit formation in a grate-kiln process. This study was inspired by our investigations and findings from our previously conducted pilot-scale [ Characterization of fly ash particles and deposits was presented in Part I of this study whereas thermochemical equilibrium calculations and viscosity estimations are discussed here (part II of this work). As previously explained in Part I, the major inorganic elemental distributions comprising the bulk deposit material were different from the original fuel ash. The most prominent difference was the enrichment of Si and Al against most of the other inorganic elements. S and Cl were depleted in the collected deposits suggesting that these elements along with part of Na and K were likely to have formed non-oxide compounds, most of which are volatile under the global conditions of pulverized-fuel firing. The significant enrichment of K and Na - especially the particles captured in stage 1 of the impactor (Part I)-, with respect to their original content in the fuel, supports the abovementioned suggestion. This stems from the chemical association of these elements in the fuel along with the high degree of fragmentation of fuel particles (which is characteristic of high temperature pulverized-fuel firing) implying the likelihood of volatilization of smaller ash particles. This is in fact fractionation of ash forming elements during high temperature pulverized firing and constitutes a potential for melt formation. Considering this, the composition of the sampled slags is used as inputs in the thermochemical equilibrium calculations of this study instead of using the original fuel ash composition. In light of the findings in Part I which emphasized the significant role of the coal ash particles in deposit formation, a sequential ash transformation scheme is proposed on the basis of the most abundant inorganic elements in the sampled deposits (slags). This was meant to study the effect of change in deposit composition (associated with pellet dust addition) on phase equilibrium conditions under the global conditions in the ECF. The 0.4 MW pilot-scale pulverized coal fired furnace, owned by the iron ore pelletizing company LKAB in Sweden, is designed to simulate a downscaled grate-kiln plant. This pilot-scale furnace is referred to as ECF (Experimental combustion furnace) in this work. The ECF is a horizontal furnace 14 m long with the outer- and inner diameter of 1200 mm and 800 mm respectively. It is lined with 200 mm-thick refractory bricks and the outer steel mantle has a thickness of 10 mm. Heated secondary air of ~1100 °C is supplied to the ECF kiln via two perforated ceramic sections that are located above and below the burner. Unlike the rotary kiln, the ECF does not rotate, and the sampling locations were positions P Chemical analyses of the high rank bituminous coal and disintegrated pellet dust (KPBO) used in this study are shown in Quantitative mineralogy of the coal was carried out using the X-ray diffraction facility located at CSIRO's North Ryde laboratories ( Short term deposits (slags) were sampled from 3 different positions (P 1.5 mm K-type thermocouples were used to measure the temperature of the ceramic tube surface and the deposited layer. The temperatures of the deposits were measured at all three positions for a period of 30 min during each sampling. Note that deposit samplings were always carried out with simultaneous temperature measurements. To generate an amount of pellet dust equivalent to that generated and dispersed in the full-scale induration machine, the required dust amount was calculated based on our measured dust concentration of 10,000–15,000 mg/Nm Coal was combusted with the operating conditions listed in Natural gas was combusted with the same thermal throughput as the coal-fired runs i.e.0.4 MW, and 20 kg/h of pellet dust was added to the gas stream as listed in Coal was combusted together with the addition of pellet dust as listed in For thermochemical equilibrium calculations of the present study short-term deposits sampled during the combustion of coal (without the presence of pellet dust, To quantify the overall elemental composition, the bulk solid slag samples (short-term deposits) were analyzed using inductively coupled plasma (ICP) technique with sector field mass spectroscopy (SFMS) (detailed information is given in Part I). The average bulk chemical composition of the deposits ( The bulk chemical composition of the sampled deposits from coal combustion ( Several other characterization techniques were performed on the sampled deposits namely, Scanning Electron Microscopy (SEM-EDS), X-Ray diffraction (XRD), quantitative phase analysis (the Rietveld method), and Automated Mineralogy. Detailed description of the above-mentioned characterization techniques is given in Part I. To study sintering and melting behavior of the sampled deposits (slags), sintering tests were performed using a newly developed optical dilatometer Misura HSM-ODHT which continuously captures in-situ shadow images of the sample while exposed to heat. It measures the change in area (shrinkage) of shadow images (two dimensional) with respect to temperature and time during the thermal process. The slag was ground to a fine powder using marble pestle and mortar. The powder was then mixed with deionized water to form a slurry, which was then compacted into a cylindrical pellet and dried. Then the sample was placed on an alumina plate (15 × 15 mm The Equilib module of FactSage [ Viscosity models are employed in various industries to predict the viscosity of a given slag, however, the models are only applicable to a certain range of compositions and process atmosphere, no wonder their performance cannot be readily assessed. The viscosity models used in this study include the Watt-Fereday, Lakatos, Streeter, BBHLW, Duchesne, Bomkamp, S2, Kalmanovitch-Frank, Shaw, Urbain, and Riboud [ The average flue gas temperature measured with the temperature probe during coal combustion (with and without the addition of pellet dust; see As previously explained, the composition of the sampled slags is used as inputs in the thermochemical equilibrium calculations of this study instead of the original fuel ash composition. In light of the findings in Part I which emphasized the significant role of the coal ash particles in deposit formation, a sequential equilibrium calculation approach is proposed where the composition of the pure coal-ash slag (slags collected in In combustion processes the effective partial pressure of oxygen may vary over a wide range, from reducing conditions within the flame and also near the surface of the burning char particles to highly oxidizing conditions in the burnout zone and away from the flame. To be able to gain insight into deposit formation phenomena in rotary kilns of iron ore pelletizing plants, it is of prime importance to take the chemical potential of oxygen into account, as there is a considerable amount of iron in the system and oxygen partial pressure plays a key role in determining the proportion of ferrous iron (Fe Investigating the effect of pellet dust addition on equilibrium phase assemblages is difficult without information on how the liquidus temperature changes as a function of composition (i.e. change in the liquidus temperature associated with change in Fe Clearly the mass ratio of (SiO  Liquidus isotherms plotted in As can be seen from the figures, the liquidus temperature decreases as Fe   The proportions of the various solid phases present below the solidus temperature as a function of pellet dust addition are shown in In addition to its Al content, mullite is also being depleted in silicon and 100% of its silicon is distributed between cordierite followed by feldspar (  The proportions of the solid phases present at 1200 °C temperature ( The foregoing observations suggest that pellet dust addition did not affect the melt formation at this relatively low temperature (1200 °C). Therefore, it can be inferred that interaction between coal ash constituents and pellet dust is limited to solid-solid phase transformations which are known to be sluggish since solid state diffusion is a slow process and expectedly it takes much longer time, than the 30-min sampling time in this study, to attain equilibrium, at least in the solid state. The solid-solid interaction between pellet dust and coal ash constituents results in complete disappearance of mullite in exchange for an increase in the amount of cordierite and feldspar both of which have a lower melting point compared to that of mullite. Therefore, melt formation is expected to increase at higher temperatures as a result of this transformation. This is the most important interaction between coal ash and pellet dust at 1200 °C provided that equilibrium is attained. The composition of the melt at this temperature is given in Phase transformations observed in the temperature range of 1200–1275 °C (not presented in this work) were considerably similar to the ones observed at 1200 °C. According to the calculations at 1300 °C, feldspar and cordierite totally disappear and become part of the melt, however, cordierite starts to precipitate when the pellet dust content in the slag reaches 37 ± 0.5 wt% (equivalent to addition of 60 ± 1 g of pellet dust per 100 g of the initial ash) ( In terms of the liquid phase, the liquid fraction goes down from 43 ± 0.3 wt% (at 0 wt% pellet dust) to 21.5 ± 0.5 wt% at the final compositional point ( According to the calculations at 1400 °C, cordierite totally disappears and becomes part of the melt. Corundum is no longer stable and as pellet dust addition proceeds mullite disappears at a considerably high rate (  The second axis in There seems to be a clear correlation between the liquid fraction (calculated for However, to investigate the effect of ash composition and ash chemistry on deposit formation (notwithstanding the ash content), the measured deposition rates should be normalized with the ash content. Since pellet dust was not premixed with the coal, the direct normalizing with the ash content did not seem reasonable and an alternative approach was proposed in Part I of this study to account for the difference in ash content. The normalized deposition rate (hereafter referred to as deposition fraction, which is the fraction of ash that deposited on the ceramic tube in wt%) was defined as:  As can be seen in At 1400 °C coal ash constituents were simply depleted by the Fe-rich aluminosilicate melt and since there was no coal ash to react, hematite particles precipitated out the melt as spinel. Moreover, at 1300 °C it was observed that liquid continuously formed as pellet dust was added. Therefore, disregarding the excessive pellet dust (when corundum and/or spinel formation is due to overfeeding the system with pellet dust) seems to be a reasonable comparison tool. As previously explained, disregarding Fe-rich solid phases such as corundum and spinel, is equivalent to the amount of liquid formed. Therefore, according to Melt composition to be fed to the viscosity models was taken from the data obtained from several SEM-EDS and automated mineralogy analyses coupled with thermochemical equilibrium calculations. The data taken from automated mineralogy are not shown here and can be found in Part I (Tables 7 & 8) of this study. The models S2, Watt-Fereday, and BBHLW had the lowest AALE values and were the best match considering the specific operating conditions of this study, the composition of the collected slags (the molten fraction of the slag as obtained from SEM_EDS and verified by equilibrium calculations), and the actual viscosity measurements in the literature. As can be seen in Sintering tests were carried out to examine the effect of pellet dust on the strength of the deposits formed in iron ore pelletizing plants. On the contrary, the slags collected in Unburnt carbon or unconverted carbon in the char might play a key role in deposition during the iron-ore pelletizing process [ As a result, a reducing atmosphere (CO rich) is induced surrounding the burning particles which contribute to reduction of Fe The effect of this reducing atmosphere on the fraction of liquid phase is shown in The colour shading in figures refers to the predicted mass fraction of the melt (liquid slag) in the deposits. The figure to the left represents the situation “without any unburnt carbon in the deposits, the one to the right represents the situation “with the presence of an infinitesimal amount of unburnt carbon in the deposits”. As can be seen in the right figure the melt fraction increases substantially (compared to the situation illustrated in the left figure) at all temperatures and levels of pellet dust addition due to the previously-mentioned reducing effect induced by the unconverted carbon. Hence, intensified deposition/slagging is expected. A sequential ash transformation scheme (valid for high-rank coals and based on the pilot-scale experimental observations and TECs) is shown in The bulk of the mineral matter disintegrates into relatively large ash particles ranging from 0.5 to 20 μm in diameter through the fusion of mineral matter on the surface of the burning char particles (Particle formation- coarse fraction). Thereafter, the already generated fly ash particles agglomerate followed by transportation of these agglomerated particles onto the surfaces mostly through inertial impaction (deposit formation and growth). According to the findings deposition of pellet dust particles is independent of the global temperature in the kiln and a liquid phase was neither observed nor calculated for these particles when entrained in an ash-free gas stream (e.g. natural gas combustion). However, when coal ash particles are present extensive interaction between these particles and pellet dust particles is expected. The resulting intensified deposition as a result of the aforementioned interaction can be described with the following possible scenarios:  As previously explained and illustrated (  In this work, a sequential ash transformation scheme (valid for high-rank coals and based on the pilot-scale experimental observations and TECs) is proposed on the basis of the most abundant inorganic elements in the sampled deposits (slags). This was done through investigating the effect of change in slag composition (associated with pellet dust addition) on phase equilibrium conditions under the global conditions in a 0.4 MW pilot-scale experimental combustion furnace (ECF). The most important findings are as follows: The twofold effect of the interaction between hematite particles and coal ash particles upon slagging was summarized as follows: [ At higher temperatures (1300–1450 °C) the amount of melt increases drastically with increasing pellet dust content. The experimentally obtained deposition fractions exhibit a positive correlation with the abovementioned increase in the amount of melt within 1300–1450 °C temperature range. Within this temperature range, Fe content of the liquid phase increases accompanied by a considerable decrease in the viscosity of the resulting melt. In this temperature range deposition is governed by the amount of melt and viscosity. Therefore, stronger deposits (as confirmed by the conducted sinterability tests) with a high degree of sintering are expected. According to the calculations and based on the findings in part I of this study, it can be inferred that interaction between coal ash constituents and pellet dust at relatively low temperatures (1200–1275 °C) is limited to solid-solid phase transformations provided that equilibrium is attained. Therefore, in the abovementioned temperature range (1200–1275 °C), the interaction between coal ash constituents and pellet dust had no significant effect on melt formation and deposition. Under the reducing conditions inside the flame coal ash constituents and pellet dust at any proportions are soluble in the resulting Ca-Fe-rich aluminosilicate melt. LKAB (