Since the early days, there has been a general consensus within the industry and amongst grinding professionals that classification efficiency and circulating load both have a major effect on the efficiency of closed circuit ball mills. However, the effect of each is difficult to quantify in practice as these two parameters are usually interrelated. Based on experience acquired over the years and the investigative work conducted by F.C. Bond, it was established that the optimum circulating load for a closed ball mill – cyclone circuit is around 250%. This value is used as guideline for the design of new circuits as well as to assess the performance of existing circuits.
                  The role of classification in milling appears to have been neglected in the current efforts to reduce the energy consumption of grinding. Two past approaches, experimental and modelling, for quantifying the effects of classification efficiency and circulating load on the capacity of closed ball mill circuits, are revisited and discussed in this paper. Application to the optimisation of existing circuits and design of new circuits is also discussed, with special attention to the development of more energy efficient circuits.Over the years, ball mill circuits closed with cyclones have become an industry standard, and since the early days, it has been recognised that classification efficiency and circulating load both have a major effect on the efficiency of closed circuit grinding (i.e. its capacity to produce the desired final product). However, the individual effect of each, circulating load and classification efficiency, is difficult to quantify in practice as these two parameters are usually interrelated. Although mill capacity tends to increase with circulating load, an optimum circulating load of 250% was established ( The effect of circulating load on grinding circuit capacity was recognised many years ago. In a report published in 1925, Edward W. Davis from Minnesota School of Mines first demonstrated the fundamental relationship between the new feed rate and the circulating load in a closed grinding circuit. His original graph of the relationship (see  Research into the effect of classification efficiency on grinding circuit capacity was carried out by Finnish investigators ( The effect of circulating load and classification efficiency was investigated by In the “Functional Performance Characteristics of Ball milling” approach ( In recent years, development of high frequency screens has overcome many of the problems previously encountered in continuous fine screening, such as blinding and low capacity. The most recent developments in fine screening technology are discussed by In a series of open circuit tests reported by For a closed circuit milling flowsheet as represented in The total solids mass flow of the mill discharge is: The final product mass flow in the mill discharge is The mass flow of the coarse material in the mill discharge is the difference between the total solids and the final product: After classification this material is returned to the mill feed and the total amount of the coarse material in the mill feed is: From Eqs. Assuming that the fraction of coarse material in the mill load ( Finally, a relationship is derived for the relative capacity of a closed grinding circuit at different circulating load and classification efficiencies ( Eq. Another comparison between the model predictions (from Eq. It can be observed from Based on the above analysis, it can be concluded that Eq. It is well documented in textbooks that the circulating load ( Eqs. Using Eq. Data from industrial circuits utilising hydrocyclones from Hukki (1965) and Metso PTI’s database were superimposed in Plant data confirms that classification efficiency decreases with increasing circulating load. Classification efficiency value is not useful unless is related to the circulating load. For example, 50% classification efficiency is very common at There is significant number of modern operations operating at Clearly, capacity gains expected from increasing the circulating load, based on early work by Davis, are not achievable in practice as higher circulating load inevitably results in lower classification efficiency. The model for the relative circuit capacity (Eq. The relative capacity of a closed ball mill circuit as function of circulating load was calculated for three different classification arrangements: cyclones with 38% of fine material reporting (by-pass) to coarse product (cyclone underflow), screens with 20% of fine material reporting to coarse product (screen oversize), two stage classification, cyclones followed by screens treating cyclone underflow, with 15% of fine material reporting to coarse product (screen oversize). The circulating load of circuits using cyclones is typically higher than 250%, and circuits using screens usually have a lower circulating load, in the range of 100–200%. However, screens can achieve significantly higher classification efficiency having a significantly lower percentage of fine material (in the order of 20%) reporting to the coarse product (screen oversize). A circuit using two stage classification, with cyclones followed by screens, also has a circulating load typically in the order of 100–200%, but could have even better classification efficiency with only about 15% of fine material reporting to coarse product. The relative capacity model predictions (compared to the reference point of 250% circulating load and 50% classification efficiency) are presented in Compared to the “reference point”, a ball mill circuit closed with screens is expected to have 15–20% higher capacity at significantly lower circulating load due to higher classification efficiency (70–85%). Two stage classification with cyclones in the first stage and screens in the second stage (screening cyclone underflow) may achieve higher classification efficiency (75–95%) with less screening capacity compared to screening alone. This would further increase circuit capacity; potentially 20–25% higher than the “reference point”. Based on the analysis presented here it is estimated that the practical potential for increasing grinding circuit capacity in mineral processing plants by using more efficient classification technology is in the order of 15–25%. This can be achieved with existing fine screening technology. Considering that the cost of energy is expected to rise, every new plant design or expansion should consider alternatives to single stage cyclones to improve the capacity of closed milling circuits. The effect of classification on grinding circuit product density and the subsequent impact on downstream processing was not addressed in this work. There can be a compromise between cyclone efficiency and flotation residence time when single-stage cyclone classification directly precedes flotation. The classification efficiency is reduced when operating at higher feed density, but lower feed density results in lower cyclone overflow (flotation feed) density and hence longer flotation residence time. The use of fine screens or two-stage classification will also result in a more dilute grinding circuit product. Whether or not this is a problem will depend on the downstream processing. Prior to leaching, when a thickener is commonly used, grinding circuit product dilution would have relatively small consequences. However, in the case of flotation circuits, if the grinding product is too dilute, which it may be in some cases, significant CAPEX increase may be required for the additional thickening stage. To a certain extent, increasing circulating load can provide an increase in capacity for ball mills in closed circuits; however, the magnitude of the capacity increase is limited by classification efficiency which decreases with increasing circulating load. A simple mathematical model for the relative capacity of closed grinding circuits as function of circulating load and classification efficiency was validated using published data. Reasonable agreement was observed between the experimental results and model predictions indicating that the model could be used for initial evaluation of different closed circuit ball milling options. Analysis is continuing to further validate and improve the model. Closed ball mill circuits incorporating screens have lower circulating loads, higher classification efficiency and can achieve higher capacity than circuits using single stage cyclones which have higher circulating loads and lower classification efficiency. The practical potential for increasing ball mill circuit capacity using existing fine screening technology was estimated to be in the order of 15–25%; thus, offering significant potential to reduce energy consumption in mineral processing.