High speed machining (HSM) of tool steels in their hardened state is emerging as an attractive approach for the mold and die industry due to its potential for significant cost savings and productivity improvement. An experimental study was conducted to investigate the tool wear mechanism and surface integrity in high speed ball nose end milling of hardened AISI A2 tool steel using coated tungsten carbide and polycrystalline cubic boron nitride (PCBN) tools. It is found that coated carbide tools can only be used at low speed (120m/min) while high content PCBN tools are suitable for HSM range (470m/min). PCBN tools produce a damage free workpiece with better surface finish and less work hardening. Despite the higher tool cost, HSM with PCBN tools lead to reduction in both total cost and production time per part.High speed machining (HSM) of tool steels in their hardened state is emerging as an attractive approach for the mold and die industry since machining and polishing take up more than 50% of the total production time The definition of HSM varies with the workpiece materials. The HSM range for alloyed steels is about 500 Polycrystalline cubic boron nitride (PCBN) tools are claimed to be more suitable for HSM of hardened steels by several researchers Despite the known benefits of PCBN tools, there is still limited knowledge on the influence of CBN content in the PCBN tools on tool life. Most researchers employed low content PCBN tools (about 45 The workpiece material used was hardened cold work tool steel AISI A2 at 64 HRC. The chemical composition is shown in The milling tests were conducted on a Mori Seiki NMV5000 5-Axis high speed milling machine without any coolants. The maximum spindle speed is 20,000 RPM. The spindle drive motor power is 18.5 Three different tool materials were tested as shown in The cutting edge radius of the cutting tools was found to have a critical influence on the tool life in milling applications for both coated carbide and PCBN tools. It was reported that honed coated carbide tools and upsharp PCBN tools led to the best tool performance As shown in The maximum flank wear, After the milling tests were completed, samples were cut from the workpieces using a wire EDM for surface integrity analysis. The 3D surface topography was measured using Wyko NT1100 optical profiler. The surface finish was examined using SEM. The hardness was measured using an Instron Wilson-Wolpert Tukon 2100B Hardness Tester. Vickers’ indenter was used with a load of 1  Both PCBN grades performed much better than the coated carbide grade even at four times higher cutting speed at 32 At the same cut length of 97 Surface finish is a critical factor for the die/mold industry. The required Ra for plastic molding is typically smaller than 0.1   The hardness before and after milling using different tool materials at 291  The microstructures of the surface machined using coated carbide tool at 120 The higher cost of PCBN tools compared to coated carbide is a major economic consideration. This study compares total variable manufacturing cost models for finished workpieces produced using both tool materials. It is assumed that the total cut length for certain die/mold is 291 Two significant further savings may be obtained by using PCBN milling tools. The PCBN tool's higher productivity will decrease the significant investments for milling machines. Secondly, regrinding the PCBN tools seems feasible and will offset a portion of the initial tool cost. The coated carbide tools cannot be reground due to the damaged coatings. An experimental study was conducted to investigate the tool wear mechanism and surface integrity in ball nose end milling of hardened AISI A2 tool steel using coated tungsten carbide and PCBN tools. It is found that coated carbide tools cannot be used at the HSM range. Significant crater wear developed after short cut length and the surface roughness is high. High content PCBN tools are suitable for HSM of hardened A2 steel. No chemical wear was found on the PCBN tool. The failure mode is chipping/flaking due to lack of toughness when the cutting edge is worn out. Low content PCBN tool does not have the required toughness and abrasion resistance for the application. At the normal cutting speed of 120 Although the cost for the PCBN tools are about 5 times higher than coated carbide tools, the cost analysis shows that the total cost per part is reduced by 11% and the total time by 40% when PCBN tools are used due to the much higher material removal rate and reduction of polishing time. Therefore, high content PCBN tools are suitable for HSM of hardened tool steels and have many advantages compared with coated carbide tools including significant cost savings and productivity improvement.