Hypothesis
                  Film-forming polymer latex particles of diameter <300 nm can be prepared in the complete absence of surfactants, stabilised in part by silica nanoparticles through a Pickering type emulsion polymerisation. Control of the silica wettability through modulation of reaction pH or by reaction of the nanoparticles with a hydrophobic silane results in silica-covered latex particles.
               
                  Experiments
                  The oil-in-water polymerisation process used methyl methacrylate (MMA) and n-butyl acrylate (BA) as co-monomers, potassium persulphate (KPS) as an initiator and a commercially available colloidal nano-silica (Ludox®-TM40). It was found that pH control before polymerisation using methacrylic acid (MAA) facilitated the formation of armoured latexes, and mechanistic features of this process are discussed. An alternative, more robust protocol was developed whereby addition of vinyltriethoxysilane (VTES) to control wettability resulted in latexes completely armoured in colloidal nano-silica. The latexes were characterised using SEM, cryo-TEM and AFM imaging techniques. The mechanism behind the adsorption was investigated through surface pressure and contact angle measurements to understand the factors that influence this irreversible adsorption.
               
                  Findings
                  Results indicate that nanoparticle attachment (but intriguingly not latex size) is dependent on particle wettability, providing new insight into the formation of nanoparticle-armoured latexes, along with opportunities for further development of diversely functionalized inorganic/organic polymer composite particles.Pickering recognised, in the early 1900s, that finely divided solid particles can be used as stabilising agents, echoing previous findings by Ramsden Colloidal nanocomposite particles which have become an area of interest in emulsion polymerisation can be produced by polymerisation of an organic monomer-containing emulsion in the presence of inorganic colloidal particles Inorganic/organic hybrid latex particles have numerous applications, one of which is in exterior decorative paints. Armes et al., discuss the formation of water-borne polymer/silica core-shell dispersions with properties desirable in surface coatings such as storage stability, flame retardancy, film-forming ability, high weatherability, increased gloss and resistance to staining. Most silica-containing surface coatings are solvent-based, and with the growing demand for water-borne, environmentally friendly coatings, interest has shifted towards the production of water-continuous, film-forming, polymer/silica nanocomposite particles With emerging interest in synthesizing film-forming, armoured nanocomposites for use in surface coatings, focus has shifted towards the formulation of latexes prepared at a relatively low cost and via robust, scalable routes. Schmidt et al. demonstrated the use of functionalized silica sols to prepare surfactant-free polymer/silica nanocomposites with core-shell particle morphologies Bon et al. reported an emulsion polymerisation process that produced non-film forming polymer latexes armoured in a layer of nanoparticles. Colloidal stability was provided through the adhesion of nanoparticles onto the surface of the latex achieved by varying the surface charge density of the colloidal nanoparticle at low pH. The mechanism for this was proposed as a particle nucleation process via coagulative homogenous nucleation where the silica adsorption on the surface of the latex particles happens after polymerisation starts. It was hypothesized that colloidal instability of the growing oligomers caused coalescence until a decreasing surface-volume ratio of the clusters that are formed in the process repel each other, creating ‘stable’ latex particles armoured in silica From the extant literature, two major questions remain: do the inorganic nanoparticles stabilize the initial monomer emulsion droplets in a Pickering-type system, and what causes their attachment to the latex particles? In order to synthesize film-forming latexes that are completely armoured in nano-silica, to investigate the mechanism behind the adsorption of silica nanoparticles onto latex particles, and to understand the factors affecting the colloidal stability of the latex produced, in the present work we performed direct surface modification of the surface of the adsorbing nanoparticles. A soap-free emulsion polymerisation process was carried out which produced silica-armoured stable polymer latexes by influencing the nanoparticle surface charge density. This was achieved using commercially available colloidal silica nanoparticles (Ludox® TM-40), approximately 25 nm in diameter, methyl methacrylate (MMA) and The monomers used were methyl methacrylate (MMA), Emulsion polymerisation processes were carried out in a double-walled cylindrical glass reactor (500 mL) in a water bath. The reactor was attached to an overhead mechanical paddle stirrer fitted 1 cm above the bottom of the reactor vessel running at 180 rpm, a condenser, and an outlet for nitrogen gas. The pH was monitored using a pH meter (Mettler Toledo), and an oven at 150 °C was used to determine the solids content gravimetrically. The glass transition temperature ( A 40 wt% solution of Ludox TM-40 silica sol weighing 52 g was diluted and dispersed in 395 mL of deionised water in a 500 mL double walled glass reactor. The pH of the reaction was initially adjusted using HCl (aq) to pH 4.5–5 and then later on using MAA or VTES to achieve similar pH levels and placed under a nitrogen atmosphere by purging. To this, 52 g of monomer was added and the reaction mixture was heated to 65 °C and stirred with an overhead stirrer at an rpm of 180. The emulsion polymerisation commenced upon the addition of 0.73 g of the initiator APS which was dissolved in 20 mL of water. The percentage overall solids content measured included the mass of monomers, silica particles, initiator and silane. Monomer conversions were monitored through the experiment through the use of gravimetry. Experimental conditions and the average particle diameters of the final latex particles obtained for the all polymerisations conducted are outlined in Water-soluble monomers such as acrylic acid (AA), methacrylic acid (MAA) and methacrylamide in emulsion polymerisations are able to react in the aqueous phase, and affect the rheology of the latex and the surface chemistry of the latex particle In order to investigate the effect of methacrylic acid (MAA) on the adsorption of Ludox® TM-40 silica nanoparticles onto the surface of the latex particles, experiments were conducted both in the presence and absence of MAA using MMA as a monomer at pH 4.5, below the pKa of MAA, at an overall solids content of 15 wt%. MMA was chosen initially as the sole monomer to produce a high glass-transition temperature ( Similar attachment of nanosilica onto the surface of the latex was found for higher solids content in the presence of MAA (data not shown) with a particle size of 220 nm. Cryo-TEM was used to image latexes (Fig. S1) prepared with a mixture of BA and MMA (LMB0- The formation and stability of a Pickering emulsion depend on the interfacial activity of the stabilising particles, The above results indicate that pH = 4.5 gives excellent attachment of silica to the latex particles. However, attempting the emulsion polymerization process at pH > 4.5 led to some interesting observations. SEM images obtained from experiments using MMA and MAA at pH values between pH 5.5 and 8.5 (M01-M05- The effect of the concentration of nanosilica on the adsorption on latex particles was thus investigated. Latex particles were prepared at different loadings of Ludox® TM-40, all at pH = 4.5 ( The formation of a stable latex in the absence of a surfactant or silica particles could be accounted for due to the presence of carboxylic acid groups from MAA. Ceska reported a surfactant-free emulsion copolymerisation using carboxylic acid monomers, and indicated that an acid monomer (MAA) promotes both stability and the formation of polymer particles Chemical functionalization of the silica nanoparticles was used to explore the effect of silica wettability on its attachment to the latex. To control the wettability of the colloidal nanoparticles at the interface, 1% vinyltriethoxysilane (VTES) was added to the emulsion polymerisation of MMA (without MAA) at pH 4.5 (LMS1- We have thus far established the effects of system chemistry and control parameters on the latex particle morphology produced using emulsion polymerization with silica nanoparticles present. However, the above sections raise interesting questions as to the role of silica and its surface chemistry in the precursor monomer emulsion itself. The emulsion polymerisation reaction proceeds via a batch process where all the reagents are mixed, stirred and the contents discharged for further processing on completion of the polymerisation. Whereas, commercially, it is more beneficial to perform emulsion polymerisations for the preparation of latexes in either semi-continuous or continuous processes, which allow for more control in reaction and process variables, a batch process polymerisation is more amenable to interrogation of the mechanistic aspects of this polymerisation. This emulsion polymerisation starts with water, monomers, water-soluble initiator (APS) and Ludox TM-40 ® (colloidal nanosilica), which replaces the need for conventional (molecular) surfactants. There are no micelles formed due to the absence of surfactants, and it is hypothesized that silica nanoparticles adsorb to the interfaces of the monomer droplets present in a Pickering type emulsion; this hypothesis is tested in the sections that follow. It is further hypothesized that VTES copolymerises with growing oligomers, which in turn causes the nanosilica to attach itself onto the VTES via silane condensation, with the silica ultimately surrounding the latex particles. The order of these processes is not precisely known, although it seems logical that the silica particles start at the monomer/water interface where the silane hydrolysis and reaction with VTES can occur. As polymerization proceeds and the monomer droplets decrease in size, there is less interfacial area available, and the VTES-coated silica particles are excluded from the interface of the monomer droplets and then adsorb to the growing latex particles.  Gonzales-Matheus et al. report a high-solids Pickering miniemulsion polymerisation method using silica nanoparticles as stabiliser. In this process, through an efficient nucleation mechanism and strong adsorption of silica onto the surface of the latex, Pickering-stabilised latexes were produced.  The effectiveness of the stabilization of droplets in a particle-stabilized emulsion depends on particle size, shape, inter-particle interactions and wettability of the particles by both the oil and water phases Through the interfacial tension, the effects of the chemical composition of the fluid interface and the adsorption and desorption of surface active solutes can be investigated. Pendant drop tensiometry is a powerful method to measure the interfacial tension, taking advantage of a simple experimental setup wherein a fluid droplet is suspended from a needle and the shape of the pendant drop, deformed by gravity, is used to obtain the surface or interfacial tension To try to understand the mechanism behind the attachment of silica nanoparticles onto latex particles in the presence of VTES, the interfacial tension and surface pressure of a droplet of the emulsion organic phase as a function of interfacial area were investigated in the absence and presence of silica nanoparticles. This was achieved using pendant drop tensiometry and contact angle measurements. MMA with or without 1% VTES was added to a vial, and a drop of water or 1% Ludox® TM-40 was suspended in this vial. Interfacial tension readings were then recorded until a stable measurement was obtained, after which the droplet size was gradually reduced and the corresponding interfacial tension measurements with respect to the reducing area were recorded over time. The time taken for the stabilisation of these droplets varied widely. The kinetics of this experiment were not measured as the experiment was conducted to purely understand evidence of equilibrium absorption of nanoparticles onto the surface of the latex. By plotting the surface pressure (the interfacial tension at a given area subtracted from the interfacial tension of the uncompressed interface) against area, a surface pressure isotherm was produced, shown in For the pure MMA–water interface, no surface pressure was recorded. That is, the interface behaved as though no insoluble/immobile material was present. This is as expected, and indicates that in these circumstances, the monomer behaves as a pure ‘oil’. A small surface pressure effect was noted for the MMA–1% silica interface, likely indicating some adsorption of silica to the droplet surface. The surface pressure effect arises due to adsorption of the nanoparticles onto the ‘clean’ interface, which occurs as a surface is freshly formed from an increase in area. Particles diffuse from the undisturbed bulk to the sublayer from where they can adsorb to the droplet surface To further elucidate the role of VTES on changing the silica nanoparticle surface chemistry, the wettability of a planar silica surface after addition of VTES was investigated by contact angle measurements. A drop of water was placed on a glass microscope slide that had been pre-treated with different concentrations of VTES solution, and the contact angle was measured ( The glass transition temperature ( Since conditions that promoted full coverage of the surface of the latex with nano-silica had already been identified for MMA (a high The resultant film prepared by drop casting a latex sample comprising MMA + BA + VTES onto the surface of a glass microscope slide was imaged using AFM, and this is shown in Film-forming latex particles armoured in Ludox® TM-40 silica nanoparticles were prepared, in the absence of surfactants, through a Pickering type emulsion polymerization process in the presence of either an organic stabiliser such as methacrylic acid (MAA) or vinyltriethoxysilane (VTES). The work conducted was inspired by experiments previously done by Bon et al. where they were able to show nanoparticle attachment onto the surface of latexes in the complete absence of surfactants Adsorption of the silica nanoparticles onto the surface of the latex particles occurs through surface modification of the colloidal nano-silica particles. When the nanoparticles are made more hydrophobic, they are able to locate at the oil–water interface and subsequently adsorb onto the surface of the prepared latex, as seen from results obtained through pendant drop tensiometry and via contact angle measurements. This is achieved through the addition of a hydrophobic silane such as VTES, or by the addition of MAA and choice of a pH below its p Curiously, it was found that stable nano-sized polymer latexes could be obtained when silica did not stabilize their surface by adsorption, and indeed without any silica present in the process at all. These results indicate that the formation of armoured latexes through emulsion polymerization is a complex process, and that Pickering conditions are not necessarily required or obtained, depending on the particle loading and chemistry used. Nanocomposite particles as Pickering stablisers in emulsion polymerisation processes for the formation of latex particles have been explored From this work, although it is clear that increasing particle hydrophobicity promotes adsorption at both the monomer–water interface and latex–water interface, neither is required for the production of stable latexes. These data suggest new pathways to the formation of armoured latexes, and also indicate that further mechanistic studies of the underlying surface chemistry and latex particle growth mechanisms are warranted. We are grateful to Dulux Australia for providing materials and facilities used in this work. This work was supported in part by the grant of a Future Fellowship from the Australian Research Council (R.F.T). We would also like to thank the Graduate Research Industry Partnerships (GRIP) at Monash University for part of the funding and support. The SEM and TEM images were recorded at the Monash Centre for Electron Microscopy (MCEM) at Monash University.