In 6 of the 81 patients who were treated with intramedullary nailing for a femoral or tibial fracture the ball-tipped guidewire was impossible to remove manually after nail implantation. In four cases we had to remove the implant and to re-insert the nail. While this is a relatively common complication well known to orthopaedic and trauma surgeons, it has not been previously reported. We developed and tested in vitro a reverse cutting guidewire that was able to successfully deal with this problem obviating the need for implant removal and re-insertion.Intramedullary nailing has become the gold standard in the treatment of diaphyseal fractures of the femur and tibia. A relatively common but not previously described complication is the inability to remove the guidewire through the inserted intramedullary nail. In these cases it is necessary to remove both the nail and the guidewire, leading to loss of reduction and repetition of all stages of the procedure from the beginning. The purpose of this study is not only to present this complication but also to propose an innovative solution. Between September 2008 and June 2012 eighty-one patients underwent intramedullary nailing of the femur or the tibia in our institution for extra-articular fractures using the Expert femoral or tibial nail. In six cases (7.4%) the ball-tipped guidewire was impossible to withdraw by means of hand manipulation after nail insertion. In two cases hammer blows on the T-handle were successful, while in the remaining four cases the nail (one femoral, three tibial) had to be removed. Following nail removal, it was made evident that a bone fragment was incarcerated between the nail and the guidewire leaving no space for the ball-tip to withdraw through the nail ( A modified reverse-cutting ball-tipped guidewire was developed by our team and was tested in vitro in order to overcome this previously undocumented and unresolved complication. Two 3.2 guidewires were modified with the use of a high-speed rotary power tool. Using a cutting disc the smooth proximal part of the ball-tip was carved. This resulted in a reverse cutting ball-tip in a fashion similar to the cutting edges of a drill bit ( In vitro testing of the device was performed. In the first set of tests an Expert tibial nail (Synthes) 9 In a second set of tests a KFn femoral nail (Königsee Implantate, Allendorf, Germany) with a diameter of 12 In the first series of tests with the Expert nail we prepared twenty bone fragments that were impacted at the tip of the nail. In fourteen tests the guidewire was withdrawn either by manual force or hammer blows. In the remaining six we managed to simulate the condition in theatre where no manipulation was able to extract the guidewire. In these instances withdrawal with the power drill was effortless. The cutting edges of the modified guidewire easily cut through the bone. In the second series ten tests were performed where the ball-tip was impossible to pass through the narrow canal of the syringe cap. When mounted to the drill it passed with little effort in all instances. Various complications have been reported during intramedullary nailing of long bone fractures, including entry point problems, problems with reaming, bending of the nail, iatrogenic fractures or fracture-site comminution, distraction of the fracture site, extrusion of the nail in the adjacent joints or into the soft tissues and neurovascular injuries. Guidewire complications during intramedullary nailing have been described in the past. Faraj et al., Although the complication we describe is well known amongst experienced trauma surgeons and implant technicians, it has not been documented in the English literature or the surgical technique leaflets of the popular intramedullary implants. It is most likely that the bone fragment is impacted in the tip of the nail while it passes through the fracture site. To our best knowledge, this is the first time that this complication is documented in detail. It is also the first time a reverse cutting ball-tipped guidewire is developed in order to address this complication. It is a safe and efficient way to resolve this problem when it occurs. None declared. The authors would like to thank Mrs Eleftheria Papadopoulou, operating theater nurse, for helping with the experimental setup.