Pathological calcification of the cardiovascular system is one of the major causes of high mortality and morbidity in dialysis patients. The inhibition of ectopic calcification relies (I) on the formation of calciprotein particles (CPPs), nanospherical complexes of calcium phosphate mineral, fetuin-A and other acidic serum proteins, and (II) on the stabilization of calcium phosphate prenucleation clusters by fetuin-A monomers. In supersaturated serum, mineral ion aggregation leads to a change in the electrical impedance. In this work, we present a method based on electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) to establish an impedance trace of mineral ion clustering in vitro. In the presence of 20μM of serum protein fetuin-A, a prototypic calcification inhibitor, we measured a change in impedance (Δ
                     R) of 195.52±27.78%Ω compared to 430.41±11.36%Ω in inhibitor-free samples. We also identified a CPP-formation dependency on the actual content of ions and protein in the samples under investigation. Two-step ripening of CPP was also observed. The presented method may form the basis of a simple label-free bedside or online test to be used in routine clinical practice for estimating the calcification risk in serum.Patients with end-stage renal disease (ERSD) have highly increased morbidity and mortality rates ( In a healthy population, calcification is normally restricted to bone and teeth (i.e. physiological mineralization) ( On the protein level, fetuin-A/α Biochemical studies revealed that the inhibition process is based on a direct interaction of the fetuin-A domain D1 with BCP to form soluble nanometer-sized colloidal particles shielded by a layer of fetuin-A; denoted as calciprotein particles (CPPs), and mineral cluster (<1 During the formation of CPPs, a reduction in the concentration of calcium and phosphate ions is expected. Analyzing the phosphate concentration profile of a sample after the formation of CPPs indicated that about two thirds of the phosphate was enclosed in the CPPs ( As the electrical impedance (or simply resistance) of a solution is inversely proportional to its ionic content ( To date, there is no tool in the market for the assessment of calcification inhibition capacity. A couple of methods have been introduced at laboratory scale including transmission electron microscopy (TEM) and dynamic light scattering (DLC), small-angle neutron scattering (SANS), turbidimetry, or a radioactive All stock solutions of sodium chloride (NaCl), Tris buffer, calcium chloride (CaCl Measurements were performed using a self-made electrochemical cell which consists of four gold-plated ring stainless steel electrodes as shown in The distance between the outer pair of “current-delivery” electrodes was set to 60 The impedance spectra were fitted to an equivalent electrical circuit corresponding to the measuring cell as shown in Several in vitro assays were performed to monitor the inhibition of mineral sedimentation in presence of pure proteins or protein mixtures. The results were compared to those obtained from established methods TEM, SANS, and the radioactive     The measuring cell used in this study is a conductivity cell with an electrical circuit represented in Different sources of error were systematically eliminated to ensure the accuracy of the measuring cell. Internal drifting of the results, due to either leakage of solution from the cell or ions diffusion from the electrodes into the solution, was investigated. The impedance of both 0.9% NaCl solution and a mix of 6 Linearity, i.e. dependency of measurement results on the amplitude of the applied voltage signal, was also assessed (data not shown). 30 To first check whether the inhibition of calcification is actually based on the formation of CPPs or simply due to Ca In addition, according to published data ( We analyzed the inhibition capacities of pure proteins and protein mixtures by monitoring the change in solution impedance as an indicator of mineral particle formation. The data in comparison to inhibitor-free samples are given in  Our results showed that impedance measurements tended to be more robust during late-stage of CPP formation. Measurements during early-stages of CPP formation (<5 To further evaluate the inhibition capacity of serum or individual serum proteins, the mineral precipitation at 8000 On the other hand, the role of albumin as an inhibitor of calcification was ambiguous by this assay, see A kinetic experiment was carried out to determine whether a transformation in CPPs size, number, and/or morphology can be detected by EIS-measurement or not. The impedance trace over 10 Monitoring of the mineralization process by the SANS method also revealed a two-step growth of CPPs ( An EIS-based method for monitoring CPP formation from supersaturated solutions was established. Despite the complicated measuring situation, the method reports kinetics of CPP formation virtually identical to previous studies employing TEM, SANS, DLS, etc. EIS enabled the time-resolved study of CPP formation kinetics over a wide range of inhibitors. Unlike TEM, SANS and DLS, EIS cannot, however, provide information on the structure or chemical composition of CPPs. Nevertheless, the data in this work further supports the role of fetuin-A as a major systemic calcification inhibitor in serum. Other proteins (e.g. albumin), low molecular weight components, and ionic content present in the serum may also play a role in the CPP formation and accordingly, contribute to the inhibition process. Several parameters, as time of measurement and non-specific changes occurring within the sample, might affect the reproducibility and specificity of the measurement and thus have to be optimally controlled. pH value for instance, changes by −1.84, −0.91, and −0.25 in inhibition mixtures containing 0 To the best of our knowledge, this is the first time that an EIS-based method is used for such a type of measurement application. The method offers a promising alternative for simpler, easy-to-use, and inexpensive estimation of calcification inhibition capacity in serum especially for patients with end-stage renal disease (ESRD). Those patients often have reduced levels of calcification inhibitors in the blood associated with mineral metabolism disorders, which may lead to severe vascular and valvular calcifications (