Abstract
                  The following pictorial essay is a review of common elbow pathology as seen on elbow MR imaging. These include pathologic conditions that involve tendons, ligaments, osseous structures, bursa and other miscellaneous and incidentally detected lesions.Elbow pain and loss of function are relatively common manifestations of pathologic conditions that result most commonly from occupationally related chronic overuse, microtrauma from athletic activity or acute trauma. MR imaging of the elbow can demonstrate a diversity of elbow pathology that may involve muscles, tendons, ligaments, osseous structures, nerves, bursae and articular surfaces. In the following discussion, we review the MR imaging features of a range of relatively common elbow pathology. Epicondylitis is the most common cause of elbow pain and dysfunction. Medial epicondylitis ( The lateral (radial) and ulnar (medial) collateral ligamentous complexes provide stability to varus and valgus stress, respectively. Tears of the ulnar collateral ligament usually involve the anterior bundle, which provides the majority of valgus stabilization to the joint The biceps tendon is most frequently injured at or near its attachment to the radial tuberosity. Degeneration or tendinosis is the result of repetitive compression of the distal avascular tendon by the ulna and radius, resulting in mucoid degeneration. Ruptures are uncommon and usually result from acute extension of a flexed elbow ( Rupture of this tendon ( The ulnar, median and radial nerves are usually surrounded by fat, which facilitates their visualization on MR imaging. Imaging appearances of an entrapped nerve may include increased signal intensity on T2-weighted images, nerve thickening and nerve displacement from its expected location. Possible causes of nerve entrapment include impingement by anatomic variants and anomalies, muscle hypertrophy, thickened ligaments, degenerative changes, direct trauma, posttraumatic or postsurgical osseous changes, masses ( An osteochondral defect ( Osseous injuries are usually initially detected by radiography or CT. Occult or stress fractures can have less specific findings on radiography; in these scenarios, MR imaging can be obtained for further evaluation. The characteristic MR imaging finding of a stress fracture is linear or irregular hypointensity on T1-weighted images, which is surrounded by hyperintense marrow edema (in acute and subacute stages) on fat-suppressed T2-weighted images ( Fracture nonunion ( Loose bodies within the elbow can cause locking, clicking or limitation of range of motion. Loose bodies frequently settle in the coronoid or olecranon fossa. MR imaging is useful for distinguishing loose bodies from synovial calcific foci and also for determining their number, size and precise location ( Two common types of bursitis of the elbow include bicipital-radial bursitis and olecranon bursitis. Bicipital radial bursitis ( Occasionally, there is detection of various incidental findings on elbow MR imaging to include infection (