Despite their known osteoconductivity, clinical use of calcium phosphate cements is limited both by their relatively slow rate of resorption and by rheological properties incompatible with injectability. Bone in-growth and material resorption have been improved by the development of porous calcium phosphate cements. However, injectable formulations have so far only been obtained through the addition of relatively toxic surfactants. The present work describes the response of osteoblasts to a novel injectable foamed bone cement based on a composite formulation including the bioactive foaming agents soybean and gelatine. The foaming properties of both defatted soybean and gelatine gels were exploited to develop a self-hardening soy/gelatine/hydroxyapatite composite foam able to retain porosity upon injection. After setting, the foamed paste produced a calcium-deficient hydroxyapatite scaffold, showing good injectability and cohesion as well as interconnected porosity after injection. The intrinsic bioactivity of soybean and gelatine was shown to favour osteoblast adhesion and growth. These findings suggest that injectable, porous and bioactive calcium phosphate cements can be produced for bone regeneration through minimally invasive surgery.The optimisation of porous scaffolds of either natural or artificial origin is a widely recognised objective in tissue engineering Soybean is a natural material mainly composed of proteins and carbohydrates (∼40% each). Soybean also contains an oil fraction (18%), a mineral fraction (∼3%) and isoflavones In the present study soybean hydrogels have been used in combination with gelatine to obtain an injectable and self-setting composite calcium phosphate foam, with enhanced biological properties for bone tissue engineering. As both biopolymers are known for their foaming properties, it was envisaged that their combination with a calcium phosphate cement (CPC) paste could provide a composite macroporous material with enhanced rheological and biological properties. In particular, together with assessment of the potential use of soybean and gelatine as fluidising and foaming agents of CPCs, this work aims at demonstrating an effect on osteoblast activity. Indeed, in addition to the bioactive properties of soybean, gelatine is known to be an adhesive protein, containing the RGD sequence involved in cell attachment mechanisms The combination of these biopolymers with CPCs is likely to provide additional properties to the known osteoconductivity of CPCs. CPCs are able to harden in situ via a dissolution–precipitation mechanism mimicking the bone mineralization process. In particular, cements based on α-tricalcium phosphate (α-TCP) set according to the reaction shown in Eq. (1), giving as a product calcium-deficient hydroxyapatite (CDHA) crystals of micro/nanometer size This setting reaction, which takes place at the physiological temperature (37 The CPC powder used in this work consisted of 98 wt.% α-TCP and 2 wt.% hydroxyapatite (HA) (Merck, Germany). α-TCP was obtained by heating an appropriate mixture of CaHPO The liquid phase was a 2.5% (w/v) Na Soybean-based hydrogels were obtained simultaneously with the soybean flour defatting process. The flour (Infinity Food, UK) was agitated for 2 Self-setting foams were prepared by mixing the prefoamed liquid phase with the cement powder In order to allow the foaming process to proceed the liquid to powder (L/P) ratios of the foam preparations were adjusted depending on the fluidity of the polymer solution employed. The optimised paste was obtained after careful characterisation of the physico-chemical properties of the cements. Taking into account the porosity and injectability results, an optimum composition was selected, containing 20% (w/v) soybean extract and 5% (w/v) gelatine. The paste was further characterised in terms of reaction kinetics, specific surface area, microstructure and pore size distribution prior to in vitro cell studies. A gelatine-based foam, prepared using 15% (w/v) gelatine as the foaming agent in the liquid phase The terms 5S and 20S indicate the addition of 5% and 20% (w/v) soybean hydrogel to the liquid phase of the foamed cement, and 5G, 10G and 15G indicate the addition of 5%, 10% and 15% (w/v) gelatine to the liquid phase. The injectability of the foamed pastes was evaluated in a universal testing machine by measuring the relative amount of paste that could be extruded through a syringe with a 2 Total porosity and macroporosity introduced during the foaming process in the different hydroxyapatite foams were measured in the set specimens after complete reaction (12 The evolution of the setting reaction in the foams was characterized by powder X-ray diffraction (XRD) (INEL CPS-120, France) (Cu The compressive strength after 12 For in vitro tests the samples were prepared using sterile components. The cement powder phase, the Na Saos-2 cells (Istituto Zooprofilattico Brescia, Italy) were cultured in Dulbecco’s modified Eagle’s medium (DMEM) supplemented with 10 To determine the toxicity of the materials Saos-2 were seeded in the lower chamber of a 24-well transwell plate (3.0 To assess the cell substrate properties of the materials Saos-2 cells (5 In all experiments cell viability, differentiation and activity were tested at defined end points from 24 Alamar blue (Biosource International) dye was used to determine cell viability. Four hours after the Alamar reagent had been added to the culture wells at 10 vol.% for the fluorescence was read at an excitation wavelength of 490 The cell colonization of different composite surfaces was assessed using a conventional fluorescence microscope (Nikon Eclipse E800). The cells were fixed with 2% formaldehyde in phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) for 5 The alkaline phosphatase (ALP) content of cells was assayed after 6 Collagen secretion by the cells was evaluated after 72 Statistical analysis was performed with StatView™ 5.0.1 software for Windows (SAS Institute, Cary, NC). Results are reported as means The addition of different concentrations of the soybean hydrogel and gelatine to the liquid phase of the cements allowed the production of stable liquid foams that, upon mixing with the cement powder, were able to self-set, giving macroporous hydroxyapatite foams. Total porosities of the foams containing different amounts of soy hydrogel and gelatine are shown in Taking into account the previous results, the formulation containing 20% (w/v) soy hydrogel and 5% (w/v) gelatine hydrogel (20S/5G) was selected for further characterisation; this formulation combined a high macroporosity with very good injectability. The L/P ratio was adjusted to 0.55 The microstructures of the soybean-based (20S/5G) and the gelatine-based (15G) foams after injection are shown in The pore size distribution of the three cement compositions determined by MIP is shown in As shown in The indirect effects of the experimental composites on Saos-2 cells clearly showed that no toxic agents were released by the experimental composites, and no changes in Saos-2 viability were observed ( Collagen release was not significantly influenced by any composite ( As expected, Saos-2 cells grown on TCPS showed an increase in viability with time (4000 Direct contact assay of the cell–composite interaction showed good cell viability at all the tested experimental points. In addition, a significant increase in cell viability was observed from 72 Saos-2 cells showed good ALP activity on all composites, with no significant differences (121 Cell colonization of the composites, analysed by nuclear staining (Hoechst dye 33258) of Saos-2 cells grown on the materials showed that all the composite surfaces were homogeneously covered by cells after 24 Foaming of the cement liquid phase is not a new method to prepare macroporous cements. This method has been applied in the past using either synthetic surfactants Another interesting feature to be highlighted in the developed self-setting foams is their hierarchical pore structure, where bubbles with the minimal required size for bone in-growth (larger than 100 It is also important to note that the combined use of soybean and gelatine affected the setting reaction of the α-TCP-based cement only slightly, limited to the early reaction time course. Moreover, biopolymers influenced the microstructure of precipitated CDHA crystals. Thus, whereas the specific surface area of the gelatine-containing foams was smaller than that of the inorganic non-foamed cement, soybean/gelatine foams had a twice as large specific surface area compared with the control cement, suggesting an enhanced rate of crystal nucleation in spite of crystal growth. This effect led to the formation of a network of smaller crystals. A further advantage that the addition of soy-derived polymers to the foams is expected to convey is increased osteogenic activity. This effect was analysed in the present work by means of in vitro cell culture studies. In particular, osteoblast-like Saos-2 cells were used to screen the injectable foams. Saos-2 cells are bone-forming cells characterised by a mature osteoblast phenotype and are widely used in bone cell differentiation, proliferation and metabolism studies Biochemical assays on Saos-2 cells challenged with the experimental composites injected in transwell inserts showed that cell viabilities on the experimental cements and control TCPS were comparable, suggesting the absence of any toxic components leached from the materials. Moreover, this study has demonstrated that experimental composite foams prepared with gelatine and/or gelatine/soy are able to support cell attachment and growth. However, it is worth noting that in the direct contact studies all cements and foams showed cell proliferation rates lower than that observed on the control TCPS. This result is coincident with previous studies on apatite-based ceramics and cements When comparing the unfoamed and foamed cements the highest viability was obtained for Saos-2 cells grown on 20S/5G, suggesting an effect of the soybean-derived polymers contained in this foam on osteoblastic-like cell differentiation. It can be hypothesised that a gradual release of isoflavones takes place during the cell culture experiments that leads to higher Saos-2 cell viability and differentiation. However, relatively high levels of cell proliferation and differentiation were also observed when cells were tested with the 15G scaffold. These improved properties of the 15G cements were ascribed to the presence of bioligands (e.g. the RGD sequence) in the gelatine that are able to recognize the cell integrin receptors. In all cases cells retained the typical osteoblast morphology, characterised by an irregular orientation, while some cells established a very close contact with the material surface, their filopodia penetrating the troughs of the porous cement surface. As no significant difference was shown across cements in terms of filopodia contact with the troughs in the cement surface, this behaviour was attributed to the properties of the ceramic rather than to the presence of the biopolymers. ALP activity and collagen production were measured as markers of cell activity and differentiation to an osteoblast phenotype. Saos-2 cells challenged with the 20S/5G composite foam showed a significantly higher ALP activity compared with the other samples. As mentioned above, this effect was ascribed to the oestrogenic potential of soybean isoflavones such as genistein and daidzein The intrinsic bioactivity and foaming properties of soybean and gelatine were successfully used to develop a novel injectable, self-hardening soy/gelatin/hydroxyapatite composite foam, the characteristics of which are suitable for bone regeneration through minimally invasive surgery. Clinical applications such as vertebroplasty and secondary implant fixation procedures could benefit from the use of these novel cements, reducing the surgical trauma to the patients and enhancing the tissue regeneration potential. The present work was supported by the SmartCaP 6 FP Project, Contract No. NMP3-CT-2005-013912. E.B.M. acknowledges the Mexican Council for Science and Technology (CONACyT) for a PhD scholarship grant. Support for the research of M.P.G. was received through the prize ICREA Academia for excellence in research, funded by the Generalitat de Catalunya. Certain figures in this article, particularly Figures 3 and 4, are difficult to interpret in black and white. The full colour images can be found in the on-line version, at