Treatment of distal femur fractures in the coronal plane can be challenging. Depending on fracture line orientation, topography and associated comminution, decision-making regarding approach and fixation is not straightforward and can result in complications. Therefore, treatment of coronal plane distal femur fractures (Busch-Hoffa fractures) should be approached in a systematic manner, leading to efficient planning and operative execution. Here, we offer a proposed treatment algorithm, guiding treatment, approach and fixation based on the modified Letenneur classification of coronal plane distal femur fractures.In 1869, Fredrich Busch was the first author to describe a coronal plane fracture of the lateral femoral condyle [ Busch-Hoffa fractures are caused by high-energy trauma. Nork et al. reported over 80% occurred as a result of either motor vehicle or motorcycle accidents [ Type I depicts a fracture line, which is in line with the posterior cortex and, therefore, yields a large fragment of the femoral condyle. Type I may also be associated with articular comminution, adding a Type I variant to the Letenneur classification. Type II is an osteochondral fracture, as the main fracture plane is away from the posterior cortical of the femur. The fragment may, therefore be deprived from vascular supply. Depending on the size of the osteochondral fragment, a type II may be subcategorized in IIa, IIb, and IIc. Letenneur Type III has an oblique orientation, which intersects the articular surface anteriorly. Based on the modified Letenneur classification, an algorithmic treatment protocol is proposed, offering preferred surgical approach to allow for facile, mechanistic, principle-based fixation strategies. Here, we outline each Letenneur fracture type associated with a case-example to highlight the proposed strategy. The procedure is performed under general anesthesia. The patient is placed prone on a radiolucent table with bump under the thigh allowing for fluoroscopic control in multiple projections. A longitudinal incision measuring approximately 10 cm in length is placed on the posterolateral aspect of the knee, in line with the lateral head of the biceps tendon. A careful blunt dissection is carried out aiming to identify the peroneal nerve, which is located medially to the head of the biceps tendon. A number 2 Penrose drain is passed around the nerve, for its protection and mobilization. Deep dissection is performed in between the lateral head of the biceps tendon and the iliotibial band ( The reduction is obtained with the knee in full extension. The distal fragment may be mobilized with a ball spike pusher or with a Weber clamp. Provisional fixation is accomplished with Kirschner wires, under fluoroscopic control in multiple projections. A 3.5 mm small fragments plate is contoured to buttress the posterolateral surface of the lateral condyle. Additionally, lag screws may be considered from posterior to anterior, avoiding the penetration of the cartilage anteriorly ( In cases of posterolateral shearing with an impacted or comminuted osteochondral fragment in the articular surface (Letenneur type I variant), the standard posterolateral approach may be insufficient to provide adequate exposure and reduction of the articular surface. Thus, we prefer to have our patient laying oblique on the operative table, with a small foam under the ipsilateral hip, so we may perform an extended lateral approach to the knee joint with an osteotomy of the Gerdy tubercle. The osteochondral fragment is reduced anatomically and fixed with headless screws ( Alternatively, an anterolateral parapatellar approach may be selected with the patient in supine position. The main drawback of this approach is the difficulty achieving fracture reduction of the posteriorly sheared fragment with the flexed knee. We routinely use a Weber clamp to address fracture reduction and K-wires to provide provisional fixation. Lag screws from anterior to posterior are used to fix the fracture, and a horizontal plate increases construction stability ( For Letenneur types IIa, IIb, and IIc, our treatment preference is the posterolateral approach between the biceps tendon and the peroneal nerve ( Performing this approach, one can fix small fragment fractures of the lateral condyle using screws from posterior to anterior ( For Letenneur type III, as we are dealing with a fracture that results in a large posterolateral fragment we normally perform an anterolateral parapatellar approach, fixing the fracture using anterior to posterior lag screws, accompanied with a horizontal neutralization belt plate. Coronal plane fractures of the medial condyle are rare. Our treatment protocol includes posteromedial subvastus approach with the patient in prone or supine-oblique position. When in supine-oblique position, a pad applied under the hip on the contralateral limb makes the approach easier, with the surgeon positioned on the opposite side of the fracture. Fracture reduction is performed with the knee in extension. Provisional fixation is obtained using K-wires. A buttress reconstruction, DCP, or LCP plate can be placed on the posteromedial surface of the distal femur to fix the fracture. Lag screws are used from posterior to anterior to fix small fragments (  Busch-Hoffa fractures are rare, and treatment methods are based on the few reports in the literature. High suspicion index is required to prevent overlooking of coronal plane fractures. Computed tomography scan should be obtained for an adequate preoperative planning. Generally, Busch-Hoffa fractures are treated using the principle of absolute stability to provide early range of motion and satisfactory functional outcomes. Several treatment possibilities were described to provide adequate reduction and fixation, including anterior to posterior or posterior to anterior lag screws, posterolateral and posteromedial plates, as well as horizontal plates [ The Letenneur classification is the most cited system for coronal plane fractures of the distal femur. To the best of our knowledge, we are unaware of any studies showing a treatment algorithm based on the Letenneur classification system, therefore providing a rationale for management of Busch-Hoffa fractures. Moreover, we identified the type I variant, a modification to the original Letenneur classification, when an intercalary articular fragment is associated with type I fracture. In terms of Busch-Hoffa fractures, type I variant is relatively frequent, and the standard posterior approach developed for type I is inefficient to address the intercalary fragment. Thus, introducing the type I variant to the original classification, one can more adequately address the intercalary and the vertically sheared fragments. Posterolateral approach with the Gerdy osteotomy, as well as the parapatellar approach using anterior to posterior lag screws plus a horizontal belt plate are very efficient treatment options for this fracture pattern. Our preference for posterolateral buttress plates in Letenneur type I fractures is based on the biomechanical study of Sun et al. [ The main limitation of the present study is the lack of long-term outcomes using validated functional scores to evaluate the presented treatment protocol. Since this is the first presentation of the modified Letenneur classification, more data is needed to validate our algorithm; in these rare fractures, a multi-center, international trauma registry may offer the best data in determining an ideal approach and fixation protocol. Busch-Hoffa fractures are challenging injuries and an accurate preoperative assessment of the injury, determining the exact plane of the fracture and the size of the osteochondral fragment in the femoral condyle are key elements of the decision-making process. Our goals were to group the three most typical fracture patterns and bring awareness to a new variant of Letenneur classification. Future studies with series of cases using this algorithm should be considered to validate our algorithm of treatment. The authors declare that they have no conflict of interest related to this manuscript.