Cassiterite is the main ore mineral of Sn deposits, and may be used to date tin mineralization processes/processes. Both isotope dilution thermal ionization mass spectrometer (ID-TIMS) and laser ablation multi-collector inductively coupled plasma mass spectrometer (LA-MC-ICP-MS) have been applied to cassiterite U–Pb dating. Here we show that cassiterite U–Pb dating results using LA-ICP-MS are comparable to those using LA-MC-ICP-MS. Our results also show that Tera–Wasserburg U–Pb intercept age is far better than the previously used 206Pb/207Pb versus 238U/207Pb “isochron” age because the latter weighted data points with low proportions of common Pb more heavily, such that introducing larger errors. Moreover, 206Pbi/207Pb changes with age and 238U/207Pb ratios, such that yields results younger than the real ages with larger errors. Samples with multiple common Pb sources are difficult to date. Nevertheless, multiple common Pb in cassiterite are often associated with fluid inclusions that may be identified and avoided. The precisions of cassiterite U–Pb ages are not as good as zircon ages, but they provide direct dating on the mineralization processes/processes. Therefore, coupled studies on zircon and cassiterite dating may provide constraints on the relation between magmatism±hydrothermal activities and mineralization.Cassiterite (SnO Cassiterite, however, usually has common Pb contents much higher than those of zircon. Moreover, the U content of cassiterite is generally at low ppm levels, which is much lower than that of zircon, and even rutile and titanite, etc., with higher common Pb proportions. As a result, published ID-TIMS cassiterite U–Pb ages have errors considerably larger than those of LA-ICP-MS U–Pb ages of zircon and many other high-U minerals. In particular, cassiterite formed during hydrothermal processes may contain mineral/fluid inclusions with non-equilibrium common Pb that is harmful to high quality isotope dating ( In recent years, in situ laser ablation-multicollector-inductively coupled plasma-mass spectrometry (LA-MC-ICP-MS) U–Pb dating on cassiterite yields Here we try to evaluate and optimize in situ cassiterite U–Pb dating method using LA-ICP-MS. Our results show that Tera–Wasserburg U–Pb lower intercept age is better than Cassiterite samples from Hehuaping Sn–Pb–Zn deposit of the Nanling Range, South China and Xuebaoding Sn–W–Be deposit in the Songpan–Garzê orogenic belt southwest China have been analyzed in this contribution. Both deposits have been previously dated using other methods ( The Hehuaping tin polymetallic deposit is located to the southeast of the Wangxianling pluton in the Middle Nanling Range, near Chenzhou City, South China. Tin mineralization is spatially associated with a Late Jurassic (~ The Xuebaoding Sn–Be deposit is located to the north of Longmenshan, near Pingwu county, southwest China. The potential reserves of Sn and W metal of this deposit are 49,000 Ore samples (WXL17 and IV) were crushed to 40–60 Cassiterite samples are checked carefully under the microscope, electron microprobe (EMP) and scanning electron microscope (SEM) to observe mineral and fluid inclusions and cracks. Most cassiterite grains from the Hehuaping deposit have abundant fluid inclusions ( U–Pb dating was carried out using a LA-ICP-MS system in the CAS Key Laboratory of Mineralogy and Metallogeny, Guangzhou Institute of Geochemistry, the Chinese Academy of Sciences. The system consists of an Agilent 7900 ICP-MS coupled with a Resonetics RESOlution S-155 laser. This laser ablation system is equipped with a large sample cell (155 In order to achieve the best working conditions, cassiterite samples from the Hehuaping deposit were analyzed three times, using different laser energy densities and repetition rates. The dating results are listed in Sixty single spot U/Pb analyses were measured by LA-ICP-MS with a laser beam diameter of 74 In the second group, 40 spots were analyzed using a laser beam diameter of 74 In the third group, 30 spots were analyzed using a laser beam diameter of 74 We also analyzed cassiterite grains of tin skarn from the Hehuaping deposit using a laser beam diameter of 74 A large cassiterite crystal from the Xuebaoding W–Sn–Be deposit was selected for U–Pb dating, using a laser beam diameter of 74 In general, high energy densities and faster repetition rates lead to higher signals and smaller errors. Meanwhile, the faster ablation also means more chance to ablate fluid/mineral inclusions and thus introduce non-equilibrium common Pb, which may cause large errors. For cassiterite grains from the Hehuaping greisen, the best results were obtained using beam diameter: 74 Our In addition, our new LA-ICP-MS concordia and Tera–Wasserburg lower intersection ages are also consistent with recently published In principle, The Tera–Wasserburg concordia diagram places Given that the Tera–Wasserburg concordia age is the lower intercept age that is controlled by samples with low common Pb, spot analyses with lower common Pb are weighted more heavily. As shown above, Tera–Wasserburg concordia ages are preferred for U–Pb dating of cassiterite and other minerals with high common Pb. Nevertheless, for samples with very high common Pb, Tera–Wasserburg concordia may also produce ages with large errors. Multi-collector ICP-MS has an advantage of high precision Pb isotope data, and therefore it is commonly used for minerals with high common Pb contents. Previous studies on in situ cassiterite U–Pb dating so far published have all been carried out using LA-MC-ICP-MS. In addition to cassiterite, other U-bearing accessory phases such as zircon ( As discussed above, the Tera–Wasserburg concordia diagram is the best way to obtain U–Pb ages for minerals with high common Pb. This age is defined by LA-ICP-MS is much cheaper than LA-MC-ICP-MS, which has been widely used on U–Pb dating of zircon ( For cassiterite and other high common Pb minerals, samples with multiple common Pb sources are difficult to date. Cassiterite from pegmatite, granite and greisen usually has homogenized common Pb. In contrast, those from skarn deposits usually have two sources of common Pb, i.e., granite and carbonate. These non-equilibrium common Pb may introduce large errors ( Cassiterite is an ore mineral, therefore it directly dates the mineralization event. Zircon U–Pb ages usually record magmatic or hydrothermal (for hydrothermal zircon) processes. Fluid inclusion The best result for cassiterite from the Hehuaping greisen is 158.9 For the Xuebaoding cassiterite sample, our U–Pb dating results (194.8 These two samples' cassiterite LA-ICP-MS U–Pb dating results are all similar to previously published ages using other methods, suggesting that these mineralization events were closely associated with magmatic fluids. Cassiterite is the main ore mineral of Sn deposits and can be dated using in situ LA-ICP-MS methods. Tera–Wasserburg U–Pb intercept age is the best way to eliminate common Pb effects. The commonly used There is no conflict of interest. We would like to thank Professor Hui-min Li at Tianjing Institute of Geology and Mineral Resources for his helpful instructions, discussion and cassiterite samples. Thanks also to Dr. Yan Liu at Institute of Geology, Chinese Academy of Geological Sciences for his cassiterite crystal. Professor C.T. Lee and an anonymous referee are thanked for constructive review comments. This study is supported by the