A protective effect of plant extract from Onobrychis ebenoides on ovariectomy-induced bone loss in rats has been shown. To investigate the molecular mechanisms that underly the beneficial effect of O. ebenoides (Onb) on bone loss, we studied its potential to activate ER subtypes (ERα and ERβ) on transiently transfected HeLa cells with HO-hERα or pSG5-hERβ and 3×ERE-TATA-Luc expression vectors. Its impact to stimulate differentiation and mineralization of osteoblasts (KS483 cell line) by Alizarin Red-S staining was also examined. Furthermore we sought to induce for its potential the IGFBP3, a known estrogen-dependent marker in MCF7 breast cancer cells. 17β-Estradiol and the pure antiestrogen ICI182780 were included to serve as control samples of the estrogenic and antiestrogenic activity respectively. Our data revealed: (1) Onb extract displayed a significant estrogenic activity on both ERα and ERβ subtypes. (2) It exhibited direct action on osteoblasts by inducing mineralization. (3) It showed estrogenic activity in MCF7 cells. These findings suggest that the beneficial effect of Onb extract on bone loss is mediated through an estrogen-like action via activation of ERα-ERE and ERβ-ERE pathways and via direct action on the mineralization process of osteoblasts.Human and animal studies  All these in vitro and in vivo findings prompted us to investigate the molecular mechanisms that underly the estrogenic effects of the The whole plant, dried and pulverized (17.5 HeLa (cervical adenocarcinoma) cells (ATCC Cell Bank) were grown in Dulbecoo’s Modified Eagle Media DMEM (Gibco BRL, Athens, Greece) with 10% fetal bovine serum (FBS, Gibco BRL, Athens, Greece). Before each transfection experiment, cells were maintained for 2 days in DMEM phenol red (PR) free containing 10% dextran-coated charcoal stripped serum (FBS DCC treated). For each transfection experiment 2 The KS483 cell line, which is a non-transformed stable subclone of a parental cell line KS4 that has the ability to form mineralized nodules in vitro, was used for the bone study. KS483 cells were grown in phenol red free α-minimum essential medium (aMEM) (Gibco BRL,Athens, Greece) with 10% FBS (Gibco BRL, Athens, Greece). For our experiments, KS483 cells were seeded in 12 well plates (at a density of 45.000 The cell culture stimulation IGFBP-3 assay was carried out as previously described ( After 24 Results are expressed as percentage of control vehicle (sample in the absence of compound). All values are expressed as the mean  The number of mineralized nodules was statistically increased by E The effect of vehicle control (in the absence of compounds), E The present study aims at certifying and further elucidating the possible molecular mechanisms underlying the beneficial effect of the Onb extract on bone loss, using an in vitro approach. In this context, we evaluated the estrogenicity of Onb extract mediated via the human ERα and ERβ as well as its potential to support the function of osteoblasts. Such data may be useful to interpret the results of the in vivo study, i.e., the protective effect of Onb extract on ovariectomy-induced bone loss in rats ( Numerous studies assessing the estrogenic responses of several phytoestrogens and plant extracts have been used in vivo in animal models and in vitro assays. In the in vivo models, rats or mice are usually used while the data from the in vitro assays are often generated by using human cell lines and human ERs ( Our data support that E  Osteoblasts and osteoclasts are important players in bone remodeling since osteoclasts excavate old bone and osteoblasts fill the fresh cavities with new bone. Bone remodeling is characterized by a balance between osteoclast bone resorption and osteoblast bone formation. Estrogens play a central role in the control of both cell types modulating negatively osteoclasts and affecting positively osteoblasts. Estrogens are known stimulants of osteoblasts proliferation, differentiation, mineralization and survival, via genomic and non-genomic mechanisms ( The modulation of IGFBP-3 levels in MCF-7 cells is a well-established biological response to estrogens and therefore a useful screening tool for assessing the estrogenicity/antiestrogenicity of a substance/extract ( In concluding, we suggest that the beneficial effect of Onb extract in the ovariectomy-induced bone loss in rats is mediated through an estrogen-like action, via activation of both ERα and ERβ subtypes in an ERE-dependent manner. Its anabolic effects on bone, similar to those exhibited by estradiol, were through the promotion of osteoblastic differentiation and mineralization and suggest the potential therapeutic benefits of the Onb extract as an antiosteoporosis agent. Its estrogenic effect, however, on MCF-7 cells implicates that further in vivo studies are We would like to thank Professor J.-A. Gustafsson, Director of the Department of Medical Nutrition, Karolinska Institute of Medical University in Stockholm for providing the ERβ expression vector, Dr. Tomoshige Kino, Pediatric and Reproductive Endocrinology Branch, National Institute of Child Health and Human Development, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda USA for providing us with the ERα expression vector and Dr. Kenneth S. Korach, Reproductive and Developmental Toxicology, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda USA and Dr. McDonnell of Duke University Medical Center for providing us with the ERE-Luc expression vector. We would also like to thank Dr. T. Yamashita, Head Nephrology, Pharmaceutical Research Laboratories, Kirin Brewery Co, Ltd. Japan and Dr. M. Karperien, Department of Endocrinology and Metabolic Diseases, Leiden University Medical Center the Netherlands for providing us with the cell line KS483. We thank the Bodossaki Foundation and the General Secretariat of Research and Technology, Ministry Development (EPET II) for financing the cell-culture facilities. We also thank the General Secretariat of Research and Technology, Ministry Development (PAVE) in cooperation with PHARMATEN S.A.