In this paper we report the application of a suitable methodology to study the morphology, structure and composition of core@shell nanoparticles (NPs) systems with polydispersity in the shell thickness, with subnanometer resolution and good sampling. Through the combination of Medium Energy Ion Scattering with Transmission Electron Microscopy, we perform a systematic investigation on core@shell Au@Ag NPs synthesized by an original wet chemical method. For samples synthesized with baths of different AgNO3 concentrations, the present approach allowed us to determine the NP's Ag shell thicknesses distribution of about a few nanometers around the Au core.The particular optical properties of colloidal metallic nanoparticles (NPs) have been applied on glass technologies for thousands of years in the human history. Particularly, the use of NPs composed by gold and silver in glasses has been noticed since the Roman era In the present work we have extended the application of MEIS to a systematic investigation of the morphological and compositional properties of Au@Ag NPs which are polydisperse in both, morphology and composition. The Au@Ag NPs were produced by chemical reduction of water soluble metal salts precursors in a seed-mediated approach. Through the TEM observations, the typical average NPs sizes and shapes were obtained, which allowed the definition of a geometrical model to be used as an input for the MEIS analysis with PowerMEIS. The local compositional and morphological parameters were later refined. Following this procedure, the size distribution of the seed Au NPs was obtained; the formation of single Ag NPs in addition to a Ag layer on the Au NPs were identified, and the Ag shell thickness and its dispersion were determined. Au NPs seeds synthesis (s112): 1 Au@Ag NPs synthesis: core@shell NPs were synthesized by using a seed mediated approach, where gold seeds are added into reactive solutions (baths) for the silver deposition to take place. A typical bath is a solution containing AgNO In all cases, core@shell NPs were obtained by adding 0.1 Routine characterization: The extinction spectra of the NPs where recorded using a Shimadzu UV-1200 spectrometer with a 1 MEIS characterization: The MEIS measurements were performed using a 151.9 MEIS samples preparation: Si/SiO   The blue shift in the SPR associated with gold indicates the formation of the silver shell on the Au NPs  From the areas of the Ag and Au MEIS signals in Up to this point, MEIS analysis allows to have complementary evidence to the main observations drawn from the conventional techniques. Nevertheless, as will be shown below, a quantitative analysis of these polydisperse samples can be made through the modeling of MEIS signals. This allows to go deeper into the analysis of the NPs obtained and, consequently, gain in understanding about the process involved in their synthesis. Here we have used the sample s112, without Ag, as a reference to characterize later the core–shell structure of the other samples. The size of the NPs on sample s112 was also determined by MEIS analysis. Simulations of the MEIS spectra at different scattering angles were performed by using the PowerMEIS code The simulated spectra were compared with the measured ones at three different scattered angles: 109°, 120° and 131° (shown in The size distribution of the NPs was estimated also from the Since the Au NPs sample is nearly-monodisperse, the statistical analysis based on TEM images is reliable and a direct comparison with MEIS results is possible. The estimation of the mean radius ‹ MEIS results corresponding to Au@Ag NPs samples were analyzed by assuming that the addition of AgNO As is evidenced in The similarities in the Ag shell distribution between the samples, as MEIS results show ( In consistency with the heterogeneous shell distribution qualitatively observed by TEM, the Ag shell thickness distribution obtained from the Au MEIS signal fitting is bimodal ( In this work, the Au@Ag NPs synthesized by a seed mediated procedure were systematically studied. The MEIS technique, recently developed to analyze NPs, has been successfully applied. Qualitative aspects such as Ag shell formation are unambiguously determined by this technique. Also quantitative information such as the Au NPs size and size dispersion ( RM, FPC and MAP worked on the sample synthesis. RM prepared all the samples for TEM and performed the TEM experiments as well. RM, PFPF and MAP worked on the discussions and analysis of TEM results. DFS, RM and MAP wrote the main manuscript text. RM prepared the first two figures; DFS prepare de others except the supplementary figure, which was prepared by RM and MAP. DFS planed and worked on the MEIS experiments, with the participation of PLG, PFPF and FPC. DFS worked on the MEIS analysis, with the participation of PLG and PFPF. All authors reviewed the manuscript. The authors acknowledge the financial support by Brazilian agency CNPq, the PRONEX program, and the use of the infrastructure of the Ion Beam Implantation Laboratory at UFRGS. From the Argentinean side, the authors acknowledge the financial support of the Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at 