Fuel and leasable minerals mined in the United States have historically been subject to federal royalties while locatable minerals have not. In recent years there have been multiple attempts to alter this policy and subject locatable minerals to federal royalties as well; most recently the preliminary 2012 Obama budget included a gross royalty on hard-rock mining on public lands. This paper analyzes the issue of imposing such federal royalties from both a legal and economic perspective. From a legal perspective, it is argued that the state of western property rights precludes royalties on currently extant claims so revenues from a royalty would not be realized for many years. From an economic perspective, it is argued that the effect on revenue would be smaller than one might anticipate due to such a royalty crowding out state levies or encouraging vertical disintegration on the part of mining firms to avoid much of the burden of the royalty.Reform of the “1872 Mining Law,” which forms the basis of the General Mining Law ( The 1872 Mining Law settled a significant problem in its day—the issue of extralateral claims. These are claims located next to a known deposit and/or operating mine. The owner(s) of the extralateral claims would wait until they believed that a miner crossed the boundary line between their claims, and then sued. Contemporary accounts suggest that these lawsuits virtually shut down mining on the Comstock Lode in Nevada where Nevada's future Senator William Stewart was a successful mining attorney. When he got to the Senate, Stewart sponsored mining laws in 1866 and 1872 to clear up the issue of title to subsurface mineral rights, i.e., invalidate extralateral claims. Extralateral claims were only valid if their owner diligently tried to develop them ( The majority of mines that would be impacted by reforming the Mining Law of 1872 engage in so-called “hardrock” mining (as opposed to “softrock” mining, i.e., coal mining, other fuel minerals like oil and gas, and “common variety” minerals like aggregate and industrial minerals e.g., lime, gypsum, and clay). Hardrock minerals are defined here to include non-ferrous metals such as copper, gold, silver, platinum group metals, molybdenum, lithium, etc. These minerals are generally referred to as “locatable” minerals under 30 U.S.C.A. § 22 in that they can be located and claimed following the general guidelines of the General Mining Law of 1872. So-called “common variety” minerals, such as sand, gravel, coal, oil, and gas, are considered “leasable” under the Mineral Leasing Act of 1920 (30 U.S.C.A. Section 201(b)). Proponents of federal mining royalties typically attempt to draw a comparison between leasable and locatable minerals. One simple justification for the distinction between locatable and leasable minerals is that the former are harder to find, and because of this, the discoverer is rewarded for their discovery with ownership. Such an arrangement would arguably tend to encourage economic efficiency, as prospectors for harder-to-find minerals will require higher potential rewards to compensate for the risk involved. Another important distinction between hardrock minerals and both common variety minerals and fuel minerals is that the latter are generally usable commodities at the point of extraction: the quarry, the mine mouth, or the well-head. Hardrock mineral ores usually require significant beneficiation, or processing, after extraction. Additionally, there are geological differences between these types of minerals as well. Leasable minerals like gravel, oil, natural gas, coal, etc., are generally found in horizontal geological structures, like river beds with aggregate, or coal fields, where if one finds a leasable mineral in one place, it is very likely that more of it can be found nearby. The 1872 Mining Law has been criticized for a number of limitations, which can be sorted into two broad categories. First are arguments that the 1872 Mining Law gives primacy to mining operations and largely ignores other concerns such as environmental protection. The second category is fiscal; primarily, that the 1872 Mining Law contains no provisions for federal royalties on minerals mined from federally owned lands, leading to what is perceived both as foregone revenues as well as differential treatment of mining among states, potentially causing a race to the bottom. This argument is bolstered by the “common sense” notion that, because deposits on privately owned land accrue royalties to the owners of the land, deposits on publicly owned land should accrue royalties to the owners of the land as well. There are other specific criticisms that can be leveled but they will generally fall into the categories of either environmental/land use issues or fiscal issues. We will briefly look at the first class of issues, that the General Mining Law of 1872 lacks provisions for environmental protection and that the law gives mining uses priority over all other potential uses of federal lands, before turning to the fiscal issues relating to federal royalties. The criticism that the 1872 General Mining Law lacks environmental protection provisions, while true, is misplaced as other laws have been passed that do address possible degradation of natural and cultural resources. The 1872 General Mining Law simply defines the process by which individuals can acquire and maintain property rights in mineral resources on federally owned land. As possible environmental degradation would occur as a result of the extraction of a resource, rather than the mere ownership of the right to extract said resource, there is no compelling reason that both issues need to be addressed in the same law. More generally, the criticism that the 1872 General Mining Law gives land use priority to mining uses of federal lands ignores the fact that the law has been amended and augmented numerous times by numerous federal statutes (see, for example, the Antiquities Act of 1906, the Clean Water Act of 1972, the Endangered Species Act of 1973, the Federal Land Policy Act of 1976, and so forth) as well as by federal rule making pursuant to these acts (principally CFR 43 3809). It is still true that, There is a significant permitting process that puts the presumption that whichever land use maximizes economic value is the best use of a particular piece of land to serious and open public scrutiny. While such processes may be imperfect, they nonetheless undermine the statutory primacy of mining claims by allowing non-economic issues, such as esthetic or religious concerns, to potentially outweigh purely economic value maximization on a case-by-case basis. Indeed, a significant percentage of U.S. federally owned lands are closed to mineral entry (i.e., staking mining claims) for precisely these reasons. Of the 700+ million acres of federal land administered by the U.S. Bureau of Land Management, 27 percent are closed to mineral entry. If one adds in federal lands administered by other agencies with restricted entry such as national parks, Indian reservations, national monuments, wilderness areas, wetlands, etc., the percentage of federal lands closed to mineral entry or with significant restrictions is around 40 percent ( The criticism that there is no provision for federal royalties in the General Mining Law is the concern upon which this paper will primarily focus. As with the concerns mentioned above, the general premise is also correct insofar as there are no federal royalties on minerals covered under the General Mining Law. This criticism also requires further examination. It should first be noted that the issue over potential federal hardrock mineral royalties is largely symbolic. Nationwide, mining is a relatively small industry. In their report examining the impact of H.R. 2262 in 2007, the Congressional Budget Office estimated the income derived from hardrock minerals removed from federal lands to be approximately $1.0 billion ( Moreover, it would be untenable to enact royalties on already claimed deposits, so any revenues will only be generated from currently unclaimed ore bodies and thus are unlikely to be realized for years, if not decades. The call for a federal royalty ignores the basic definition of a royalty, which is a payment to the owner of a valuable resource whether it is a mineral, a patent, a copyright, etc. When a locatable mineral is found on public land, the discoverer stakes and records a claim and, if done properly, ownership of the mineral is conveyed from the federal government to the discoverer. In other cases the federal government may have conveyed title to another private landowner through, for example, one of the Homestead Acts; in such an instance, a mining company could obtain permission from the landowner to explore and lease the mineral rights with the promise of a royalty if production occurs. The thrust of reform efforts on this issue is to convert the mining claim system to one in which the federal government would retain ownership of mineral rights, like it currently does for leasable minerals. The federal government cannot, however, receive a royalty on property that it does not own, and the federal government no longer owns the mineral rights to previously claimed discoveries. There have been discussions about “clawing back” the minerals rights already conveyed—for example the Hardrock Mining and Reclamation Act of 2007 included a 4% royalty for extant mines with operations permits—but this would clearly be challenged as a taking of private property, as the property rights have already been conveyed. As a result, the discussion of moving to a leasing system is therefore only plausible within the context of future mining claims. Furthermore, the argument that a royalty on future claims would increase government revenues needs to be considered within context of existing government revenues accruing from private mining operations. Governments at the federal, state, and local level are currently taxing individuals and corporations engaged in mining; while the federal government only taxes income, state and local governments utilize a variety of methods of taxation, including income taxes, property taxes and sales and use taxes. We argue that a federal royalty would to some extent “crowd out” some of the currently extant state and local taxes—some revenues would simply shift from state and local governments to the federal government. To address this, we turn to a discussion of the political economy of mineral taxation at the state level. We have attempted to put together a meaningful comparison of state mining taxes for non-ferrous metal mining in the U.S. This task is not as simple as proponents of royalties have claimed; a coalition of environmental lobbying groups (Earthworks, the Mineral Policy Center, and the Sierra Club) put together a “white paper” ( Comparing state taxation of metal mining has difficulties that go beyond the use of terminology like “net” and “gross”. Each state produces a different mix of minerals which, in some cases, they tax differently. For example, in Colorado, molybdenum is taxed differently than other metals. In Utah, beryllium is taxed differently than copper. Each state tends to adapt the tax laws to the economics of the particular mineral produced and the size of the operations in their states. Nevada and Alaska, on the other hand, take more of a “one size fits all” approach to mineral taxation. Gold miners are subject to the same set of statutes and regulations as copper miners, molybdenum miners, geothermal producers, etc. Small producers are given a reduction in tax rates, Further confounding the comparison of the tax treatment of mineral producers among states is the role of other, non-mineral related taxes, in determining the overall tax burden of a mining operation. All states have property taxes on property, plant, and equipment, but rates vary. Most states have corporate income taxes and/or sales and use taxes, and the rates vary among states, and in some cases, local jurisdictions within states. In an effort to address these difficulties, we have taken a hypothetical medium sized gold mine that would be fairly typical of an operation found in Nevada and calculated its tax liabilities if that mine were in various other states. The hypothetical mine produces 250,000 ounces of gold per year which it sells for $1100 per ounce for gross revenue of $275 million. It employs 350 workers with labor costs including benefits and taxes of $36.4 million. Net operating profits are assumed to be $50 million per year. The results for the two states with the highest mining-specific taxes, Montana and Wyoming, are somewhat misleading. In the case of Montana, the state has adopted a relatively negative attitude toward mining in the past decades. Part of this is due to the legacy of mining in the state and its negative perception. In fact, the hypothetical mine used for this example could not be built in Montana because Montana bans the use of cyanide heap leach processing, a gold refining process we assumed for our comparison. Consequently, it is doubtful that any Montana mine would exist to actually pay the amount shown. If someone discovered a gold deposit in Montana they would likely concentrate the ore to increase the grade of the material, and then ship it out of state for final processing. We have included Montana using the same financial model anyway for reasons of comparability. The case of Wyoming is slightly different. The major mining products in Wyoming are coal, uranium, and trona. These products are typically sold at the mouth of the mine without significant processing and, hence, without the operator incurring significant costs. The hypothetical mine model used for this exercise anticipates significant processing and costs after the mined material leaves the mine mouth to maintain the comparability of the results; while these costs are tax deductible in other states, they are not in Wyoming. If the gold deposit that the hypothetical mine is based on actually existed in Wyoming the operators would no doubt adapt to the tax regime. This would be done by selling the ore at the mine mouth without processing to avoid being taxed on the value added to the product from processing. Consequently, if we discount the results for Montana and Wyoming for the reasons above, as a practical matter this leaves Alaska and Nevada as the states with the highest mining-specific taxes for this hypothetical mine. States with the lowest mining-specific tax burdens, California and New Mexico, nonetheless have total tax burdens similar to those of the other states considered because of their reliance on general business and other taxes like corporate income taxes, general property taxes on property, plant and equipment, sales taxes, and other levies. While the total state tax bill for our hypothetical mine is typically between 20% and 30% of net operating profit, it is illustrative to note that the specific composition of the tax varies considerably from state to state. This observation is suggestive of the counterintuitive result that enacting a federal hardrock royalty may have a relatively small effect on the total tax bill a mine would have to pay; a royalty would simply impel state and local governments to reduce state taxes paid by each mining company. While counterintuitive, this argument is based on the logics of fiscal federalism and fiscal decentralization. If we assume a single-government system, for any given mining endeavor, the government can view the taxable income as fixed and must choose a level of taxes that maximizes government revenue while generating enough profits to keep the mine in business and encouraging exploration by prospective miners. Once this level of taxation is determined by the government, the specific form that these taxes take is essentially zero-sum. Increases in one form of taxation must be offset by decreases in another; assuming the government has already determined the overall level of taxation, failure to offset increases in this manner will ultimately risk lost future revenues due to mining capital flowing to other industries or reduced future exploration ( Within a federal system, economic units are taxed by multiple levels of government. This has the potential to generate both horizontal and vertical fiscal externalities. The horizontal externality is more well-known and refers to governments at the same level competing against each other to attract firms. This form of competition is expected to push tax rates down and is reliant upon the mobility of economic units. The vertical externality is less often discussed and arises due to a commons problem; when multiple governments levy a tax on the same base, governments at each level are expected to fail to fully take into account the effect that their tax will have on the ability of governments at other levels to generate revenue. Vertical externalities have a theoretically ambiguous effect on tax rates ( The imposition of a royalty will, except in the limiting case that the royalty has zero excess burden, discourage production. If government revenues come from extracting mineral rents rather than taxing general business income, the impact of the tax will be neutral on economic activity. There is a significant body of literature on the design of mining taxes for nonrenewable resources (see In the case of the proposed federal hardrock royalty, the theoretical effect on state tax rates is ambiguous, though we suspect that a royalty is more like the broad based taxes above as it is essentially a gross proceeds tax and will lead to reductions in state tax rates. Holding state and local tax rates constant, if a federal royalty leads to a decrease in production, state and local governments will receive less revenue from mining activity. State and local authorities could increase taxes on mining to make up for the lost revenues. However, if these governments place any weight on minimizing the total burden of taxation, within a multi-tax setting we would expect them to respond with not only an increase in tax rates on mining but also an increase in other rates to make up for the lost revenues. The typical argument against the fiscal federalism/fiscal decentralization position is that competition among states will result in a “race to the bottom.” One with this perspective would argue that states will have chosen a level of taxation that is less than optimal, for fear that otherwise mining companies will choose to operate in different jurisdictions; state governments are forced to “leave money on the table” when determining how much to tax mines (though this argument applies to any business endeavor, not just mining) out of concern that the company will flee to a neighboring, more favorable, jurisdiction. The potential for this to occur would justify the harmonization (if not centralization) of taxation as a means of avoiding this form of competition. This argument has merit in the case of processing, but much less so in the case of mineral extraction, as the race to the bottom argument is dependent upon the ability of firms/operations to relocate. While the capital and mining expertise are mobile, the mines themselves are inherently immobile. If a neighboring state or a foreign country has a more favorable set of regulations or taxes, there is little a mining company can do as the ore body has a fixed location. In some cases it is economically feasible to ship unprocessed ore hundreds of miles for processing, and concentrated ores are shipped around the globe for refinement—this is commonly done now to take advantage of more efficient refining technologies at other locations—but this is an industrial process, not a mining process. The fact that mining is in fact two separate processes—extraction and refining—further reduces the ability of a royalty of the type under consideration (gross royalty) to generate funds for the federal government. Mining companies will seek to minimize the value of the tax base at the time of the taxable event, for example through transfer pricing ( The nature of property rights in the west is highly fragmented; it is possible that one party could own surface rights, another party might own mineral rights, while a third party owns water rights to the same piece of property. Situations such as these have historically created multiple local stakeholders at odds with one another. In recent decades groups with political clout at the federal level, such as environmental lobbies, have entered the fray, moving these land use battles out of the statehouses and on to Capitol Hill and causing political commentators to lose sight of the purpose and function of the fragmentation of rights. In isolation, the laws and institutions that have generated the current state of western property rights, particularly with regard to locatable mineral rights, seem to be antiquated and at odds with the laws regarding other sorts of mineral rights. It is not surprising, then, that stakeholders at odds with mining interests are rallying around this seeming incongruity as a means by which they can claim that their concerns are motivated by advancing the public interest. Most traditional analyses of mineral taxation have taken the form of either a theoretical focus on the taxation of mineral rents or an empirical analysis of mineral industry tax regimes. Both of these approaches yield useful insights on policies related to mineral industries. For example, recent efforts to apply these principles include efforts in Australia to institute the Minerals Resource Rent Tax and the Resource Super Profit Tax. These initiatives reflect an attempt to extract mineral rents as opposed to general business income because of the neutral impact of rent taxation on economic activity. While the traditional literature on mineral taxation is typically descriptive of the economic impact of various forms of taxation, our efforts take a different approach. We are attempting to fuse economic theory with political analysis and create a theory that is descriptive of both how the political process influences the forms of taxation that are ultimately enacted and how mining companies will ultimately respond to those taxes. In the case of a benevolent government with perfect knowledge, there would be no need for this distinction; an ideal rent tax could be formulated by economists and enacted by governments. If either assumption is relaxed, then divergences between optimal policy and actual policy should be expected. In countries with highly diversified economies, such as the U.S., concerns about taxation of mineral industries are simply not a matter of significant national debate. At a national level, mining companies are taxed like all other corporations. When it comes to individual states, however, mineral taxation regimes may be considered significant public policy issues, as in the case of Alaska with large petroleum and other mineral resources, or Nevada with large resources of metals. However, in more populous states with more diverse economies like California, Arizona, or Colorado, mineral taxation is not a particularly salient issue. The result is that state mineral taxation reflects a more diverse set of political interests; while states with large mining sectors might be expected to have tax laws that consider the importance of taxing mineral rents, we doubt that such attention is paid in the states with more diverse economies. It is against this backdrop that we have tried to shed light on two separate, but related topics: the 1872 Mining Law controversy and state taxation of hardrock minerals. As mentioned above, federal land law in general has created a complex system of property rights. In our view, this dysfunctional land/resource holding system has created an unrealistic debate about federal royalties on mineral resources. While all other countries consider minerals as “national patrimony” and state property, the U.S. legal tradition has always considered locatable minerals as private property. In the eastern U.S. these minerals generally belong to the owners of the surface who own the land in “fee simple title”. In the western U.S. some land is owned in “fee” with mineral rights, but a majority of the land in the inter-mountain west, i.e., between the Rocky and the Sierra Nevada mountains, is owned by the federal government. Mineral rights to these lands are owned by private claimants ( Moreover, we argue that the current policy discussion is focused squarely on federal royalties on minerals produced on federal lands and does not adequately account for the interaction between these proposed federal royalties and the current state of taxation at lower levels of government or the likely effect on the organization of mining companies. State and local governments will adapt their taxation of minerals to the nature of the hardrock mining industry in their states. Likewise, hardrock miners will adapt their operating procedures to the tax regime in the state where the minerals are located. This process will generate an equilibrium level of effective taxation that should be roughly similar across the states in which mining occurs. Although state tax systems may look quite different in terms of mining specific and general business taxes, our “apples to apples” comparison shows that the overall tax burden varies very little. The imposition of a royalty should have a less than anticipated effect on the equilibrium level of government revenue accruing from mining activity, though the specific forms those revenues take would undoubtedly change. In conclusion, we believe that the arguments in favor of federal royalties ignore the actual constellation of property rights in western states, fail to take into account the current state and local tax systems in the west, and disregard the likely producer response to the imposition of a royalty. These factors, when combined with the underlying economics of the industry, imply that a royalty will have a much smaller than anticipated effect in terms of revenue generation and may reduce the efficiency of the mining industry in the Western US.