Gases show promise as an alternative to water-based fracturing fluids because they are non-damaging to water-sensitive formations, show some potential to create complex fracture networks, flow back to the well rapidly after treatment, and deliver some environmental benefits. However, the ability of gases to transport proppant has been questioned due to their relatively low viscosity and density. The fracturing then proppant-carrying capacity of various gases is investigated to determine the form and function of the emplaced proppant pack. First, fracture propagation and proppant transport driven by several commonly-used pure gases (CO2, liquified petroleum gas, ethane, and N2) is simulated and compared against slickwater fracturing – generally identifying inferior reach and functionality. Several methods are then investigated to improve the proppant-carrying capacity of the pure gases. Results show that, compared with slickwater, gases create shorter and narrower fractures and carry proppant shorter distances due to their lower viscosity and faster leak-off. Among the gases examined in this study, liquified petroleum gas and CO2 return the deepest proppant penetration along the fracture, followed by ethane, and with N2 unable to carry proppant into the fracture due to the resulting narrow fracture. However, elevating injection rate of gases could improve their fracture-inducing potential and proppant-transport capability to a level competitive with that of slickwater. A near-uniform proppant distribution may be achieved by using a gelled gas, with an approximately two order-of-magnitude enhancement in viscosity, or a foam-based fluid with a high quality. The fracture length may also be extended by limiting leak-off due to the increased viscosity. Moreover, ultra-light-weight proppants (ULWPs) perform better with gases than commonly-used sands in terms of uniformity of distribution, due to decelerated proppant settling. Well performance is improved significantly by fracturing with gelled gases or foams instead of pure gases or by pumping ULWPs instead of normal sands.Hydraulic fracturing is one of the most effective and widely-used methods to stimulate production from unconventional oil and gas reservoirs exhibiting micro- and nano-Darcy native permeability. This requires the pumping of highly-pressurized fracturing fluids into wells to create new fractures or reactivate pre-existing natural fractures in the hydrocarbon-bearing reservoir. A proppant pad is introduced later in the pumping and fracture-driving sequence to prop open the complex network of fractures when pumping ultimately stops and fractures deflate under the Slickwater, composed of water and a small amount of friction reducer, is currently the most popular fracturing fluid used in commercial production of unconventional oil and gas. This is due to its low cost, ready availability, as well as its ability to generate complex fracture networks with good fracture containment and limited gel damage within fractures ( A few waterless fracturing technologies have been developed and field tested during the past several decades, including oil-based fracturing, explosive and propellant fracturing, and gas fracturing ( Various methods can be used to enhance the proppant-carrying capacity of gases. In some cases, a gas is gelled before fracturing to achieve a high and consistent viscosity, which is able to evenly distribute the proppant in fractures ( Precise prediction of fracture geometries remains a significant challenge due to the extraordinary complexity of active processes. Most “traditional” hydraulic fracturing models have been developed based on the linear elastic fracture mechanics with simple 2D or pseudo-3D geometry ( In this study, we investigate the ability of different gases to transport proppant in a propagating blade-shaped fracture and then evaluate the resulting gas production rates using previously developed deformation-transport-closure models ( We explore fracture propagation coupled with proppant transport using an internally consistent model satisfying the elastic stress distribution with transport of a rheological mixture of fracturing fluid and proppant ( Fracture propagation is formulated based on the PKN-formalism ( The fracture width profile is given by The flux of the fluid/slurry within the fracture can be defined by Poiseuille's law as By considering fracture inflation, fluid flow and fluid leak-off, the local fluid mass balance equation is written as The fracture propagation model is defined by Eqs. The 2D mass balance equation for the proppant is written as Validations of fracture propagation and proppant transport are described separately ( During shut-in, flowback and production stages, decreasing hydraulic pressure allows the fracture to deflate and to compact the encased proppant pack. A fracture closure model is then used to follow the evolution of the residual aperture profile and conductivity of fractures partially filled with proppant packs as the hydraulic pressure decreases at the conclusion of pumping ( Based on linear elasticity, the residual width profile Note that the integral in Eq. The net stress applied on the fracture walls Assuming that the proppant pack has a constant compressibility For the unpropped fracture regions, roughness of fracture walls controls the closure of the two elastic surfaces in contact. The contact stress of the asperity can be described as ( Based on elastic Hertzian contact theory, the depth of proppant embedment can be written as Given the fluid pressure distribution within the fracture Eqs. Sections We perform a series of numerical simulations on fracture propagation and proppant transport driven by various gases, including CO Consider a formation at a depth of ~1000 m where the minimum Permeability, During the first 1000 s, pure fluid without proppant is injected to initiate and propagate the fracture as a pre-pad fluid. Proppant is then introduced to form a mix of fracturing fluid and proppant particles until 2000s, at which time pumping stops. The injection rate  Simulations of fracturing with various gases are then performed, where all the input parameters are kept the same as those for the case of slickwater fracturing - excepting the fluid properties ( Gases are sometimes gelled to achieve a high and consistent viscosity, to improve the proppant-carrying capacity and to control fluid leak-off. We explore the case of fracturing with gelled CO In this simulation, the dynamic viscosity of the gelled CO Foams are also a good candidate for fracturing unconventional formations because of their capacity to suspend proppant but with intrinsically low water contents. As stated previously, foams normally contain both liquid and gas phases with the two phases combined by applying a suitable foaming surfactant. The liquid phase could be water, acid, or alcohol, while the gas phase is usually N In this study, a polymer-free N Foam density can be calculated by Typically, foam quality is in the range of ~50%–95%, and the fracturing fluid is considered as energized if the percentage of the gas volume is below 50% ( Ultra-light-weight proppants (ULWPs) are proppants with a low density, relative to normal sands (S.G. ~2.7) and relative to the fracturing fluid. These proppants are fabricated by coating strong materials with light materials, creating significant porosity inside hard materials, or directly using polymers as raw material for the proppant ( At the conclusion of pumping, fluid pressure decreases, enabling hydraulic fractures to close and compact the encased proppant packs. We define fracture closure for all 11 cases discussed in Sections The residual apertures,  Fracture propagation and proppant transport driven by commonly-used pure gases (CO During fluid-driven fracturing, the gases are principally in their liquid or supercritical phases. Relative to slickwater, they exhibit lower viscosities and densities, which in turn results in faster leak-off rates and more severe proppant settling. Consequently, at the same injection rate and at the conclusion of pumping, the gas-driven fractures are shorter and narrower and encase shorter proppant banks than the slickwater-driven fractures. Among the gases examined in this study, LPG and CO Viscosity of gases can be enhanced by adding trace amounts of “thickeners” to form a gelled system or by mixing a gas with a liquid to obtain a foam-based fluid. The enhanced viscosity not only reduces the leak-off rate, which increases both the length and width of the fracture, but also improves the proppant-carrying capacity of the gases by slowing proppant settling. The proppant carried by gelled CO Reservoir simulations show that fracturing with pure gases returns lower production rates than with slickwater when the fluids are injected at the same rate. This inefficiency of gas fracturing can be compensated by elevating the injection rate during operation, which may be capable of increasing the resulting production rate to a magnitude comparable to that of slickwater fracturing or even higher. Well performance is improved significantly by fracturing with gelled gases or foams instead of pure gases or by pumping ULWPs instead of normal sands. Among them, the low-quality foam returns the highest production rate, while the ULWP returns the lowest. This is possibly because a long fracture with relatively low conductivity favors increased flow over the case of a short fracture with high conductivity for the ultra-low-permeability reservoir.  The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. The following is the Supplementary data to this article: Supplementary data to this article can be found online at