X-ray diffraction (XRD) patterns of the Gedikler (Eşme-Uşak) bentonite samples show the presence of silica polymorphs which have a characteristic XRD reflection at ca. 4.04Å. Opaline silica polymorphs, opal-C and opal-CT, can be misidentified as α-cristobalite using standard XRD patterns of the raw bentonite samples. In order to distinguish opaline silica polymorphs from α-cristobalite, NaOH dissolution (0.5M and 10min.), phosphoric acid (H3PO4) digestion (240°C, 15min) and thermal treatment (1150°C, 48h) were applied. After these applications, samples were examined by XRD and Fourier transform infrared (FTIR) spectroscopy. It was observed that the 101 diffraction maximum at ca. 4.04Å almost disappeared after NaOH dissolution and phosphoric acid digestion. Moreover, the crystal order and the diffraction maxima at 4.04Å increased dramatically after thermal treatment. Besides, FTIR spectra of the samples are similar to untreated ones after NaOH dissolution, whereas they are comparable to opal-A after phosphoric acid digestion. Furthermore, the phosphoric acid digestion residues, which consist mainly of opal-A, were transformed to α-cristobalite during the thermal treatment. Based on these studies, it was concluded that the Gedikler bentonite samples contain mainly opal-CT, opal-A and minor amounts of α-cristobalite. The result of the phosphoric acid digestion method and the NaOH dissolution method yielded comparable results.Bentonite is a clay composed primarily of smectite, which usually coexists with non-clay minerals and trace organic matter ( The silica polymorphs commonly reported in bentonites are quartz, opal-A, opal C, opal-CT, and α-cristobalite ( Bentonite deposits are widespread in Western Anatolia, Turkey. A typical deposit is the Gedikler bentonite, which aside from smectite, contains kaolinite, opal-CT and minor amounts of jarosite, quartz and K-feldspar ( The raw bentonite samples used in this investigation were taken from the Gedikler (Eşme-Uşak, Turkey) area. Air dried samples were ground finer than 100 Three different methods were applied to distinguish the silica polymorphs, namely NaOH dissolution ( The NaOH dissolution method was applied to the raw samples to dissolve opaline silica polymorphs such as opal-A, opal-CT and opal-C. The samples were dried overnight at 105 H In order to determine the different opaline silica polymorphs, thermal treatment was used in addition to the chemical methods. Also, thermal treatment was applied to the H Before and after the treatments of phosphoric acid digestion, NaOH dissolution and thermal treatment, the XRD patterns of the samples were obtained. The XRD patterns of the samples were obtained with a Rigaku Ultima IV X-ray diffractometer using CuK A representative XRD pattern of the raw bentonite sample is shown in The results obtained from the applied treatments are listed in Representative XRD patterns of the raw and NaOH treated sample are given in In experiments with the 0.5 Representative XRD patterns of the raw and phosphoric acid digested sample are given in In samples treated with the NIOSH 7601 method, the FWHM values of ca. 4.04 Opaline silica polymorphs produce XRD patterns characterized by broad, low intensity peaks affected by heating because they are hydrated ( The FWHM values of all residual peaks at ca. 4.04 The H The XRD results of the samples G2 and its residues obtained after treatment by NaOH, phosphoric acid and thermal treatment are listed in Powder XRD is applied only to phases with long range order ( The FTIR spectrum of the untreated sample clearly indicates opal-CT (3465, 1637, 1200, 795, 621, 557, 494 The effects of the NaOH dissolution, H In the H The effect of the heating on the FTIR spectrum of the H Silica polymorphs with characteristic XRD reflection centered at ca. 4.04 Sincere thanks are due to George Christidis, Associate Editor, and reviewers for their detailed reviews that led to substantial improvements in this paper.