Although brazing is commonly regarded as a joining technique, the following chapter will introduce possibilities for using brazing as a coating technology, which offers new and unique solutions for applying functional coatings to surfaces. Details are presented of some fundamental aspects of this coating technology with regard to processes, metallurgical considerations and mechanical properties, followed by the various methods for producing coatings by brazing. Examples of applications are explained with regard to the various coating techniques. The chapter gives an overview of the major technologies of coating by brazing and demonstrates that this relatively unknown coating technique offers complementary possibilities to other well-established coating processes. It is shown that the specific possibilities of coating by brazing create a niche where this coating technique can offer superior solutions.Brazing is commonly regarded as a joining technique. Due to its specific capabilities, however, brazing offers new and unique solutions to apply functional coatings to surfaces of components, working under severe conditions of mechanical, thermal or chemical load or a combination thereof. By forming a metallurgical bond, brazing offers the possibility of producing joints of high strength. Applied as a coating technique, this results in high bond strength for the coating. In contrast to most welding processes, brazing also allows materials that belong to very different groups to be combined and joined. By using powder metallurgical methods, brazing can produce coatings for many different combinations of materials, tailored to specific applications. This chapter will introduce solutions with blends of different metals, as well as between metals and carbides or even – using special filler metals – between metals and ceramic materials including diamond and cubic boron nitride. Following some fundamentals of brazing, with special regard to coating technology, there will be an introduction to the different methods for using brazing as a coating technique. This starts from the well-known cladding of surfaces with solid segments of cemented carbides, using filler metal and flux. It will also cover methods for manufacturing and applying abrasive surfaces, consisting of hard and sharp-edged particles in a filler metal matrix. The application of pre-sintered The application of such coatings will be explained for surface restoration and wear protection and for protection against corrosion and oxidation. In plant engineering, coatings of very specific properties may be required, e.g. self-lubricating coatings, coatings of defined porosity or coatings with characteristic physical or chemical properties. Examples of such applications will be introduced. Almost all of the coatings produced by brazing consist of two or even more constituents, typically applied in the form of powders or products manufactured from powders. At least one of these constituents remains solid during the brazing process, while at least one of the other constituents forms a liquid phase at the brazing temperature. The free spaces between the non-melting powder particles form capillary gaps for the melting constituents. The melting constituent is regarded as the brazing filler metal and may be heat treated above its liquidus temperature or just between the solidus and liquidus. At the brazing temperature the filler metal melts and wets the non-melting constituent, to form a dense layer of coating material. At the same time, some excess of filler metal wets the substrate to be coated and forms a strong bond between the coating and the surface of the substrate. As a result, the applied material forms a uniform surface layer of constant thickness and well-defined contours ( In the molten stage, the filler metal may dissolve considerable amounts of the non-melting material, depending on the solubility of this material in the filler metal. Also, diffusion of elements of the filler metal into the non-melting powder and into the substrate occurs. The intensity of such reactions is controlled by the metallurgical composition of the system, the specific surface area of the non-melting powder and the process parameters of the brazing process. It is increased by a large contact area between filler metal and the non-melting powder surface. Also, narrow gaps between the solid powder particles form short diffusion paths and thereby increase the diffusion flux according to Fick’s first law of diffusion. This contributes to a more intense reaction as well. The effect may be detrimental with regard to the required coating properties. An excess of liquid phase by molten material and subsequent deformation or even flow off of the coating, for example, may lead to scrap. The ratio of solid phase and liquid phase, therefore, has to be well balanced, to allow Also, metallurgical incompatibilities could result in brittle phase formation and could lead to unacceptable cracks in the surface. For most applications, however, diffusion processes between filler metal and the non-melting constituent are an important prerequisite for obtaining the required properties of the coatings. An example of such an application will be given in Besides the two constituents of a brazed coating as mentioned above, further additives may be applied to a coating system, either to obtain specific properties of the surface or to enhance wetting of the filler metal with the non-melting constituents. As an example, the reactive element Ti may be added, to allow wetting of ceramic materials like cubic boron nitride (CBN) or diamond grit. When applying a coating to a surface, it is an objective for almost any application to obtain coatings of low porosity. Any volume of powder, however, is a packing of particles and consists of solid particles and of free spaces between these particles. The ratio of the volume of particles versus the total volume of the bulk material is called the packing density. The value of the packing density depends, among other things, very much on the packing order of the particles, the shape of the particles and their grain size distribution. To obtain dense brazed coatings, the On the other hand, a carefully selected grain size distribution can contribute to increased packing density. Adding a second fraction of non-melting particles may increase packing density considerably. The maximum size of such a second fraction is obtained when the particles of the fine fraction fit into the free spaces of the first fraction. Under the condition of spherical-shaped particles, the maximum diameter of a second fraction of powder added to the first fraction can be calculated as given in The brazing process applied as a coating technique aims to transform a porous packing of particles into a dense layer of compound material with minimum porosity. If the coating material is a homogeneous mix of non-melting material and filler metal ( Due to the many different material combinations that can be produced by brazing as a coating process, it is not possible to give general values of strength, as might be the case for other coating processes. There are, however, some general considerations with regard to bond strength between coating and substrate. Coating by brazing forms a bond between materials at the interface. The bond strength is comparable to the strength of brazed joints in conventional brazing. If the coating material and base material of the substrate have similar physical and mechanical properties, the strength of the joint can be close to the strength of the base material. With dissimilar materials the discontinuities at the interface have a major influence on the strength values. In particular different coefficients of thermal expansion (CTEs) can cause high internal stresses in the coating. In the worst case, such stresses may be so high that the coating may chip off completely due to crack propagation parallel to the interface zone. This section will explain the different variations of coating techniques available to produce coatings by brazing. This coating technique can be regarded as a joining technique as well as a coating technique and thereby forms the link between both. Segments, typically cemented carbide plates or other wear-resistant materials, are brazed to the surface of a component. Applications are found in the tools industry, mining industry, wood and paper processing and minerals processing. Brazing provides the means of joining with the highest strength and thermal stability.  Selection of low-melting filler metals results in a small temperature interval between the brazing temperature and room temperature and thereby limits the total thermal contraction as a result of the temperature difference. For this reason, low-melting silver-based filler metals are frequently used to braze cemented carbide plates. An additional advantage of this group of filler metals is their high ductility and relatively low yield strength. The CTE stresses can be limited very effectively by plastic deformation of the filler metal layer between substrate and coating. The best results for stress reduction are obtained if the thickness of the ductile filler metal layer is as high as possible. In capillary brazing, however, the brazing gap is limited to 0.2–0.3 The brazing process can also be modified to lower the level of CTE mismatch stresses. Low cooling rates down from the brazing temperature leave sufficient time for the steel substrate to undergo plastic deformation at elevated temperatures. Such creep effects contribute to a decrease of stress levels in the joint. For some critical applications with components of larger surface area, it has even been known to stretch the steel part during cooling or in a following heat-treating process by mechanical straightening. Such straightening induces tensile stresses in the steel part, which lead to plastic deformation of the steel, while the cemented carbide part is under compressive stresses. As cemented carbides can withstand compressive stresses much better than tensile stresses, at the end of such a straightening process the internal stresses are effectively lowered. Large surface areas, such as carbide-plated industrial paper knives of length 1000 For application under extreme conditions of wear, segments of polycrystalline diamond (PCD), chemical vapour deposited diamond or boron nitride with a backing of cemented carbides are selected. Such applications can be found in fibreboard and metal matrix composite machining and in oil and gas drilling. For oil and gas drilling the highest reliability and strength are required, as replacement of the cutter head during drilling may incur immense costs. Besides the commonly known silver- and copper-based filler metals, special gold containing brazes, When surfaces with high friction or for abrasive tools are required, brazing offers a superior solution. Hard particles produced from crushed cemented carbides or from ceramic material chips are embedded in a metal matrix and bonded to the surface of a component by brazing. The metal matrix is formed by a brazing filler metal. To produce such coatings, the surface of the tool or component is initially coated with an adhesive layer. This could be a special glue as well as a suitable brazing paste, which offers sufficient adhesion. The carbide particles are then sprinkled onto the adhesive surface. Some of the applied particles stick to the surface, while an excess of material, which has not bonded, can be separated from the part by gravity. If not applied with the paste, a well-adjusted quantity of filler metal is then added to the surface. Filler metals are selected from copper-based, copper–tin, nickel or silver–copper alloys. In a brazing process under protective atmosphere or in a vacuum, the filler metal melts, wets the carbide particles and forms a bond with the substrate. As the joint between the materials is a strong material bond, the particles do not need to Applications of abrasive surfaces are found in the tooling industry. Such tools are used for grinding or cutting operations. Besides tungsten carbide, other hard particles may be used for abrasive tools. If so-called active elements like Ti or Zr are added to the filler metals, these filler metals will even wet ceramic materials under suitable conditions of brazing atmosphere and temperature. Cubic boron nitride as well as diamond grit can be used to produce tools for grinding extremely hard materials. Gas turbine components require high reliability under service conditions of an elevated temperature, corrosive attack and high mechanical load. Blades and vanes of gas turbines for stationary use as well as for aircraft engine applications, After a certain time under service conditions, these components show damage such as cracks, pitting and material loss. Due to high costs, reliable repair methods are required so that the worn components can be reused. The restored part should perform as reliably as a new component. As most welding techniques would damage the structure of these high-performance materials, the best solution to repair worn blades and vanes is offered by brazing techniques. More detailed information is given by A proven solution for repairing worn gas turbine components is the application of pre-sintered preforms. Mixtures of powders with a similar composition as the base metal (the metal matrix powder) and a second powder, a so-called diffusion braze, are processed in combination with organic binders, to bring the mixed powders into the form of a sheet or tape of defined thickness. Uniaxial pressure is applied to the green tape, to obtain a high green density. Sintering under a controlled atmosphere will form a metal sheet material from these tapes. The sintering process is performed as liquid phase sintering at temperatures close to the liquidus temperature of the filler metal. Typically diffusion brazes contain boron, which In a second step, the resulting metal sheets can be machined into the required shape.  Besides pre-sintered sheets, another technique is applied successfully to restore worn surfaces of turbine components. A blend of base metal powder and filler metal powder is processed together with suitable polymers, to form a flexible mat material. There are many different compositions of base metal and filler metal in use; an overview of common compositions and combinations can be found in The brazing cycle comprises several steps. In the first step, the binder is carefully decomposed by thermal debindering at temperatures up to approximately 600 During liquid phase sintering, the density of the coating increases to almost full density. This requires shrinkage of the randomly packed powder structure by about 40%. Shrinkage is a three-dimensional process and would lead to dimensional changes of the preformed tape. For coating purposes, however, it is preferable to allow shrinkage only in the direction perpendicular to the surface, while the other dimensions should remain stable. This can be realised to a major Wear protection is a major application of coating processes by brazing. Surfaces with very well-defined properties and precise contours close to the final dimensions can be obtained. This reduces the requirement for expensive machining of difficult-to-machine wear-resistant coating materials. Unlike the surface restoration of turbine components, the non-melting phase is usually a type of carbide of metallic nature. While tungsten carbides WC and W2C are most common, other carbides are also used, such as chromium carbide, titanium carbide or vanadium carbide. Filler metals are mainly nickel based, but also a group of low-melting iron-based alloys or even copper-based filler metals of high ductility can be used, depending on the requirements of the application ( Except for the wetting process, there should not be too much diffusion or alloying between the carbides and the metal matrix, as such effects would lead to the formation of brittle phases, e.g. eta carbides. The conditions for a brazing process with carbide-containing systems therefore have to be modified. Brazing temperatures should be as low as possible while still allowing proper wetting and flow of the filler metal, and the time at the brazing temperature should be short in order to avoid excessive alloying. These metallurgical requirements are in contrast with the requirement to obtain low porosity in liquid phase sintering. To overcome this problem, a process with two or more layers has been developed. With multi-layer polymer bond tapes, the filler metal constituent is separated from the carbides in the tape. This leads to a system in which a pure carbide layer mat of high packing density is formed. By simple cutting or stamping operations, this carbide mat can be easily brought into the desired geometry. The thickness of such a layer varies between 0.5 The carbide mat is attached to the surface that requires protection, using a glue of adapted composition. On top of this first layer of the pure carbide mat a second congruent layer is applied, which consists of only filler metal powder. The quantity of the filler metal supply is controlled by the thickness of this second layer in relation to the thickness of the carbide mat.  As the packing density of the carbides is already at the maximum of up to 70 As an example of a coating close to the final contour, Due to its ability to produce coatings of precise contours, coating by brazing may even be used as a forming process. Multi-layer tapes also allow the production of coatings of different layers with specific properties. A buffer layer of high ductility and low coefficient of thermal The application of base metal and filler metal layers using tapes offers very precise application of coating materials from the aspect of quantity and geometry as well as creating high-performance coatings with regard to material properties. For certain applications, however, this is not required. A simple but reliable process may be required instead, which mass produces wear parts at low cost. Again, coating by brazing offers an economic solution. The protective layers can be applied by dipping the wear parts into slurry, composed of filler metal and carbides in a liquid binder. Such slurries typically consist of approximately 20 The viscous binder of the slurry is intended to keep the metal and carbide particles in a homogeneous distribution so they stick to the surface of the wear part after application. Such binders consist of a solvent, a resin or polymer as a thickener and rheological additives. The additives may improve the anti-settling behaviour of the solid particles, avoid sagging of the applied slurry coating or support wetting of the liquid slurry on the surface of the wear part. After drying, additional additives may contribute to enhanced adhesion of the applied coatings on the surface and to improved handling properties in the green state. All ingredients of such binders have to be selected in such a way as not to disturb the brazing process or to have any detrimental effect on the furnace from evaporating decomposition products. In the coating process, the part is dipped into the slurry. Depending on the viscous properties of the slurry and its wetting properties on the steel surface, a layer of a certain thickness is deposited onto the part. In the next step, the solvent is dried, which is mainly done at elevated temperature in an air oven. Finally, the dried parts are placed in a brazing furnace under a protective atmosphere, where the polymers of the binder decompose. This degradation of the binder polymers happens at temperatures up to approximately 500 Applications of such coatings are found in agricultural products or equipment for mechanical processing equipment. Filler metals and carbides in an organic binder can also be deposited onto the surface of wear parts by spray processes. Suitable slurries with homogeneous and finely dispersed particles with a narrow grain size distribution are also called suspensions. These suspensions for spray application are modified to have low viscosity under high shear rates but at the same time a high viscosity and yield point at low shear rates. Such rheological behaviour is called structural viscosity. It allows the slurries to be deposited in a spray process with high shear rates using a conventional spray gun and at ambient temperature ( This technology produces coatings of 0.05 to 0.3  After deposition of the suspension layer and after drying, the coated parts are brazed under protective atmosphere or in a vacuum furnace. The resulting layers show very low porosity (<  Another specific advantage of a spray coated and brazed layer is shown in Sprayed coatings of higher thickness, up to 2.5 Successful investigations have demonstrated that suspension coatings can also be brazed using induction ( Besides wear and corrosion protection, other requirements may be met by functional coatings. High friction surfaces improve safety by preventing slips and are useful for improving the grip of handling equipment. For such applications, surfaces can be applied as shown in Unlike high-friction surfaces, coatings with embedded solid lubricants are capable of optimising the tribological behaviour of bearing surfaces and contributing to low friction and wear. Self-lubricating surfaces can be produced, using polymer bond mats with graphite inclusions. Nuclear fusion research requires an ultra-high vacuum (UHV) of less than 10 