The microstructure of the cladded layers consisted of carbide particles and primary Fe3C blades in pearlite-ledeburite matrix. The addition of V into the cladded layer increased the volume percentage of carbide particles and led to the formation of relatively fine (Ti,V)C complex carbides with uniform distribution in the matrix, while the volume percentage of the primary Fe3C phase decreased. With increasing the weight percentage of V in the cladding layers, the microhardness and wear resistance of the cladding layers increased which was due to the increase in volume percentage of (Ti,V)C complex carbides and the strengthening effect of the matrix by V. The addition of V up to 5 wt.% to the two passes Fe-Ti-C cladding layer increased the hardness from 51 to 62 HRC. The wear weight loss decreased by about 60%. The predominant wear mechanisms of the cladded samples were separation of carbides and adhesive wear. In the cladded layer containing higher vanadium content, the separation of carbides decreased and lower adhesive wear was seen.The applying of hard surface layers using welding methods such as shielded metal arc welding (SMAW), plasma arc welding (PAW), oxyacetylene welding (OAW) and gas tungsten arc welding (GTAW) is used in wide range of industrial applications to control wear and corrosion. In surface treatments, usually a proper powder and a thin surface layer of substrate melt simultaneous and rapidly solidify to produce compact coating with good metallurgical bonding to overcome surface degradation mechanisms. Wear is one of the most important degradation mechanisms of materials. Wear resistance of materials is a result of suitable combination of hardness and toughness. By adding hard powder particles to a soft matrix (composites) the wear resistance can be improved. In this regard, when, carbide particles distribute uniformly throughout the weld metal, the toughness of the weld metal considerably increases. Some of the strong carbide formers elements such as Nb, Ti, V and Zr can react with carbon and consume it, results in increase in toughness by decreasing the carbon content of the matrix. With regarding the mentioned studies, it is clear that there are several investigations about the cladding of carbon steels with Fe-Cr-C-M alloys (M = Ti, V, Nb, …), but there is no investigation about the Fe-Ti-C-M alloy layers. Also, Hardfacing by welding is used in different industries, such as nuclear and steam power plants, agriculture machines, pressure vessels, and even in railways ( AISI 1045 carbon steel with dimensions of 100⨯50⨯10 mm The weight percentages of C and Ti elemental powders were constant in all powder mixtures and the weight percentages of V and Fe were variable. In order to creating uniform powder mixture, the milling process was carried out in a planetary ball mill for 2 h. The rotation speed of the vial and ball to powder weight ratio were fixed 600 rpm and 10:1, respectively. To reduce the oxidation of the powder mixture during milling, Ar inert gas was used in the vial. The obtained uniform powders were pressed in a metallic mold with dimensions of 60⨯15⨯2 mm In order to evaluate of the microstructure of the samples, metallography techniques were used. Samples were prepared by grinding successively in 60, 100, 220, 400, 600, 800, 1000, 1500, 2000, 2500, and 3000 grade emery papers and polishing by alumina solution to remove the scratches. The etching process was done with solution consists of 2 ml nitric acid, 1 ml hydrofluoric acid and 97 ml distilled water. The chemical compositions of the cladding layers was obtained using optical emission spectroscopy (OES) analysis with Foundry-Master PRO model. Phase and microstructural evaluations of the cladded layers were done by X-ray diffraction (XRD) analysis in a PHILIPS PW3040 machine with Cu k     In  In   The XRD patterns of all cladded layers are presented in By increasing V content in the deposited layers, this element consumes C and less Fe In this section, first, hardness and then microhardness results are discussed. The hardness results of the samples indicated that with increasing V content in the two passes deposited layer up to 5 wt.% the hardness increased from 42 to 62 HRC owing to increase in volume percentage of carbides in higher V content and also the formation of complex carbides ((Ti,V)C)).  The results of reciprocal wear test of the samples are presented in    In all deposited layers the microstructure contained carbide particles and proeutectic Fe By addition of V element to the deposited layer, more TiC carbide, VC and (Ti,V)C complex carbide are formed. Also, due to the increase in nucleation sites with increasing V content, more and finer carbides are formed. V element via carbon consumption and formation of VC carbide, creates carbon depleted matrix, therefore the chemical composition of the weld pool shifts to eutectic compound and the primary Fe In second pass of all samples the volume percentage of carbides was more and their sizes were smaller than the first pass due to the dilution effect of the first pass with substrate. The increase in V content of the deposited layer increased the hardness of the cladded layer due to the formation of more complex carbide phases. The addition of V up to 5 wt.% into the FTC layer increased the hardness from 51 to 62 HRC and decreased the wear weight loss about 60%. Also, adhesive and delamination were the predominant wear mechanisms of the deposited layers. Because of the higher hardness, higher volume percentage and uniform distribution of carbides in the matrix, the lowest friction coefficient was seen in the sample containing 5 wt.% V.