This work concerns a three-step process for the recovery of vanadium from heavy oil and Orimulsion combustion fly ashes. This consisted of acid leaching, oxidation and precipitation of the vanadium pentoxide, followed by washing of the precipitate. Preliminary tests were conducted to investigate the effect of some operating parameters for the various steps of the process. After these preliminary tests, the recovery of vanadium from the fly ash samples was performed on a laboratory scale and the overall yield of the process was determined. By washing the precipitate, it was possible to reduce the concentration of the impurities and to allow its use for the production of ferrovanadium alloys.The fly ashes produced from the combustion of heavy oils are composed of unburned carbon and an inorganic fraction containing a low concentration of vanadium (1%–7%). This concentration is, however, comparable to that found naturally in mineral resources. Even if vanadium is widely distributed throughout the lithosphere, it is not present in high concentrations in minerals and is very often recovered as a by-product during the extraction of other metals Several processes have been proposed to recover vanadium from fly ashes using hydrometallurgical processes. The recovery may be carried out directly on the fly ashes by acid Recently, Orimulsion (a registered trade mark belonging to Bitumines Orinoco) has received increasing attention as an alternative fuel. Orimulsion is a stable bitumen-in-water emulsion made from pure natural bitumen occurring in the Orinoco Belt of Venezuela. The bitumen reserves are put at 186×10 In this work, a simple three-step process for the recovery of vanadium from heavy oils and Orimulsion combustion fly ashes was studied. The recovery process consisted of an acid leaching, oxidation and precipitation of vanadium pentoxide. The use of extraction solvents was avoided and the purity of the precipitate was achieved through a specific washing of the precipitate in order to control the concentration of the impurities (typically Cu, Co, Na, K, S, and P) and to allow the use of the precipitate for the production of ferrovanadium alloys. Carbon content was determined by a Carlo Erba 1106 analyser. Sulphur content was determined by a LECO SC 432 DR I.R. detector. Moisture (105°C, in nitrogen atmosphere) of the fly ashes were determined by a METTLER TG 50 thermobalance. The composition of the mineral fraction of the fly ashes and of the precipitated vanadium pentoxide was determined by a PERKIN-ELMER PLASMA 400 ICP-AES analyser on the solutions obtained by digesting the dried samples (0.5 g) with strong acids (7.5 cm Three samples of heavy oil combustion fly ashes were examined. These were collected from the flue gases of different oil-fired power plants. The Orimulsion combustion fly ash sample was collected from the flue gases of the 320 MW Fiume Santo power plant (Nuoro, Italy). This plant is the ENEL S.p.A. demonstration unit for the evaluation of Orimulsion as a competitive fuel. The composition of the fly ashes is reported in Some preliminary tests were conducted to set out the leaching operating conditions. The increase of the vanadium concentration in the extract was followed over 24 h. However, even in the tests conducted in the most unfavourable conditions (water leaching at room temperature), practically all the extractable vanadium was obtained within 30 min for all the fly ash samples. The preliminary tests disclosed also that alkaline leaching was not effective. Once the leaching time and the nature of the leaching solution was assessed, the effect of some operating parameters on the yield of vanadium extracted (liquid-to-solid ratio (L/S), temperature, and acidity of leaching solution) was studied and is reported as follows.   Following the results obtained with the heavy oil fly ashes, the process was conducted at the boiling temperature of the solution. In The effect of the liquid-to-solid ratio was studied in the range L/S from 3 to 5 by leaching with sulphuric acid (2 M). As reported in The oxidative precipitation of the vanadium from the extract solution was performed under the conditions suggested by Giorgini et al. Preliminary studies (M. Giorgini, private communication) have shown that the sodium contained in the raw precipitate may be reduced by up to 95% through repeated washings of the precipitate with acidic solutions. The increased effectiveness of the acidic solutions with respect to water is due to the greater capacity of dissolving the sodium vanadates present in the precipitate. By adopting the operating conditions that were set out in the preliminary tests, the three-step process (leaching, oxidative precipitation, washing of the precipitate) of vanadium recovery was performed and the overall yield was determined. The block diagram of the process is reported in The extract was separated from the carbonaceous residue by filtration and the residue was washed three times with water (150 mL/stage) to recover the extract solution retained by the cake. After the oxidative precipitation, the precipitate was separated from the exhaust solution by filtration and was washed three times with dilute H  The vanadium concentration of the solutions used in the oxidative precipitation, depending upon the vanadium content of the samples and the leaching yield, fell in the range 2.5–6.1 g/L for the heavy oil fly ashes, and fell in the range 13.7–18.1 g/L for the Orimulsion fly ash. As reported in The composition of the precipitate after washing, reported in The recovery of vanadium from the fly ashes of heavy oil and Orimulsion combustion was performed using a three-step process, which consisted of an acid leaching, oxidation and precipitation of the vanadium pentoxide, followed by washing of the precipitate. The overall yield of vanadium recovery was higher for the Orimulsion fly ash and must be attributed to the higher yields obtained both in the leaching and in the precipitation stage. By washing the precipitate it was possible to reduce the concentration of the impurities (typically Cu, Co, Na, K, S, and P) and to allow its use for the production of ferrovanadium alloys.