Avulsion fractures of the calcaneal tuberosity represent only 1.3% to 2.7% of calcaneal fractures. These fractures are common pathologically in nature and attributed to decreased bone mineral density. Calcaneal insufficiency avulsion (CIA) fracture in patients with diabetes mellitus is most likely due to Charcot neuroarthropathy (CN) as described by the Brodsky classification (Brodsky 3B). Traditional open reduction and internal fixation is difficult in all calcaneal avulsion fractures because of poor bone quality. The authors report the first known description of the use of fracture fragment excision and double row anchor fixation.A 39-year-old woman with type I diabetes mellitus and a history of CN presented with an avulsion fracture of the calcaneal tuberosity. Excision of the fracture fragment and a gastrocnemius recession and reattachment of the Achilles tendon with double row anchor fixation to the calcaneus were performed. At 1 year, the patient’s American Orthopaedic Foot & Ankle Society rearfoot score improved from 27/100 to 88/100. CIA fractures are an infrequently described injury. Because diabetes mellitus is frequently associated with this disease, it most likely represents a CN event. Traditionally, CIA fractures have been operatively treated with open reduction internal fixation. Previous authors have described difficulty with fixation because of poor quality. In the current report, the authors describe a novel operative approach to CIA fractures through the use of double row anchor fixation and excision of the fracture fragments. The authors feel that this previously undescribed treatment is superior to traditional methods and may serve as a new treatment option for all patients who have sustained this unusual pathology regardless of the underlying cause. The current authors provide a novel operative technique that provides inherent advantages to the traditional repair of CIA fractures. We believe CIA fractures represent a CN-type event and care should be taken when evaluating and treating these patients to prevent further sequelae.Calcaneal fractures account for 1.2% of all fractures of which 25% to 40% are extra-articular The term A 49-year-old woman with type I diabetes mellitus for over 39 years and a history of CN presented for evaluation of swelling and pain to the left heel for 2 weeks in duration. The patient had been offloading the contralateral limb with a CAM boot for a plantar ulceration secondary to a CN deformity. The patient denies any traumatic event and had no history of ulceration to the left foot. Her pulses were intact, but she had significant neuropathy with a Michigan neuropathy index of 9/10. The patient had no defect or deformity that was noted on the left foot. Radiographs demonstrated an area of sclerosis to the posterior calcaneus near the Achilles insertion ( The patient was taken to the operating room urgently the next day. The patient was placed in a prone position, and a posterior midline incision with minimal undermining was used. As expected from evaluation of the CT, the fracture fragments were extremely comminuted. The bone quality was poor and would be insufficient for fixation. All fracture fragments were excised and the Achilles tendon was reattached to the remaining calcaneal tuberosity using the Suture Bridge (Arthrex, Inc, Naples, FL) double row anchor system ( Multiple studies have indicated that patients with diabetes have a higher incidence of pathological fractures The course of CN appears to be on a continuum that proceeds through joint and bony dissolution and disintegration, bone formation, and bony consolidation Brodsky classified calcaneal CN and described it as a pathological fracture of the calcaneal tubercle with secondary deformity and collapse of the distal portions of the foot Despite the lack of consistent reports, certain risk factors for CIA fractures may be inferred. Similar to more common locations of CN, it appears that decreased BMD, neuropathy, and other factors play a central role in the pathogenesis of CIA fractures. Alterations in BMD have been well accepted in the general diabetic population Traditional operative treatment of calcaneal avulsion fractures includes suturing the avulsed bone fragment, and using suture anchors with screw fixation or tension band wiring Decreased BMD may become evident as early as 5 years after a diagnosis of diabetes The proposed operative repair of CIA fractures uses a suture bridge technique which, according to the manufacturer’s data The rarity of this pathology makes larger randomized studies improbable. We hope that this technique can be used in all subjects that sustain this injury regardless of the causative nature. This will allow further research to explain advantages and disadvantages to this technique. This approach may prove advantageous to traditional open reduction internal fixation, but limited conclusions can be drawn from a single case report. In conclusion, the current authors provide a novel operative technique developed by the senior author (PRB), which provides inherent advantages to the traditional repair of CIA fractures. We believe CIA fractures represent a CN-type event and care should be taken when evaluating and treating these patients to prevent further sequelae.