The flocculation characteristics of sodium alginate-g-polyacrylamide (grade VI) SAG-VI developed in authors’ laboratory was compared with some commercially available flocculants in aqueous suspensions of 0.5 wt.% iron ore slimes. Two varieties of iron ore slimes were taken, one is denser than other, for comparison. The iron ore slime samples were characterized using XRD analysis, IR spectroscopy, chemical analysis and density measurements. Among the various polymeric flocculants, SAG-VI, shows better performance than others in one case, whereas its performance is comparable or at par in the other case. Iron ore slimes with smaller particle size are better flocculated by the neutral flocculants than those with a larger particle size.The process of flocculation Sodium alginate, the sodium salt of alginic acid, is a water-soluble anionic polymer. Sodium alginate was chosen for grafting because of its many advantages like ready availability, low cost, ready water solubility and extended structure in water solution. In our previous paper Sodium alginate was procured from Aldrich Chemical Company, USA. Acrylamide was procured from E. Merck, Germany. Ceric ammonium nitrate (CAN) was obtained from Loba Chemie, Bombay, India. Acetone and hydroquinone were supplied by S.D. Fine Chemicals, India. Sodium nitrate was supplied by E. Merck, Bombay, India. Two varieties of iron ore slimes were collected from iron ore mines Kiriburu (Orissa, India) and Joda (Bihar, India), respectively. The iron ore slimes are abbreviated as K and J. For the flocculation experiment, the following flocculants were used. Their chemical nature and sources are shown below. The details of synthesis and characterization of SAG-g-PAM were published elsewhere The IR analysis of the two iron ore slimes J and K was carried out in potassium bromide (KBr) pellets using a Perkin–Elmer 883 Infrared spectrophotometer (UK). The spectra are shown in The chemical analysis of the iron ore slimes (wt.%) is given below. PW 1840 diffractometer and PW 1729 X-ray generator (Philips, Holland) were used for this study using CuK The densities of the two iron ore samples were measured using a specific gravity bottle by the standard method. The densities of the two iron ore slimes were 3.445 g/cc for sample J and 3.518 g/cc for sample K. A standard Jar test procedure was followed. The flocculator used was supplied by M.B. Instruments, Bombay, India. Turbidity measurements were carried out using a Digital Naphelo Turbidity meter supplied by Systronics, Ahmedabad, India. A 0.5 wt.% suspension of iron ore slime was used for the flocculation studies. The suspension was put in each of five 1 l beakers and the flocculant was added in solution form. The following procedure was used for all flocculants. Immediately after the addition of the flocculant, the suspension was stirred at uniform speed of 75 rpm for 2 min. This was followed by a slow stirring at 20–25 rpm for 5 min. Afterwards, a settling time of 10 min was allowed. At the end of the settling period, the turbidity of the supernatant liquid was measured using the Digital Nephelo Turbidity meter. The dose of flocculant was varied in the range 0.025–5 ppm. From the chemical analysis, it is evident that the major component of the iron ore slimes in both the two cases is Fe The polyacrylamide chains have been grafted on the sodium alginate by solution polymerization technique in aqueous solution. Hence, there is no possibility of polyacrylamide chains getting hydrolyzed. The hydrolysis of grafted polysaccharide have been done by alkalis and we have studied the hydrolysis of polyacrylamide grafted sodium alginate in details in our previous communication The flocculation characteristics of SAG-VI were compared with other commercially available flocculants in 0.5 wt.% iron ore slime suspensions. The results are shown in According to Another reason for the better flocculating power of the graft copolymers over the linear polymers is as follows: essentially, polymer bridging occurs because segments of a polymer chain absorb to different particles, thus linking the particles together. In order for effective bridging to occur, there must be sufficient polymeric chains, which extend far enough from the particle surface to attach to other particles. In the case of linear polymers, the polymer segments attached to the surface in trains project into the solution as tails or form part of loops, which links trains together Different behaviour of SAG-VI was observed in flocculation of iron ore slime (J) suspension. The flocculation performance by SAG-VI was compared with other three commercial flocculants in 0.5 wt.% aqueous suspensions. Here, Magnafloc-351 gives the best performance. SAG-VI shows slightly better or comparable results to the other two flocculants i.e. Rishfloc-225 and Magnafloc-351. The flocculation performance of SAG-VI and other commercially available flocculants are compared separately in 0.5 wt.% of both the iron ore slime suspensions in water as depicted in When very long polymer molecules are absorbed onto the surface of particles, they tend to form loops that extend some distance from the surface into the aqueous phase, and the ends may also dangle. These loops and ends come into contact with, and attach to another particle forming a bridge between the two particles. This is the bridging mode of flocculation From the above investigations, the following conclusions can be drawn. The flocculation behaviour of two iron ore slimes of the same chemical nature depends on their particle size and density. The flocculation performance of the graft copolymer of sodium alginate and polyacrylamide (SAG-VI) was better than the linear polyacrylamide commercial flocculants in the aqueous suspension of iron ore slime, which had higher density. On the other hand, the flocculation performance of graft copolymer (SAG-VI) was comparable or at par with the polyacrylamide commercial flocculants in the suspension of iron ore slime which had lower density. Iron ore particles with smaller size are better flocculated than that with larger size by the neutral polymers through bridging. The authors are grateful to CSIR (New Delhi) for financial support to carry out the above investigation.