Interest in sustainable energy production is one of the most important resources in the development of technologies, and one of the promising sources is the use of microalgae as a raw material. These are obtained in nature, do not need good conditions to develop, occupy a small area for growth and replace the use of food products for the production of biofuel. However, one of the biggest hurdle is the biomass harvest and one of the innovative techniques being proposed is ozone-flotation. Flotation processes are influenced by the physical characteristics of bubbles and particles, and therefore it is necessary to investigate the size distribution of generated bubbles, their action in microalgal cells and the oxidation and release of proteins that act as biosurfactants. In this work the effect of ozone bubble size in a three-phase system (ozone – wastewater – microalgae) and size of microalgal particles separated by ozone-flotation were evaluated. Three ozone flows were used (0.2, 0.6 and 1 L/min). Best results were obtained with a flow of 0.6 L/min achieving 88.5% efficiency, increased biomass oxidation, destabilization of microalgal cells (zeta potential 3.17 mV), highest protein release (46.7 mg/L) and, a demonstrated efficiency of proteins in reducing bubble coalescence. Regarding the latter, no differences in size or distribution of the ozone bubbles were obtained between the 3 evaluated heights of the column (bottom, middle and top). At this flow the mean bubble diameters were maintained at 1910, 2028 and 2071 μm for bottom, middle and top, respectively, with approximately 50% of the bubbles concentrated up to 2000 μm. In addition, due to the higher action of ozone with microalgal cells, smaller particle sizes in the column were found due to the oxidizing action of ozone.The use of microalgae as a source of biofuel has stood out as a renewable raw material in part because many of the resources required for mass cultivation can be supplied by sewage However, one of the major challenges for using microalgae in biofuel production is an efficient harvesting method. Normally, harvesting processes are based on different physicochemical and biological properties of microalgae. Flotation has emerged as a promising unit operation for microalgae harvesting due to the tendency of microalgae to float instead of settle, and less energy is used compared to centrifugation. In order to achieve adequate contact angle between bubbles and microalgae, the cells of the microalgae must be hydrophobic; this can be achieved through the addition of surfactants or coagulants Bubble-particle interactions have been widely shown to be the most important sub-process in flotation The main individual elementary steps of flotation are the collision of a solid particle with a bubble, attachment and adhesion of a particle to a bubble and detachment of a particle from a bubble An effective way to improve interaction, binding and stability efficiencies in the bubble/microalgae relationship is to reduce the size of the bubbles, thus increasing the surface area per unit volume and increasing the probability of interaction between bubbles and algae The addition of surfactants reduces bubble coalescence and push bubbles in the slurry zone towards the foam phase, due to an increase in air bubble residence time There are currently few works that have evaluated the bubble-particle relationship in flotation, and the majority of such literature is for two-phase systems, because three-phase systems (solid–liquid–gas) are particularly complex The three-phase system works with minerals, with air-water-quartz and talc The aim of this work was to investigate, for the first time, the effect of ozone bubble size distribution and microalgal size in a three-phase system (ozone-wastewater-microalgae). Three ozone flow setups were used to evaluate the effect of protein release as a biosurfactant, helping in the coalescence of ozone bubbles by ozone flotation. The biomass used was obtained from the cultivation of microalgae containing a majority of Ozone-flotation experiments were carried out in batch and bench scale using 1L of a freshly homogenized culture of Bubbles generated during ozone-flotation were measured in a three-phase system (wastewater-ozone-microalgae) applying a visual technique with image analysis. The images were captured by a NIKON D3400 digital still camera with an AF-S DX MICRO NIKKOR 400 MM lens positioned at a suitable distance (29.7 cm) from the flotation column for focus adjustment. Shutter speed was 1/1000 and ISO sensitivity of 400, this allowed to capture bubble images without blur. The flotation column was backlit using illumination assisted with a cold light, with three vertically mounted Osram T8 10 W LED lamps. One lamp was placed on the opposite side of the camera and the other two on the sides of the flotation column. Example of the obtained photograph are shown in A computer with special software for image data processing and analysis (Image Tools) was used. Image size obtained was 6000 × 4000 pixels (24 Megapixels) and 24 bits color. The Due to the great turbidity of the water caused by the microalgae, the images were captured after 5 min of ozone flotation so that ozone could react with microalgae by releasing proteins to harvest biomass. A ruler was placed inside the flotation column with the culture to calibrate the images by conversion to pixel number; this was done for each height of column and ozone flow. To evaluate the coalescence of bubbles, the images were captured 3 cm from the bottom of the flotation column; from the middle of the column the images were captured 25 cm from the bottom and from the top, 55 cm from the bottom. About 300 bubbles A schematic representation of the experimental setup is shown in Stabilization of the microalgae was determined by the zeta potential. The zeta potential of the microalgae culture (initial sample) was taken as a reference point to evaluate the effect of ozone on the cells after harvesting by ozone-flotation. After completion of the microalgae harvest by ozone-flotation (ozonation time for all tests was 20 min) the water remaining in the flotation column was then blended to obtain only one final sample for determination of the zeta potential. The zeta potential was measured with a particle sizing systems ZLS zeta module that fits into the Dynamic Light Scattering (DLS) technique, using Particle Sizing Systems equipment, NICOMP (model NICOMP 380 ZLS). This technique actually measures the electrophoretic mobility of the particles and converts this measurement to zeta potential based on Smoluchowski equation with sample temperature 25 °C. The determination was made in triplicate. The total protein content was determined by the Biuret colorimetric method as described by Gornall et al. For ozone-flotation, a design with two factors was proposed, with variables coded to represent the ozone flow rates (0.2, 0.6 and 1 L/min) and column height at the bottom, middle and top (3, 25 and 55 cm, respectively). The design involved carrying out 27 experiments, each with three replicates. The influences of these operational variables were determined for the following responses: bubble size, particle size, mass transfer of ozone, protein in column flotation and biomass harvested, biomass recovery, oxidized biomass and zeta potential. Statistical analyses were performed using statistical software MINITAB version 16. Data were tested for normality using an Anderson-Darling Normality Test. Normally distributed data were compared using an analysis of variance (ANOVA) at the 5% significance level, to analyze and compare the experimental data the Tukey test was used. For data not normally distributed, a non-parametric analysis of variance (nonparametric ANOVA) was applied using the Mood’s Median Test. The bubble size distribution from three heights in the flotation column and protein release within the different ozone flow conditions is shown in Ozone bubble size is directly influenced by the ozone flow rate (p-value 0.000) ( For a flow rate of 0.2 L/min, there was a statistical difference between the bottom and middle height bubbles, bottom and top bubbles (p-value 0.000), but not between middle and top bubbles (p-value 0.203). And for the O The bubble size distribution differed according to flows used ( With a flow of 0.6 L/min the distribution was more homogeneous. The majority of the bubbles were concentrated between 1500 and 3000 μm (representing 81, 97.6 and 98% of the distribution, respectively). The distribution was maintained in the middle through the top of the column with a flow of 0.2 L/min with a Sauter diameter of 2045 μm for the bottom, 2028 μm at the middle and 3057 μm at the top ( For the flow rate of 1 L/min the minimum diameter of the bubbles was not between 500 and 1000 μm as it was for the other flow rates, and in fact bubbles with a diameter less than 1500 μm were only in the lower part of the column. A significant size increase was found and the distribution is wider for the curves ( In Ozone flow rate had a great influence on harvested biomass and biomass oxidation during the ozone-flotation process. The transferred O The lowest efficiency was found when the O The initial zeta potential of the microalgae was −15 ± 1.4 mV and a pH of about 8. After the ozone-flotation process, the zeta potential was different for each O For ozone flows of 0.2 and 1 L/min the microalgal loads after ozonation remained negative, but less negative than initially (−6.6 and −12.1 mV, respectively). For the flow of 0.6 L/min the charge of the microalgae was positive (3.17 mV). The photographic methods in combination with digital imaging is apparently a promising solution to obtain reliable measurements of bubble size in three-phase systems The size of the bubble increases with increasing ozone flow due to the larger volume of gas entering the system, this increase was also observed by Reis and Barrozo Each ozone flow and each column height produced significantly different Sauter mean diameters, with smaller diameters at the bottom that increased to the top. Bubbles carrying particles can be brought together in a turbulent vortex resulting in bubble coalescence and consequent detachment of particles. Inertial detachments have also been found, due to rapid changes in the trajectory of the bubble, or because of oscillations of the bubble’s surface Through visual observations, it was observed that at the beginning of the ozone flotation process, the bubbles were less uniform and greater coalescence could be observed. With the passage of time and greater reaction of the ozone with the microalgae cells, the bubbles became uniform with less coalescence. However, at the end of the process the bubbles return to as they were in the beginning of the process due to the low concentration of microalgae and a consequent a reduction in proteins. In this case the application of ozone oxidizes the cells, releasing proteins that act as biosurfactants, reducing the superficial charge of the cells and avoiding the coalescence of bubbles, in addition to increasing the extraction of biomolecules due to their oxidizing action. In microalgae harvesting two processes predominate, the chemical reaction of ozone with microalgae and a physical process that favor the flotation of microalgae. Small bubbles increase the chance of bubble-particle contact, but very small bubbles have a low rate of ascent. Very large bubbles are also not favorable because they decrease bubble-particle interaction. Coward et al. In this process, a biomass harvesting efficiency of up to 88.5% and 0.404 ± 0.08 mg of proteins/mg of biomass was obtained for an ozone flow of 0.6 L/min and doses of ozone applied at 0.16 mg O It was observed that efficiency is dependent on the flow of ozone applied. For the flow of 1 L/min it was not possible to obtain high efficiency due to shorter contact time and larger size of bubbles. For the flow of 0.2 L/min, the low efficiency was previously explained by low bubble flotation velocity and thus particle detachment, which may also be related to the negative zeta potential of the microalgae. However, for the flow of 0.6 L/min, there was a low stability of colloids with positive zeta potential (+3.2), which favored the high efficiency of microalgae harvest (88.5%) and oxidation of cells (31.6%) reducing its size to less than 1 µm. The increase in zeta potential at 0.6 L/min flow rate, It occurred because there is more efficient contact between the bubbles and the particles, when there is a more homogeneous bubble size in the column and so highest microalgae harvesting (shown in Ozone-flotation bubble size distribution is one of the main characteristics that influences harvesting efficiency. For the flow of 0.2 L/min in the lower part of the column, 59% of the bubbles are below 1500 μm, with 50% of the bubbles in the middle and 43.5% in the top at 2000 μm. For the flow of 0.6 L/min the relative cumulative frequency did not show much difference between heights, 55% of the bubbles are below 2000 μm (bottom), 50.2% (middle) 45.7% (top). And for the flow of 1 L/min the size of the bubbles increases, being that the most are concentrated between 2500 and 4500 μm for the 3 columns height. The ozone flow of 0.6 L/min produced the most effective algal harvesting, liberation of proteins in the flotation column, biomass oxidation, greater destabilization of particles, and especially greater action of proteins a as biosurfactant that reduce the coalescence of ozone bubbles for a biomass concentration of 500 mg/L of microalgae grown in wastewater. The authors acknowledge MSc. Isaura Yáñez-Noguez for her laboratory support and thanks to MEng. Calina Grazielli for her support with the figure of the experimental structure. This research project was supported by the