The existing methods for MoO3 production from high-grade molybdenite concentrates normally suffer from the inefficiency of oxidation and complexity of the overall process. In this work, a novel method for MoO3 production from alumina-silica-added molybdenite concentrate pellets by simultaneous oxidizing-volatilizing was proposed, validated and compared with other methods. Molybdenite concentrate mixed with additives was fabricated into spherical balls and roasted in air. Molybdenum disulfide was rapidly oxidized, volatilized and thus separated from pellets, wherein additives were sintered to be mullite as porous framework to keep the strength of single pellet, and in turn to support the stacked pellets. With mass ratio of additives to ore 1:2, ratios of S removal and Mo recovery from pellets reached over 99.9% and 97.2% respectively at 1050 °C within 20 min, and the condensed material was identified to be valuable MoO3 with purity over 99.9%. The excellent performance of MoO3 separation was attributed to the construction of firm pellet layers and favorable diffusion conditions inside pellets.In molybdenum industry, pure MoO Although these technics have experienced long-way development and been implemented in practice for decades, they normally suffer from inefficient oxidation and complex flowsheet. For instance, oxidation of molybdenite concentrates through oxidative roasting over 600 °C usually takes >2 h and exhausts low-concentration SO To surmount the above-mentioned problems, a high-temperature flash-roasting process [ Thus, the key issue is whether MoO A high-grade molybdenite concentrate provided by a dressing plant in China's Shannxi Province was used for this research. Main element contents are listed in Besides, chemical reagents of Al Molybdenite concentrate with certain amount of additives was ground and mixed in an agate mortar for 10 min. Then, the mixture was moistened with 15 wt% water and fabricated into green balls with the diameter of about 10 mm. After that, the green balls were dried at 105 °C for over 3 h. The deformation of single pellet during oxidizing-volatizing was measured through the horizontal furnace equipped with a camera as depicted in As seen in X-ray Diffraction analysis was conducted to identify the phase compositions of raw materials and roasted pellets using a diffractometer (RIGAKU D/Max 2500, Japan). Environmental Scanning Electron Microscopy (ESEM, FEI QUANTA 200, Holland) equipped with an energy dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDS) detector was used to study the distribution of elements in pellet. Mo content was measured through chemical titration method. Sulfur and carbon contents were determined by Infrared Carbon‑sulfur Analyzer (Leco Corporation, CS844, USA). Impurities in raw materials and product were assayed by the instrument of Inductively Coupled Plasma Atomic Emission Spectrometer (Baird, Ps-6, USA). Chemical compositions of roasted pellets were assayed using X-Ray Fluorescence Spectrometer (Panalytical, Axios max, NED). Mo recovery ratio and sulfur removal ratio were calculated as follows: Pellet firing in fixed beds only requires basic strength to sustain the structure of sphere layers, but balls made of molybdenite concentrate are easily broken during oxidation-volatilization. Thus, it is critical to seek suitable additives serving as effective skeleton materials. Herein, silica and alumina, which are of low cost, non-volatility and high melting point, have been given preference. Single pellets fabricated from molybdenite concentrate with or without additives of SiO In addition to roasting single pellet, multiple-layer pellets comprising different amount of additives were also investigated using shaft furnace. Ratios of weight loss to initial mass of molybdenite concentrate as function of additive amount, and images of roasted pellets or residues are displayed in The weight loss of molybdenite concentrate pellets derives from S removal and MoO  The effect of roasting temperature on Mo recovery was examined as shown in Without additives, the single pellet ( With binary additives used as skeleton materials, roasted pellets could keep the initial shape with no cracks and less volume change. In addition to the filling effect, the transformation of additives during roasting is also of great significance. XRD pattern of the roasted ball containing binary additives is displayed in Traditionally, MoS From kinetic perspectives, MoO Semi-oxidized pellet which was roasted at 1050 °C for 10 min has been prepared and the elemental mapping of its cross section is displayed in Besides, there is likely to be a dynamic balance between the progress of oxidation and volatilization. When MoO The flowsheet of the novel method for MoO Otherwise, the novel method also has obvious advantages in terms of waste treatment. First, no solutions of alkali or acid are used and thus rarely are polluted liquids generated. Second, benefiting from the rapid speed of oxidation, the exhaust is more likely to be high concentration SO As regard to the product, the volatiles condensed from MoO Additionally, the comparison of MoO It is proved feasible to prepare pure MoO This work was supported by the