Manufactured fine aggregates are progressively more used worldwide as an alternative to natural sand in concrete. In a recent study by the authors the removal of contaminants from manufactured fine gneiss aggregates by dry rare-earth magnetic separation was investigated. The present work initially demonstrates that single-stage dry high-intensity magnetic separation of the unclassified fine fraction (−2.36 mm) of the aggregate produced by a vertical shaft impact crusher allows simultaneous partial removal of the flaky biotite particles as well as reduction in the proportion of fines, thus improving its potential for application as a replacement of natural sand in concrete. The work then investigates the effect of magnetic field intensity, specific throughput, roll velocity, splitter position and moisture content on the performance of a bench-scale separator following a full factorial design of experiments. The non-magnetic product from an additional test was then used in combination with the coarser (+2.36 mm) unconcentrated fraction produced by a vertical shaft impact crusher in tests in concrete. Concretes with different strengths were prepared and results show that the upgraded non-magnetic manufactured aggregate was able to match the performance of concrete using natural sand, demanding one third less rheology additive, with comparable strengths at 28 days of curing.The shortage of natural sand coupled to environmental restrictions has motivated the search for replacement materials in many parts of the world, in particular to meet the demands from the construction and building industry ( Crushing is an important stage in processing manufactured fine aggregates, and several studies have demonstrated the benefit of impact (vertical shaft impact or VSI) over compressive crushing as a method to improve particle shape ( Crushed fine aggregates, in particular when resulting from VSI crushing, typically contain larger proportions of fines than natural sand. However, given the usually non-reactive nature of these fines, their presence may be tolerated in concrete ( Mineral composition has also been known to influence the effectiveness of manufactured fine aggregates in mortars and concrete. Minerals resulting from weathering of feldspars (kaolinite and illite), as well as phyllosilicates, such as biotite and chlorite, have been associated to deleterious effects in mortars and concrete ( In summary, the successful application of manufactured fine aggregates in mortars and concrete has been found to require good control of particle shape, which can be achieved by application of VSI crushers ( Important advances have been made in the last decade in the field of dry rare-earth magnetic separation (REMS). One of the main advantages of REMS is its low energy consumption and high throughput, while the high wear rate of the belt is one of its main challenges. REMS has been known to separate efficiently particles in the size range from 25 mm to 75 µm and has been very successful in separation of moderately paramagnetic minerals, given the recent developments in powerful rare-earth ceramic magnets ( The present work analyzes in detail the application of dry REMS to upgrade a manufactured fine aggregate from a gneiss rock from Brazil, building up on the previous work by the authors ( A sample of fine manufactured aggregate was collected from a quarry located in the metropolitan area of Rio de Janeiro, Brazil. Petrological analyzes identified it as a gneiss from the Rio Negro Complex ( A sample of natural sand was also collected from a concrete producer and served as the control of the tests in concrete. It is a dredged sand consisting predominantly of quartz from a local artificial water body. Magnetic separation tests were conducted using a laboratory scale dry rare-earth magnetic separator ( The magnetic roll is composed of two different groups of rare-earth permanent magnets separated by a large steel roll, thus allowing to investigate separation at two different magnetic field intensities by moving lateraly the positions of the feed silo and the vibratory feeder ( The tests consisted of feeding the entire −2.36 mm (unclassified) material to the separator. Although the magnetic separator generates a middling product, it was incorporated in either the non-magnetic or the magnetic product in the tests, so that only two products were generated in each experiment. Magnetic separation experiments started with an exploratory (preliminary) test in which the separation performance was analyzed in great detail. This test was conducted with the dry feed, with the roll speed set to 139 rpm, the feed rate to 10 kg/h (76 kg/h·m) and with the magnetic field intensity of 0.40 T. Both magnetic and non-magnetic products were screened using the 1.18, 0.425, 0.212 and 0.053 mm sieves and chemical and mineralogical analyzes performed on each fraction. In this test, the non-magnetic product was combined with the middling material. Tests were then conducted following a factorial ( A final test was conducted to prepare the sample for concrete, which was carried out with dry feed, with the roll speed at 181 rpm, feed rate at 90 kg/h·m, magnetic field intensity at 0.58 T and with a change in the inter splitter position in order to match the necessary amount of fines of the optimal grading defined by Analyzes of variance of the main effects as well as interactions of main variables were carried out analyzing the confidence intervals of the effects ( Batches of approximately 10 kg of the dry −2.36 mm material split using a longitudinal pile of the entire sample were used in each test. In the case of tests with the moist material, the required volume of water was added to the sample, which was mixed for a few minutes in a plastic bag, until moisture appeared to be uniformly distributed. Tests were then conducted by introducing the sample in the hopper on top of the vibration feeder ( Samples of both products of the separator were immediately weighed after each experiment and those corresponding to tests with moist feed were dried in a lab oven at 100 °C ± 5 °C for 24 h, being weighed afterwards. Quartered samples of the products were then subjected to size, chemical and mineralogical analyzes. Size analysis were conducted in a Ro-Tap® sieve shaker using sieve openings ranging from 2.36 until 0.300 mm ( The chemical composition of the feed and products was determined by semiquantitative X-ray fluorescence spectroscopy using a SHIMADZU Ray Ny EDX-720, with 3 kW rhodium sealed tube and Si(Li) detector, cooled by liquid nitrogen, in standardless mode. Prior to chemical analyses, the samples were ground in a planetary mill to sizes below 0.075 mm, dried at 105 °C for 12 h, mixed in proportion of 1 g of sample to 0.5 g of boric acid (H Mass flows, as well as size and chemical analyses results from the magnetic separation experiments were reconciled using the JKSimMet® software ( Tests in concrete were conducted using a selected sample of the non-magnetic −2.36 mm product, mixed with the corresponding part of the material previously classified in the size range 4.00–2.36 mm. Two formulations, shown in Brazilian type III Portland cement (containing 35–70% of blast furnace slag in its composition) ( Results from analysis of the as-received material, with particle size below 4.00 mm, are presented in As mentioned in X-ray fluorescence spectroscopy provided the chemical composition of the sample, presented in On the previous work by the authors ( An additional comparison between the two strategies of conducting the test is possible by analyzing the efficiency of separation as a function of size. Separation efficiency ( Yet another analysis of the separation results is possible by comparing the size distributions of the products and the feed from the test. A summary of the analysis of variance results from the factorial experiments is presented in the With the exception of the effect of feed rate on the Fe Several interactions between variables were also found to be significant ( The feasibility of fully replacing the natural fine aggregate by a manufactured fine aggregate generated by a vertical impact shaft crusher and subsequently classified using a dry rare-earth magnetic separator was investigated. In summary, this test with the −2.36 mm material resulted in a yield (mass recovery) of 77.1%, with the non-magnetic product containing 1.24% Fe  Concretes of two compressive strengths for each fine aggregate were prepared, hereafter named NS-25 and NS-45 for the concretes using natural sand, and MFA-25 and MFA-45 for concretes using manufactured fine aggregate with compressive strengths of 25 and 45 MPa, respectively. Slump values for the concretes are summarized in  Although tests have been conducted at the bench scale, it is worthwhile analyzing the potential industrial application of the proposed process route. First, the process is carried out fully dry, and this is due to growing restrictions in the use of water in the minerals industry in Brazil in recent years. The proposed flowsheet involved in the production of the manufactured fine aggregate in question is presented in The initial feed material, consisting of particles in the size range from 45 to 19 mm, resulting from earlier stages of crushing (primary, secondary and tertiary) in the aggregate plant, represents the feed to the proposed manufactured fine aggregate plant. The selection of this size range has been made on the basis of its saturation moisture, that is, the maximum moisture that the aggregate will contain after water being poured onto it, such as during strong rainfall, and subsequently drained. This value was measured as being 0.8% for the size range and material in question. Given this value, it is proposed that after the material is reclaimed from the stockpile all conveyor belts and equipment must be protected from direct exposure to rainfall, since further reduction in size would lead to higher capacity to retain surface moisture, which would be detrimental to both fine screening and dry magnetic separation operations. The material from the stockpile, which would remain exposed to rainfall, would feed the VSI crusher, which would operate in closed circuit with a multiple deck screen, with an option of returning the material coarser than 4.00 mm directly to the VSI crusher. The undersize of the screen is screened again with a 2.36 mm opening. This passing material is then fed in open circuit to the dry REMS, at a moisture content that would likely not exceed 0.5%, given the saturation moisture content of the material in the stockpile and the marginal ability of the VSI crusher in removing some moisture during its operation due to heat dissipation. Operating conditions would have to be varied in the presence of moist feeds, including a reduction in feed rate, an increase in roll velocity and the rejection of the middling material to the magnetic waste ( The final product for application in concrete would then be obtained by mixing the retained 4.00–2.36 mm from the second screening stage to the −2.36 mm non-magnetic product ( The proposed process flowsheet ( Dry REMS of the unclassified −2.36 mm material resulted in very good separation performance for the material contained in the 1.18–0.212 mm range, with limited upgrading in coarser sizes and well as low yields at finer sizes. Separation of the main deleterious minerals, namely biotite and hornblende, occurred efficiently, with recoveries of feldspars and quartz above 75% in the non-magnetic product. A comparison between results from bulk magnetic separation tests in the present work and those from the earlier work by the authors ( Statistical analyzes of the factorial experiments demonstrated significant effects of all main variables studied on nearly all responses studied. Rotation frequency increased yield, while feed rate and magnetic field intensity had the opposite effect. Moisture content increased the non-magnetic product contamination with fines, whereas feed rate and magnetic field intensity reduced it. Moisture and rotation frequency increased Fe The unconcentrated 4.00–2.36 mm material combined to the non-magnetic −2.36 mm product was used in concrete and results compared to those obtained using natural sand. The resulting size distribution was nearly entirely within the optimal limits established by the Brazilian standard, whereas aspect ratio (shape) was similar to that of the natural sand. Full replacement of natural sand by manufactured fine aggregate resulted in concretes with the same compressive strength after 28 days of curing with one third less demand for rheology controlling additive. The authors would like to thank