Estimating the head grades from the ore feeding a processing plant is not a trivial task and is a continuing source of controversy in the mining industry. Grades determined as part of short-term mine planning are frequently not reproduced by sampling the continuous flow of ore at the plant. Head grades are normally obtained by sampling the continuous flow periodically during a day or shift and taking the average of the multiple samples collected. The standard error of this mean grade depends on the ore variability and the frequency (number) of samples. The more samples that are taken, the higher the precision of the calculated mean. Variographic experiments are normally used to map grade variability during a certain period of time, and the extension variance is derived from this variogram. This approach is time-consuming, expensive, and cumbersome, and therefore its use is often avoided in the mining industry. Additionally, a temporal variogram can vary as different ores are mined during the lifetime of the mine. This paper investigates a novel approach based on simulating the grades of orefeeding the processing plant. In situ three-dimensional grade models are constructed using geostatistical simulations. Grade spatial continuity and variability are reproduced in models with the same characteristics of the real deposit. These models are used in mine planning and scheduling, transforming a three-dimensional block model into a one-dimensional string of values feeding the plant (one-dimensional flow). The grades thus obtained have the statistical characteristics of the unknown real grades and can be sampled to simulate a variographic experiment. The results of this study showed consistency and provided satisfactory estimates of the sampling error for various sampling intervals using the simulated grades. They also showed that a variographic experiment can change significantly from time to time as the ore changes and that a selected sampling protocol can become obsolete if not adjusted for ore variability.Discrepancies between the grades obtained by sampling the ore feeding a processing plant and those determined in the mine are a common problem in the mining industry. This so-called mine/mill reconciliation problem has a number of causes ( A sample is representative when there is a combination of accuracy and reproducibility. Accuracy is defined as the absence of bias or systematic error. It's a property of the mean, which should be zero. Reproducibility is defined as a low dispersion of the sample values around their mean. It is a property of the variance of the sampling errors, which should be minimal ( One important result of Gy's theory is that the variance of the mean of a lot, when based on several samples, depends on the sampling strategy ( systematic selection: can be defined as the selection of points spaced at a uniform time interval. It is the most widely used selection method in the industry. stratified random selection: in this method, the total time is divided into uniform intervals, but the points at which samples are extracted are selected at random in each interval. The objective of this method is to avoid possible cyclic fluctuations in the grades of the material. completely random sampling: in this method, the samples are extracted on a completely random basis. In this study, only systematic selection was used. The question asked was: what would be the sampling error (or the difference between the real grades and those obtained using the samples) resulting from extracting a few samples from a continuous flow and declaring the average of these samples to be the grade of the lot? That is exactly what happens when the ore feeding the processing plant is sampled during, for instance, a shift or a day and the average of these samples is declared to be the day/shift grade. This error, or the difference between what is declared as the grade of a shift (or other period) and the real grade, is simply ignored in many cases. In other mine sites where there is a measure of the error, the result is obtained from so-called variographic experiments. Data obtained during such experiments are used to calculate the error using mathematical techniques based on auxiliary functions and extension variance ( Note that it is difficult to obtain data to calculate the error using current methods. As it has been mentioned, these methods are based on a variographic experiment, which needs samples to be taken at short time intervals (such as every 2–4 The results derived from a variographic test will determine the sampling intervals to be adopted, with a calculated error being associated with each time interval chosen. The error associated with extending the value of a few samples to the grade of the entire lot (day or shift) depends on the variability of the ore during the period. Assuming that this ore variability will hold for a long period of time (i.e., stationarity of the variogram over a long time span) might not be realistic. This paper proposes an alternative approach to the problem of measuring the sampling error (the error due to assuming the grade of shift given samples extracted at every The first step in this new sampling methodology is the application of a block simulation model to model ore grade statistics and its space/time connectivity as a continuous flow. A three-dimensional model is constructed, with ore block values reproducing the in situ grade variability and spatial continuity. This model is then applied to mine planning, i.e., pit optimization and mine scheduling. The optimized mine schedule provides a sequence of blocks to feed the processing plant at a given time. The grades of these blocks have previously been determined using geostatistical simulation ( By simulating the entire time series of grades at the plant (which is related to the ore being mined during a given period), it is possible to estimate the error associated with the use of different sampling intervals, and thereby to select a sampling that will lead to an acceptable error for a given ore type. There are several sources of uncertainty in a mining project, some of which are listed in These uncertainties cannot be eliminated, but there are alternative approaches to predict and reduce them. One way to quantify the uncertainty arising from a lack of knowledge of the correct mined grade values would be to perform geostatistical simulation. The real mined grades from the mineral deposit are not known, but they can be replaced by multiple equally probable simulated scenarios. These simulated models can be used in mine planning and scheduling to anticipate the uncertainty and risk associated with the grade values during the lifetime of the mine. This study proposes the use of multiple geostatistical simulated models as the input for planning the mining schedule and for analyzing the sampling uncertainty (the third reconciliation phase in generation of multiple equally probable three-dimensional (3D) models using the turning bands algorithm (TBA) with conditional data ( mine planning for each grade block model derived from the simulations to obtain the respective mining schedule; transformation of the mining sequence from a 3D in situ model to a 1D time series, simulating the feeding of the processing plant; simulation of different sampling strategies in the continuous flow; calculation of the relative error and the variability of samples within each sampling strategy for the different simulated scenarios for the mineral deposit. Conditional simulation and kriging estimation differ in many aspects. In general terms the objective of kriging is to provide, at each geographical position of a certain mineral deposit, the best estimation of a variable in a least square sense, without reproducing the original variability of the data. Consequently, the variance of the estimated values is less than the variance of the original data. On the other hand, geostatistical simulation methods aim to reproduce in-situ variability, and the spatial continuity of the input dataset. The idea embedded in most geostatistical simulation methods used for simulating continuous variables is to assess the uncertainty in the estimation prior to any guess about the value estimated. Models used in this way aim to replicate the spatial structure of a dataset as a whole rather than provide reliable local estimates of an attribute at particular locations. Mine production plans, schedules, and blending strategies require knowledge of grade dispersion. Because kriged estimates are said to be biased in terms of grade dispersion they should not be used for these engineering applications. Equally probable models generated by simulation of the deposit are introduced to overcome this problem. The simulated model is said to be conditionally simulated if it honors values at sampled points and reproduces the same dispersion characteristics of the original dataset, i.e. the mean, variance and covariance or variogram. In a conditionally simulated model it is possible to address questions referring to the dispersion of the grades during mining or processing, since the dispersion characteristics of the original data are maintained. The better the spatial continuity and variability of the real deposit can be described, the better the numerically simulated model will be. The simulated data, Thus, from a perspective of two-point statistics, there is no difference between the real and simulated values. The interesting aspect of conditional simulation is that simulated values can be generated in all geographical positions covering the whole deposit and not only at the sampled sites. The penalty for obtaining this denser grid of values through the deposit is an increase of the estimation error, or, in geostatistical jargon, the variance of the estimation obtained through conditional simulation is higher than the variance obtained using estimation methods ( The multiple outputs allow evaluation of the variation in head grades of the ore feeding the processing plant. From this temporal sequence, it is possible to simulate multiple sampling alternatives and thereby evaluate the sampling error associated with each one. In this study, to analyze the possible sampling configurations, the silica (SiO Simulation in a mining context means reproducing the characteristics of a mineral deposit, creating an array of values that has the same statistical and spatial characteristics as the true grades. A simulation is not an estimation; it is rather a set of values having the same general statistical character as the original data. The principles of geostatistical simulation were originally presented by study of grade continuity ( optimizing sampling plans for advanced exploration ( evaluation of resource/reserve estimation methods ( mine planning ( mill optimization ( blending and homogenization ( financial risk analysis ( risk in resources estimation ( any combination of the above. Here, the emphasis is placed on the use of conditional simulations for characterizing spatial in situ dispersion of SiO Fifty equally probable scenarios of the deposit were obtained using the TBA with 2 A test of the similarity of spatial character is illustrated by a comparison of the experimental semivariogram of the simulated values with the semivariogram model that characterizes the conditioning data ( Using the same technique and the same samples, but with different realizations, allows determination of the uncertainty associated with the mineral phenomenon. Thus, although the uncertainties cannot be eliminated, the tools to quantify them and reduce them considerably are available. Of all the blocks simulated (33 Note also that there are blocks where the grade uncertainty is extremely high. This shows the need to define a sampling interval that is suitable for all possible scenarios, as ore characteristics change with time (as a result of mining different zones within the deposit). Given the size of each simulated mining unit, it should be possible to obtain 908 samples during a day (1 sample every 95 Note from these figures that the average grade changes each day according to the ore zone mined (following the planned mine scheduling) and also according to the simulation model used as the input (considered here as the “true”grades). The dashed lines depict the range of possible values (max/min) that the processing plant can receive during the day. This means that, unless a blending pile is used, the plant operator should not expect a constant grade throughout the day! As the mean grade varies each day from simulation to simulation, the same happens to the average grade for the month. The average monthly grade is expected to be 1.99% (according to simulation 23) and 2.47% (according to simulation 42). In order to conduct a variographic analysis, one must consider a continuous flow of ore traveling along a conveyor belt divided in a certain number of increments (or mined blocks) during a certain period. These increments will most likely exhibit distinct grade values and these grade values will show some variability, the magnitude of which depends on the variability among the particles of the material and on the particle segregation in the particular lot, among other factors ( In Gy's theory, the sampling variances are estimated experimentally from the variographic experiment, from a set of samples taken at fixed intervals. Suppose that ( Examples of experimental variograms are shown in As the material from the mine is a blend of hematite and itabirite (both of which show large statistical differences with respect to silica), it generates a high nugget effect in the variogram, as can be seen in Assuming that each of these scenarios has an equal chance of representing the real mineral deposit, it can be risky to propose a sampling interval based on an experimental variogram calculated with samples taken during a short period of time, since it is clear that the experimental variograms represent completely different models. The variograms could be used to calculate the extension variance (EV), which refers to the error associated with the act of extending a sample value to a larger support or zone of influence. In this method, the grade ( Because different variograms are used for calculating the error of extending a sample value to a time interval, it is clear that, depending on the variogram selected, different EVs will be obtained. Consequently, different errors will be calculated for the same sampling intervals (because of the distinct temporal variability modeled by different variograms). The variographic experiment combined with the EV calculation is called the classical solution. The major drawback is the need for data to run the experimental time-series variogram. As an alternative, the new methodology presented in this paper uses simulation geostatistics combined with mine planning to simulate the time series (of grades feeding the plant during the lifetime of the mine). Details of the generation of the equally probable scenarios are presented in the next section. The variogram provides a tool for characterizing and displaying the variability of a time-autocorrelated process. However, obtaining the data to construct a model for estimating the sampling error is a laborious process, and, owing to its complexity, one that can be performed only a few times over the lifetime of a mine. This paper therefore suggests a new methodology to define the sampling interval from a continuous flow, based solely on geostatistical simulations. For each simulation, the mean of silica obtained from an exhaustive model (908 One important result of Gy's theory is that the variance of the mean of a lot, when based on several samples, depends on the sampling strategy. Considering a one-day period, there are 908 possible increments (given the size or support on which the simulations were built). The grade content is different for each increment and different from the average grade for the day. However, when systematic selection is used and the number of increments is sufficiently large, the mean grade of these increments approaches the “true” mean for the day. Thus, what is to be sought is the minimum number of increments to approximate the “true” mean, obtaining a low relative error at the minimum possible cost. To calculate the mean grade of the interval in different configurations,Eq. is the mean grade during one day obtained from n extracted samples; is the number of increments analyzed in a day (fixed number); is the counter representing the number of increments analyzed (ranges from 1 to is the grade at the location of each increment. Consider that the daily grade is calculated using 4 Seven different sampling configurations were tested, collecting respectively Note that, as each simulation presents different characteristics of variability, sampling some scenarios may show similar results within the same simulation. In As can be seen from  By using geostatistical simulations to emulate the flow of grades that will feed the processing plant and/or homogenization piles, it is not necessary to a mine operating to proceed with a variographic experiment. This simulation procedure presents a major advantage over traditional techniques. In traditional techniques, sampling equipment should already be in operation for obtaining the temporal variograms, and this sampling equipment was selected and installed without confirmation of their suitability for the sampling interval used. By applying the methodology introduced in this paper, one can perform an analysis on the required number of sample increments leading to a better adjustment in the sampling system. Grade spatial continuity and variability are reproduced in models with similar statistical characteristics of the real deposit. These models are used in mine planning and scheduling, allowing the transformation of a 3D block model into a 1D string of values feeding the plant (1D flow). These 1D strings of values (grades) have the statistical characteristics of the unknown “true” grades and can be sampled to simulate a variographic experiment. In this study, the results showed consistency and provided satisfactory estimates of the sampling error for various sampling intervals using the simulated grades. They also showed that a variographic experiment can change significantly from time to time as the ore changes and that a selected extraction interval can become obsolete if not adjusted for ore variability. Different sampling intervals can be tested (simulated) before a new mine is brought into operation: that is, a variographic experiment can be simulated without physically sampling the continuous flow. For future work, the results herein presented will be confronted with those obtained by the classical solution (variogram analysis and extension variance). It is also planned to analyze the reconciliation between the data obtained by simulations and real data obtained by sampling a continuous flow in iron ore.