Performance prediction of the roadheaders is one of the main subjects in determining the economics of the underground excavation projects. During the last decades, researchers have focused on developing performance prediction models for roadheaders. In the first stage of this study, the performance of a roadheader used in Kucuksu sewage tunnel (Istanbul) was recorded in detail and the instantaneous cutting rate (ICR) of the machine was determined. The uniaxial compressive strength (UCS) and rock quality designation (RQD) are used as input parameters in previously developed empirical models in order to point out the efficiency of these models, and the relationships between measured and predicted ICR for different encountered formations. In the second stage of the study, Artificial Neural Network (ANN) technique is used for predicting of the ICR of the roadheader. A data set including UCS, RQD, and measured ICR are established. It is traced that a neural network with two inputs (RQD and UCS) and one hidden layer can be sufficient for the estimation of ICR. In addition, it is determined that increase in number of neurons in hidden layer has positive optimizing on the performance of the ANN and a hidden layer larger than 10 neurons does not have a significant effect on optimizing the performance of the neural network. Furthermore, probability of memorizing is being recognized in this situation. Based on this study, it is concluded that the prediction capacity of ANN is better than the empirical models developed previously.Performance prediction is one of the major parameters for the success of roadheader applications and generally deals with machine selection, production rate, and bit consumption. Instantaneous cutting rate (ICR) is defined as the production rate during a continuous excavation phase in m Artificial Neural Networks (ANNs) have emerged as a new tool for analyzing the geotechnical problems. This technique allows generalizing from a training pattern, presented initially, to the solution of the problem. Once the network has been trained with a sufficient number of sample data sets a new input having a relatively similar pattern will be predicted on the basis of the previous learning pattern ( Research studies for mining and tunneling projects have been carried out to analyze the performance of mechanical excavators by using ANN. This study presents the application of an ANN modeling technique to predict roadheader performance. Four empirical models using the same predictors (UCS and RQD) have also been tested in this study. A data set obtained from Kucuksu sewage tunnel project is first used to analyze the efficiency of previously developed empirical performance prediction models. The main parameters used to predict the ICR of roadheader are uniaxial compressive strength (UCS) and rock quality designation (RQD), which are used as input parameters in these models. This original data set, taking into account these input parameters, is then subjected to ANN to build a predictive model for roadheader performance. The efficiency of the previous empirical models and suggested ANN model are discussed in detail. In the literature, two methods have been suggested for the performance prediction of roadheaders. The first method concerns on small scale and full scale laboratory rock cutting tests. The second method depends on the empirical models developed by using a large amount of in-situ data, and ICR of roadheaders correlated with rock parameters, ground conditions, and machine specifications. The most widely used experimental and empirical prediction methods suggested for roadheader performance prediction and their input parameters can be summarized as follows: The first method of estimating ICR of roadheader is to use specific energy (SE), described as amount of energy required for cutting unit volume of rock. The investigations made by Empirical performance prediction models are mainly based on past experience and the statistical interpretation of previously recorded case histories. Therefore, the collection of field data is very important for the development of empirical performance prediction models. The accuracy and reliability of these models depend on the quality and extent of the available data ( Artificial neural networks are complex mathematical models inspired from biological neurons which are widely used in modeling of nonlinear systems and system identification. An artificial neural network generally consists of an input layer, hidden layers, and an output layer. Every layer includes many neurons and the number of layers and neurons in each layer are determined by the user with respect to scale of the problem. All neurons in the structure have interconnections between each other similar to biological nervous system. ( An artificial neural network does not include any physical information about the system; instead it can be trained to setup a relation between the inputs and outputs of the system. The artificial neural network should be trained by using a sample data set for this purpose. A successful artificial neural network can be formed by three main steps which are training, validation and test. For this manner, the sample data set should be randomly separated into three subsets. Usually the scale of one of the subsets, which will be used for training, is definitely larger than others. The other two sets will be used for validation and test. It might be useful to examine the training procedure by using one neuron. ( At first the training data is used for training the artificial neural network. Random real numbers are initially assigned to the weights corresponding to each input. After that the process starts for the first input group and output. Each input and its corresponding weight is multiplied and then weighted inputs are summed as given in Eq. The weighted sum is applied to an activation function. In most cases the activation function is a sigmoid function given in Eq. The output of the activation function is already the output of the neuron. The error between observed output and neuron output is calculated and the error is back propagated by using a learning algorithm. Such artificial neural networks are named feed forward (back propagated) neural networks. The weights are updated with respect to a specified learning algorithm. The learning algorithm tries to minimize the error between actual output and predicted output. Gradient descent methods are generally used as learning algorithms. Levenberg-Marquardt algorithm which is distinguished among the learning algorithms is usually used because of its speed and robustness. It is possible to define error criteria but mean squared error is frequently used for this purpose in artificial neural network training. After updating the weights, the process repeats for the next sample group of inputs and outputs. One training cycle of the complete data set is called an epoch ( In most applications, an artificial neural network consists of one or more hidden layers and more than one neuron in each layer. In such cases the back-propagation algorithm diffuses to the complete architecture and updates all weights of the inter-connections between neurons and layers ( The second important step is the validation step which is performed in order to generalize the artificial neural network. The artificial neural network is applied to a data set which differs from the training data set. High number of epochs or large training data set can cause over-fitting or memorizing. Validation step must be applied to ensure the generalization of artificial neural network ( The third step is the test step, in which a data set that is different than training and validation data sets is used for testing. This step is similar to the validation step except in one difference. Validation step is the criteria in order to stop the training step. On the other hand, test step is applied to a trained and validated artificial neural network to measure its performance ( Finally, it must be expressed that, the training process must be stopped with respect to a flag. This flag can be specified number of epochs, specified error, and specified error gradient or validation checks. All these parameters are user defined as number of hidden layers and number of neurons in each layer and finding the optimum parameters are usually depends on trial and error. Kucuksu sewage tunnel, which has a length of 1037 Roadheader performance analysis carried out at the tunnel alignment, where the main rock was limestone (72%) with UCS values ranging from 98.2 to 174.6 At first, several prediction studies are performed by using empirical models, which are generalized in previous studies, in order to provide comparison. Then, the same data set is used to estimate the roadheader performance based on ANN modeling. The first empirical model (Eq. In the next step, an ANN is used for ICR prediction. Neural Network Toolbox in MATLAB is used to setup the nonlinear relation between inputs and output parameters. Only RQD and UCS are used as input parameters and ICR is specified as the output parameter. As the ANN has two inputs, its input layer includes two neurons and output layer has one neuron similarly. In the beginning single hidden layer is used. Number of hidden layers should be increased if the performance does not satisfy the expectation. ANN is trained for successive number of neurons in hidden layer varying between 1 and 20. In each simulation, the number of train, validation and test data are 14, 5 and 5, respectively and randomly selected by software. Levenberg-Marquardt back propagation algorithm is used for training the ANN. The stopping criterion is assigned to perform 50 epochs. Mean squared errors of train, validation and test data are calculated in every simulation. For each number of neurons in hidden layer the simulation is repeated 200 times and averages of the mean squared errors and correlation of test data are calculated in order to provide a fair comparison criterion. The total performance index is given in The performance of the ANN should be interpreted according to mean squared error of the test data. It can be seen that the lowest average mean squared error is obtained by an ANN with 3 neurons. In addition to that second highest average correlation of test data is obtained in same network architecture. At this point it must be stated that the ANN method depends on randomness and if only one simulation was performed for each case, here case corresponds to the number of neurons in hidden layer, the comparison would be unfair because every simulation starts with random weights and some of the simulations would start with better random weights concluding with better performance. For this purpose simulations are repeated 200 times and averages are calculated to find the particular number of neurons to obtain the solution with probable best performance. After this explanation it can be said that an ANN with 3 neurons in hidden layer is more suitable than others in the solution of this particular problem. In addition to that there is an increase trend in average of the mean squared errors of test data between 10 and 20 neurons which is showing that as the number of neurons increases the mean squared error increases in ANN that includes more than 20 neurons in hidden layer so it is not required to investigate the effect of number of neurons increment after 20 neurons. The average mean squared error in a solution with an ANN including 3 neurons in hidden layer is relatively small so it is not necessary to perform simulations with more hidden layers. Beyond this point, the study is focused on an ANN with 3 neurons in hidden layer. The simulation is performed again but repeated 1000 times at this time. The ANN with best test data performance that is the mean squared error of test data is obtained among these 1000 trials. The ANN with best performance is recorded and applied to entire data. In In order to signify the efficiency of the ANN method, the results are compared to those obtained by using four empirical models found in literature. The comparison is made upon entire and test data. The mean squared errors, correlations and coefficients of determination calculated by each model are given in The empirical methods are relatively easy to use and usually take a short time to reach a solution. The feasibility of using the empirical methods instead of artificial network modeling and numerical analysis in the initial stages of predicting the performance of a mechanical excavator is very important. The usage of the empirical methods does also not require any special software. Beside their advantage of simplicity, they also have a few of weaknesses. They require high-quality and large amount of machine performance data under highly controlled conditions. While artificial neural network modeling has some advantages, it also has some disadvantages. Disadvantages include its “black box” nature, greater computational burden, proneness to over-fitting, and the empirical nature of model development. Despite its disadvantages, the development of ANN methods for modeling and prediction of performance of mechanical excavators; such as TBM, and circular saw machines, have been well accepted through the scientific community. ANN model described in the paper ( The results of this study showed the benefits of the ANN method compared to the empirical methods as it was studied in a case study from Turkey. ANN modeling has a wide use for solutions of mining and underground construction problems. In this research, performance predictions of roadheaders by using ANN modeling works for medium to high strength rocks according to UCS classification ( The purpose of this study is to identify and discuss the efficiency of Artificial Neural Network (ANN) on the performance prediction of roadheaders. The development of ANN methods for modeling the performance of tunnel boring machines (TBMs) has been well accepted through the scientific community. The ANN used in this paper demonstrated promising results in predicting the achieved instantaneous cutting rate (ICR) for the case study in question. The obtained results are summarized as follows: An ANN with 2 inputs (RQD and UCS) and 1 output (ICR) is designed for ICR prediction. The architecture of the ANN consists of 1 hidden layer. The data set is divided into 3 separate parts which are training, validation and test data sets. Numerous training trials are performed starting from a single neuron to 20 neurons in the hidden layer. Mean squared error values of each data set, and correlations of test data for each trial are recorded to obtain the performance index. Based on the results of this study, it is observed that 1 hidden layer is sufficient for the prediction. In addition, best results are obtained with an ANN including 3 neurons in hidden layer. In each trial, training has stopped after performing 50 epochs. A hidden layer size greater than 10 neurons does not have an optimizing effect on the performance. Four different empirical models are compared to the ANN method. Mean squared errors, correlations and coefficients of determination of each of these four methods are recorded and compared with those obtained with ANN. It is concluded that the artificial neural network designed in this study draws a better performance than the empirical models. This study showed that ANN is a convenient tool for predicting ICR of roadheader. It can be stated that analyzing of ICR of roadheader by ANN may be used as an essential knowledge for project engineers in order to ensure the financial and scheduling credibility of the mining and tunneling projects. The authors would like to thank to Prof. Nuh Bilgin for his valuable help during the data collection. The authors would also like to thank to Prof. Hanifi Copur for his contributions in this study.