The comminution of metals (scraps) is carried out in order to obtain suitable fragment size distributions and/or to liberate the valuable components. In the case of thin-walled metals and metal scraps, respectively, shredders of the swing-hammer type are frequently used for the liberation and size reduction. The technically relevant equipment is introduced in this paper. Inside these shredders, the material is subject to complex stressing modes. On the basis of systematic investigations using a small-scale horizontal shaft shredder, four successive stages occurring during the process of the comminution of metal sheets are explained.The size reduction of automobile scrap and other types of light steel scrap as well as scraps from electronic appliances, lead-acid accumulators, non-ferrous metals and metal chips is generally carried out by means of swing-hammer shredders. This is due to the complex stressing modes occurring inside this type of equipment, which are well suited for the comminution of thin-walled metal scraps. The objectives of the size reduction are to obtain suitable size distributions required by the subsequent processing steps, to increase the bulk density and to liberate the components of composites and assemblies ( Some swing-hammer shredders typically utilised for the comminution of automobile scrap and other types of light steel scrap can be seen in The configuration of the discharge grates most common for the comminution of light steel scrap is shown in In For the investigations concerning the microprocesses taking place inside the swing-hammer shredders, a small-scale horizontal shaft shredder, a modified Izod pendulum and an impact apparatus were used (see As a result of the intensive deformation of the material, the characterisation of the products of the comminution has shown to be difficult. The fragment size and fragment mass distributions as well as their median values were used to indicate the results of the comminution. It has to be paid attention to the fact that every fragment can be described by its three main dimensions Therein, Herein, On the basis of systematic investigations utilising test bodies of sheet metal, four successive stages could be distinguished during the process of comminution ( The 1st stage of the comminution comprises the tearing off of single fragments from the feed as a result of the combined action of tensile stress, bending and torsion. It takes place in the space close to the feed chute including the anvil. The comminution possibly taking place was examined by means of the modified Izod pendulum. It became clear that breakage can occur only if the specific section modulus However, from investigations using the small scale horizontal shaft shredder, it can be derived that the 1st stage of comminution can occur under certain conditions only. The feed has to be voluminous and has to contain openings. If it is clamped by the feeding device, the impacting tools can act into the material and tear off fragments. Initially, the following 2nd stage of the comminution is characterised by an intense deformation (bending to compaction) of the comparatively large platy fragments, which leads to the formation of flaws. As a result of the combined action of tensile stress, bending and torsion, they propagate until breakage. This process becomes obvious if conducting batch tests at varying shredding times and, therefore, at varying specific energy consumption ( As can be seen in The effect of the deformation on the process of comminution becomes clear looking at If the fragments are too small in order to form abutments inside the lower part of housing, impacts against the walls of the housing become crucial for a further comminution. They cause a proceeding deformation (bending to compaction) of the fragments, which results in the formation of flaws. As a consequence of internal deadlock and of locally varying deformations, tensile stress is formed inside the fragments. Thus, a gradual crack extension until breakage takes place. These processes can be attributed to the 3rd stage of comminution. The processes taking place inside the small scale horizontal shaft shredder can well be reproduced by means of the impact apparatus shown in These differences can be explained if considering the development of the degree of bending and degree of compaction as a function of the number of impacts (  The 4th stage of comminution is characterised by a further intense compaction of the fragments until they possess a spherical shape. Simultaneously, the formation of fines can be observed. The number of fragments having sizes of The comminution of metals and scrap in swing-hammer shredders presupposes a sufficient deformation (bending to compaction) of the fragments, which results in the formation of flaws. The flaws propagate as a consequence of the combined action of tensile stress, bending and torsion until breakage is reached. This process is repeated several times for the formed fragments until they pass the discharge grate. By means of systematic investigations utilising platy test bodies, four successive stages could be observed during comminution: The 1st stage takes place in the space adjacent to the anvil and comprises the tearing off of fragments from the feed. However, its occurrence is restricted to voluminous material. During the 2nd stage, an intense deformation resulting in the formation of flaws in the spots where the material is bent is observed. The demand of energy for that is influenced by the circumferential velocity of the impacting tools. As a result of the combined action of tensile stress, bending and torsion the flaws propagate until breakage. The 3rd stage is characterised by further deformation and compaction of the fragments due to impacts. Breakage of the fragments occurs as a result of a gradual crack formation, which is caused by internal tensile stress. Thereby, the amount of energy consumed is dependent on the fragment mass and in particular on the stressing obtained during the preceding stages. The stage 4 leads to a further compaction of the fragments until they have the shape of spheres. Then, the major mechanism of comminution is the formation of fines as a result of abrasion taking place at the surface of the fragments. The authors would like to thank the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (DFG) for financial support.