Depletion of uranium ore deposits is leading to a need for more efficient uranium extraction techniques. In this study, gas-phase electric discharge is applied to an aqueous leaching solution dispersed between electrodes as a technique for enhancing acidic extraction of uranium. Application of the electric discharge treatment resulted in a 1.5 to 2.0 times increase in the leaching rate and an improvement in uranium recovery of 4%. The enhanced extraction method was found to involve oxidation of ferrous ions in the acidic aqueous solution by nitrogen-containing ions generated in the spark discharge channels.Increase in demand for nuclear fuel and depletion of global uranium ore deposits require implementation of more efficient uranium extraction technologies. Furthermore, the number of nuclear power plants in industrial nations is increasing: China, India and Russia are planning to commission forty-six new nuclear power plants in the coming years ( Uranium is extracted from ores using acidic or carbonate leaching processes ( As a result of the reaction Disadvantages of chemical oxidation methods include the necessity of chemicals delivery to often remote locations and a need for safe chemicals storage, making the A method for iron oxidation in acidic solutions using pulsed electric discharges in air has been presented in which the treated solution is dispersed into droplets of a few millimeters in size ( Previous work has demonstrated the ability of a pulsed dielectric barrier and spark discharges to oxidize dissolved ferrous iron in acidic solutions ( Acidic leaching solutions were treated by electric discharge using the experimental setup shown in The electrode system was energized by a thyristor pulse generator with magnetic pulse compression stages ( The storage tank was filled with four liters of leaching solution, which was circulated through the electric discharge reactor. The duration of the electric discharge treatment varied from 40 to 60 The outline of the experimental leaching setup is shown in The leaching procedure used in the experiments comprised the following steps. Aqueous solutions of sulfuric acid from tanks (1) and (2) were fed into leaching columns (3–6) of a height of 1 The experiment included two successive stages: preliminary acidification and active leaching. Excess concentration of sulfuric acid in preliminary acidification facilitates opening of the ore grains and liberation of uranium, increasing the degree of uranium extraction. It also reduces further acid consumption in reactions with carbonate substances during the active leaching stage, shortening its duration ( The acidification resulted in partial dissolution of uranium (VI) and iron. Uranium ions were removed from the solutions by ion exchange: approximately 55% of the total uranium content was extracted at the acidification stage. Unlike the uranium, ferrous iron was not removed and thus accumulated in the solution. At the end of the acidification stage, the concentration of Fe The acidification solutions were reused in the leaching stage with a sulfuric acid concentration of 5 Concentration of uranium (VI) in the solution was determined using Sakharov's method of titration of uranium-containing solutions by ammonium vanadate in the presence of potassium dichromate ( Electrical characteristics of the discharge were registered with a Tektronix P6015 voltage divider, resistive current sensor and Tektronix 2014 digital oscilloscope with the bandwidth of 100 Prior to the leaching stage, spark discharge treatment of model solutions was carried out to establish optimal treatment parameters.  Subsequent to the acidification, the stage of active leaching continued for thirty-seven days. After every 48 The concentration of nitrite and nitrate ions in the leaching solution after 40  The electric discharge treatment of the leaching solutions resulted in an increased uranium extraction rate ( Thermal discharges at atmospheric pressure have relatively low efficiency of short-lived oxidants generation ( The highest generation efficiency of short-lived species such as O and OH is reached in dielectric barrier and pulsed corona discharges ( Nitrogen-containing substances are characterized by relatively long lifetime in air. These species diffuse from the spark channels to the reactor volume and further dissolve in the leaching solutions. High gas temperature and density of charged particles in the spark discharges promote generation of nitrogen monoxide (NO), which is further oxidized to NO Dissolution of nitrogen oxides in aqueous media forms nitrite and nitrate ions according to the reactions According to Dissolution of nitrogen monoxide in the presence of nitric acid further increases the concentration of nitrite ions due to the following autocatalytic reaction ( According to the reaction In the leaching experiments, nitrite ions were completely consumed in the redox processes with iron, uranium and other constituents of the ore, which affirms the major oxidation role of nitrite ions. Consumption of nitrate ions was substantially smaller, which may be conditioned by the reaction Energy consumption of the electric discharge treatment was 42 Spark electric discharge in air was utilized in the treatment of an aqueous leaching solution to enhance the uranium heap leaching process. The electric discharge treatment in experiments simulating uranium heap leaching resulted in a two-fold decrease in the leaching time for the same extraction rate. Ultimate overall uranium recovery increased by 4% compared to the conventional leaching process. Oxidation of iron and uranium in the leaching process occurred due to oxidation reactions induced by nitrogen-containing compounds generated in the spark discharge channels. The oxidation mechanism involved dissolution of nitrogen oxides, formation of nitrite and nitrate ions, and oxidation of ferrous iron and uranium by nitrite ions. The energy consumption of the uranium leaching process used in the experiments was approximately 42 The authors express their gratitude to Galina Lobanova and Petr Khryapov from Laboratory 12, Institute of High Technology Physics, Tomsk Polytechnic University, for their help with the experiments. The authors also thank Prof. Sergei Preis, South China University of Technology, China, for valuable discussions and Peter G. Jones, Lappeenranta University of Technology, Finland, for proofreading the text.