In this paper, a closed-loop subspace identification approach through an orthogonal projection and subsequent singular value decomposition is proposed. As a by-product of this development, it explains why some existing subspace methods may deliver a bias in the presence of the feedback control and suggests a remedy to eliminate the bias. Furthermore, as the proposed method is a projection based method, it can simultaneously provide extended observability matrix, lower triangular block-Toeplitz matrix, and Kalman filtered state sequences. Therefore, using this method, the system state space matrices can be recovered either from the extended observability matrix/the block-Toeplitz matrix or from the Kalman filter state sequences.The method of closed-loop identification has been developed over the last 30 years. Important issues such as identifiability under closed-loop conditions have received attention from many researchers Closed-loop identification refers to the identification of process models using the data sampled under feedback control. Correlation between the disturbances entering the process and the input offers the fundamental limitation Closed-loop identification has attracted an increasing interest over the last decade due to the emerging research area of identification for control. The key idea in the identification for control strategy (as opposed to a `disjoint' or separate identification and control) is to identify After the establishment of the classical prediction error methods (PEM) for system identification, the subspace identification method is a relatively new approach used for the state space model identification. In this approach, certain subspace matrices of the process are, at the first step, calculated through data projection Identification of the subspace matrices from closed-loop data has also received an attention by a number of researchers Another class of subspace system identification is called the instrument variable methods By adopting the EIV model structure of The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Several subspace notations adopted throughout this paper are revisited in Section Consider a state space model in the innovation form Following the standard subspace notation, one can derive, through the iterative substitution of Eqs. The output and innovation block-Hankel matrices The states are defined as The extended observability matrix The reversed extended controllability matrices In subspace identification literature, the following short-hand notation is often used: The following two projections are frequently used throughout this paper.   Two important properties of the oblique projection are often used and they are With the above definitions, a non-steady state Kalman filter can be derived from Eqs. First, from Eq. In subspace literature, one often performs an oblique projection of Eq. Following the same line, if we now make an orthogonal projection of Eq. Let us now revisit Eq. One may ask, at this stage, whether the calculation of the column space of The situation becomes more complex for closed-loop identification where the future disturbance To solve this problem, by adopting the EIV structure of Wang and Qin Eq. The projection method may also be mathematically regarded as an instrument variable method where the instrument is Now multiplying both sides of Eq. Perform SVD decomposition of With Eq. As can be seen from the above derivation, Subspace identification algorithms draw a lot of their strength from the use of Perform a The problem must have resulted from the controller since they both work well under the open-loop condition. To find the problem, let us consider that the controller is described by the following state space model: Eq. As a consequence, the subspace orthogonal to the column space of In order to guarantee that the left null space of The same applies to SOPIM as it can also be treated as an instrument method. In this case, rather than projecting to With the modification, all the computation procedures discussed in the last section are valid for closed-loop identification after replacing From the above discussion, one can see that the undesired effect of the feedback control on the identifiability of open-loop instrument and/or projection subspace methods may also be alleviated if the setpoint In this subsection, we shall develop an alternative method for both open-loop and closed-loop identification through the calculated Kalman filter states. Write Eqs. The estimate of With the availability of However, SOPIM-S may not be applicable to closed-loop data even though the state has been estimated. The main problem is Eq. First estimate Assuming there is at least one sample time delay in the process, i.e.  We shall call this modified method as closed-loop subspace orthogonal projection identification method via the state estimation for model extraction, abbreviated CSOPIM-S. Model estimation algorithms based on Kalman filter state, SOPIM-S and CSOPIM-S, appear to be more cumbersome than the algorithms that directly extract models from The proposed closed-loop identification algorithm can also be directly applied to closed-loop identification of the following error in variable (EIV) systems In this section, we will use a benchmark problem to evaluate the proposed approach and compare it with other existing subspace identification algorithms. We will apply the following representative subspace algorithms in the literature: closed-loop algorithm by Van Overschee and De Moor The system to be considered was first presented by Verhaegen Van Overschee and De Moor In this simulation, we will reproduce the results of Van Overschee and De Moor To appreciate closed-loop subspace identification algorithms, we have also applied classical subspace algorithms, N4SID, MOESP, two CVAs (CVA that we have programmed according to Since the proposed algorithm is a closed-loop identification algorithm, it must be applicable to open-loop identification. A natural question is how it performs in open-loop identification. Thus, we perform open-loop Monte-Carlo simulation using the open-loop plant without feedback control. Its results together with the comparison with other classical subspace identification algorithms are shown in Finally, we shall verify our claim that one of the instrument-variable based subspace identification methods, SIMPCA, can deliver a bias estimate for closed-loop identification at least under the condition that the external excitation is white noise but the bias can be reduced if the external excitation is autocorrelated, and the proposed CSIMPCA can effectively eliminate the bias. The closed-loop simulation results for SIMPCA are presented in In this paper, by adopting the EIV model structure, a subspace orthogonal projection identification method (SOPIM) is proposed. It, however, yields a bias for closed-loop identification at least under the condition that the external excitation is white. Through analysis of the bias error of SOPIM under closed-loop conditions, it is discovered that other existing instrument subspace methods in the literature may also suffer from the same bias error and therefore, these methods only yield a partial solution to closed-loop identification. Motivated by this discovery, a remedy is derived to eliminate bias error for SOPIM as well as for one of the existing instrument subspace identification algorithms, SIMPCA, for the sake of closed-loop identification. As a result two new subspace closed-loop identification algorithms CSOPIM and CSIMPCA, named after SOPIM and SIMPCA, respectively, are developed. In addition, the orthogonal projection method proposed in this paper provides both extended observability matrix and Kalman filter state sequence. Therefore, system models may also be recovered from the estimated Kalman state sequence, and the closed-loop subspace orthogonal projection identification method via state estimation (CSOPIM-S) is proposed. Simulations based on a benchmark problem compare the performance of the proposed algorithms with a number of well-known subspace identification algorithms and verify the feasibility and closed-loop applicability of the proposed algorithms. This work is supported by Alexander von Humboldt Research Fellowship of Germany and this support is greatly acknowledged by B.H. and S.X.D. S.J.Q. also acknowledges the support from Natural Sciences Foundation of China in the form of an Outstanding Young Investigator Award for Overseas (60228001).