In order to prepare sophisticated biomaterials using a biomimetic approach, a deeper understanding of biomineralization is needed. Of particular importance is the control and regulation of the mineralization process. In this study, a novel bilayer rate-controlling model was designed to investigate the factors potentially influencing mineralization. In the absence of a rate-controlling layer, nano-scale hydroxyapatite (HA) crystallites exhibited a spherical morphology, whereas, in the presence of a rate-controlling layer, HA crystallites were homogeneously dispersed and spindle-like in structure. The mineralization rate had a significant effect on controlling the morphology of crystals. Furthermore, in vitro tests demonstrated that the reaction layer containing spindle-like HA crystallites possessed superior biological properties. These results suggest that a slow mineralization rate is required for controlling the morphology of inorganic crystallites, and consumption by the rate-controlling layer ensured that the ammonia concentration remained low. This study demonstrates that a biomimetic approach can be used to prepare novel biomaterials containing HA crystallites that have different morphologies and biological properties.Biomineralization is a process by which organisms build bones, teeth, pearls and other bodily structures In all of these methods, biocomposites were prepared rapidly and the nucleation and growth of inorganic crystallites could not be controlled accurately The objective of the current work was to develop a novel method for slowing down the mineralization rate using a bilayer rate-controlling model (RCM), and to investigate the effects on the formation of hydroxyapatite (HA) and the fabrication of the final composites. The aim was to prepare biocomposites in a way that more closely resembles natural biomineralization. Chitosan (CS), a positively charged polysaccharide possessing desirable bioactivity and biocompatibility, is easily obtained at low cost and has been widely used in the syntheses of various biomaterials Chitosan (CS, Mw 100 Three models were designed based on the chemical constituents shown in Firstly, the lower reaction layer was prepared via crosslinking. In brief, CS powder was dissolved in 20 Secondly, the rate-controlling layer was prepared by dissolving AGA in 40 Ammonia was added to the top of the bilayer gel system and allowed to slowly penetrate in order to generate alkaline conditions. Beakers were stored at 4 Morphological investigations were carried out using a SEM (Quanta200, FEI, Holland) and a TEM (2010FEF, JOEL, Japan). The crystal phase was characterized by wide-angle X-ray diffraction analysis (X’pert Pro, PANalytical, Holland). The working conditions of the X-ray diffractometer were CuK The MG63 osteoblast-like cells were obtained from Zhongnan Hospital of Wuhan University, and cultured in Dulbecco's modified Eagle medium (DMEM) containing 10% fetal bovine serum (FBS) at 37 The MG63 osteoblast-like cells were seeded on the CS/HA films of three models for 48 The MG63 osteoblast-like cells (2.0 All data were reported as means FTIR spectra were obtained for the CS/HA layer of each experimental material ( Real-time monitoring revealed that the control group only took 8 Crystallographic characteristics of crystallites were investigated using X-ray diffraction. The morphology of CS/HA layers was observed by SEM. In RCM-1 models, nano-sized spindle-like crystallites were uniformly dispersed in the CS matrix, presumably due to the presence of the AGA/CaP rate-controlling layer ( Cell morphology and the capacity to grow on the surface of biomaterials are often dependent upon the surface characteristics of biomaterials Cell proliferation on the CS/HA composite disks was significantly enhanced throughout the duration of cell culturing ( In this work, we developed a novel, versatile method for preparing spindle-like HA crystallites. The slower rate of mineralization in the reaction layer of the RCM-1 models resulted in HA crystallites with a unique structure and biological properties. The mineralization rate varied considerably between models; the slowest rate occurred in RCM-1, and the rate in RCM-2 was also much slower than the control group. The bilayer rate-controlling RCM-1 models successfully achieved the goal of controlling the mineralization rate. However, we could not determine if the change in rate was proportional to the weight ratio of AGA/CaP. CaP precursor salts were chosen as the ammonia-consuming components so that HA precipitates could be immobilized in the AGA gel network through which ammonia could slowly permeate against the resistance by inorganic particles. Under acidic conditions, CaP precursors would also precipitate to form stable particles, however the acid would be consumed simultaneously without forming a homogeneous solid phase. We ensured that calcium and phosphorus were the only inorganic components so that no other ions would interfere with mineralization in the reaction layer. Additionally, the relatively low temperature of 4 The presence of an inorganic phase in the rate-controlling layer of RCM-1 resulted in the slowest rate of mineralization in the reaction layer of this model. Ammonia must be consumed at a rate that is adequate to accomplish the nucleation and growth of HA in the AGA matrix, therefore the starting ammonia concentration in the reaction layer is significantly affected by the rate-controlling layer. Newly precipitated HA particles in the AGA matrix can immediately act as buffer components that influence mineralization conditions in the reaction layer. Indeed, the three RCM-1 models exhibited different mineralization rates due to the different weight ratios of AGA/CaP in the rate-controlling layers. With a higher inorganic phase content, the mineralization rate of the reaction layer was slower. In RCM-2, the three dimensional network of the pure AGA gel slowed the diffusion of ammonia to the extent that it was not consumed at all, and the starting concentration in the reaction layer remained too high to facilitate the appropriate level of nucleation and preferred orientation of HA particles. The influence of the mineralization rate on the structure and function of the resultant biomaterials was investigated. Spindle-like HA crystallites were obtained in RCM-1 reaction layers, whilst spherical HA crystallites were obtained in the reaction layers of the RCM-2 and control group. Similar bands in the FTIR spectra of the CS/HA reaction layers confirmed that the crystallites in all three models were HA ( During the biomineralization process, biomacromolecules can interact with the growing inorganic crystals through hydrogen bonds and electrostatic interactions, and these interactions can influence the nucleation, growth, morphology, and grain size of the inorganic crystals. Crystal morphology is primarily determined by the growth rate on the different crystal surfaces. Generally, the absorption of a molecule onto the growing crystal surface can inhibit or decelerate the crystal growth planes in that direction. In this work, mineralization of the reaction layer in RCM-1 was slowed by ammonia diffusing through the AGA/CaP rate-controlling layer. However, in RCM-2 and the control group, there were many more nucleation sites on the CS polymer chains, and precipitation in the stronger alkaline conditions was finished before regulation of nucleation and growth could take place. The rapid permeation of ammonia hindered nucleation and growth of HA in the CS matrix. Ammonia must therefore diffuse at the appropriate rate to achieve optimum control of nucleation and growth in order to produce the desired HA crystallite morphology. The appropriate rate of growth allowed crystals to grow in line along polymer chains to form spindle-like HA crystals that were approximately 50–70 When compared with the conventional micro-sized particles, the nano-sized HA particles possessing a large relative surface area can form a tight interface with polymeric matrices, offering desirable mechanical properties, while maintaining favorable biological properties, thus influencing cell adhesion, proliferation and differentiation for new tissue formation In order to better understand biomineralization and optimize biomimetic approaches, a novel bilayer RCM was successfully designed to investigate the factors that potentially influence the mineralization process. This bilayer model included a AGA/CaP rate-controlling layer positioned above a CS/HA reaction layer. The mineralization rate of the reaction layer could be effectively controlled by diffusion of ammonia through the rate-controlling layer. The results showed that a slower rate of mineralization undeniably resulted in nano-sized spindle-like HA particles that were uniformly dispersed in the CS matrix. The biological properties of composites containing these crystallites were superior to those containing spherical HA crystals resulting from a more rapid mineralization. The rate of mineralization can therefore be controlled to achieve composites of the desired morphology. The novel strategies presented in this work may be useful for the development of biomimetic syntheses and bioactive coatings for use in tissue engineering. In principle, our model could be further modified to produce biointerfaces tailored to specific needs. The authors gratefully acknowledge financial support from the