Fine grinding of silica was carried out in a jet mill, varying operational parameters such as feed rate, classifier rotational speed and grinding pressure. The size reduction of silica was intensive as the jet mill is energy intensive. Abrasive and destructive breakage mechanisms took place varying according to the operating conditions of the jet mill. The minimum particle size obtained was 3.15μm with a span value of 1.30. The circularity value of the ground silica ranged from 1.29 to 2.02. Particles ground at lower grinding pressure exhibited more or less spherical shapes whilst at higher grinding pressure, elongated particles with sharp edges were produced.Fine grinding has increased in importance with the drastic increase in the demand for fine particles in various industries such as paper, paint, plastic, pharmaceuticals, ceramics, cosmetics, foods and fine chemicals ( Jet mills are commonly used to produce particles between 1 The breakage of particles in grinding mills is highly dependent on design and operating parameters. In grinding mills the breakage mechanism determines the quality of the particles in terms of particle size, particle size distribution and particle shape. The main breakage mechanism is destructive breakage due to impact but other breakage mechanisms such as abrasion, primary cleavage and secondary cleavage into blocks also play important roles, dependent on the operating conditions of the grinding mill. High grinding pressure (higher jet velocity and greater grinding energy) leads to destructive breakage, producing fewer blocks and platelets but exhibiting sharp edges. If lower grinding pressure is used, abrasion grinding will be more dominant resulting in chipping of the particle edges ( This paper focuses on the effect of operational parameters such as feed rate, classifier rotational speed and grinding pressure on the breakage mechanism of silica in terms of particle size and distribution, and particle shape during fine grinding in a jet mill. High purity silica supplied by Sibelco Asia, Johor, Malaysia, of high crystalinity, with Continuous grinding was carried out by varying the feed rate, classifier rotational speed and grinding pressure at three levels. The feed rates chosen were 4 Morphological analyses were done on the feed and ground samples. The images for the morphology analysis were captured using a scanning electron microscope, ZEISS Supra 35VP, with an acceleration voltage ranging between 5 Image treatment was performed by Scion Image Release Beta 4.0.2 software, to obtain binary images containing the particle silhouette from the initial grey level image. This procedure involved segmentation, erosion and hole filling. Segmentation was done to separate particles of interest from the background. Erosion removes any object in contact with the image edges which are not fully in view. Hole filling was done to obtain a complete silhouette of the particle. Once silhouetted the particles were ready for quantification. The particle silhouette was used to determine shape using 2D shape descriptors, circularity (    The coarser particle peak at 22    It can be deduced that lower grinding pressure, at 2 At high grinding pressure, particles had high acceleration with led to destructive breakage of the particles. The tendency for random particle breakage was very high and normally the particles were forced to break along the weak planes. The trigonal structure of silica led to production of concave particles, elongated with sharp edges, as shown in The breakage mechanism in the jet mill was influenced by feed rate, classifier rotational speed and grinding pressure. Abrasion and destructive breakage took place in the grinding mills according to the operating conditions of the jet mill. At low grinding pressure, abrasion breakage was dominant whilst at high grinding pressure destructive breakage takes place. The abrasion breakage mechanism produced more spherical particles with high circularity values. The circularity value of ground silica ranged from 1.29 to 2.02. Generally the circularity value of ground silica was lower than that of the feed. The breakage mechanism in the grinding chamber of the jet mill had an impact on particle size, distribution and particle shape. The authors wish to gratefully acknowledge Universiti Sains Malaysia and Ministry of Science, Technology and Innovation, Malaysia for granting the research fund under Science fund (Project no.03-01-05-SF0197) for this research project.