Fly ash, if not utilised, is considered a waste product. Zeolitisation of coal fly ash offers the opportunity to create an added value product from a waste stream. Using a two-step zeolitisation process, Si is leached from improved fly ash residue — a previously untested feedstock for this process. Optimisation of the conditions of crystallisation of synthetic zeolite are discussed in this paper. The type of synthetic zeolites produced was found to be highly dependent on the conditions of the crystallisation process. Zeolites formed include zeolite Na-P1, sodalite, zeolite Na-A, zeolite K-A, and others. Crystallisation parameters explored in this paper include sodium aluminate addition, duration of crystallisation period, temperature, and the type of fly ash (improved fly ash residue vs. untreated fly ash). Yields of up to 250g/kg of ash of high purity zeolite Na-P1 were produced from improved fly ash residue. Although this is an improvement on yields in literature, tentative profitability calculations on a full scale plant require a yield of 286g/kg ash in order to achieve a return on investment within 4years.Fly ash (FA) is defined by European standard EN 450-1 as a“fine-grained powder, which is mainly composed of spherical glassy particles, produced during the combustion of pulverised coal” ( Fly ash has multiple components which can be separated. These components are a low density component, a carbonaceous component and a ferromagnetic component. The amount of these components present will vary depending on coal type and combustion conditions. The light weight fraction is made up of cenospheres which are small, hollow, ceramic spheres formed during combustion. Air trapped within the spheres gives rise to their low density. Carbon forms up to 25% by mass of the ash. The magnetic content varies between 0.5% and 18%. A magnetic concentrate can be recovered which is primarily spherical iron enriched aluminosilicate with an iron content of 20–61% by weight ( Zeolitisation of fly ash provides an opportunity to produce an added value product from a waste stream. Zeolites have high cation exchange capacities (CEC) of up to 5 The current study investigates the use of improved fly ash residue of the two particle sizes for zeolite synthesis. Improved fly ash residue is ash from which cenospheres, unburnt carbon and magnetite have been removed. The improved fly ash residue has undergone sequential processing steps in order remove the lightweight, organic, and magnetic fraction. The synthesis yield and zeolite type will be analysed with respect to FA type, Al ion addition, incubation time, and temperature. The novelty of this work comes from the use of improved fly ash residue, rather than untreated fly ash, thus investigating the influence which a processed ash source has on the zeolitisation process. Three different FA materials were obtained from the FA processing company RockTron Ltd. Carbon content was assessed via Loss-on-ignition (LOI) tests which were performed in a furnace at 1000 The apparatus consisted of a round-bottomed 1 All experiments were conducted using a spherical, wide-neck 1 In order to assess the impact of the quantity of SA added, experiments were conducted. In each of these, an increasing concentration of SA solution was added to the crystallisation step. Only 100 As shown in Upon the addition of lower doses of SA to the solution, there was no noticeable immediate change in appearance. This indicates that the solution is not saturated enough to produce an immediate precipitation. With the 136 The four experiments analysing duration of crystallisation were 3  The effects of the temperature of crystallisation on yield and form of zeolite are shown in  The PSD in The effects of variation in the ash used on yield and form of zeolite are shown in The benchmark experiment, 6 The zeolitisation of coal fly ash is influenced by many factors. The highest yields of zeolite Na-P1 were found by adding 136