Purpose
                  The aim of the present study was to evaluate the acute toxicity and pharmacokinetics of paclitaxel nanosuspensions stabilized with TPGS in mice.
               
                  Method
                  The paclitaxel nanosuspensions were prepared by evaporative precipitation into aqueous solution (EPAS) method, and freeze-dried powders of the nanosuspensions were obtained through lyophilization process. The morphology and particle size of nanosuspensions were determined by transmission electron microscope and Zetasizer, respectively. The acute toxicity and pharmacokinetics of paclitaxel nanosuspensions after intravenous administration to Kunming mice were studied. A marketed paclitaxel injectable solution was studied parallelly.
               
                  Results
                  The paclitaxel nanoparticles were in rod shape under transmission electron microscope, and their mean particle size was 135.4±5.7nm. Results of acute toxicity showed the LD50 of paclitaxel nanosuspensions was 98.63mg/kg, twice more than that of the marketed injection (41.46mg/kg). After intravenous injection paclitaxel nanosuspensions displayed different pharmacokinetic properties in comparison with the marketed injectable solution, including a decreased initial drug concentration, increased plasma half-life, AUC and MRT.
               
                  Conclusions
                  The paclitaxel nanosuspensions prepared in this study could markedly enhance the tolerance dosage in mice, and manifest different pharmacokinetic properties compared with the solution.Research on colloidal drug delivery systems may be the hottest field in pharmaceutics in the last several decades. Among these colloidal systems, drug nanosuspensions have been paid more and more attentions as a promising approach due to its pharmaceutical advantage and pharmacoeconomic value An important advantage of the drug nanosuspensions is that they can be applied to various administration routes, such as oral Paclitaxel (PTX), a diterpenoid derived from the needles and bark of the Pacific Yew tree (Taxus brevifolia), is a potent inhibitor of cell replication, blocking cells in the late G In this study, PTX nanosuspensions were prepared by EPAS method. TPGS, a surfactant which can inhibit the efflux function of P-gp, was used as the stabilizer. In order to enhance the stability of nanosuspensions, freeze-dried powders were obtained through lyophillization method. Acute toxicity and pharmacokinetics of PTX nanosuspensions were studied in mice after intravenous administration. Evaluation of the in vitro and in vivo performances of the PTX nanosuspensions against the resistant tumors, which is now ongoing by our groups, will be further reported. PTX (95.0%) was purchased from MeiLun Biotechnology Co., Ltd. (DaLian, China). PTX standard (99.0%) and TPGS were purchased from the Sigma Aldrich Co. Ltd. Marketed PTX (XINERJIN 0.2 First the nanosuspensions were filled into glass flasks and pre-freezed using an ultra cold freezer (MDF-382E, SANYO, Japan) at −80 The particle size of PTX nanosuspensions was measured with a Zetasizer (3000SH, Malvern Instruments Ltd., UK). The morphology of nanosuspensions was observed using transmission electron microscope (TEM, JEM-1200EX, Japan). One drop of nanosuspensions was placed on a copper grid and stained with 2% phosphotungstic acid solution for 2 Kunming strain mice (25 Kunming mice (8-week old male) were studied with 6 animals per dosing group. Mice were individually housed in suspended stainless steel cages, and provided rodent feed and water ad libitum. PTX solution injection (at 14.4 Kunming strain mice were divided into two groups and administered with XINERJIN Two hundred microlitres of plasma were extracted and homogenized with 1 HPLC analysis of PTX was performed on an Agilent 1200 series HPLC system (Agilent, USA) equipped with an autosampler system and a variable wavelength UV detector. The detection wavelength was set at 227.0 Statistical differences were estimated using Student's The mean particle size of PTX nanosuspensions was 135.4 The results of acute toxicity showed that the LD The PTX blood concentration–time curves after intravenous administration of different formulations in mice were shown in Safety is a primary issue for medicines, thus the toxicity assessment is the most important data for registration of a new medicine. For the injection dosage forms of poorly soluble drugs safety issue may be more troublesome. Due to their low solubility, a large amount of organic cosolvents or solubilizers should be added in most cases before they are formulated as injectable solution, which will result in unwanted side effects or even toxicities. Due to the aqueous property and safe composition of nanosuspensions, the need for organic solvents or extreme pH ranges for solubilization of poorly soluble drugs is excluded. This provides an opportunity to escalate dose and reduce solvent-related adverse effects. In this study, mice displayed a significantly better tolerability for PTX nanosuspensions than they did for PTX solution ( Many studies have proved that the intravenous colloid drug system can significantly change the pharmacokinetic properties of drugs In addition, in the terms of safety, the altered pharmacokinetics may also be conducive to the reduced toxicity of the nanosuspensions related to the initial plasma peak The present studies successfully prepared PTX nanosuspnesions by an EPAS process, in which the P-gp inhibitory surfactant TPGS was used as stabilizers. Animal experiments proved that PTX nanosuspnesions possessed a higher tolerability than the marketed solution. This was mainly attributed to: (i) the aqueous properties and safe compositions of nanosuspensions and (ii) the MPS deposition resulting in a lower None declared. L.G.: Owner of the foundation, the organizer and designer of this subject; be in charge of each experiment and the paper writing. G.L.: Technological assessor of the whole subject. J.K.: Being in charge of the morphology of the nanoparticles. M.N.: Being in charge of the animal experiments. Z.W.: Being in charge of the support of the materials and apparatus. H.W.: Being in charge of the morphology of the nanoparticles. J.M.: Technological assessor on the pharmacokinetic studies. X.W.: Technological assessor on the formulation studies. This work was partially supported by the