Recent developments in Life Cycle Impact Assessment (LCIA) provide a basis for reducing the uncertainty in monetarisation of environmental impacts. The LCIA method “Ecoindicator99” provides impact pathways ending in a physical score for each of the three safeguard subjects humans, ecosystems, and resources. We redefine these damage categories so that they can be measured in terms of Quality Adjusted Life Years (QALYs) for impacts on human well-being, Biodiversity Adjusted Hectare Years (BAHYs) for impacts on ecosystems, and monetary units for impacts on resource productivity.
                  The monetary value of a QALY can be derived from the budget constraint, i.e. the fact that the average annual income is the maximum that an average person can pay for an additional life year. Since a QALY by definition is a life-year lived at full well-being, the budget constraint can be determined as the potential annual economic production per capita at full well-being. We determine this to be 74,000 EUR with an uncertainty estimate of 62,000 to 84,000 EUR. This corresponds well to the 74,627 EUR willingness-to-pay estimate of the ExternE project. Differences to other estimates can be explained by inherent biases in the valuation approaches used to derive these estimates.
                  The value of ecosystems can be expressed in monetary terms or in terms of QALYs, as the share of our well-being that we are willing to sacrifice to protect the ecosystems. While this trade-off should preferably be done by choice modelling, only one such study was found at the level of abstraction that allows us to relate BAHYs to QALYs or monetary units. Stressing the necessity for such studies, we resort to suggest a temporary proxy value of 1400 EUR/BAHY (or 52 BAHY/QALY), with an uncertainty range of 350 to 3500 EUR/BAHY.
                  The practical consequences of the above-described monetarisation values has been investigated by combining them with the midpoint impact categories of two recent LCIA methods, thus providing a new LCIA method with the option of expressing results in both midpoints and an optional choice between QALY and monetary units as endpoint. From our application of the new method to different case studies, it is noteworthy that resource impacts obtain less emphasis than in previous LCIA methods, while impacts on ecosystems obtain more importance. This shows the significance of being able to express impacts on resources and ecosystems in the same units as impacts on human well-being.The applicability of cost-benefit assessments (CBA) is affected by the high uncertainty in relation to monetarisation of environmental impacts (see e.g. The UNEP/SETAC framework for LCIA ( The LCIA method “Ecoindicator99” ( For each of the three safeguard subjects (humans, ecosystems, resources) we specify a common measurement unit. Our measurement units are slightly adjusted compared to the units for impact or damage applied in the “Ecoindicator99” ( Within the safeguard subject “humans” we define the damage category as “Human well-being” with the measurement unit Quality Adjusted Life Year (QALY). This measurement unit is identical to the Disability Adjusted Life Year (DALY) used by Within the safeguard subject “ecosystems”, we define the damage category as “Biodiversity” with the measurement unit Biodiversity Adjusted Hectare Year (BAHY). This measurement unit is identical to the PDF m In giving equal weight to all individuals or species, the QALY and BAHY concepts have a level of abstraction that may complicate their application for valuation in e.g. choice modelling, but at the same time gives them the level of neutrality required to reduce arbitrariness and uncertainty from specific contexts. For the safeguard subject “resources” we define the damage category as “resource productivity” measured as the future economic output in monetary units. In practice, we use “EUR In this section, the monetary value of a QALY is derived from the overall budget constraint, and the resulting value compared to and discussed in the context of the results of other methods to derive the monetary value of a QALY. The budget constraint, i.e. the fact that the average annual income is the maximum that an average person can pay for an additional life year, provides an upper limit for the monetary value of a QALY. Since a QALY by definition is a life-year lived at full well-being, the budget constraint can be determined as the potential average annual income at full well-being, which is equal to the potential annual economic production per capita. Since a QALY conceptually covers all aspects of human well-being that one would be willing to pay for, all income will on average be spent on total production to maintain full well-being, providing that there is no long-term change in capital stock. Therefore, the potential average annual income at full well-being also provides a lower limit for the monetary value of a QALY. We may thus conclude that there is a conceptual equivalence between the monetary value of a QALY and the potential economic production per capita. The potential annual economic production per capita is calculated by It is interesting to note that the willingness-to-pay studies performed as part of the recent update of the ExternE methodology ( Other estimates in the value-of-life literature – 42 in total – were reviewed by The willingness-to-pay estimate of the ExternE project of 74,627 EUR is provided with an uncertainty estimate of 27,000–225,000 EUR ( Lack of willingness-to-pay values for general impacts on ecosystems has been a major obstacle for the inclusion of such impacts in CBAs. For example, in his otherwise thorough study of the economic impacts of climate change, As a more solid alternative to willingness-to-pay estimates, choice modelling is gaining ground as a way to value ecosystem impacts (see the survey of However, although choice modelling has been applied to specific ecosystems and geographically limited ecosystem services, only one study ( In an initial attempt ( To express BAHYs in monetary units, we used the above-derived value of a QALY, thus arriving at a value of 3500 EUR/BAHY (74,000 EUR/QALY divided by 21 BAHY/QALY). Noting that the current human activities engage approximately 50% of natural ecosystems (37% of NPP according to However, we note that the value of 3500 EUR/BAHY is one order of magnitude larger than the range of 63–350 EUR per ha of ecosystem protected suggested by the ExternE study ( The choice modelling study of Finally, we note that the current environmental protection expenditures in developed countries are at 1–2% of GDP. Although this is not the same as the marginal willingness-to-pay for additional ecosystem protection above the current level, it may – together with the above observations – indicate that our initial suggested value of 5% of the potential income for ecosystem protection is likely to be an upper bound. Using the ExternE values as a lower bound, we have an order of magnitude range for the “correct” value of a BAHY, i.e. it is likely to be anywhere between 350 and 3500 EUR/BAHY. In the following exemplary applications, we used a value corresponding to valuing the current global ecosystem impacts at 2% of the potential income, i.e. 1500 EUR/person year or 1400 EUR/BAHY, stressing that this is purely a proxy value in order to show the importance of being able to express ecosystem damage in monetary terms, waiting to be replaced by better estimates to be made directly by choice modelling. That the impacts on the three damage categories are additive is demonstrated by the following reasoning: In a world without externalities, the GDP would be 74,000 EUR/capita, as shown in the previous section. This would also be the money we could spend. The potential value of production and consumption is thus 2 The relationship between QALYs and potential human economic production is an equivalence, i.e. while the potential annual per capita economic production of 74,000 EUR The practical consequences of the above-described endpoint modelling has been investigated by integrating it with the midpoint impact categories of two recent LCIA methods (EDIP2003 and IMPACT2002+), extended to the damage categories of “Ecoindicator99”, thus providing a new LCIA method (named Stepwise2006) with the option of expressing results in both midpoints and an optional choice between QALY and monetary units as endpoint. The full documentation of Stepwise2006 is available via We have applied the Stepwise2006 method at different stages of development to a number of case studies (  The relative importance of the different environmental impacts is shown in This shows that four impact categories (global warming, injuries, nature occupation, and respiratory inorganics) make up 92% of the total monetarised impacts from the included impact categories. Important impact categories that are not yet included in the Stepwise2006 method are invasive alien species and traffic noise. Earlier monetarisation studies have primarily obtained their values from stated preferences (via contingent valuation or choice modelling) or from revealed preferences. The method applied for the Stepwise method (i.e. obtaining the monetary values directly via the overall budget constraint in terms of the potential human economic production), requires that all impacts are first expressed relative to an overall concept of well-being (such as QALYs), which has only recently become possible, especially as a result of the pioneering work of In general, previous studies combine a number of different methods for monetarisation and solicit separate values for specific pollutants, disabilities and environmental compartments. For example, the ExternE study ( In our approach, we have sought to reduce the need for separate monetarisation exercises, by suggesting that all human health and ecosystem impacts be measured by one indicator (QALY) and by then assessing the monetary value of this overall indicator. This does not eliminate uncertainty and the need for assumptions, but it does increase the consistency and transparency of the assumptions made. An overview of monetarisation studies has recently been provided by Important impacts are left un-monetarised in previous studies (see e.g. Expressing all environmental impacts in QALYs and using the budget constraint to establish an equivalence between QALYs and monetary units, opens up for seamless integration of new impact categories, e.g. for social and economic impacts, which may also be expressed in either QALYs or monetary units ( As any endpoint method will include a number of assumptions that may be controversial, a wider scientific and stakeholder review procedure is needed to approach consensus on the procedures and values used. This is especially relevant for the application of the overall budget constraint to derive the value of a QALY, a procedure which has not been attempted earlier. Also, to replace our proxy value for the severity of ecosystem impacts, a proper choice modelling study should be performed, preferably in conjunction with a larger study to obtain consistent values for a larger number of issues, and including calibration to the values derived in the “Global burden of disease” study ( Thanks are extended to many colleagues who over the years have joined discussions on the ideas put forward in this paper. The final push necessary to put the ideas into a practical format was provided by the project “Environmental assessment of municipal waste management scenarios in Malta and Krakow” for the European Commission, DG-JRC, Institute for Environment and Sustainability. I am also grateful for comments by several reviewers and editors on early versions of this paper.