The purpose of this study was to present the results of the metatarsal fractures treated with a closed antegrade intramedullary pinning technique. The records of 35 consecutive patients with metatarsal fractures operated on from August 2005 to June 2010 by the authors were retrospectively reviewed. Four patients were not contactable and 1 patient refused to participate. Accordingly, the study cohort was composed of 30 patients (24 male, 6 female) with 46 metatarsal head, neck, or shaft fractures. Inclusion criteria were metatarsal head, neck, or shaft fractures with a displacement of more than 3 to 4 mm or an angulation of more than 10° in the sagittal plane. Fractures combined with Lisfranc injury or metatarsal base fractures were excluded, as were bicortical comminuted fractures or long oblique fractures. Times to bone union, limitations of motion at affected metatarsophalangeal joints, and residual pain were evaluated at 6 weeks after surgery and at final follow-up. American Orthropedic Foot and Ankle Society scale was evaluated at final follow-up. Fracture union was obtained at an average of 7.1 (range 6 to 10) weeks. Two patients had moderate limitation of metatarsophalangeal joint at 6 weeks but recovered to full range at final follow-up. Average American Orthropedic Foot and Ankle Society score at final follow-up was 96.7 (range 83 to 100) points. Closed antegrade intramedullary pinning was found to be a useful method for treating displaced metatarsal fractures and to allow immediate joint motion and partial weightbearing in a stiff-soled shoe.Metatarsal fractures are relatively common foot injuries, but few reports are available on operative techniques or clinical results (apart from the fifth metatarsal base fractures and metatarsal stress fractures). Although in many cases these fractures can be treated nonsurgically, if a fracture is displaced or angulated, it may not be easy to achieve satisfactory reduction and stability with closed methods. Several surgical methods have been introduced to treat displaced fractures when satisfactory reduction and stability cannot be obtained by closed reduction techniques The authors treated displaced metatarsal fractures with a closed antegrade intramedullary pinning technique. This technique allowed displaced metatarsal fractures to be easily reduced without opening the fracture site, and at the same time secured firm fixation without infringing the MTP joint. Furthermore, the described method allowed immediate joint motion and caused no motion or pain limitation, and thus allowed rapid return to daily activities. Here, the authors present the operative procedures and clinical results of the closed antegrade intramedullary pinning technique for displaced metatarsal head, neck, and shaft fractures. This study is a retrospective case series. Our institutional review board approved the current study. The records of 35 patients (26 male, 9 female) with metatarsal fractures operated on from August 2005 to June 2010 by the authors (H.N.K and Y.W.P) were retrospectively reviewed. Patients were invited for a final follow-up visit for a detailed evaluation by an experienced physiotherapist. However, 4 patients were not contactable and 1 patient refused to participate. Accordingly, the study cohort was composed of 30 patients (24 male, 6 female) with 46 metatarsal head, neck, or shaft fractures (4 head fractures, 22 neck fractures, 20 shaft fractures). Fourteen patients had 1 metatarsal neck or shaft fracture requiring reduction and fixation, 8 patients had 2, and 4 patients had 3. Four patients had metatarsal head fractures. Twelve patients were injured during traffic accidents, 7 patients had experienced a direct impact by a heavy object to the metatarsal head area, 11 patients had a sports-related injury, and 1 patient had fractures combined with degloving injury when a car ran over the foot. The mean age at time of surgery was 29 (range 11 to 48) years. Inclusion criteria were metatarsal head, neck, or transverse (including short oblique) shaft fractures with a displacement of more than 3 to 4 mm or an angulation of more 10° in the sagittal plane (dorsal to plantar), or an unstable fracture for which reduction cannot be maintained after closed reduction. For metatarsal head fractures, widening of the involved MTP joint was also examined, and when this widening was not reducible, surgery was considered. The authors believe that this joint widening occurs when the displaced fractured head is not attached to the joint capsule or collateral ligaments, as in such cases, simple traction could not reduce the displacement. Metatarsal base fractures or proximal shaft fractures were excluded, as were bicortical comminuted fractures or long oblique fractures. These fractures were not amenable to fixation by this technique. The pre-bent K-wire could not be easily introduced into the medullary canal, and so was the reduction and firm fixation of the fracture. Fractures combined with Lisfranc injury or other concomitant fractures were also excluded, as were fractures with MTP joint dislocation. All fractures were reduced and fixed within a week of injury by closed antegrade intramedullary pinning without opening fracture sites or infringing joints. While under regional ankle block anesthesia, the patient was placed in the supine position. Under guidance of an image intensifier, a small incision was made over the dorsal aspect of the foot at the proximal end of the fractured metatarsal. Soft tissue was dissected, taking care not to injure neurovascular structures and extensor tendons. An entry hole was then made with a 2.0-mm drill bit. A 1.6-mm K-wire was prepared with 3 and 12 mm of the distal end bent through 5° and the prepared K-wire was held by a plier ( Postoperatively, immediate motion of the MTP joint and partial weightbearing in a stiff-soled shoe were allowed. Full weightbearing was permitted 4 weeks after the operation. K-wires were removed when pain subsided, which was usually at 6 to 8 weeks for metatarsal head or neck fractures. For metatarsal shaft fractures, K-wires were removed 3 months after the operation. Times to bone union (defined as no pain at the fracture site and radiographic union) were evaluated. Limitations of motion at affected MTP joints and residual pain were evaluated at 6 weeks after surgery and at final follow-up. American Orthropedic Foot and Ankle Society (AOFAS) lesser metatarsophalangeal-interphalangeal scale was evaluated at final follow-up The clinical results are presented in the Metatarsal fractures may result from either indirect or direct forces. Indirect injuries occur when the forefoot is held fixed and the leg or foot is twisted, a situation often seen in athletic injuries to the foot. Direct injury, common in industrial accidents, often results from a heavy object falling on the dorsum of the forefoot Metaizeau et al introduced closed intramedullary pinning for radial neck fractures, which enables closed reduction and fixation of the fractured radial head without opening the fracture site Although metatarsal fractures are a common cause of forefoot pain and account for about 35% of all foot fractures However, closed antegrade intramedullary pinning has several advantages. In particular, fracture reduction can be achieved more easily by controlling the distal fragment with a pre-bent K-wire, which also allows fracture stabilization to be achieved. Furthermore, when this technique is used, fracture sites do not have to be opened, which is a considerable advantage in cases with soft tissue compromise on the dorsum of a fracture and a non-injured articular surface and capsule-ligamentous structure, the latter of which allows early joint motion. Early weightbearing is allowed with a wire in the metatarsal because the wire does not project to plantar skin. For displaced transverse metatarsal shaft fractures, the proximal end of the wire can be embedded under the skin and kept in the fractured metatarsal for more than 8 weeks, which reduces the risk of reduction loss after early wire removal. We believe closed antegrade intramedullary pinning is especially effective for the treatment of displaced pediatric metatarsal fractures. However, technique is limited when bones are osteoporotic, as during surgery, the pre-bent distal end of the K-wire may penetrate the plantar cortex of the proximal metatarsal and prevent the wire from entering the medullary canal of the metatarsal and advancing to the fracture site. Furthermore, when the medullary canal is narrow, it may be difficult to pass the isthmus of the metatarsal shaft with the pre-bent distal end of the K-wire. In this situation, bent angles at the distal end of the wire can be adjusted or a smaller-diameter wire can be used, but the stability and ability to reduce the fracture are decreased. This study is limited by its retrospective, noncomparative nature, which prevents the described methods from being used as a definite surgical choice for metatarsal fractures. Nevertheless, we believe the described methods can be an effective option for metatarsal fractures, especially for those with dorsal soft tissue compromise. In addition, we only used postoperative AOFAS scores to evaluate outcome. In conclusion, closed antegrade intramedullary pinning was found to be a useful method for treating displaced metatarsal fractures and to allow immediate joint motion and partial weightbearing in a stiff-soled shoe.