Coal plays an important role in power generation, with around 40% of the world’s electricity coming from coal. It is believed that is importance will continue for decades The Soma Coal Basin covers one of the largest lignite reserves in Turkey. In the Imbat Mine where the research relevant to this paper was carried out, coal seams have coal strength ranging between 8 and 60 The Soma Coal Basin is one of the largest economic lignite-bearing alluvial basins of western Turkey, with around 600 million ton coal reserves dispersed in 11 different areas Some chemical properties of the main coal beds in Turkey are reported by Toprak Karayigit and Whateley The uniaxial compressive strength is a basic property in the classification of coal strength and in determining the cuttability of any geological formation. Coal is not a continuous solid material but contains various discontinuities, such as cracks, cleats and bedding planes. Consequently, the strength of coal decreases with increasing specimen size. These aspects of the problem for coal strength determination are discussed in detail by different authors Although mechanical tests should preferably be carried out on large coal specimens, the difficulty, cost and inefficiency of preparing such specimens, have always led researchers to use index tests and cube samples in sizes ranging from 2.5 to 5 An attempt has been made to use the point load test on coal specimens in the Agean Lignite Mine The Schmidt hammer was originally developed to estimate the in situ strength of mass concrete mass. Subsequently it has been used in a similar manner to estimate the strength of rocks and coal seams This test is described in detail by Evans and Pomeroy The workability or cuttability of coal and strength properties of coal is well defined in a seminal work published by Evans and Pomeroy Falcon attempted to review the application of coal petrology to classify coal cuttability in South Africa Macgregor pointed out that certain variables, such as percentage volatiles and some vitrinite, show some degree of correlation with certain mechanical properties and the cuttability of South African coals Macgregor and Baker, discussed the possible use of petrological data and proximate analysis in the prediction of cutting forces for coal, pointing out that the significant predictors are dependent on coal properties Szwilski stated that the cuttability is influenced largely by the structural and physical properties of the coal seam Drag bit cutting tests were conducted primarily to determine bit forces encountered in Indian coal types (having a wide range of compressive strength and hardness) by Singh et al. Imbat mine is located in Eynez in the city Soma-Manisa and is operated by Imbat AS under the license IR 75153 of Turkish Coal Enterprises. The mean overburden is 600 At the time of the research study, the Sublevel caving method was used with three consecutive longwalls, as shown in The coal is very prone to spontaneous combustion. The fly ash obtained from the power station is mixed with water and pumped behind the longwall to prevent spontaneous combustion of coal. Twenty eighth coal samples were collected from different areas of the mine for proximate, ultimate analysis and coal strength tests. Before collecting fresh samples an area of 1 The results of proximate and ultimate analysis of the coal samples taken from different levels of the coal seam are given in The relationships between net calorific values, carbon and ash content are shown in Schmidt hammer has two types, N and L. The N-type hammer is less sensitive to surface irregularities, and should be preferred in field applications; while the L-type hammer has greater sensitivity in the lower range and gives better results when testing weak, porous and weathered rocks Cube samples having a length of 5 The relationship between volatile matter, uniaxial compressive strength and impact strength index values as previously published by Speight Eight different coal samples taken from different levels of the coal seams were subjected to cuttability tests in order to see the variability of coal cuttability along the seam. A laboratory cutting set, similar to one developed in the University of Newcastle Upon Tyne, UK, was used for the cuttability determination of coal samples The cutting parameters measured are defined as follows. F′C is the mean peak cutting force, the peak force acting parallel to the cutting direction in kN. FC is the mean mean cutting force, the mean forces acting parallel to the cutting direction in kN. F′N is the mean peak normal force, the peak force acting perpendicular to the cutting direction in kN. FN is the mean normal force, the mean forces acting perpendicular to the cutting direction in kN. Q is the yield, the volume of coal excavated per unit cutting distance in m The experiments were replicated four times and executed parallel to bedding planes. The cutting parameters defined below serve to determine the correct selection of a mechanized cutting system. The torque or power of a shearer is directly related to the cutting force, the sumping force of a shearer is related to the normal force. Specific energy as a criterion for the use of selecting the most efficient rapid excavation systems is defined in Specific energy allows also the mining system to be selected. Shearers are used in harder coals compared to plows, in other words shearers are preferred in coals having higher specific energy values In the research work carried out in this paper, the specific energy measured in the laboratory is for one depth, one tool geometry under standardized conditions. However a detailed research program was carried out recently and it was reported that specific energy values measured under standardized laboratory cutting conditions were closely related to optimum specific energy values measured in relieved cutting The relationship between Specific energy and Schmidt hammer test values is seen in As seen from The basic objectives of these research studies were to find the relationships between cutter forces, specific energy, mechanical strength of coals and cleat frequencies. Classifications of the coal seams according to the workability were based on these findings. However, this research differs from the previous ones in a sense that the cuttability or specific energy is found to be related to coal properties such as calorific value, volatile matter, fixed carbon and ash content. Specific energy shows an optimum value for a given calorific value of around 4000–5000 The research was carried out by financial support of