High-entropy alloys (HEAs) have emerged as an important class of materials since 2004 with immense potential both at the level of fundamental understanding and also in terms of possible applications. This chapter deals with the basic concepts that underpin this new class of alloys. It starts with the definition of HEAs and how they differ from other multicomponent alloys such as Ni-base superalloys. Then, it gives a classification of alloys in terms of the number of components. A notation that is commonly used to represent composition in these alloys, particularly the non-equiatomic alloys with alloying additions, is brought out. Finally, four core effects of HEAs are elucidated, namely, high-entropy, severe lattice distortion, sluggish diffusion, and cocktail effects.As the combinations of composition and processes for producing HEAs are numerous and each HEA has its own microstructure and properties to be identified and understood, the research work is truly limitless ( Phase diagrams and the systems they describe are often classified and named after the number, in Latin, of components in the system. They can be christened based on their number of components as unary, binary, ternary, quaternary, quinary, sexinary, septenary, octonary, nonary, and denary from 1- to 10-component alloys, respectively. It is suggested that this nomenclature recommended by There are very few binary engineering alloys that are in commercial use, and most alloys are actually multicomponent alloys. However, most of these multicomponent alloys are still based on one principal element and are named after the principal element, such as Fe-, Al-, Cu-, Ni-, and Ti-based alloys. These alloys may consist of solid solutions and intermetallic compounds (crystalline or quasicrystalline). These often include interstitial compounds, known as Hagg phases. Under nonequilibrium conditions, some of the alloys form metallic glasses.  The mutual solubility between solvent and solute components in a binary alloy system could be judged by Hume-Rothery rules, namely, crystal structure, atomic size difference, valence, and electronegativity. In fact, all these factors also influence the interaction between different elements and make the enthalpy of mixing of an atomic pair either negative (attractive interaction leading to ordering and the formation of intermetallic compounds), positive (repulsive interaction leading to clustering and segregation), or near zero (leading to the formation of disordered solid solutions). As free energy of mixing of a state is determined by enthalpy of mixing and entropy of mixing, the competition of different states also relates with the competition of enthalpy of mixing and entropy of mixing. For a binary alloy system, these two factors affect the solubility between two components at different temperatures. When solubility is limited after competition between two factors, terminal solid solutions based on each component form and can be seen in the phase diagram. When a solid solution forms at all compositions, without a miscibility gap or intermediate phases, it is called an isomorphous system. But continuous solid solutions in binary alloy system are not common because the conditions for its formation are very difficult to fulfill. Similar concept could be applied to higher-order alloy systems in which a greater number of elements are involved in determining enthalpy of mixing and entropy of mixing. Available binary alloy phase diagrams ( While such terminal solutions are well known in binary, ternary, and quaternary alloy systems, it is curious to know whether we can obtain solid solution phases in the center of higher-order phase diagrams. In fact, formation of such solid solutions in the center of the phase diagram has not been explored much ( This concept has opened up floodgates of research activity since 2004, and > In addition to studying basic phases and microstructure of different equiatomic multicomponent alloys ranging from 5 to 20 components ( Gibbs phase rule, which gives the degrees of freedom ( However, it is important to note that the number of phases observed in these HEAs is significantly less than the maximum number of phases expected from the phase rule, suggesting that large configurational entropy in these alloys enhances the mutual solubility for forming solid solution phases (disordered or partially ordered) and thus restricts the formation of a large number of phases. Furthermore, HEAs being multiprincipal-element alloys, the diffusivities of atoms are expected to be low, and hence, the formation of a number of phases is kinetically constrained in such alloys. Thus, the observation of less number of phases in HEAs is not only due to high configurational entropy of these alloys but also due to low diffusivities in these multicomponent alloys. These merits are often useful in controlling microstructure and properties of a material for practical applications. Each HEA contains multiple elements, often five or more in equiatomic or near-equiatomic ratios, and minor elements ( Why are such multiprincipal-element alloys called HEAs? From statistical thermodynamics, Boltzmann's equation (  Although total mixing entropy has four contributions such as configurational, vibrational, magnetic dipole, and electronic randomness, configurational entropy is dominant over other three contributions ( It can be seen from  Based on the above, the composition definition of HEAs in a broad sense can be explained to some extent from configurational entropy calculation. From the configurational entropy equation, we can observe that an element having a concentration of 5 There arises a question from the definition: what is the upper bound of the number of metallic principal elements? For 5-, 10-, 12-, 13-, 14-, 15-, 20-, and 40-component equiatomic alloys, the total configurational entropies are 1.61 Indeed, it is not easy to give a clear-cut composition definition for HEAs. The composition definition is just a guideline. An alloy with some deviation from this composition definition might still be regarded as an HEA. For example, an alloy with 21-component equiatomic alloy is surely an HEA, even though each element has a concentration smaller than 5 If we use the above composition definition and the practical upper bound of 13 principal elements, at an arbitrary choice of a group of 13 metallic elements, we can obtain a total of 7099 possibilities for designing equiatomic HEAs with 5–13 elements ( C For any system, we may design equiatomic HEAs like AlCoCrCuFeNi. We may also design non-equiatomic HEAs with minor alloying elements like AlCo As the composition of each HEA does not contain a single principal element, the sequence of the constituent elements in the chemical formula could be shown in many different ways. For the sake of easy identification and to make comparisons between alloys of the same system or alloys belonging to different systems, one common method is to put the element name of principal elements in alphabetical order and finally put minor elements behind but in similar alphabetical sequence. This is convenient but does not carry additional meaning. Ordering the elements by atomic number or Mendeleev number may have more significance but lacks the convenience of alphabetical order. The concentration could be expressed as atomic ratio or atomic percentage in the subscript position. For example, the expressions for two equiatomic alloys, AlCoCrFeNiTi and CoCrCuFeMnMoNiZr, conform to this rule. The expressions for two non-equiatomic alloys, Al HECs have also been developed and investigated based on the similar concept of HEAs. Their components corresponding to elements in HEAs are binary nitrides (e.g., AlN, CrN, Si There are many factors affecting microstructure and properties of HEAs. Among these, four core effects are most basic ( High-entropy effect is the most important effect because it can enhance the formation of solid solutions and makes the microstructure much simpler than expected. Based on physical metallurgy concepts, we easily expect such alloys to have many different interactions among elements and thus form many different kinds of binary, ternary, and quaternary compounds and/or segregated phases. Thus, such alloys would possess complicated structure not only difficult to analyze but also brittle by nature. This expectation in fact neglects the effect of high mixing entropy. As for the mixing enthalpy, Δ As the Gibbs free energy of mixing, Δ In the solid state of an alloy, although there are numerous possible states, the equilibrium state is the one having the lowest free energy of mixing according to the second law of thermodynamics. There are three possible categories of competing states, that is, elemental phases, intermetallic compounds, and solid solution phases below the lowest melting point of the alloy ( In order to reveal the high-entropy effect, which enhances the formation of solid solution phases and inhibits the formation of intermetallic compounds, consider a HEA composed of those constituent elements with stronger bonding between each other. If strain energy contribution (due to atomic size difference) to mixing enthalpy is neglected for simplicity, the free energies of mixing for various kinds of state are shown in That means the mixing enthalpy in the random solution state is half that of the completely ordered state. Assuming that all heats of mixing for unlike atomic pairs are the same, Δ Consider another case where one HEA contains an element that has strong repulsion force to other elements, that is, it has large positive mixing enthalpy with other elements. It is expected that the element will segregate to form an elemental phase with little solubility with other elements. Mixing entropy effect is still not sufficient to overcome the large enthalpy effect. Suppose the element has weak repulsion force, that is, has small positive mixing enthalpy, with some other elements, its segregation phase will contain higher concentration of these elements due to mixing entropy effect and becomes a concentrated solid solution with a major element. In general, if the heats of mixing for unlike atomic pairs have smaller difference, simple solid solution phases would be dominant in the equilibrium state. For example, CoCrFeMnNi alloy has small difference in such heats of mixing as shown in The atomic size difference among elements in an HEA also affects the stability of disordered solid solution phases. This is because large atomic size difference would cause the lattice to be heavily distorted and contribute strain energy to mixing enthalpy and thus mixing free energy. On the other hand, there are a variety of structures that preferentially form under large atomic size difference. It has been known that atomic size is one of the main factors that determine the structure of intermetallic compounds or intermediate phases ( Because the multicomponent matrix of each solid solution phase in HEAs is a whole-solute matrix, every atom is surrounded by different kinds of atom and thus suffers lattice strain and stress mainly due to the atomic size difference as shown in Lattice distortion not only affects various properties but also reduces the thermal effect on properties. Hardness and strength effectively increase because of large solution hardening in the heavily distorted lattice. For example, Vickers hardness of FCC equiatomic alloy CoCrFeMnNi is 1192 The distorted atomic planes increase x-ray diffuse scattering effect and lead to smaller peak intensity ( In diffusion-controlled phase transformation, the formation of new phases requires cooperative diffusion of many different kinds of atoms to accomplish the partitioning of composition in HEAs. As explained in the last section, an HEA mainly contains random solid solution and/or ordered solid solution. Their matrices could be regarded as whole-solute matrices. As a result, the diffusion of an atom in a whole-solute matrix would be very different from that in the matrix of conventional alloys. A vacancy in the whole-solute matrix is in fact surrounded and competed by different element atoms during diffusion. It has been proposed that slower diffusion and higher activation energy would occur in HEAs due to larger fluctuation of lattice potential energy (LPE) between lattice sites (  It is expected that sluggish diffusion might affect the phase nucleation, growth and distribution, and morphology of new phase through diffusion-controlled phase transformation. It also provides various advantages in controlling microstructure and properties: easiness to get supersaturated state and fine precipitates, increased recrystallization temperature, slower grain growth, reduced particle coarsening rate, and increased creep resistance. As an example, The article on “Alloyed pleasures: Multimetallic cocktails” by To illustrate the cocktail effect, two examples are introduced. In the first example, refractory HEAs have melting points very much higher than that of Ni-base and Co-base superalloys (