The classical equations of two-phase flow in a porous media are solved together with two transport equations representing the leaching process. For the two-phase flow we use the pressure-saturation formulation, where the principal variables are the total pressure, the total flux and the saturation of the liquid phase. For the transport equations the variables of interest are the sulfuric acid and the copper concentration. The numerical method combines a mixed finite element method with a finite volume method. The first one is used to approximate the total pressure and flux, while the second is used to calculate the saturation and both concentrations. The advantage of this approach is its capacity to completely characterize the dynamics of the liquid and gaseous phase, and treat with the same model acid and bio-leaching processes. Several examples show the application of the method.volumetric concentration of sulfuric acid in solution (kg/m volumetric concentration of copper in solution (kg/m compressibility of gaseous phase capillary diffusion coefficient tensor of hydrodynamic dispersion (m gravity (m/s gravity vector (= absolute permeability of the porous system (m equilibrium distribution constant (adsorption coefficient) (m first-order kinetic constant (extraction coefficient) (m relative permeability of the global pressure (Pa) capillary pressure function (Pa) entry pressure (Pa) pressure of fractional flow function (–) real numbers residual water saturation (–) saturation of concentration (mass of copper/mass of solid phase) of copper in solid phase (kg/kg) time (s) total time of simulation (s) flow velocity (m/s) total velocity (m/s) volumetric (flux or Darcy’s velocity) velocity of phase ( liquid phase (leach solution) gaseous phase total mobility (m s/kg) phase mobility function (m s/kg) Brooks–Corey parameter (–) Lax–Friedrichs parameter first-order consumption factor (consumption coefficient) (1/s) viscosity of the solid bulk (dry) density (kg/m density of porosity of ore bed (volume of void/volume of bed) (m volume of solid phase/volume of bed (= Most companies, as a result of the favorable economics possible in heap leaching, consider heap leaching an alternative to conventional processing (flotation, agitation and vat leaching) Leaching is a transfer process of mass between the leaching solution (fluid phase) and the ore bed (solid phase) Two distinct phenomena are of interest in the study of heap leaching: fluid flow and the physicochemical reactions. These two phenomena can be studied separately if the extent of leaching of an element of solution that has participated in this process, and the extent of leaching that an element of the heap has undergone, does not influence the solution flow pattern. In other words, the solution flow pattern in a heap depends only on the initial conditions of the heap. In general, researchers in heap leaching have separated the fluid flow problem from the physicochemical problem. We develop a mathematical model, which consists in a system of nonlinear partial differential equations, in the context of multiphase system in a porous medium, that considers simultaneously the fluid flow problem and the physicochemical problem. Our model generalizes previous models which consider only one phase (see for instance Respect to the numerical solution, we present a generalization to the nonlinear case, which is very useful for engineering applications Finally, we report numerical results that illustrates the application of our model to the heap leaching process. We consider a multiphase system in a porous medium. Let a representative elementary volume (REV) (see A mass balance must be specified for each component. The mass balance equations for the transport of component In the case of sorption, In this paper we consider 2D geometry ( In this article we consider a heap of leaching of width In order to simplify our model, we consider a two phase flow through a porous medium with the following assumptions (see Thus, the continuity equations The pressure at the microscopic level has a jump discontinuity when passing from one fluid phase to the other. The jump is called the In conjunction with constrains Alternative formulations for system  ( ( ( In petroleum reservoir simulation the governing equations that describe fluid flow are usually written in a fractional flow formulation, i.e., in term of a saturation and a global pressure. The main reason for this fractional flow approach is that efficient numerical methods can be devised to take advantage of many physical properties inherent in the flow equations. Therefore, the systems The sulfuric acid and the copper ions are transported by the leach solution. The presented equations conform the classical transport equations in the context of biphasic/bicomponent flow In Eq. During migration through the porous media (heap) sulfuric acid reacts with the copper. Acid consumption is assumed to be proportional to its concentration ( The transport of copper ions through the heap is mainly governed by two processes. The first process consists of a chemical reaction that occurs between the leaching agent and the mineral particles. The copper present in the ore is solubilized passing from the solid to the liquid phase. The kinetic involved is a the first order ( The change in the concentration of copper in the solid phase follows the mass balance The heap leaching of copper ore model is described by Eqs. To complete the definition of our model, the initial and boundary conditions are indicated for each of the unknowns. In effect, for In this paper we will use the finite element approximations, which combines the mixed finite element methods for pressure and velocity Eqs. The discretization of Eqs. Assume that For a finite index set In this section we define an implicit vertex-centred finite volume approximation of Let The same method used for The same method used for To Eq. A computer program was written to simulate the flow of liquid phase and the concentrations of acid and copper. This program consists in the following subroutines:  To obtain the approximations: The approximations The approximations The approximations The approximations Eq. We will use the following numerical values of the global parameters: Assume the residual saturation in the heap to be: Assume the concentration of sulfuric acid in the irrigation solution to be: Assume the adsorption coefficient to be The initial condition is A mathematical model in We acknowledge the partial support of: MECESUP-UCO-9907, FONDECYT 1030718, Fondap in Applied Mathematics, University of Concepcion’s Graduate School, Mineral Technology Center (CETTEM) and the Universidad Católica de Temuco.