The operation of mineral processing equipments is affected by natural disturbances coming from changes of the ore feed characteristics and operating practices. A method to quantify the impact of natural disturbances and equipment operating practices on plant performances is described in this paper. The method that is based on process simulation is applied to an industrial hydraulic classifier. For the studied process it was found that most of the variation observed in the production results is due to the operation of the classifier rather than changes in the feed mineral composition and particle size distribution.The operators of mineral processing plants are often required to reduce the variability of process performance indices such as the fineness of grind for a grinding circuit, the recovery or the grade of a flotation concentrate. The variability of a process output variable may have three main sources, natural disturbances that affect the ore feed characteristics, the operation of the plant itself and errors on the measurements used to calculate the plant performance indices. Measurement errors are unavoidable and their amplitude may be estimated by repeated measurements of one variable. Data reconciliation ( In this paper process simulation is used to help in the identification of the source of variability in a process. The process used to illustrate the method is the upgrading of an iron oxide concentrate in a hydraulic classifier ( The first part of the paper describes the operation of a hydraulic classifier and the second part discusses the application used for the illustration of the proposed method. The following section describes the methodology used for data acquisition and processing. The last section describes and illustrates the proposed diagnosis method. A simplified drawing of a hydraulic classifier is shown in The separation of minerals in the classifier can be described using partition or separation curves similar to those observed for a hydrocyclone processing an ore consisting of minerals of various specific gravities ( The method described in this paper is applied to a hydraulic classifier used in the pelletizing plant of ArcelorMittal Mines (Canada) of Port-Cartier, Quebec Canada. The hydraulic classifier is used to upgrade an iron oxide concentrate produced by spiral classifier ( The hydraulic classifier used in the pelletizing plant is manufactured by Linatex and some dimensions of the equipment are given in The results of 150 The variation of the classifier feed mineral composition and mineral size distribution, The operation of the hydraulic classifier. Simulation was used as an aid to identify the impact of the variations of the feed composition and of the operating conditions on the variability of the hydraulic classifier production results. Seven sampling campaigns were conducted on different days and hydraulic classifiers operating steady state during the production of low silica concentrate. Samples of the feed, overflow and underflow streams were collected during 90 The data processing is carried out using a least squares data reconciliation algorithm that also performs mineral reconstruction using the element and oxide assays and estimation of the mineral partition curves in the classifier ( The estimated mineral contents of the iron oxide concentrate feeding the classifier for the 7 considered sampling campaigns are given in Hydraulic classifiers separate the particles according to their size and density. Hence the size distribution of the minerals in the feed is strategic to assess the operation of these equipments. The estimated quartz and hematite size distributions expressed as weight retained for the considered sampling campaigns are shown in The variations of the mineral contents ( Results of the sampling campaigns provide typical variations in the classifier feed characteristics and classifier operating conditions as traduced by the mineral partition curves. The proposed diagnosis method is based on the generation of random feed compositions and mineral partition curves that are used simulate the classifier operation. The analysis of the simulation results provides information concerning the factors responsible for the process variability. The input variables for the simulation are the following: The solids feed rate to the classifier ( The mineral contents ( The weight retained of the minerals in the feed stream ( The partition curve of the minerals ( The feed rate of each mineral in each size interval is calculated using the following: The weight fraction of mineral The solids weight recovery to the underflow is given by The mineral content in the classifier underflow is calculated using The mineral assays are readily converted into elemental and oxide species (Fe The method used to analyze the sensitivity of the classifier to the variations in the feed composition and mineral partition curves consists of generating random feed composition and mineral partition curves that belong to the observed variations of the actual process ( The variable Several hundred of random data for the variables of interest can then be generated and used to simulate the classifier operation by solving Eqs. The analysis is conducted through the simulation of the classifier responses to 150 different concentrations of the 5 minerals in the classifier feed. The variation of the feed composition follows the one observed from the sampling campaigns ( The simulation results are presented in The next studied variable is the size distribution of the minerals in the classifier feed. For the simulation the mineral contents of the feed and the mineral partition curves are kept constant to their average values observed for the sampling campaigns (see The last simulation uses the average mineral contents ( Several sampling campaigns were conducted on hydraulic classifiers used to upgrade an iron oxide concentrate by removing fine quartz particles. The samples were used to assess the variability of the feed composition as well as the variability due to the operating practices of the mineral partition curves in the classifiers. These data were used in a sensitivity analysis to identify the source of observed variability in the hydraulic classifier performances. Results of the analysis show that most of the variability in the weight recovery observed from the production data is probably caused by the operating conditions of the classifier. Work is in progress to develop a phenomenological simulator of the classifier to help in studying various control strategies for the classifiers. The methodology described in this paper can be readily applied to assess the sources of variability in the production results of flotation and other concentration processes. The authors acknowledge the assistance of Violaine Ouellet, Jean-Pierre Côté, Khadija Bouchha and the plant technicians for the data processing, planning and realization of the sampling campaigns. The authors acknowledge