An improved liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry method is reported for the determination of residues of captan (+tetrahydrophthalimide), captafol, folpet (+phthalimide), and iprodione in fruits and vegetables. The optimized electrospray ionization parameters (high cone gas flow, and a low desolvation temperature) did not result in degradation of target compounds, rather they provided a significant advantage over the conventional GC–MS/MS methods, which lack sensitivity and repeatability. Strategies for minimizing losses in recovery of these compounds during sample preparation included cryogenic comminution, extraction with acidified ethyl acetate or acetonitrile, and dilution of the final extract with acidified water prior to LC-MS/MS analysis. The method performance complied with the SANTE/11813/2017 guidelines, with recoveries in the range of 70–120% at the LOQ of 0.01 mg/kg across the tested matrices at various pHs. The efficiency of the method was reflected in its precision (RSDs < 10%) for incurred residues.Captan, folpet, and iprodione are fungicides, which are used frequently for treating various pre- and post-harvest plant diseases ( Despite the use of these fungicides over the years, no robust method exists that can analyze them without incurring any degradation. This limitation calls for a method that is sensitive, repeatable, and reproducible but does not resort to uncommon instrument configurations [e.g., gas chromatography (GC) with cold on-column injection coupled with mass spectrometry (MS) involving chemical ionization in negative ion mode]. To analyze these compounds, GC is commonly used with different types of detectors, viz., electron-capture ( In recent years, atmospheric pressure gas chromatography (APGC) with tandem mass sectrometry (MS/MS) has been reported as a viable strategy for the residue analysis of these problematic compounds ( Sample preparation methods for these analytes reported so far include the Dutch mini Luke method ( Given this, our current endeavor was to develop a simultaneous screening and quantification method for captan, captafol, folpet, iprodione, THPI, and PI, and validate the approach in a range of fruit and vegetable matrices. Since these analytes have a tendency to degrade in response to multiple factors, efforts were taken to optimize ion source parameters, such as cone gas flow and desolvation temperature. We also estimated the extent of losses at various steps in analysis, and optimized the sample preparation workflow to minimize degradation. Finally, the parameters of method performance [linearity, limit of quantitation (LOQ), accuracy, and precision] were evaluated as per the analytical quality control guidelines of DG-SANTE ( A mixer/grinder (Philips India Pvt. Ltd., Mumbai, India), and a high-speed homogenizer (Diax 900, Heidolph Instruments GmbH & Co. KG, Schwabach, Germany) were used for blending the matrices. The other equipment used for sample preparation were as follows: spinix vortex shaker (Tarsons, Calcutta, India), centrifuge (Kubota 6500, Tokyo, Japan), micro-centrifuge (Hermle z306, Hermle Labortechnik GmbH, Wehingen, Germany), ultrasonic bath (Spectra Lab Instruments, Mumbai, India), weighing balance (Adair Dutt, Mumbai, India), and Turbovap LV concentrator (Caliper Life Sciences, Hopkinton, MA, USA). HPLC grade acetonitrile, analytical reagent grade magnesium sulfate, sodium sulfate, sodium chloride, ammonium formate (98%), and formic acid (89%); pesticide residue analysis grade ethyl acetate; and primary secondary amine (PSA) were procured from Merck (Bangalore, India). Liquid nitrogen used for the cryogenic comminution of samples was procured from a local supplier (Pious Traders, Pune, India). Certified reference standards for the target compounds, >98% purity, were purchased from Dr Ehrenstorfer GmbH (Augsburg, Germany). Stock solutions were prepared individually by dissolving approximately 10 mg of the reference standard in 10 mL acetonitrile in amber colored glass bottles, which were stored at −20 °C. Intermediate solutions (25 µg/mL) of individual analytes, and the mixed working standard (1 µg/mL) were prepared in acetonitrile (+0.1% formic acid), based on As these molecules are prone to degradation in conventional GC–MS/MS, special attention was given to optimization of the LC-MS/MS parameters, the conditions during sample communition, and the subsequent workflow of sample preparation. The analysis was performed based on A UHPLC system (UPLC, H-class) coupled with a tandem quadrupole mass spectrometer (Xevo TQ-S, Waters Corporation, Milford, MA, USA) was used with an Atlantis T3 (100 × 3 mm, 5 µm) reverse phase column. Throughout the chromatographic runtime, the column oven, and sample manager (with flow through needle) were maintained at 35 °C, and 10 °C, respectively. The mobile phases comprised (A) water: acetonitrile (95:5, v/v), and (B) water: acetonitrile (5:95, v/v) with 5 mM ammonium formate + 0.1% formic acid as the modifiers in both. The mobile phase flow rate was 0.4 mL/min, and the injection volume was 10 µL. The mass spectrometer was operated with the ESI in positive ion mode. The optimized compound specific MRM transitions with cone voltage, and collision energies are presented in A total of six samples comprising grape, apple, okra, tomato, cucumber, and potato were purchased from different supermarkets, located in Pune (India). In order to ensure homogeneity samples were comminuted in two steps: firstly, the sample was milled thoroughly in a blender and secondly, a portion of this milled sample was subjected to high-speed homogenization at 15,200 rpm for 2 min (   For linearity, a five-point calibration curve was plotted in the concentration range 0.005–0.05 mg/L in solvent, as well as the test matrices, except for PI (0.025–0.25 mg/kg). LOQs were established as the smallest measured quantities of target analytes (in the matrix) for which the S/N of the quantifier, and confirmatory (qualifier) MRM transitions were ≥10:1, and ≥3:1, respectively, with accuracies (recoveries) in the range 70–120% ( The following equation was employed to calculate the matrix effect: According to the residue definitions whenever captan, and THPI were detected in a particular sample, the THPI residue was multiplied by a molecular mass based conversion factor, so values can be expressed as captan concentration. Similarly, this approach is also applicable to PI for estimating the folpet residues. [Residues of THPI as captan = Residue of THPI in sample × (MW of Captan/MW of THPI)]  THPI residues = 0.14 mg/kg Captan = BLQ (below the limit of quantitation) Residues of THPI as captan = 0.14× (MW of Captan/MW of THPI) = 0.14 × (299/150) = 0.28 mg/kg.  Captan = 0.233 mg/kg THPI = 0.01 mg/kg Total residues of captan = 0.233 + (0.01 × 299/150) = 0.253 mg/kg Optimized GC–MS/MS conditions for a multiresidue analysis resulted in a significant degradation of captan, folpet, and captafol, which was evident from detection of prominent signals for both metabolites (THPI and PI). Similarly, iprodione showed poor stability and a lack of sensitivity during analysis. Since the major degradation occurred in the instrument (during injection in the liner, and during ionization in the EI source), GC–MS/MS analysis resulted in an irregular response, and a poor calibration linearity ( During chromatographic optimization, an acidified mobile phase was preferred to prevent degradation of the target pesticides. Because of their non-polar nature, they were retained on the C The mobile phase modifiers, consisting of 0.1% formic acid + 5 mM ammonium formate, facilitated production of protonated molecular ions, as well as the ammonium adducts of the target analytes. For captan and folpet, the ammonium adducts were the additional MRMs for confirmation. To minimize in-source fragmentation of these compounds, the cone voltage was set at 2 V for captan, folpet, and iprodione, and 6 V for captafol. For THPI, and PI, the optimum cone voltages were 28 V, and 20 V, respectively. All the optimized compound-specific parameters-MRM transitions, cone voltage, collision energy, and dwell time – are presented in ESI parameters, including the source temperature, capillary voltage, desolvation temperature, desolvation gas flow, and cone gas flow, had a significant influence on sensitivity (peak area and S/N). To minimize in-source fragmentation, the ion source temperature (150 °C), and nebulizer gas flow (7 L/hour) were optimized, based on UHPLC flow rate (0.4 mL/min. The capillary voltage ranged between 0.5 V and 4 kV to achieve the highest signal intensities. A capillary voltage of 3.5 kV offered the highest and most stable signal for all target analytes ( The effect of desolvation temperature was examined between 200 and 550 °C ( The addition of 0.1% formic acid in water (v/v) to acetonitrile minimized degradation of captan, captafol, folpet, and iprodione, which is in agreement with the findings of The European Union Reference Laboratory (EURL) on Single Residue Methods (SRMs) has reported previously that these compounds are base-sensitive with potential to degrade during sample preparation (especially, in alkaline, and also neutral-pH commodities), and instrumental analysis ( For cucumber (a neutral-pH commodity), comminution under the cryogenic conditions increased the response of captan, and captafol by 92–96%. Also, there was ∼40% increase in the recovery of folpet, with no appreciable degradation to PI. For iprodione, however, there was a marginal increase in recovery (by 10–15%) only, over ambient-temperature processing ( The addition of acidified water (with formic acid) 1:1 ( Grape and cucumber extracts, representing matrices of acidic and neutral pH, respectively, were evaluated separately for stability of target compounds at 0.1 mg/kg. The ACQUITY Sample Manager was maintained at 15 °C. In our study, dilution with acidified water played a significant role in ensuring the stability of these compounds in the solution phase. In contrast, in the absence of acidified water, there was an immediate reduction in recoveries of captan, and captafol (from cucumber) by 16, and 26%, respectively, which subsequently increased to ≥40% after 8 h. Similarly, a loss (at 0-hour injection) of 25%, and 12% residues was observed for folpet, and iprodione, respectively, which increased to 37%, and 24% after 8 ( Calibration linearity in the solvents, as well as the matrices was established through linear equations (with 1/x as the weighting factor) in the range 0.005 to 0.05 mg/L, except for PI (0.025 to 0.25 mg/L), with r Matrix effect is a well-known phenomenon in pesticide residue analysis, where any suppression, or enhancement of signal intensity occurs due to co-elution of coextractives from the matrix or their interference. In this study, the matrix effect differed with sample processing and extraction methods. With the ethyl acetate extraction method, signal suppressions varied in the range 10–60% across the test matrices. The addition of acidified water after comminution of okra and apple reduced matrix effect by 20–30% ( When sample preparation was carried out using QuEChERS (without the addition of acidified water), signals were enhanced with higher recoveries in most of the matrices, especially okra, and tomato ( As the residues of captan, captafol, folpet, and iprodione did not show any degradation during the analysis, a mixture of these compounds (including THPI, and PI) can be used for spiking blank matrices, and estimation of recoveries. The performance of this method was evaluated in terms of recovery, and repeatability (precision) at two concentrations (0.01, and 0.05 mg/kg; n = 6). Based on matrix-matched calibrations, mean recoveries (n = 6) were estimated to be 0.01 and 0.05 mg/kg, respectively. In each of the commodities tested, recovery and repeatability were acceptable (70–120% with RSDs <20%) for all target analytes ( Our method performance clearly has certain advantages, compared with the results of In the incurred potato, okra, and tomato samples, only folpet was detected with no signal for PI. In the case of captafol, and iprodione, the residue definitions did not include any metabolites, and only their parent molecules were monitored for residue estimations. Estimation of the incurred residues of captan (+THPI) is explained for two grape samples (I and II) collected from a captan treated vineyard (Pune, India) ( Out of the 20 farm-gate vegetable samples (tomato, potato, and okra) with a previous history of field applications of captan and/or folpet, the range of residues were 0.01 and 0.02 (± <10%, n = 6) mg/kg ( The LC-MS/MS method reported here is the first application of LC-ESI-MS/MS for effective determination of phthalimide fungicides residues (captan, captafol, folpet, and their major metabolites), and iprodione in fruit and vegetable matrices. With implementation of this method, the analysis of target compounds, which have traditionally remained problematic, can be performed in a robust and accurate manner without any ambiguity. Comminution of samples with liquid nitrogen, and the subsequent addition of the acidified water prevented degradation of captan, captafol, and folpet during sample preparation. Acidification also improved stability of the compounds in final extract during a typical batch of analysis comprising ∼40 sample injections. Our findings also showed that ethyl acetate based sample preparation and QuEChERS performed equally well in terms of the recoveries. It was further demonstrated that LOQs achieved with this optimized protocol easily meets EU-MRL compliance requirements. With this high throughput method, a single chemist could process 25–30 samples a day, and the LC-MS/MS analysis could be completed within 8 h. Therefore, this optimized method not only provided highly satisfactory method performance for the targeted pesticides, but also proved to be time and labor effective compared with conventional GC–MS(/MS) methods. The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. We gratefully acknowledge the funding received from the National Referral Laboratory Project of Supplementary data to this article can be found online at The following are the Supplementary data to this article: 