Hydrogen peroxide was widely selected as the chemical oxidant in chemical remediation or as the donor of oxygen in in situ aerobic bioremediation of organic pollutants. In this paper, hydrogen peroxide pretreatment and plant system was done to examine its possibility to remediate the heavy metal contaminated soil or heavy metal–organic combined contaminated soil. Heavy metal contaminated soil was collected from the heavily industrialized area, in Fuyang county, Zhejiang province, China. And heavy metal–organic combined contaminated soil was prepared from the same contaminated soil by spiking 100μgg−1 2,4-dichlorophenol (2,4-DCP). Results showed that H2O2 could improve the dissipation of 2,4-DCP and enhance the availability of Cu and Zn in soil. The greatly increased DOC (dissolved organic carbon) in the oxidation process was probably the main reason for the greatly increased water soluble Cu in higher pH condition. Water soluble Zn, however, easily rebound to soil components with the time being and had no positive relation with dissolved organic carbon. Planting with ryegrass influenced the behavior of pollutants in soil. It was observed that the dissipation of 2,4-DCP could be enhanced by the presence of plant roots and the availability of Cu and Zn in the planted soil was changed due to the mobilization and rebound mechanisms in the rhizosphere. Co-contamination of 2,4-DCP caused the greater availability of Cu and Zn in H2O2 pretreatment. But with the ryegrass planting, it was easier to rebound to the less available phase in the rhizosphere. Both Cu and Zn concentration in shoots increased with the H2O2 treatment. Therefore our results suggested that H2O2 pretreatment was probably a promising way for promoting the dissipation of persistent organic pollutants and enhancing the solubility of Cu and Zn in soil. A combination of H2O2 pretreatment and suitable plant might be an efficient alternative for remedying heavy metal or heavy metal–organic contaminated soil.The growing development of agricultural, industrial and urban activities has given rise to a number of environmental problems because of the presence of heavy metals, toxic organic compounds in soil ( Hydrogen peroxide (H Heavy metal contaminated soil was collected from the heavily industrialized area, in Fuyang county, Zhejiang province, China. The selected properties of the soil were measured with the routine analytical methods ( Subsamples contaminated with 2,4-dichlorophenol were prepared from the above heavy metal contaminated soil. The level of 2,4-DCP was 100 Two hundred grams of each subsample (including control subsamples without an addition of 2,4-DCP) were put in open plastic pots and preincubated in the laboratory for 1 Soil samples were taken from pot at the end of the culture. Rhizosphere soil was defined as the soil remaining attached to the roots after gentle shaking by hand. Heavy metal contents were determined by flame atomic absorption spectrophotometry (Perkin Elmer AA100) after extraction with different chemical agents. Dissolved organic carbon was determined on a TOC analyzer (Apollo 9000). For water soluble heavy metals and dissolved organic carbon in the soil, 2 Residual of 2,4-DCP in soils were extracted by Soxhlet extraction (10 In the case of pots with plants, shoots were cut at the soil surface, dried and weighted. Plant samples were digested using a mixture of HNO The results were presented as the average of three replicates. Statistical analysis (One Way ANOVA) were made using SPSS for Windows. The same letters on the bars of the same graph, or at the same column (line) of the table are not significantly different ( Hydrogen peroxide mediated chemical oxidation of persistent organic pollutants were widely researched ( Unlike organic pollutants, heavy metals in soils could not be removed with H   Phytoremediation of organic pollutants is based on the beneficial effects of roots on degradation. A multitude of changes occur in soil in the presence of roots that may be apprehended as changes in its chemical characteristics, modified microbial composition, and enhanced microbial activity. By directly comparing vegetated and unvegetated contaminated soils, results from our study indicated that contaminant dissipation could be enhanced by the presence of plant roots. There was no 2,4-DCP residual was detected in the planted soil.  In order to further illustrate the rhizospheric behavior of Cu and Zn in H  In the present study the plants were not analyzed for 2,4-DCP and its metabolic products originating from 2,4-DCP contaminated soil, hence it was difficult to determine which processes were responsible for the plant-mediated removal. Previous studies showed that plants primarily metabolized xenobiotic compounds to more soluble and generally less toxic products that were next compartmentalized, owing to their lack of an efficient excretory system, within the apoplast or cell vacuoles, and as bound residue integrated in the cell vacuoles, and as bound residues integrated in the cell walls ( Hydrogen peroxide was a safe, efficient reagent to improve 2,4-DCP removal and enhance the availability of heavy metals in soil. The characteristics of heavy metals in H This work was jointly supported by the National High Technology Project of China (2002AA649200), and Laboratory of Material Cycling in Pedosphere, Chinese Academy of Science. The authors also want to extend thanks to the referees for invaluable comments.