Copper cyanocomplexes have been recognized as important competitors for the adsorption sites of activated carbons during gold adsorption. In the present paper, an adsorption mechanism of negatively charged Cu cyanocomplexes on available sites of different activated carbons is proposed. The mechanism considers the (i) solution chemistry (e.g., effects of pH, CN/Cu molar ratio, and ionic strength by adding Na+, K+, and Ca2+ cations); (ii) surface properties of the activated carbon samples (e.g., density of surface functional groups and point of zero charge — PZC); and (iii) copper speciation. The adsorption experiments demonstrated that the enhanced interaction of copper species at pH<PZC and low ionic strength can be ascribed to the net positive charge on the surface of the solid phase. When the basic surface groups are completely deprotonated (i.e., pH>PZC>pKa basic groups), electrostatic repulsion inhibits the adsorption of negatively charged Cu species. It is also proposed that the interaction of Ca2+ ions with acid groups generate an excess of locally positive charges on the surface of the activated carbon, and such positive charges enhance the adsorption of negatively charged copper cyanocomplexes, even when the net surface charge is negative. The results from thermodynamic and Raman analyses indicated that under typical, practical conditions of gold adsorption from cyanide solutions (pH>9 and CN/Cu molar ratio>4), the main competitor for the adsorption sites of the activated carbon is the Cu(CN)3
                     2− species and not the Cu(CN)2
                     − species.Due to a relatively high solubility in cyanide media, copper minerals typically present in gold ores may affect the extraction of this precious metal. Exceptions are the less soluble chalcopyrite, chrysocolle and tetrahedrite ( Thus, a successful application of the traditional methods for treating low-grade, complex gold ores, which include stages such as the Carbon in Pulp (CIP) and Carbon in Leaching (CIL) processes, requires a high selectivity of Au adsorption from solutions containing Cu. While the adsorption of the dicyanoaurate (I) (Au(CN) The adsorption of copper cyanocomplexes on activated carbon has been suggested to be strongly affected by copper speciation, which depends on the solution pH and free cyanide concentration. Results from Regardless of the contributions that such previous works provided, it is important to highlight that the interaction mechanisms among the copper cyanocomplexes and activated carbon remain unclear, and the effects of parameters such as cyanide concentration, pH, and ionic strength on physicochemical properties of the adsorbent material have been overlooked. To date, the adsorption of Cu cyanocomplexes on the activated carbon has been discussed mostly on the basis of metal speciation. In this context, an adsorption mechanism of copper cyanocomplexes is presented in this paper, which takes into account the effects of pH, CN/Cu molar ratio, and ionic strength on copper speciation and on relevant properties of the adsorbent material. The properties of particular interest here are the density of surface functional groups and surface charge. In this work, four types of activated carbon from different source materials were investigated, as follows: Samples produced from coconut shell (C), The activated carbon samples were characterized in this work by the following properties: (i) specific surface area (SSA); (ii) ash content (AC); (iii) density of surface functional groups (DSFG), and (iv) point of zero charge (PZC). The SSA was determined by the Brunauer, Emmett, and Teller (BET) method (Quantachrome, NovaWin2), while the AC value was calculated by the weight loss of the samples, after heating in porcelain crucible at 900 The DSFG of the activated carbon samples, as well as the identification of the corresponding groups, was determined by the Boehm method ( The PZC value of the activated carbon samples was obtained according to the procedure described by For the electrophoretic mobility measurements, the activated carbon samples were initially ground in an agate mortar to fine powder (> The thermodynamic stability of the Cu cyanocomplexes was evaluated with the help of Eh–pH diagrams and speciation curves. The Eh–pH diagrams for the Cu–CN–H The speciation curves were obtained assuming ideal and non-ideal systems. For this work, the activity coefficients reported by The adsorption data were obtained at 25 In order to identify the Cu species adsorbed on the activated carbon, adsorption experiments were carried out with an ion exchange resin as well. The experiments were conducted at 25 The analysis of copper cyanocomplexes in cyanide solutions with different pH values and in the ion exchange resin after loading was carried out by means of Raman spectroscopy, using a Horiba Jobin Yvon (Labram HR 800) spectrograph, equipped with a 633 The SSA, AC, DSFG, and PZC values of the activated carbon samples are shown in Regarding the identification of the functional groups on the activated carbon surface, It can also be seen from It has also been reported that phenol and amine groups deprotonate, respectively, in pH about 10 (Eq. On the basis of the PZC values determined here, at pH Thus, net positive or negative charges on the surface of the activated carbon samples will depend on the amount and type of the acid and basic functional groups available. It is important to mention that the Boehm method used here is limited to a total quantification of basic groups. A precise quantification of amines and other functional groups is not provided by this method. In addition to the main functional groups available on the surface of the activated carbon samples, the structure of these materials was also evaluated in this work. Raman spectroscopy and a peak-deconvolution method of the Raman spectra, using the Peakfit software, were applied. The results from two selected samples illustrate the findings: sample with the lowest DSFG value (C1 sample — 1.2 According to  The thermodynamic stability of the Cu cyanocomplexes was evaluated with the help of Eh–pH diagrams and speciation curves, and the formation of such species was investigated by means of Raman spectroscopy. The Eh–pH diagram for the Cu–CN–H   According to the analysis carried out here and previous publications ( Copper speciation in cyanide solution as a function of pH and CN/Cu molar ratios was investigated by Raman spectroscopy. The spectra obtained at CN/Cu Regarding to copper speciation as a function of the CN/Cu molar ratio, the spectra were obtained at pH These results demonstrate the distribution of the Cu(CN) Three activated carbon samples with different total DSFG values were selected for the adsorption experiments: C1 — 1.2 As already discussed, in pH values below approximately 7.4, which represent the average PZC value obtained for the C1, B1, and E2 samples ( In an attempt to evaluate the effect of the abovementioned remaining protonated basic groups, additional adsorption experiments were conducted at higher pH values (condition in which the amine groups are deprotonated) and CN/Cu The observed trends of copper adsorption on activated carbon as a function of pH have been ascribed only to copper speciation ( As given by Eqs. The loading breakthrough curves for pH Raman spectra were obtained for the resin after loading (0.008  The effects of ionic strength and type of “spectator” cation on the adsorption density of the copper cyanocomplexes on the activated carbon were investigated at pH For CN/Cu For CN/Cu It is known that electrostatic attraction (or adsorption of positive charges such as Na Thus, the adsorption of Ca The different behavior obtained when monovalent and divalent cations were added to the solution was investigated by electrophoretic mobility measurements. The effects of Na Our results demonstrated that the Cu(CN) On the basis of the adsorption results, it is suggested that the electrostatic interaction between the surface of the activated carbon and the copper cyanocomplexes is the key factor controlling the adsorption of this metal. The enhanced interaction of the copper species with the adsorbent material under more acidic conditions (i.e., pH Under more alkaline conditions (i.e., pH When the basic functional groups are fully deprotonated (i.e., pH Under typical conditions found in gold cyanidation (i.e., pH Application of Raman spectroscopy in order to identify the copper species adsorbed on the activated carbon in the presence of Ca Finally, it is important to emphasize that the conventional practices such as the increase of pH (and ionic strength) by adding CaO in attempt to maximize the selectivity of gold adsorption may not be entirely successful. The addition of Ca In this paper, an adsorption mechanism of copper cyanocomplexes on activated carbon was proposed by an experimental approach that takes into consideration the nature of the interaction among the copper species and the adsorption sites of the activated carbon. At low ionic strength, the charge associated with basic functional groups available on the surface of the adsorbent material plays an important role on copper adsorption. When these groups are positively charged, the attraction of negatively charged Cu species is enhanced, whereas under conditions in which these groups are deprotonated, the metal adsorption decreases significantly. On the other hand, the interaction of Ca The first author would like to thank Prof. Maria Sylvia S. Dantas (INCT-Acqua) for the valuable contribution in the accomplishment of the Raman analysis, and LAQ-DEMET for the chemical analysis. The financial support from the Brazilian agencies (