Leaching of silver sulphide precipitates with nitric acid was performed at a variety of temperatures, pressures, acid concentrations and solids concentrations, with a maximum extraction of 96.1% achieved by leaching at 150°C, 1100 kPa(g), and 9.6% solids with twice the stoichiometric amount of nitric acid. Further improvement in the silver extractions would be expected with further optimization of the leaching conditions and this process could represent a hydrometallurgical alternative for the recovery of silver from silver sulphide precipitated from photographic solutions.
                  Hydrogen reduction from nitric acid leach solutions resulted in near quantitative precipitation of silver (99.8%) in 1 h at 150°C and 4000 kPa(g) hydrogen pressure. High precipitation efficiencies with hydrogen reduction were achieved even at silver concentrations well in excess of the solubility limit for silver sulphate at room temperature. High purity silver with a particle size of 96.2% passing 106 μm was produced.Silver sulphide (Ag The majority of the work done on nitric acid leaching of sulphide materials has focused on the treatment of refractory (i.e., pyrite, arsenopyrite or chalcopyrite) ores containing precious metals. Several processes have been reported in the literature for nitric or nitrous acid leaching of these complex sulphide ores Therefore, the objective of this research was to determine whether metallic silver could be produced hydrometallurgically from silver sulphide precipitated from photographic solutions, by pressure leaching with nitric acid to dissolve the silver followed by hydrogen reduction to produce a high purity silver powder from the nitric acid leach solutions. Silver sulphide was generated by precipitation either from solution prepared from reagent grade AgNO The two batches of silver sulphide produced analyzed 77.5% and 75.2% Ag and 12.1% and 14.7% S, respectively. Silver sulphide (Ag Solutions were analyzed for silver using atomic absorption spectroscopy (AA). Leach residues were analyzed gravimetrically for silver at the University of Alberta and were analyzed for sulphur with LECO combustion by International Plasma Laboratory, of Vancouver, BC, Canada. Metallic silver produced in the hydrogen reduction tests was dissolved in nitric acid and analyzed with atomic absorption. Leaching and hydrogen reduction tests were performed in a stainless steel Parr autoclave (250 mL) fitted with a Teflon liner and single axial agitator. In the leaching tests, the solids and solution were charged to the autoclave, heated over 0.5 to 1 h to the desired temperature and allowed to react for 1 h at temperature. As nitric acid fumes at the reaction temperatures tested, offgases from the autoclave were constantly vented to maintain the desired operating pressure (1100 or 1800 kPa(g)). After 1 h, the autoclave was cooled to 95 to –100°C and allowed to react for 15 min to allow any elemental sulphur in the leach slurry to solidify. The autoclave was then cooled to 60 to 70°C. The slurry was then filtered and the solids washed with hot water to remove any entrained leach solution from the solids and allowed to dry in an 80°C oven overnight. The leach solution and wash water were combined and collected. A white precipitate formed during the cooling of the leach solution, indicating supersaturation of the leach solution with silver sulphate (Ag In the hydrogen reduction tests, the pH of the leach/wash solution from the specific leach tests was adjusted to between 5.5 and 6.0 using ammonium hydroxide. This solution, plus any solids that had precipitated from the leach solution, was added to the autoclave. Prior to heating, the autoclave was pressurized with hydrogen and vented three times to try to remove oxygen from the autoclave. The autoclave was then pressurized to the desired pressure and heated to the desired temperature and allowed to react for 1 h. The autoclave was then cooled and its contents filtered. The solution was collected and analyzed for residual silver concentration. Several different variables were investigated in the leaching tests, including nitric acid concentration, temperature, pressure and solids concentration. In all cases, nitric acid was used as the sole oxidant for oxidizing the silver sulphide. Two preliminary hydrogen reduction tests were completed to determine whether hydrogen reduction of the nitric acid leach solution was feasible. The particle size of the silver powder produced in Test I was analyzed and the powder was 96.2% passing 106 μm (140 mesh). In Tests 1 to 3, the acid additions used correspond to 75%, 150% and 200% of the amount required stoichiometrically based on the following reaction.  In Tests 3, 5 and 6, the temperature was varied from 125 to 175°C with the pressure kept at 1100 kPa(g). As shown in Pressure had a slightly more pronounced effect on the silver extraction than temperature However, even at the best conditions in Tests 1 to 7, the extractions indicate that 20 to 30% of the silver sulphide remained unleached. Since silver sulphate (Ag X-ray diffraction analysis To determine the amount of silver sulphate in the leach residues, the solids from Tests 4 and 5 were mixed with hot water at 100°C for 1 h to dissolve any remaining silver sulphate and the solids residues were analyzed to determine the increase in silver extraction. The water leach increased the overall extractions of silver to 79.1% and 80.9%, respectively, for Tests 4 and 5, corresponding to increases of 4% to 10% in the extraction, and indicating that 80% to 81% was ultimately the highest extraction possible for these leaching conditions. However, the amount of unleached silver sulphide in the water leach residue indicates that the low extractions are not just a result of unleached silver sulphate and further point to the precipitation of silver sulphate inhibiting the leaching of the remaining silver sulphide. One test was performed at a lower solids concentration (9.6%) and 150°C and 1100 kPa to determine whether lowering the solids concentration could improve the silver extraction (Test 8). The silver extraction from this test was 96.1%, indicating that near complete extraction of the silver from silver sulphide could be achieved with a lower solids concentration. Sulphur extractions were generally similar to or, in a few cases, slightly lower than the silver extractions in these tests. Silver and sulphur extractions should, in theory, follow each other as, to dissolve silver, the sulphur would have to be oxidized to sulphate in solution to maintain the charge balance. The analyses indicate an excess of sulphur in the feed solids which is quite possible from sulphide precipitation from acidic solutions (i.e., by the oxidation of S One test was attempted with the addition of sulphuric acid to the leach solution to try to lower the amount of oxidation of sulphur to sulphate and, thus, lower the amount of nitric acid consumed. The test was performed at 150°C, 1100 kPa(g) and with 107 g/L nitric acid (204% of stoichiometric) and an H With the best hydrogen reduction conditions tested, near quantitative precipitation (99.8%) of silver from the leach solution was possible in 1 h. The silver powder produced was of high purity (>99.8%) and quite fine (96.2% passing 106 μm), thus, making it an excellent material for powder metallurgy applications. (The lower silver grade of the Test II precipitate was likely a result of contamination with silver sulphate on cooling because of the lower precipitation efficiency in that test.) Further testing of hydrogen reduction conditions would be necessary to determine the optimum conditions for this process. Previous researchers all precipitated silver by hydrogen reduction from solutions below the room temperature solubility of silver sulphate in their leach solutions This research indicates that nitric acid leaching can be effective in leaching silver sulphide precipitates with a maximum extraction of 96.1% achieved by leaching at 150°C, 1100 kPa(g), and 9.6% solids with twice the stoichiometric amount of nitric acid. Further optimization of the leaching conditions would be required to further improve on the silver extractions achieved. Hydrogen reduction from nitric acid leach solutions was also successful with nearly quantitative precipitation of silver in 1 h at 150°C and 4000 kPa(g) hydrogen pressure. In these tests, high precipitation efficiencies were achieved at silver concentrations well in excess of the solubility limit for silver sulphate at room temperature. Silver of greater than 99.8% purity with 96.2% passing 106 μm was produced in these hydrogen reduction tests.