Deep bed filtration of liquid media is a unit process step with a wide range of applications. For the description of both the impact and the adhesion probability of particles many publications and theories are available. This paper investigates in detail the influence of the viscous force theory in combination with the roughness of participating solids on the filtration process. The proposed model illustrates the necessity of including the energy dissipation by the disjoining liquid film in the modeling of deep bed filtration processes. Furthermore, the model can be used in order to estimate the influence of roughness, particle size and viscosity on the probability of particle impact and adhesion.The efficiency of the deep bed filtration process strongly depends on the probability of particle impact and adhesion on the surface of the filter structure. For the latter case, the authors For aerosol filtration, many experimental as well as theoretical studies on the probability of adhesion can be found in the literature It is well known that a relative movement between two solid objects, immersed in a liquid medium, causes disjoining of the liquid phase which results in a viscous force opposing this relative movement of the two solids. Stefan The primary aim of the present investigation is to evaluate the relevance of the viscous force that exists between a converging particle and the surface of a filter structure during the deep bed filtration process in liquid media. Therefore, a numerical simulation is performed in order to estimate the impact velocity of particles on a single collector, assuming a one-way coupling between the fluid flow and the particles. These simulations are carried out for different particle sizes and bulk velocities. In order to consider the effect of viscous force on the particles, the model predictions are subsequently corrected employing the lubrication approximation. The numerical simulation is carried out for a single collector. Hence, the present investigation refers to the concept of the single collector. The proposed model allows one to estimate the effects of roughness of the filter surface, particle size and fluid bulk velocity on the probability of particle impact and adhesion. The present study focuses on hydrophobic solids, which have a static wetting angle for water larger than 100°. In this case, hydrophobic effects increase the adhesion force between the particle and the filter surface Stefan     Eq. The viscous force, given by Eq.   It is evident that the forces in both Eqs.   Δ The viscous force by the disjoining stagnant fluid film has to be considered between a distance The film rupture distance depends on the minimum film thickness As a result of the introduced approach, Those particles that come closer to the collector than The first step for evaluating the influence of the viscous force on the probability of physical impact probability is a numerical simulation of the particle impact on a single collector, which provides the location and the velocity of particle collision on the collector. The numerical simulation includes buoyancy, inertia and drag forces induced by the fluid flow around the suspended particles. The unsteady two-dimensional flow field is calculated by the Lattice–Boltzmann-Method for a constant inlet velocity, constant outlet pressure and periodic lateral boundaries. A detailed description of the simulation has been already presented by Werzner et al. The numerical simulations are performed for five different particle sizes, considering four different fluid bulk velocities, as listed in From the computed velocity vectors of the particle at the moment of collision, the particle impact angle       In order to correct the acquired simulation data due to the contribution of the squeeze film effect, relocation of the particles normal to the collector by a distance of  Before the viscous force is integrated in the results obtained only from the numerical simulation, some fundamental information on this deceleration force is required to be investigated. As mentioned earlier, the energy balance in Eq. The results of The energy balance in Eq.   The next logical step for the current investigation would be to combine the effect of viscous force with the results of the detailed numerical simulation obtained using the Lattice–Boltzmann-Method. As mentioned before, the velocity components of the particles at the moment of impact, obtained from the numerical simulation, are used in order to evaluate the impact velocity   It is evident in The difference between the two energy distributions, presented in By calculating the introduced  The Hiller number distribution is calculated for all investigated particle sizes and fluid bulk fluid velocities based on the corresponding physical impact kinetic energy and adhesion energy distributions. The two coarser particle sizes show a comparable adhesion probability that decreases with the increase in the fluid velocity. This observation illustrates that the kinetic energy of the particles in the moment of impact on the collector overcomes the acting adhesion energy. Thus, most of the particles are expected to rebound from the collector into the bulk fluid flow. The comparison of Finally the introduced model allows the combination of the impact and adhesion probabilities which results in an estimation of the overall filtration efficiency of a single collector. In order to evaluate the performance of the developed model, the present results are compared in The quantitative influence of the interactions between the particle and the filter on the filtration efficiency can be estimated by the use of a geometric distribution function The use of the geometric distribution enables the extension of the single collector concept to a real deep bed filtration process with a defined number of collectors in the flow direction. As a preliminary approach, it is assumed that the estimated filtration efficiency remains constant for the consecutive interaction between the particle and the collector. Thus, it is possible to illustrate the influence of the number of interactions on the resulting filtration efficiency, as shown in The use of the developed model, therefore, could help to optimize the length of the deep bed filter structure in order to achieve the desired filtration efficiencies. Furthermore, by considering the viscous force, it is possible to predict the influence of viscosity on the probability of particle impact, while modeling the deep bed filtration process. It is expected that highly viscous fluids will reduce the particle impact probability by increasing the effect of viscous drag. However, the particles that reach the collector will have higher adhesion probability owing to their lower physical impact energy. Therefore, through further intensive numerical simulations, it should be possible to determine an optimum set of parameters in order to perform a defined filtration task. Finally, the current investigation clearly shows the effect of the viscous force on the filtration efficiency. The proposed modeling approach, with the integration of the viscous force in the results of numerical simulations, shows that the viscous force is indeed a relevant parameter that strongly influences the efficiency of the filtration process. It is recommended to integrate the viscous force in the simulation codes for future numerical predictions. Numerical simulations of the particle deposition on a single collector form the basis of a developed model and a subsequent intensive study on the effect of the viscous force in the stagnant fluid layer between the particles and the collector on the filtration efficiency. The calculation of the energy dissipation induced by the suppressed viscous fluid, is based on the lubrication approximation of Stefan and Reynolds The introduced model enables the calculation of the deceleration of a particle converging onto a collector surface. Thus, it is possible to calculate the impact probability depending upon the particle size, the bulk liquid velocity and the liquid viscosity. Furthermore using the model it is possible to evaluate the required minimum bulk fluid velocity in order to ensure the impact of the particle with the collector. The calculation of the Hiller number, which takes into account the adhesion energy and the physical impact kinetic energy distributions, enables the calculation of the adhesion probability and further on the estimation of the filtration efficiency for a given particle size. The results obtained from the proposed model are observed to be in good agreement with the experimental data of Heuzeroth et al. Finally, the present investigation shows the relevance of the viscous force on the filtration efficiency in liquid media. The results clearly show that the viscous force should be considered in future numerical simulation codes to improve their predictions by taking into account the particle impact and the adhesion probabilities.  collector diameter, m particle diameter, m adhesion energy between particle and collector, J kinetic energy of the particle before collision with the collector, J kinetic energy of the particle at impact, J inertia force of the moving particle, N viscous force acting between particle and collector, N gravitational constant, m/s distance between the particle and the collector surface, m minimum liquid film thickness, m effective roughness of the particle and the collector surface, m discretization step width, m filter height, m Hiller number, − number of interactions between the particle to the filter, − particle impact efficiency, %− number of particles, − filtration probability, − deposition probability, − time, s fluid velocity, m/s particle velocity, m/s starting velocity of the particle, m/s particle velocity normal to the collector, m/s  particle impact angle to the x-axis, ° particle velocity angle to the x-axis, ° particle density, kg/m fluid density, kg/m dynamic viscosity, Pa  start condition adhesion collector effective filter control variable Impact kinetic liquid minimum particle effective roughness viscous x-direction y-direction The authors would like to thank the