Nitrogen (N) transfer is well documented in legume-cereal intercropping but this is less often reported for legume-Brassica intercrops even though Brassica crops require higher levels of N fertilizers. The present study was carried out to quantify N transfer from legumes (Lupinus albus L., Trifolium incarnatum L. or Vicia sativa L.) to rapeseed (Brassica napus L.) using the split-root 15N-labelling method. After three months we observed that legumes did not alter the growth of rapeseed. Vetch showed the lowest growth and demonstrated low 15N shoot to root translocation and no significant N transfer to rapeseed. In contrast, significant 15N enrichment was found in lupine and clover and 15N was transferred to the associated rapeseed plants (around 6 and 4 mg N plant−1, respectively), which contributed 2 to 3% of the rapeseed total N. Additionally, the data revealed that N2 fixation dominated the N nutrition in lupine despite the high N level provided in the donor compartment, suggesting a greater niche segregation between companion plants. Based on the results of this study we suggest that intercropping can be a relevant contributor to rapeseed N nutrition. Among the three legumes tested, clover and lupine seemed to be the best intercropping candidates.To reduce the use of nitrogen (N) fertilizers and their adverse economic and environmental impacts, N In ryegrass-clover mixtures it has been shown that 10% of the N fixed by clover is transferred to the grass and accounts for up 50% of the N in ryegrass ( The transfer of N between the legumes and non-fixing plants is usually quantified by using Recent results have demonstrated the benefits of faba bean-rapeseed intercrops ( Using a split-root Seeds of three legume species (white lupine, Following the method of This experiment was carried out in a greenhouse under a thermoperiod of 20/17 °C day/night and a photoperiod of 16/8 h. Natural light was supplemented with high pressure sodium lamps (Philips, MASTER Green Power T400W) supplying an average photosynthetically active radiation of 350 μmol photons m Plants were harvested three months after transplanting and separated into shoots and roots. In RC, the roots of both plants (donor and receiver) were separated. Roots were carefully rinsed with deionized water. Plant samples were weighed and oven dried (60 °C) for 48 h for DW determination and ground to fine powder before total N and Estimates of total N transfer from donor (legume) to the receiver (rapeseed) were based on the assumption that equal proportions of labelled and non-labelled N were transferred. The percentage of total donor N transferred to the receiver (%N where with: atom % atom % Then, total amount of N (mg plant The percentage of N in the receiver derived from transfer (%Ndft) was calculated as: The experiment was performed with five replicates except for clover (n = 3). The resulting variations in data are expressed as the means ± S.E. Data were analysed using analysis of variance (ANOVA), after verifying compliance of normality, and significantly different means between treatments were separated with the Tukey’s multiple range test (P ≤ 0.05). Clover had a higher total dry weight than lupine and vetch ( The N amounts in whole plants, shoots and DC roots were not significantly different for lupine and clover and significantly higher than those of vetch (for example, about 14, 15 and 7 fold higher in clover than in vetch, respectively). Moreover, compared to vetch, clover showed the highest values for N amount in RC (18 fold) and total root (12 fold). The lack of difference in the N amounts observed between clover and lupine could be explained by the higher N content of lupine (around 3 The atom% Total DW, shoot and root DW and the total N amounts in rapeseed grown in mixtures (rapeseed-lupine, rapeseed-clover and rapeseed-vetch) was similar to the DW and total N amounts of rapeseed grown alone (Control) ( No significant N transfer occurred from vetch to rapeseed. The percentages of N transferred (%N Facilitation of N resources between legumes and their associated companion crops has been widely described, especially for cereals ( Our results show that in comparison to control plants, which were grown alone, growth at the rosette stage of rapeseed was not limited by clover, lupine or vetch, even though rapeseed had to share the same soil volume and nutrient pools. This contrasts with decrease of The atom % In our study, a split root system was used for the first time to study N-transfer from three legume species to rapeseed. This method allows continuous From this study, it could be concluded that rapeseed growth was not altered by the presence of legumes. In contrast to vetch, lupine and clover may be considered as suitable candidates for rapeseed legume mixtures because both species have shown significant capacity for N transfer that is available for rapeseed nutrition. Moreover, lupine may be particularly interesting since its N nutrition relies mainly on N Thaïs Génard, Philippe Etienne, Philippe Laîné, Jean-Claude Yvin, Sylvain Diquélou: Conceived and designed the experiments; Performed the experiments; Analyzed and interpreted the data; Contributed reagents, materials, analysis tools or data; Wrote the paper. This work, conducted through the SERAPIS project, was supported by the Regional Council of Lower Normandy (grant number 12P03057), the Regional Council of Brittany and the European Regional Development Fund (ERDF) and CMI (Centre Mondial d’Innovation of Roullier group). The authors declare no conflict of interest. No additional information is available for this paper. The authors are most grateful to the PLATIN’ (Plateau d’Isotopie de Normandie) core facility for the elemental analysis used in this study. The authors thank Dr Laurence Cantrill, Director of “Out of Site English”, for revising the English in the manuscript. The authors thank the seed producers, Caussade-Semences for seeds of clover and lupine, and Jouffray-Drillaud Eco Performance for vetch seeds.