The attempts made to understand and quantify the relationship between rock texture and engineering properties have been accompanied by some ambiguities and uncertainties, and the majority of the approaches, though focusing on particular rock types, have not been so successful for even the same rock types from other regions. This study, therefore, was aimed to investigate the relationship between the texture and strength properties of a wide range of crystalline igneous rocks along with more aspects of textural analysis. For this purpose, fifteen fresh samples of crystalline igneous rocks belonging to the stone quarries of the NW Iran were collected and subjected to compressive and tensile strength tests (UCS and BTS). Thin sections of the samples were used to prepare the full mosaic image layers in three different optical conditions. About 18,000 mineral grains were manually traced on the processed images and the obtained vector data was used for the quantification of various textural parameters including size metrics, shape descriptors, microfabric indices and mineral content. Different phase considerations (full-phasic, monophasic, multiphasic and phase-ratio) were applied to derive the textural characteristics of the individual and multiple minerals and their proportional ratio. Finally, simple linear regression analysis was performed to evaluate the relationship between the texture and strength properties. The results indicated that the newly developed quartz to feldspar size ratio (QFSR) indicator was the only textural parameter that could be significantly correlated with both compressive and tensile strength in a wide range of rock types. The results also highlighted the fact that the role of quartz and feldspar encountered with different rock failure mechanisms could be different; In fact, the tensile strength was obviously affected by the size and content of K-feldspar, while the compressive strength showed a more complicated mechanism and seemed to be controlled by the interference effects of plagioclase and quartz textural properties. Furthermore, the study indicated that the influence of grain size on the rock strength was more important than the grain shape or mineral content.The strength of rocks is the most important parameter used in almost all engineering projects. Uniaxial compressive strength (UCS) and Brazilian tensile strength (BTS) tests are the most commonly used standard tests applied to determine the strength of rock materials, as performed on the sound core samples. Performing the tests is, however, expensive and time-consuming; especially in cases of high resistant crystalline and granitic rocks, they can be extremely difficult and tedious. The required high-quality core samples, on the other hand, cannot always be obtained from weak, stratified, highly fractured and weathered rocks. Several researchers have tried to find the potential relationships between textural/mineralogical and strength properties to reliably predict the strength behaviors of rocks from simple petrographic characteristics. Early experimental study on the mechanical behavior of granite and marbles suggested that the microcracks, grain boundaries, minerals cleavage, and twining planes could affect as planes of weakness, controlling the direction of failure ( The negative effects of cleavable minerals, especially feldspar, on the strength and toughness of crystalline rocks have been emphasized for several decades (   Studies also suggest that the behaviors of mica and secondary minerals are highly similar to porosity, and where their accumulation is sufficient, they can cause a large reduction in rock strength by directing the crack growing along the preferred weak paths ( The effect of textural heterogeneity on the strength of rock materials has been widely stressed in recent years. Model-based studies have indicated that the peak strength of granite can be adversely affected by the heterogeneity of geometry ( The obvious contradictions in the studies reviewed above indicate that the role of petrographic texture on the rock strength behaviors is more complicated and has not been fully elucidated. Therefore, further comprehensive studies are needed to fully clarify the effect of rock texture and mineralogy on the strength properties. This study, with a specific focus on the textural characteristics of different mineral phases and their phase-ratio consideration, was attempted to find new aspects of the governing relationships between the petrographic texture and strength properties, something which has not been investigated before. Forty different block samples of crystalline igneous rocks belonging to the ornamental stone quarries of the NW Iran and an approximate dimension of 30 × 30 × 20 cm were collected from the stone processing factories of Iran ( It should be noted that, given the large number of factors affecting the mechanical behavior of rock and rock mass, the following approaches should be considered in relation to the context of this study: First, the study was based on the microstructural aspects of rocks strength, and the large-scale controlling factors of rock mass quality, such as joint and fault, were not considered for the purpose of this study. Second, in order to narrow down the scope of the study and only focus on the independent textural characteristics of grain size, grain shape and mineralogy, and to minimize the interfering effects of the other microscale controlling factors such as heterogeneity and internal defects (microcracking and alteration), the study was conducted using the more sound and homogeneous samples as far as possible. So, the latter microstructural controlling factors of rock quality were not specifically investigated in this study. Uniaxial compressive strength (UCS) and Brazilian tensile strength (BTS) are widely used standardized geotechnical tests used for evaluation of rock strength. The core samples were cross-cut into appropriate lengths and subjected to UCS and BTS tests using a 2000 kN ELE compression testing machine, according to Optical properties of minerals serve as the basis of mineral identification achieved by the visual inspection of petrographic thin sections under a polarizing microscope in both plane-polarized (PPL) and cross-polarized light (XPL). The hue of the interference color under cross-polarized light is a function of the mineral type, the orientation of mineral crystallographic axis to the polarized light, and the thickness of the thin section passed by the polarized light ( Based on a compact and efficient modification of the first method, the photomicrographs of the present study were recorded using a polarizing microscope under three different optical conditions: (i) under non-polarized light with a fixed orientation, (ii) under polarized light in the same fixed orientation, and (iii) under polarized light after 45° clockwise rotation to the primary orientation ( The prepared petrographic thin sections were fully subjected to consecutive digital photography using a digital camera mounted on a polarizing microscope (Olympus BX60F5, Japan) at a fixed magnification of 40×. The digital photomicrographs were captured with a resolution of 1200 × 1600 pixels in the 24-bit RGB color mode. In order to produce seamless mosaic images, the photography of the thin sections was essentially conducted using 30% overlapping in both x and y directions, and followed edge-to-edge to cover the entire available area of the thin sections. The full surface area of each thin section with an effective area of about 24 × 46 mm was captured by 120 images, and by considering the three different stages of the photography for each sample, overall, 5400 digital images were acquired from the total of 15 thin sections. It should be noted that only one of the prepared thin sections which had a better representation sufficiency was used for the image analyzing processes and textural quantification, and the other one was used as a complementary tool for the descriptive petrographic studies. The unwanted arcs of the captured circular images had to be removed to allow the images to be seamlessly stitched together. This was digitally performed by 30% cropping the circular field images form each cardinal direction (up, down, left and right) to make square full-field images using a batch image-processing software. The square images were then subjected to several digital image-processing techniques to reduce the noise and improve the quality. Finally, a set of 120 images were manually aligned and integrated in the same order as captured to make a single mosaic image using Adobe Photoshop software (Adobe Systems Inc., San Jose, CA, USA). This was carried out three trials for each thin section; verall, 45 mosaic images were prepared for the task of grain boundary tracing. It should be reminded that capturing photomicrographs by the consecutive photography technique is inevitably performed by moving the viewing perspective. The figural position of the adjacent serial images obtained by this technique cannot be exactly matched in an object-to-object way to reconstruct a flawless mosaic image. Therefore, some digital distortion and skewness corrections were needed to properly connect the images, which was manually performed using Adobe Photoshop. Because of the laborious and time-consuming nature of the quantitative textural analysis, most of these studies have been based on the analysis of multiple small areas of the thin section, which constituted only a small fraction of the total area. In the present study, the total surface areas of the thin sections with high resolution were fully captured, and after careful visual inspections, a large continuous area of a thin section which could be a better representation of the mineralogical and textural characteristics was selected and used for the grain boundary tracing and textural quantification. This approach would definitely improve the reliability and representativeness of the textural samples. JMicroVision software, v1.27, with the aid of background registration technique, was used for the grain boundary tracing of the rock constituents. The software can provide the possibility of drawing different kinds of geometric objects such as point, polyline and polygon on a background of graphic objects (i.e. photographs and images), and can create a preliminary geometric database for detailed textural analysis. To construct a high-quality grain boundary map for accurate textural analyses, based on topology rules, two adjacent polygons must share the coincident boundary that is exactly the same for both. This cannot be accurately achieved by simply drawing the two independent boundary polygons for the adjacent grains, especially with complicated and highly irregular boundaries. The problem has been solved in the GIS-based software by using the snapping and auto-detect function, which allows the user to only draw the free boundaries, and so, the common boundaries, without having to redraw, can be automatically followed exactly at the previously established boundaries ( After loading a set of three superposable mosaic images in JMicroVision, the reference area was selected and outlined, and the operation was performed within the reference area. The size of the reference area depended on the textural homogeneity and grain size; it varied from 6.5 to 86.7% of the total available image areas ( The boundaries of the mineral grains were carefully traced (using a mouse) and outlined by closed polylines as a separate vector layer on the background mosaic images. The pictorial information of the images in the background was used to identify the real grain boundaries from other confusing discontinuity traces like microcracks, cleavage, twinning, etc., and to determine the grain mineralogy. The possibility of changing the order and transparency of the multiple background images during tracing allowed the use of the combined information of the different images captured in different optical conditions in order to resolve the ambiguities in the identification of the grain boundaries and mineralogy. All grains inside the reference area with a threshold diameter of 0.04 mm were outlined and registered. Overall, about 18,000 mineral grains (600–1800 grains of each sample) with the average measured area of 202.57 mm GIS-based software such as ArcMap provides a powerful tool to calculate various geometric features of digital objects. SVGZ format, which is the only available vector output format of JMicroVision software, cannot be directly supported by The DXF files were then loaded into ArcMap10, and first the polyline objects were converted to polygon. The geometric features of the polygons (e.g., area and perimeter) were calculated using the ArcMap's calculation toolbox and the “ET GeoWizards” extension. The attribute table of the objects was then exported into a spreadsheet for further analysis in Microsoft Excel. It is essential to noted that the real scale of the graphics files may change due to format conversion (here caused by the Surfer program). Therefore, control and, if necessary, correction of the scale of the converted graphic files with respect to the real initial scale would be essential. Alongside with basic geometric parameters (e.g., length and area), there are several morphometric parameters such as circularity and aspect ratio that have been developed based on the concept of geometric features and used for the textural analysis of granular materials. Moreover, there are several microfabric indices obtained by the combination of multiple textural parameters (e.g. Texture Coefficient), and are mostly used to explain the complexity of rock textural properties. In the present study, besides the variety of textural parameters prevalent in the literature of rock textural studies, some new textural parameters in line with the aims of the study were considered. The complete list of the textural parameters used in this study is given in The results of the experimental strength tests (UCS and BTS) performed on the core samples are summarized in Size metrics, including the grain size metrics of length (diameter), area and perimeter. Shape descriptors, including the grain shape descriptors of elongation, circularity, roundness, roughness, rugosity, edge smoothing, rectangularity and compactness. Microfabric indices, including the indices of grain size homogeneity and mineral heterogeneity, interlocking and texture coefficient. Given the great mass of the textural data available from the textural measurements, the data were preferably used, instead of applying point-counting analysis, to determine the mineralogical composition and lithological classification of the samples. The modal composition of the constituent minerals was determined using the areal coverage percentage of the minerals in the reference area ( By processing the Shapefile presentation of the grain polygons and assigning a particular color to each mineral phase, the Grain Size Distribution (GSD) and Mineral Phase Distribution (MPD) maps of the samples were prepared and used for further textural analysis ( Textural parameters of rock materials are usually determined through the arithmetic mean of the measured/calculated characteristic regardless of the grains type (mineralogy). In the present study, in order to examine the influenceability of the rock strength from the textural characteristics of different mineral phases, the textural mean values, besides the overall grains (as is commonly done), were calculated for the single and multiple mineral phases. The proportional ratio of the recent textural variables was also determined. Consequently, overall, 22 different textural variables (     This is to say that because all microfabric indices (see More than 300 textural variables were extracted by implementing various phasic and phase-ratio considerations based on 13 geometric textural parameters including length, area, perimeter, elongation, circularity, roundness, roughness, rugosity, edge smoothing, rectangularity and compactness (2 kinds), as well as the mineral content. The obtained variables were then correlated with the strength properties using linear regression analyses. Because of the large number of the generated textural variables, the graphical analysis of all regression results could not be shown in this study. Therefore, the results of all established regressions between the textural variables as independents and the strength variables (UCS and BTS) as dependents were comprehensively summarized as a matrix representation shown in The variation of the major rock-forming minerals corresponding to the strength properties was plotted on individual combination charts ( Quartz, because of its tectosilicate structure, elastic stiffness, and resistance to weathering and mechanical stress, is mostly considered as an initial strength factor of granite and crystalline rocks. Experimental observations, however, have indicated much more complicated and contradictory results. Some studies ( To investigate the issue, the data points of the variations in the corresponding variables were plotted and the most conspicuous outlier affecting the results was found at the first glance. So, the regression analysis was established without any outlier. The outlier was due to the sample NARI with the most quartz amount (58.5%), and exclusion of which satisfactorily improved the results. Although these recent relationships were not statistically significant at the considered confidence level (95%), they suggested the positive effect of the quartz content on the strength properties of the igneous rocks within the conventional range of the quartz content ( The grain size of the granular material can be characterized using the geometric parameters of diameter, length, area and premier. In geometry, the diameter is any straight line segment that passes through the center of a circle and whose endpoints lie on the circle. It can also be defined as the longest chord of a circle. In this sense, the “diameter” is often used interchangeably with “length” to refer to the longest linear dimension of the cross-section of the grain. Length (diameter), due to the simplicity and speed of measurement, has often been used for grain size analyses (e.g., In this approach, all available (measured) grains of each sample, regardless of the grains mineralogy, were assumed to contribute to determining the textural parameters, and the results were subjected to regression analyses in association with the strength properties. The results are sorted in the rows A and B of Despite the large number of studies on the textural characteristics of overall rock-forming grains, not much attention has been paid to the role of individual mineral phases in relation to the geomechanical and strength properties. The monophasic analysis of this study focused on the four common rock-forming minerals of quartz, plagioclase, K-feldspar and biotite, and then the textural characteristics of the selected mineral phases were correlated with the strength properties. According to the results, there was a significant inverse relationship between the mean grain size of the K-feldspar grains and the tensile strength, which was strongly supported by the different forms of size metrics ( The overall trend of the results suggested that the compressive strength was slightly affected by the negative and positive effects of plagioclase and quartz mean size, respectively ( It has long been known that plagioclase and K-feldspar have almost similar physical and mechanical behaviors ( Our results suggested that the negative effect of feldspar, especially its grain size, on tensile strength was more clear and efficient than on the compressive strength. The negative effects of feldspar content and size on the mechanical strength of granite have been previously emphasized by several authors ( Empirical studies have also shown that stress-induced cracks in granite, when faced with the lath feldspar, tend to deflect and propagate along the cleavage planes and planar boundaries of the feldspar grain ( Our results, however, did not show a clear relationship between the size and content of biotite with the strength properties ( The regression results of the mean grain size and mineral content obtained from the consideration of the feldspar and biotite/mafic mineral grains, were not significantly different from those of the only feldspar grains ( The phase-ratio analysis was firstly used by ( According to the present study, there was no significant relationship between the quartz to feldspar content ratio (here termed QFCR) with both the compressive and tensile strength ( The phase-ratio analysis was developed between the monophasic and multiphasic textural variables and the obtained values were then correlated with the strength properties. According to the results ( To explain the above observation, it can be said that as the quartz grain size is increased, relative to the feldspar grain size, the number of quartz grain boundaries per unit volume is reduced and therefore, a considerable part of the stress-induced cracks is unavoidably propagated through the interior of the larger quartz grains, which are more resistant to cracking than the quartz-quartz intergrain boundaries. On the other hand, the smaller feldspar grains due to less developed cleavage planes and smaller grain length cannot contribute as larger grains to direct the crack propagation along the weaker planes. Therefore, increasing the quartz to feldspar size ratio (QFSR) can cause the increase in the strength of the quartz-feldspar rocks. From the petrological viewpoint, the rocks with larger quartz crystals resulted from the slower cooling rate of an acidic magma with a larger amount of free silica. Therefore, the QFSR indicator, despite the derivation from the grain geometry, can be related to the petrogenesis and thermodynamic conditions of rock crystallization. The results of the phasic and phase-ratio approaches in a combined evaluation suggested that quartz and feldspar more likely have an opposite effect on the strength of crystalline quartz-feldspar rocks; so, increasing the quartz size and content can increase the strength, while increasing the feldspar size lead to decreasing the strength. It seems that the positive effect of quartz is interfered by the negative effect of feldspar. Evidence suggests that the role of feldspar size effect is more effective than the quartz size and content on the strength. The apparent difference between the regression results for the different strength properties (UCS and BTS) also suggests that the role of different types of feldspar on the rock strength encountered with the different failure mechanisms (compressive and tensile strength) may not be the same. The results clearly demonstrate that increasing the size of K-feldspar grain significantly causes a significant decrease in the tensile strength, while the compressive strength is negatively affected by increasing the size of plagioclase grains. It should be noted that the above mentioned phase-ratio analyses were developed based on the quartz-bearing samples, and the samples with no quartz content were not essentially considered for the regression analysis. Therefore, the reliability of the quartz-to-feldspar textural approaches (QPSR, QKSR, and QFCR) is practically restricted by a minimal amount of quartz in the examined samples, and so, the best results can be obtained for the quartz-rich samples. In the literature of particle science, particularly alloys and unconsolidated sediments, diversity and application of the grain morphometric parameters is more extensive. Some shape descriptors (e.g., circularity and rectangularity) describe the form of the 2D object based on its similarity to a regular basic shape, like a circle and rectangle, and some others (e.g., roundness and roughness) evaluate the object surface behaviors according to the waviness of sides and sharpness of corners. The shape descriptors given in Aspect ratio or elongation is a criterion of an object equidimensionality and can be simply determined by the ratio of the longest to shortest sides. Logically, by increasing the systematic (not scattered) elongation of rock-forming minerals, the anisotropy and heterogeneity are expected to increase. In the present study, the elongation of the measured grains was determined using the length-to-width ratio of the smallest circumscribed rectangle enclosing the grain. The procedure seems to more reliably evaluate the grain elongation in comparison to the commonly used maximum-to-minimum Feret (caliper) diameter (see Also, the results did not show the significant influence of the grain circularity and roundness on the strength properties (col. 6 and 7 in Except for the discussed cases, the other studied shape factors (edge smoothing, rectangularity and compactness) did not show a clear relationship with the strength properties (cols. 10–13 of In the field of rock mechanics, there are some microfabric indices, that proposed to evaluate the complexity of the textural effects or to predict the rock strength behaviors from the textural properties. Some of the most commonly used microfabric indices are investigated here in relation to the strength properties. The first approach to estimate the rock texture homogeneity was proposed by Interlocking is a kind of physical interference which occurs between the adjacent grains of fully crystallized or well-cemented rocks, and causes to increase the applied stress required to propagate the grain boundary crack in the failure process of crystallized materials. The interlocking effect of the studied samples was quantified based on the geometric features of the quartz grains using the Dreyer's formula ( In an attempt to provide a general and comprehensive equation to predict the geomechanical properties of rocks from the textural characteristics, ( The TC quantification of this study was carried out using a great number of grains (600–1800 grains of each sample) and the acquired values (see Understanding the role of microfabric concepts influencing the geomechanical behavior, especially in the case of crystallized rock materials, is more complex, and the suggested formulas seem not to be in full control of the facts. The theory of estimation and the validity of linear regression models depends on some assumptions about the distribution and behavior of residuals and permutations of outliers. The Normal (Gaussian) distribution is one of the main assumptions for the parametric statistics, which is critical for the small-sample analysis. Violation of the normality assumption can bias the tests of significance and leading to unreliable or unrealistic results. The violation of the normality assumption of linear regression may be attributed to the skewed nature of the dependent variable, and may be a concern for naturally skewed outcome variables ( We inspected the performed regression models to probe the possible violation of normality assumptions and the presence of potential outliers. The validity of the normality assumption was assessed by considering the widely used goodness of fit tests (Kolmogorov–Smirnov, Shapiro–Wilk, Anderson–Darling, Lilliefors, and Jarque–Bera tests) using the standardized residuals ( Given the favorable results of our regression diagnostics, and to increase the generalization and reliability of the models, we tried, as far as possible, to use all of the available data points including outliers to establish the relationships, except in the unusual cases in which the potential impact of outliers on the regression results could be clearly demonstrated. Despite the novelty of this study, it suffered from some limitations which should be considered in the generalization of the findings, as well as in conducting future studies. The first limitation of this study is related to the small sample size. Despite the wide mineralogy and large lithological diversity of the studied samples, due to the large amount of work required for manual textural quantification, we were only able to measure and quantify a limited number of samples (15 samples) for texture-strength approaches. Undoubtedly, the large size of the sample would ensure a high degree of generalizability for the findings of this study. Ensure the homogeneity, soundness and representativeness of the samples is the other critical limitation of this study and similar rock-textural studies. In the present study, we tried to minimize/overcome these issues by collecting the more sound and fresh samples and eliminating the suspicious samples through the microscope inspections. Finally, the results of this study have been based on the, mainly granite crystalline igneous rocks, and the generalizability of the findings needs to be established in a larger sample of different rock types. Different lithological types of crystalline igneous rocks with a wide textural and mineralogical variety were used to investigate the influence of mineralogy and geometric textural characteristics on the strength properties of UCS and BTS. This was done using the quantification of different textural features including size metrics (length, area and perimeter), shape descriptors (Elongation, Circularity, Roundness, Roughness, Rectangularity, Competence and Rugosity), microfabric indices (Grain Size Homogeneity, Mineral Heterogeneity, Interlocking Index and Texture Coefficient), and mineral content according to different phasic and phase-ratio considerations. Simple linear regression analysis was then performed to evaluate the correlation between the textural and strength properties. The following conclusions could be drawn from this study: The influence of grain size on the strength of the crystalline igneous rocks was found to be more important and decisive than the other textural characteristics such as mineral content or grain shape. Both the size and content of feldspar were found to have a negative effect on the strength of non-weathered quartz-feldspar rocks, though the feldspar size appeared to have much more clear and significant results. The role of different types of feldspar encountered with compressive and tensile failure mechanism appeared to be distinctly different. The observations suggested that the tensile strength is significantly affected by the size and then the content of K-feldspar, whereas the compressive strength seems to have a more complicated mechanism; apparently, it is controlled by the negative effect of plagioclase, which is partially compensated by the positive effect of the quartz size and content. Quartz to feldspar size ratio (QFSR) appeared to have a clear positive effect on both compressive and tensile strength in the context of various crystalline igneous rock types. More specifically, the compressive strength was found to have a high significant positive correlation with the quartz to plagioclase size ratio (QPSR), whereas the corresponding significant correlation was observed between the tensile strength and the quartz to K-Feldspar size ratio (QKSR). The study, however, did not find a clear relationship between the content and size of biotite and mafic minerals with the strength properties. The tensile strength is found to be particularly sensitive to the elongation and mineralogical heterogeneity of rock-forming grains. Accordingly, the abundance of elongated grains reduces the tensile strength, whereas the heterogeneity of major rock-forming minerals improves the tensile strength. The study did not show a functional relationship between the Texture Coefficient, as well as the interlocking with the strength properties. The study also suggested that due to the complexity and the confounding effects of different rock-forming minerals on the failure behaviors of rock, phase-ratio analyses can probably provide more reliable relationships between the rock texture and strength properties, where the simple full-phasic and monophasic analyses may not detect an acceptable relationship. It should be also noted that the results of this study are best suited to the case of quartz-bearing crystalline igneous rocks. So, further experimental investigations are needed to confirm the findings and interpretations of this research. There is no financial, personal or other conflict of interests related to this research.