The international mining industry needs to enhance its mineral liberation process and reduce its enormous amount of power consumption, thereby increasing its overall efficiency. Current research studies have found that the mineral liberation process can be enhanced through the use of pulsed power, ultrasound pre-treatment and microwave pre-treatment of run of mine ore. The purpose of this article is to present empirical results of treating specific granite rock samples with RF power within the VHF range. These results indicate that RF treatment of granite rock samples within the VHF range does not significantly weaken the mineral grain boundaries. These results prove that RF pre-treatment of these rock samples will not benefit the mineral liberation process. However, different results may be obtained from samples that contain mineral species that are more absorbent of electromagnetic radiation.Current physical methods used for crushing of rocks in the mineral processing industry result in erratic breakages that do not efficiently liberate the economically valuable minerals. The energy consumed by the comminution process is not easily correlated to the particle size reduction effected due to a number of factors, which include the power consumed by the crushing/milling machines themselves and the heat generated by their processes that accounts for more than 75% of the input energy ( Fossil fuels make up approximately 87% of the current global energy requirement (coal contributing 28%, natural gas 21% and oil the remaining 38%) ( CO Climate change, along with limited fossil fuel resources, has given rise to the renaissance of renewable and sustainable energy sources. It has also given impetus to the search for new technologies within the mining industry which could reduce the current power consumption, while maintaining high power efficiencies and at the same time recovering the same (or higher) percentages of valuable minerals. A number of research studies have found that the mineral liberation process can be enhanced through the use of pulsed power, ultrasound pre-treatment and microwave pre-treatment of run of mine ore ( The purpose of this article is to present the evaluation of RF treatment of rocks with the comminution process in mind. This is applied to two different samples of granite as an example. RF energy is transferred from a high-power amplifier to the rock sample by means of an innovative coupling device. A matching network is included to ensure maximum power transfer (MPT) with minimum reflected power. This article will firstly present the description of the rock samples, which was used in the study. The design of the matching network is then given and its reliability is verified. The RF treated sample was milled and a particle screen analysis was completed. These results are presented in the form of a series of graphs and tables. The petrographic description highlights the main minerals present within the granite rock samples, determined by examining polished thin sections under an electronic microscope (see The chemical composition of the granite samples was determined using an X-ray fluorescence spectrometer with a Rigaku Primini instrument. A complete wavelength dispersive scan was done using virtual standards on all the major elements, with the results shown in Granites are examples of igneous rocks, which generally have quartz contents of around 20–60%, being medium to coarse-grained and are relatively light in colour ( The electrical properties of a material can be obtained by measuring its magnitude (|Z|) and phase angle (       The practical setup of the test equipment which was used to determine these electrical properties for specific rock samples was presented in an earlier journal article ( The electrical properties of the JSC granite rock sample obtained from a network analyzer revealed that its impedance (considered as the load reflection coefficient) was 1545 A Pi matching network was subsequently designed using a computer software program, called Multimatch μlite from The matching network's performance was evaluated using a network analyzer and a practical setup. A rock sample was inserted into a parallel-plate capacitor (design and validity discussed in The input and output trimmer capacitors were adjusted until a resonating frequency point of 160.14 The matching network's performance was finally evaluated using a practical setup (see This same practical setup was then used to transfer RF power to the granite rock samples housed in the parallel-plate capacitor. Possible changes that were considered include textural, phase, grindability, colour and temperature. Textural changes (changes in grain size and inter-grain boundary relationships) were considered using polarizing optical microscopy on polished thin sections of the rock samples. Phase changes (changes in mineral assemblage) were determined using polarizing optical microscopy. Grindability, being the changes in the power consumption during grinding and changes in the particle size distribution after grinding, was determined by measuring the power consumption during milling and by performing particle size analysis (sieve tests). Surface colour changes were visually observed while surface temperature changes were measured. Contrasts between the electrical properties (resonating frequency) of the untreated and treated samples are further indicated. The results from the above considerations were interpreted in terms of the mineralogical and chemical composition of the samples. The petrographic description highlights the main minerals present within the rock sample, determined by examining the polished thin sections under an electronic microscope. Photomicrographs of the untreated and treated rock samples are contrasted in Determination of the relative grindability of the untreated and treated samples was done by measuring the power consumption during grinding and comparing the particle size distribution after the grinding process. The untreated and treated samples were ground down to powder form in a laboratory swing mill obtained from Effective Laboratory Supplies in South Africa ( The powder samples were next transferred to particle screening sieves (250 Polished sections of the powdered samples were obtained to check for textural changes with regard to particle sizes of the untreated and treated samples (see One of the aims of this research was to evaluate if the use of RF power would weaken mineral grain boundaries, leading subsequently to a reduction in energy consumption of current comminution equipment, such as the swing-pot mill. The electrical power consumed in treating the individual rock samples with 82 No significant power difference (of the swing-pot mill) is seen between the treated and untreated rock samples. Furthermore, no significant changes in resonating frequency and resistance were observed (taken from the network analyzer) and no colour change took place in the treated rock sample. Subsequently, it may be stated that with no significant mineral size reduction being realized and no power reduction being established indicate that no improved efficiency was achieved with the RF treated samples. Previous work has shown that silicate minerals are largely transparent to microwaves, as opposed to sulphide minerals that are highly absorbent of microwaves, and that the beneficial effects of microwave pre-treatment are best achieved in rocks containing both silicates and sulphides due to their different responses ( A matching network, along with a parallel-plate capacitor and an innovative coupling jig, was used to connect two different granite rock samples (JSC and JS4) to high powered RF electrical equipment. The feasibility of this technique was confirmed by repeated correlated measurements taken on a network analyzer and a practical setup. A 50 The purpose of this research was to evaluate the effect that RF power exerts on rock samples, with particular focus on textural changes. This evaluation brought to light that mineral grain boundaries within granite rock samples treated with RF power are not significantly weakened. This was firstly determined by the similar electrical properties of the untreated and treated samples, where consistent values for resonating frequency and resistance were obtained from the network analyzer. This was clarified by the SEM analysis of the untreated and treated samples. Photomicrographs obtained for both samples revealed no significant changes in the form of fractures or breakages along the mineral grain boundaries. The particle size distribution after milling of both samples further revealed no weakening or softening of the rock, as the percentage of smaller sized particles did not increase in the treated samples. Therefore, it may be stated that treating granite rock samples with RF power within the VHF range may not significantly improve rock comminution and mineral liberation. However, all the minerals present in the samples were silicate minerals, and the effect of RF power on sulphide and oxide ore minerals still needs to be evaluated.