Coal slurry is a fine-grained (<1mm) by-product of coal washing. In the past, coal slurries were deposited in settling ponds as a waste. Currently, with the introduction of fluidized bed boilers in the Polish energy sector, coal slurries are used as a fuel.
                  Compared to coal, coal slurries (analyzed in the paper) are characterized by a high content of macerals of the inertinite group, with inertodetrinite dominant. Among macerals of the vitrinite and liptinite groups, a high content of detrial macerals also merit attention. The mineral composition of coal slurries is close to that of coal, although coals are characterized by a slightly higher mineral variability.
                  Unburned organic matter in the ash resulting from burning a mixture of coal and coal slurry is dominated by detritus (<10μm). The high content of detritus in the ash may partially result from a very high content of detrial macerals in coal slurries. A small share of solid forms and inerdoids in the ash reflect the generally reactive nature of the inertinite present in coal slurries.
                  X-ray diffraction and scanning electron microscopy of ash samples reveal quartz, anhydrite, mica, hematite, feldspar, calcite and portlandite in the ash. Metakaolinite, hydrophilite, dolomite, iron oxides, calcium oxide and aluminosilicates occur in smaller quantities.An essential part of the preparation of coal for sale and its further use in the energy sector is mechanical cleaning. The process makes use of the differences in the specific gravities of clean coal, rocks and minerals. The aim of coal processing is to improve and standardize the quality of the coal, mainly in terms of the reduction of ash- and sulfur contents (pyrite separation). The raw coal is initially subjected to a preliminary classification aimed at separating the coal into two grain-size classes: coarse fractions (> During the process of combustion, coal macerals are subjected to pyrolysis, resulting in the loss of volatile components and the formation of char ( Mineral matter in coal is primarily crystalline matter in the form of crystals, grains and aggregates, with lesser contents of amorphous- or fluid matter ( During coal combustion, high temperatures cause chemical- and structural transformations of mineral matter ( In the literature, there are few petrographic studies of coal slurry or of ash resulting from its combustion. In Poland, though coal slurries have been described, petrographic- and mineralogical studies are lacking. For this reason, the authors of this article began their research. Samples of coal slurry and of coal were collected from coal mines in the Upper Silesian Coal Basin and at two power plants of the Tauron Group (Tauron Wytwarzanie S.A.). Samples of coal slurries were collected directly from the pipelines supplying the slurries to the boilers. Coal samples were collected manually from conveyor belts or automatically from boiler feeders. Some samples of coal slurries were collected from slurry thickeners, where coal slurries had been deposited in the past. Samples of bottom ash were collected from the push-plate conveyors under the boilers and fly ash samples were derived from the first rows of the electrostatic precipitators. The samples of coal slurry (6 samples), coal (2 samples) and ash (8 samples) were then used to prepare pellets using epoxy resin ( Petrographic analyses of the feed coal and of the ash samples were carried out in reflected white light using a Zeiss Axio Imager.M2m microscope combined with an automated Swift stage point counter. Maceral analysis and vitrinite reflectance were completed on the coal samples in accordance with ISO ( The phase compositions of samples of fly- and bottom ashes were determined using a Panalytical X'Pert PRO MPD PW 3040/60 diffractometer with a theta–theta geometry. A cobalt anode X-ray tube was used as the source of radiation. The X-ray tube voltage was 45 The morphology and chemical composition of the fly- and bottom-ash particles were studied using a Philips XL30 ESEM/TMP scanning electron microscope equipped with an EDS (Energy Dispersive Spectrometry) analytical system and a Sapphire detector (Centaurus BSE, EDS detector) to identify the backscattered electrons. An accelerating voltage of 15 Analyses of moisture-, sulfur- and ash contents were performed according to the applicable standards ( The coal slurries resulted from the enrichment of coal seams occurring in the Pennsylvanian formations of the Upper Silesian Coal Basin. The coals from the USCB are characterized by a high content of macerals from the vitrinite group (55–75% mmf), contents of macerals from the inertinite group amounting to ca 30% and those of the liptinite group rarely exceeding 15% ( The maceral composition of the analyzed coal slurries is significantly different from that of a typical coal from the USCB. A characteristic feature is the relatively high content of macerals from the inertinite group ( For comparison with the coal slurry samples obtained as a result of coal washing, coals subjected to enrichment were petrographically analyzed. The proportion of inertinite-group macerals is half that in the samples of coal slurry. This reduction is accompanied by an increase in vitrinite- and liptinite- group maceral contents ( In terms of quality characteristics, coal slurries are of lower grade than the coal. The analyzed samples have high total moisture contents (29.2–41.6%) and ash yields (29.0–46.4%), resulting in the coal slurries having lower calorific values (5.8–11.1 The mineral compositions of the four samples of coal slurry were determined using X-ray diffraction and scanning electron microscopy. The mineral composition is dominated by quartz, pyrite and clay minerals, with slightly smaller amounts of barite and mica ( Coal slurries are not used as a stand-alone fuel in power plants but are fed to a boiler as a mixture of coal and coal slurry in amounts up to 50/50. Petrographic studies of ash resulting from the combustion of a mixture of coal and coal slurry ( In fly ash, other forms of unburned organic matter either do not occur, or are present in trace amounts only ( X-ray diffraction analyses ( Scanning electron microscopy has shown a significant content of quartz, anhydrite, mica, calcite, feldspars, hematite and aluminosilicate glasses in the ashes ( A characteristic petrographic feature of coal slurries is a high content of inertinite-group macerals significantly exceeding contents typical of North Atlantic coals. These inertinite-group macerals are dominated by inertodetrinite. Furthermore, macerals from the vitrinite- and liptinite groups are also dominated by detrial macerals. The high contents of inertinite in coal slurries may have a negative impact by generating increased amounts of unburned organic matter in the ashes. However, the very low amounts of solid forms and inertoids in the ashes reflect good and efficient burning of the macerals from the inertinite group. Chars in ash are dominated by fragments, which may partly reflect the high content of detrital macerals in coal slurries. The mineral composition of ash is dominated by quartz, anhydrite, mica, metakalolinite, feldspar, hematite, calcite and aluminosilicate glass. A characteristic feature is the presence of Ca minerals (calcite, lime, portlandite, anhydrite, gehlenite) and aluminosilicate glass containing Ca, which is associated with the use of limestone as a sulfur sorbent. Based on qualitative analysis and numerous observations of the test material, heavy metals, and thorium- and uranium compounds, are present in trace amounts. The authors thank Pádhraig Kennan of University College Dublin for assistance with the manuscript. The authors also wish to thank the reviewers for their valuable suggestions and comments.