Rockburst, earthquake and blasting cause some dynamic loads on rock support and rock reinforcement system. Elements of rock support and rock reinforcement are generally made of steel bar or cables, which are resistant against corrosion. These support elements may be subjected to vibrations induced by turbines, vehicle traffic and long-term corrosion in addition to dynamic loading caused by earthquake, rockburst and blasting. In this study, some theoretical, numerical and experimental studies are conducted on rockbolts and rock anchors under shaking and impulsive loading. Then the outcomes of these studies are presented and their practical implications are discussed accordingly.Dynamic phenomena such as rockburst, earthquake and blasting can impose some dynamic loads on rock support and rock reinforcement. Rockbolts and rock anchors are commonly used as the principal reinforcement elements in underground and surface excavations while shotcrete and concrete linings are used as support elements (  The author presents some theoretical, numerical and experimental studies on rockbolts and rock anchors under shaking and impulsive loading in this study. The experimental part is concerned with the behaviour of a single rockbolt under step-like impulsive loads, a single fully grouted rockbolt reinforcing a discontinuity under shaking load and mode tests on the reinforcing effect of rockbolts against planar sliding failure of slopes and sidewalls. Then some numerical analyses were presented for proving some theoretical and numerical insights into observations in experiments. Furthermore, their practical implications are discussed. Rockbolts and rock anchors may be subjected to impulsive pure tensile loads, e.g. under rockburst conditions. It is very rare to see any detailed discussion or experimental result on the load-displacement-time or stress-strain-time responses of rockbolts and rock anchors under impulsive loads ( Rockbolts and rock anchors are generally used to reinforce the potential failure plane against sliding in relation to the rock slopes and/or underground cavities. This set-up results in pure shear loads on rockbolts together with tensile or compressive axial forces. As noted, the reinforcement effect differs depending upon the installation angle of rockbolts.  As shown in Planar sliding is a common form of failure in rock slopes and underground cavities from sidewalls. To investigate the reinforcing effect of rockbolts against such failure modes under earthquake loading, a series of model experiments was carried out. A shaking table was used while changing the configuration of model in order to study the planar sliding of rock slopes. The weight of the potentially unstable block was 69.7 gf and a surcharge load of 172.7 gf was imposed on the potentially unstable block. The block was unstable without springs due to the high inclination angle of the sliding plane. More than four experiments were performed. As the results are quite similar to each other, two examples are described herein. The model conditions are basically the same. The only difference is the level and pattern of the acceleration form imposed on the models. Next, a series of experiments was carried out to investigate the number and length of fully grouted model rockbolts on the layered rock slope models ( A numerical experiment on the response of 2 m long point‐anchored steel rockbolt with a diameter of 25 mm was analysed using a dynamic finite element method developed by the author (  In recent years, many experiments have been carried out on yielding rockbolts under laboratory conditions in order to investigate their shock absorption characteristics against rockburst (e.g. When a yielding rockbolt is subjected to a shock load of dropping mass ( As for elasto-visco-plastic regime, one can write the following equation of motion: The non-homogenous differential equations (Eqs. The purpose of the next example was to investigate the response of rockbolts during excavation that was assumed to be a dynamic process. For this purpose, a finite element programme was developed. A circular underground opening at a depth of 100 m was assumed to be reinforced by rockbolts of 4 m long with diameter of 25 mm installed in a hole with a radius of 36 mm. The spacing of rockbolts with an elastic modulus of 200 GPa was assumed to be 1 m by 1 m. The elastic modulus and Poisson's ratio of rock mass were 3 GPa and 0.25, respectively.  Rock mass generally contains geological discontinuities and these discontinuities play major role in local instabilities in underground openings ( The axial force The displacement of rock anchors induced by the relative displacement during each relative motion due to sliding was computed from geometrical considerations. It should be also noted that there is no sliding if the rock anchor force attains a certain level. Furthermore, the oscillations of anchor force due to visco-elastic response during each increment of axial force were neglected in computations.  In this context, some experiments on dynamic responses of point-anchored rockbolt model under impulsive load are described. The axial strain of the model rock anchor fluctuated and became asymptotic to the static strain level under the applied stress level. Some model experiments were carried out on the development of axial forces in rock anchors and grouted rockbolts, stabilising the potentially unstable blocks in sidewalls of the underground openings using shaking. Experiments showed that the anchor force increased after each slip event in a step-like fashion and became asymptotic to a certain value thereafter. Furthermore, the block did not return to its original position, implying that the axial force became higher than the applied prestress level following each slip event. The numerical experiments also clearly illustrated that the rockbolts may experience loads under dynamic condition several times those under static condition. An actual excavation of a circular tunnel supported by rockbolts was considered as a dynamic problem under hydrostatic in situ stress condition. The comparisons of stresses induced for unbolted and bolted cases indicated that the radial and tangential stresses of the supported case are less than those of the unsupported case, which indicates the reinforcement effect of rockbolts through the internal pressure as well as shear interaction between rockbolts and surrounding ground. The author wishes to confirm that there are no known conflicts of interest associated with this publication and there has been no significant financial support for this work that could have influenced its outcome.