The aim of this study was to investigate effects of using different combinations of bulking agents (sucrose, mannitol and soluble wheat fiber) on the physico-chemical [moisture, water activity, soluble solid (SSC), color], texture and sensory properties of gummy candies formulated by maltitol syrup instead of glucose syrup. Experimental points of the study were determined by simplex lattice mixture design. Linear and quadratic models were determined for the effects on hedonic sensory properties and water activity, SSC, L *, chroma, various TPA (hardness, cohesiveness, springiness and resilience) parameters according to independent variables (p < 0.05). R2 values of these models were determined between 0.579 and 0.999. With the increase of mannitol, negative changes were encountered in quality parameters other than brightness (L*). As a result of this study, it was determined that the solubility, crystallization behavior, hygroscopicity properties and sweetness level of alternative components should be taken into consideration in the selection of bulking sweeteners and agents in confectionery products. Also, it was determined that soluble wheat fiber can be a good alternative to reduce sucrose in gummy confectionery with fulfilling consumer demands and expectations.The confectionery industry is one of the main food sectors worldwide and has a market value of approximately USD 82.3 billion according to 2018 data. The expected growth of this market is 3.6% annually ( However, despite its widespread consumption, gummy candy studies are limited. An important part of these studies is the use of sugar alternatives in the product composition ( Low-calorie formulations become important for confectionery industry. Because international and various national health organizations and authorities such as WHO recommend that up to 10% of the energy in the daily diet can come from the intake of free or added sugars ( One of the approaches used in confectionery reformulation studies is to use soluble dietary fibers or bulking agents of plant origin ( Mannitol is a polyol industrially obtained by hydrogenation of sugars or starch. It can also be obtained by extracting directly from seaweed. In hydrogenation, the process is carried out at 100-150 °C under 100–150 bar pressure for 1–2 h. The ADI value for mannitol, which has a low energy value (2.4 kcal/g) ( In the case of optimization of the product composition, the mixture design technique can be used. Mixture design method is one of the important fields of applied statistics. In recent years, it has been used in the composition optimization studies of foods ( In this study, it was aimed to determine the possibilities of using mannitol and soluble wheat fiber as alternative bulking agents to sucrose in developing low-calorie gummy candy, where glucose syrup is substituted with maltitol syrup as an alternative sweetener. For this purpose, an optimization study was carried out with the use of mixture design technique, by considering various physicochemical, color, texture and sensory properties as response. In the preparation of candy samples; water, sucrose (Konya Sugar, Konya, Turkey), mannitol (Mannitol-60, Roqoutte, France), soluble wheat fiber (Nutriose, Roquette, France), maltitol syrup (Lycasin® 80/55, Roquette, France), 250 bloom gelatin (Burjel, Bursa, Turkey), citric acid (Tayaş food, Kocaeli, Turkey), apple aroma (Etol Frutarom, Kocaeli, Turkey), water-soluble colorant (Safflower extract, Döhler, Karaman, Turkey) were used. A Simplex-lattice mixture design by a statistical package, Design-Expert (Stat-Ease Inc. version 7.0, Minneapolis) was used in order to determine the influence of three independent variables on the model system and it consists of 10 experimental points. The effect of mannitol (B, X Gummy candy samples ( Moisture determination was carried out using gravimetric technique in an incubator (Pol Eko Apatura, Slajski, Poland) at 60 °C for a constant weight ( Color parameters of candy samples, L*: brightness, a*: ± red-green, and b*: ± yellow-blue were determined using a colorimeter (Chroma Meter CR-400, Konica Minolta, Japan). Chroma (C*), and hue (h°) values were calculated using the following equations; Nine-point hedonic scale sensory analyses were conducted to identify significant differences between samples. The sensory evaluation test was carried out by panelists. The panel (n = 34) was composed of staff and graduate students of Food Engineering department at Siirt University. The age composition of the panelists was 79.4% (20–25) and 20.66% (30–46) whereas the gender composition was 38.3% male and 61.7% female. Panelists evaluated the effects of maltitol syrup (MS) and glucose syrup (GS) on the sensory characteristics of samples, as appearance, color, aroma, texture, hardness, gumminess, sweetness, springiness, intense of buying and general acceptance, and consumed water and crackers between each assessment ( Texture profile analysis (TPA) was performed using a TA.XT Plus Texture Analyser (Stable Micro Systems, Godalming, UK) equipped with a load cell of 50 kg and a 2 mm diameter cylindrical probe. The test conditions involved two consecutive cycles of 50% compression with 15 s between cycles. The test speed was 1 mm/s. From the resulting force-time curve, the following parameters were quantified; hardness (g), gumminess (g), springiness (%), cohesiveness (s), resilience (%), and chewiness (hardness x springiness x cohesiveness) (g) ( Design Expert (Stat-Ease Inc. version 12.0, Minneapolis, US) program was used for data analyses. Regression coefficients of linear, quartic, quadratic, cubic and interaction terms were determined (p > 0.05). Changes in moisture content in all confectionery products may lead to significant differences in product quality characteristics such as crystallization, stickiness, development of rancidity, chewiness, and hardness ( In the samples, aw decreased with increasing sucrose level. However, mannitol and soluble wheat fiber had an opposite effect, causing aw to rise. According to the results, sucrose might bond more water in gummy candy. Decreasing amount of free-water may result in inhibition of crystallization. As a result of this effect, an increase in hardness may be encountered ( It was determined that sucrose is a more effective component than other variables in increasing SSC level. Sucrose was followed by soluble wheat fiber ( Changes in the amount of moisture in all confectionery products have an impact on the quality characteristics of the product ( Textural properties have a crucial effect on consumer perception and attitude in some foods. Confectionery stands out among these foods ( In gummy candy samples, it was determined that the use of mannitol had a significant effect on hardness and hardness increased with the use of this component. It was observed that the effect of sucrose and soluble wheat fiber on the hardness is similar. Similar interaction has been established for springiness. Springiness decreased with the use of mannitol. Sucrose and soluble wheat fiber had a similar effect on springiness, and springiness values increased with the use of these bulking agents. As a result of this effect, the use of mannitol caused a decrease in product elasticity. Mannitol has low hygroscopicity and water solubility properties. It can be easily crystallized ( The soluble wheat fiber was an appropriate component because it caused changes that can be defined as similar to sucrose on the texture parameters ( Gel structure and network formed due to biopolymer usage in the composition has a major effect on confectionery properties ( While the use of mannitol causes a decrease in cohesiveness value, sucrose and soluble wheat fiber caused an increase in this value. The reduction of crosslinking bonds between gelatin molecules can cause a decrease in cohesiveness values of gummy confectionery ( Although low gumminess values were determined for gummy candy samples obtained using soluble wheat fiber, the change of this parameter could not be modeled. In addition, the results obtained were compatible with previous studies using alternative sweeteners in gummy confectionery ( Color properties have a significant effect on consumer perception. Natural colorants are commonly used in confectionery ( In this study, the main color properties of samples [L *, a *, b *, chroma and hue angle (h°)] and the relationship between these properties with sucrose, mannitol and soluble wheat fiber combinations were investigated ( Also, in this study the use of mannitol caused a significant increase in brightness whereas the effects of sucrose and soluble wheat fiber on brightness was found as similar. a* and b* values of the samples were determined between (−8.55) - (−2.03) and 12.3–17.8, respectively. However, significant models for the effect of independent variables could not be found for both of these color parameters. While mannitol is a white substance, pigment removal occurred in the production of soluble wheat fiber. In addition, mannitol is not expected to show a reducing sugar effect on color property ( Sensory analysis is critical in process development and re-formulation studies ( The appearance, color, aroma, gumminess, sweetness, chewiness, texture, springiness, buying intense and general acceptance properties of samples were investigated by hedonic evaluation of panelists by using 1–9 scale ( It was determined that the use of sucrose in general caused higher appreciation in sensory evaluation than other components did. It was noteworthy that the use of soluble wheat fiber has a similar effect to sucrose on visual sensory properties such as “appearance” and “color”. On the other sensory parameters, it was determined that soluble wheat fiber provides more advantages than mannitol. The use of mannitol reduced liking of panelists when combined with other bulking agents. This was associated with the effects of mannitol on textural properties in the gummy candy matrix which caused indirect consequences on sensory results. For example, the fact that mannitol caused a tougher and lower elasticity negatively affected sensory parameters such as texture, hardness, chewiness, springiness. Also, less flavor release was obtained in harder candies. The textural properties of the confectionery also have an effect on the intensity and duration of the sensory hardness during the consumption of the products. In this case, the release of aroma compounds from the matrix may increase. In other words, although the increase of hardness has some potential benefits, it has disadvantages for the release of aroma compared to softer products ( The use of polysaccharide-sugar combinations can be associated with important effects such as sweetness, textural properties (eg. mouth-sensation perception), rheology, microbiological stability and color ( In this study, in which glucose syrup was substituted using maltitol syrup, the effect of mannitol, sucrose and soluble wheat fiber usage on some physico-chemical (water activity, soluble solid content), texture (hardness, springiness, cohesiveness, resilience) color (L *, C *) and sensory properties of gummy candy were modeled. With the use of these bulking agents, it has been determined that there is the possibility of developing low-calorie gummy confectionery. However, due to rapid crystallization and low solubility, mannitol caused worse sensory results in gummy candy compare to soluble wheat fiber. These properties can be stated as an advantage for other chewy confectionery products, other than gummy candy, in which crystallization should take place. In addition, it was determined that as a result of the use of combinations of soluble wheat fiber with sucrose, gummy confectionery may be obtained that can meet consumer demands and expectations. With further studies, it may be useful to examine the negative effects of mannitol for gummy candy in the presence of glucose syrup. Glucose syrups with various dextrose equivalent degrees are important for the control of crystallization in confectionery products. These components may have a similar effect on the crystallization of mannitol. Therefore, the use of mannitol in confectionery formulated by using glucose syrup or corn syrup should be investigated. In addition, it may be important to examine the effect of DE value of glucose syrups for the same aim. Also, if solely soluble wheat fiber is used as a bulking agent, its interaction with glucose syrup and optimization of the type and level of gelling agent should be investigated.  The authors have no affiliation with any organization with a direct or indirect financial interest in the subject matter discussed in the manuscript. This work was funded by the