Attrition rate of limestone and SO2 capture rate in a large scale pressurized fluidized bed combustor was evaluated. The average attrition rate (reduction rate of radius) was found to be approximately 0.2–0.7
                        nm/s
                     . The SO2 capture rate per unit external surface area of bed material was found to be independent on SO2 concentration in the flue gas. A mathematical model of SO2 capture by single limestone particle under attrition conditions was proposed. Apparent reaction order with respect to SO2 concentration was close to zero when attrition was taken into consideration. It was suggested that the rate of SO2 capture in the present PFBC was governed by the limestone attrition.Pressurized fluidized bed combustors (PFBCs) have been developed as a high efficiency power generation technology. One of the features of PFBCs is in situ SO One difference between actual PFBC system and thermogravimetric analysis is the attrition of particle. In PFBCs, particles move in the bed and collide with each other, thus the removal of surface by attrition takes place. In thermogravimetric analyzers, such attrition does not occur. The attrition of particle surface is considered to play an important role in determining SO In this article, an approach to evaluate the attrition rate of limestone within a large scale PFBC was proposed. A mathematical model of direct sulfation of single limestone particle taking account of attrition was also proposed. Experimentally obtained SO Emission of SO To evaluate the effect of fly ash recycle to the bed, two different series of runs were conducted. During the first one called “Phase-1”, the fly ash recycle was not conducted. The fly ash captured by cyclones and ceramic filters were drained from the system. During the second series of run called “Phase-2”, fly ash captured by the cyclones was recycled into the bottom of bed. For Phase-2 tests, the fly ash which escaped from the cyclones was captured by ceramic filters and drained from the system. Blair Athol coal was employed as a fuel. The analyses of the fuel are shown in Flue gas was sampled from a sampling point located at the outlet of gas turbine (i.e. at the inlet of SCR deNO According to the literature ( The reaction rate constant ( The change in the radius of unreacted core with time ( In this article, the change in the radius of the particle due to attrition was taken into account. The attrition rate,  Attrition rate of limestone within the bed was evaluated from the calcium flux in the fly ash ( From the formation of fine Ca-containing particles due to attrition, average limestone attrition rate (rate of change in radius with time),  In this work, the bed was assumed to consist of only limestone since the ash of the fuel (Blair Athol coal) was so fragile that the coal ash was considered to be broken into fine particles and carried over from the bed. In In the present work, the relation between total SO Total SO   Attrition also affected the apparent reaction order of sulfation. The results of the model without attrition cannot explain the experimental results shown in In the case of surface attrition, the reaction rate is less affected by the concentration of SO The calculation results that the conversion rate was not affected by the SO The product layer thickness shown in  In contrast to the strong effect of attrition rate on conversion rate, intrinsic reaction rate and effective diffusivity played only minor role in determining conversion rate under attrition conditions. In As mentioned in the model description, the effective diffusivity is known to change with increasing conversion of limestone as reported in the literatures ( As discussed above, the solid conversion rate was calculated to be strongly dependent on the attrition rate. The relation between the formation rate of Ca-containing fine particles due to attrition ( Another possible reason of the discrepancy between SO A method to evaluate the attrition rate of limestone in a large scale PFBC was developed. The average attrition rate (reduction rate of radius) was found to be approximately 0.2–   The authors acknowledge the collaboration and support of Ministry of International Trade and Industry, Japan, and Center for Coal Utilization, Japan.