We have deposited Hf(C,N) thin films on Si(100) and STD11 steel substrates by pulsed d.c. plasma assisted metal–organic chemical vapor deposition (PA-MOCVD) in the temperature range of 200–300°C. Tetrakis diethylamido hafnium, Hf[N(CH2CH3)2]4 (TDEAH), was used as the hafnium precursor. A mixture of He (90%) and H2 (10%) in volume ratio was used as the carrier gas, and the N2 was used as the reactive gas. During CVD, radical formation and ionization behaviors in plasma were analyzed in situ by optical emission spectroscopy (OES) at various pulsed bias voltages and N2 flow rates. The deposition rate with the change of the flow rate ratio of N2 reactive gas to He+H2 carrier gas was also increased to 0.1. With increasing bias voltage, moreover, the film growth rate was continuously increased resulting in carbon-rich films. Highly oriented oxygen-free, polycrystalline Hf(C,N) thin films in the {111} direction were successfully grown on the STD11 steel substrate at 300°C. The hardness of film changed from 1000 to 2500 HK, depending on N2 gas flow rate ratio and bias voltage. Higher hardness can be obtained for a N2 gas flow rate ratio of 0.1 and bias voltage of 600 V. The film composition was confirmed with XPS and RBS analysis, and the N2 reactive gas makes low carbon contents in the films. SEM revealed that surfaces of as-deposited Hf(C,N) thin films were smooth and featureless.Thin films of transition-metal nitrides such as titanium nitride (TiN), zirconium nitride (ZrN), and hafnium nitride (HfN) have a wide variety of technological applications such as wear-resistant and protective coatings on cutting tools, the decorative coatings on watches and frames, and the diffusion barrier coatings in the metallization process for high density semiconductor devices In this paper, we report deposition of Hf(C,N) thin films by pulsed d.c. plasma assisted MOCVD and material characteristics of the deposited films. Since all deposited thin films have always contained carbon, which is attributed to being from the metal–organic precursor, in this work, we called the deposited films hafnium carbonitride [Hf(C,N)] films rather than hafnium nitride (HfN) films. Hf(C,N) thin films were deposited on Si(100) and D2 steel substrates using a home-made PA-MOCVD system. Biasing of the susceptor and the ground, the plasma was generated by the pulsed d.c. After cleaning the samples, the pre-cleaned substrates were treated with Ar and N To understand the gas-phase reaction chemistry of the MO-compounds in the plasma, moreover, the plasma diagnostics were carried out using single Langmuir probe and optical emission spectroscopy at various bias voltages and gas flow rate ratios. The films produced by pulsed d.c. enhanced MOCVD were characterized by X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS), X-ray diffraction (XRD), Rutherford backscattering spectroscopy (RBS), scanning electron microscopy (SEM), and Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy (FTIR). The microhardness was also checked with micro Knoop hardness tester. Resistivities of the films were measured by the standard four-point probe method. The measurement of plasma density is important to understand the coating process and gas phase reaction. It is generally well known that the plasma density is not dependent on the pressure and the bias voltage but it can be influenced by the electron temperature. The plasma mainly consists of two particles such as ions and electrons. In this study, the value of electron density ( Optical emission spectroscopy (OES) is a powerful tool for controlling the coating process and for optimizing both the layer properties and the coating process. In this study, therefore, the OES was used as a qualitative in situ diagnostic method. By measuring the intensity of the spectral lines, it is possible to identify the density of the excited state. The deposited films of Hf(C,N) were first characterized by XRD and RBS. RBS was also applied to study the changes of stoichiometry, film thickness, and microhardness of our films. In the RBS analysis, nitrogen resonance method was used for the clear distinction of the nitrogen peak in spectra. A 3.6-MeV He The surface morphologies of the as-grown Hf(C,N) films deposited on D2 steel at 300°C under the gas rate ratio of 0.1 with various bias voltages showed a very smooth appearance as shown in The changes of plasma, including radicals and film properties, are illustrated in terms of carrier and reactive gases as well as pulsed power variation. The effect of the plasma bias voltage is one of the important factors to obtain high quality film. As mentioned previously, our OES experiments showed that only some species, such as CN and CH among all observed lines, are proved to be the most important as the main indicator determining the layer properties during the coating process. Good layer properties were achieved only for a deposition temperature of 300°C and the bias voltage of −600 V under the gas flow ratio of 0.1. The highest hardness value obtained for the as-grown Hf(C,N) film at this condition was 2500 HK 0.01. As shown in Hf(C,N) thin films were deposited by pulsed d.c. plasma assisted metal–organic chemical vapor deposition (PA-MOCVD). Highly oriented polycrystalline films in the [111] direction have been deposited on the D2 steel surface at temperatures as low as 300°C. The flow rate ratio of N Support of this research by the Korea Science and Engineering Foundation through the Grant No. 981-0307-2 and by the Ministry of Commerce, Industry, and Energy in Korea, is gratefully acknowledged.