A thermal regeneration process of bone char (BC), used in fluoride adsorption, was investigated in this study. Adsorption experiments and solids characterization by Scanning Electron Microscopy (SEM), X-ray Fluorescence (XRF), X-ray Diffraction (XRD), Fourier Transform Infrared Spectroscopy (FTIR), X-ray Photoelectron Spectroscopy (XPS) and Raman Spectrometry were performed in order to get an insight about the physical and chemical transformations. The results show the evidence that there was diffusion of fluoride ions into bone char particles during thermal regeneration process. In addition, the formation of fluoridated hydroxyapatite is also observed showing that fluoride has been incorporated into the hydroxyapatite structure present in bone char, clarifying the mechanisms of thermal regeneration. In addition, it was observed that the heat (thermal) treatment could increase the degree of crystallinity of bone char. The adsorptive process of fluoride in bone char was fitted to pseudo second order kinetic model and was well represented by Freundlich, Redlich-Peterson and Sips isotherm models, pointing out the prevalence of chemical adsorption and formation of heterogeneous layers on the bone char surface. The results also indicated that the optimum temperature for thermal regeneration was 400 °C.It is well known that the presence of low amounts of fluoride ions in water, between 0.4 and 1.0 mg/L, may be advantageous to human health, for example, in preventing caries ( The occurrence of water contaminated with fluoride possesses serious environmental and health problems in many parts of the world. Fluorosis cases occur broadly in various countries and regions. At least 25 countries around the world have groundwater naturally rich in fluoride ( In a view of the harmful effects caused by the excess of fluoride intake, several methods have been used to reduce its concentration in water, which can then be suitable for human consumption ( Among them, adsorption ( Adsorption is considered as an easy method to implement and is usually cheaper when compared to other methods. It consists of a simple operating system and in combination with low cost sorbents, its implementation in communities with low income, might be practicable ( Various materials have been used as adsorbents for fluoride removal from water. Among these materials, bone char has been used for fluoride removal in poor or low-income countries with capacity ranging from 1.33 to 11.9 mg/g ( Bone char filters have been used on large-scale application in the field for fluoride removal, for example, in the city of Nakuru in Kenya The aim of this study was to determine the ideal conditions of heat treatment to fluoride saturated bone char and the elucidation about the processes occurring during the thermal regeneration. For this purpose, adsorption experiments, thermal treatments and solids characterization by X-ray fluorescence (XRF), X-ray diffraction (XRD), Fourier Transform Infrared Spectroscopy (FTIR), X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) and SEM/EDS were performed. The results contribute to the optimization of the fluoride removal process using bone char from cattle bones. Bone char, a carbonaceous material containing from 70 to 76% of hydroxyapatite (HAP, Ca  The adsorption of fluoride by the bone char can occur through the formation of surface complexes at the sites phosphate ≡P It is not well comprehensible the partial contribution of each step and this aspect deserves additional studies. The measurement of adsorption rate for a given system is probably the most important factor in adsorption ( Adsorbate transport through the bulk; Adsorbate diffusion across the boundary layer, also known as external diffusion; Adsorbate transport through the pores by a combination of molecular diffusion through the fluid contained within the pores and along the surface of the adsorbent; also called internal diffusion; Adsorption of adsorbate on an available site by diverse adsorptive mechanisms. Many researchers have used mathematical models of pseudo-first order ( Adsorption isotherms allow obtaining a relationship between the amount of solute adsorbed per weight of the adsorbent and the concentration of solute at the equilibrium. This information is useful to predict the adsorption capacity of the adsorbent, one of the key parameters needed to design an adsorption system ( There are many techniques or well-established methods for regeneration of activated carbon. According to In regeneration process of saturated bone char with fluoride, various reports are available such as, thermal regeneration process ( In the work of Despite the fact that thermal regeneration is a well-established technique, and is widely used for coal, according to During the process, hydrofluoric acid and oxygen are released in gas form.  The bovine bone char was supplied by the Brazilian company Bonechar do Brasil Ltda in a particle size ranging from 0.10 to 0.17 cm. Before use, particles were washed with 0.1 M HCl solution in a ratio of 40 g/L for 1 h and further rinsed with distilled water for three times and dried at 80 °C for 24 h. Before the regeneration tests, bone char was previously saturated with 500 mg/L of fluoride solution under stirring for 4 h at a ratio of 50 g/L and then rinsed and dried. In kinetic tests, 0.2 g of bone char was added to 100 mL of 10 mg/L fluoride solution in 250 mL PET bottles and stirred at 50 rpm in rolling bottle system. Adsorption isotherms were obtained by changing the weight of bone char from 0.5 to 10 g/L while maintaining the initial concentration of fluoride at 10 mg/L. For thermal regeneration, an oven (SP-1200D) was used. Bone char samples were kept in the oven for 2 h at 100, 200, 300, 400, 450, 500, 550, 600 and 700 °C, being a sample for each temperature to determine the ideal temperature of regeneration ( Solids characterization was performed by diverse techniques such as X-ray fluorescence (XRF) (PANaytical PW2400), Fourier Transform infrared spectroscopy (FTIR) and X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) (VG ESCALAB 220I - XL with x-ray source Al Ka (1486.6 eV) operating at 150 W). XPS analysis was performed at depth scan of 4 nm on samples fractured for exploration of the internal surface. The identification of crystalline phases was carried out by X-ray diffraction (Philips PW1710 X-Ray Diffratometer PANalytical). Bone char, HAP and FAP samples were prepared in anhydrous KBr disc and also with nujol and analyzed by Fourier Transform Infrared Spectroscopy (FTIR), Bruker alpha model attenuated total reflection (ATR) and diffuse reflectance (DRIFT). Bone char samples were also analyzed by Raman spectrometer LABRAM HR-800, Horiba/Jobin Yvon, equipped with a He-Ne Laser (632.8 nm), 0.8 mW and BX-41 Olympus microscope (100× objective). The collected scattered light after passing through a notch filter and a diffraction grating (600 g/mm) is detected by a CCD (charge couple device) cooled with liquid nitrogen. The acquisition time was 5–30 s and to increase the signal/noise ratio the number of samples was repeated 10 times. For measurement of specific surface area and porosity, the data were obtained using QUANTACHROME device model NOVA-1000, adsorption surface area analyzer and pore size distribution from adsorption-condensation of nitrogen (N  Initial fluoride concentration: 10 mg/L; adsorbent dose: 2.0 g/L, temperature: 25 °C; volume of solution: 100 mL and pH variation: 7–7.5). The pseudo-first order (not shown) and pseudo-second order kinetic models were fitted to the experimental data and  Freundlich model is best suited to represent the experimental data, indicated by a correlation coefficient of 0.9964. The results indicate the formation of heterogeneous layers on the solid surface and the value of n between 1 and 10, indicates a favorable condition for the adsorption ( The behavior of bone char was studied to a wide range of temperatures during thermal treatment and results are shown in The thermal regeneration process was not able to fully recover the adsorption capacity of the previously fluoride saturated bone char. According to The X-ray fluorescence analysis for identification of elemental fluorine for samples of a) hydroxyapatite (HAP), b) fluorapatite (FAP), c) fresh bone char, d) saturated bone char, e) fresh bone char thermally regenerated and, f) saturated bone char thermally regenerated are shown in The results show that even after the thermal regeneration process of the saturated bone char ( The XRD diffractograms for (a) hydroxyapatite - HAP, (b) Fluorapatite - FAP, (c) Fresh bone char, (d) Saturated fluoride bone char and (e) saturated regenerated bone char are presented at The XRD analyses did not show significant changes in bone char samples after saturation with fluoride and after the thermal regeneration process. According to It is possible to identify the vibrations of PO The According to these results, it is possible to infer that a certain amount of fluoride migrated to inside the bone char particle after the thermal regeneration process, a result in agreement with the work of The samples: BC virgin, BC saturated, BC virgin heat-treated, BC saturated heat-treated, hydroxyapatite and fluorapatite were also analyzed by Fourier Transform Infrared Spectroscopy (FTIR) ( In HAP sample,  There is a decrease in specific surface area after the process of saturation of bone char with fluoride. The average pore diameter and total volume of pores were also decreased. SEM/EDS analysis was performed to assess the particles morphology and to verify the changes on surface related to different procedures. Four different types of samples in granular form were used in the analysis: fresh bone char, bone char saturated with fluoride, fresh heat-treated bone char and heat-treated saturated bone char. Various irregularities and porosity variations with the transverse/longitudinal position and variation between grains may be observed ( The EDS ( In this study, a thermal regeneration process of bone char (BC) used in fluoride adsorption was investigated. The use of bone chars for fluoride removal could be a promising alternative for their valorization in agreement with the principles of sustainable development. The adsorption equilibrium of fluoride by bone char was achieved in about 100 h of contact time under studied conditions with an uptake capacity of 2.37 mg/g. The maximum adsorption capacity of bone char for fluoride by Langmuir model was observed as 4.81 mg/g. FTIR analysis performed on saturated bone char after heat treatment showed that there was the formation of fluoridated hydroxyapatite, revealing that fluoride was diffused into the structure of hydroxyapatite present in bone char. The XPS analysis identified fluoride only on the surface of bone char (saturated with fluoride) and not inside in the structure of bone char. However, after the thermal regeneration, the fluoride migration took place inside the particles also. By Raman analysis, it was observed that the heat treatment can increase the degree of crystallinity of bone char. The XRF analysis detected the presence of elemental fluoride in bone char samples saturated and thermally regenerated, indicating that the regeneration process is not fully effective in removing fluoride from the adsorbent. The XRD analysis showed no change in bone char samples after saturation with fluoride and also after the thermal regeneration process. The SEM images show that the morphology of the adsorbent is compatible with the bone structure, presenting an irregular, non-uniform fractured and varied porous structure. The specific surface areas, determined by multiple points, for bone char are compatible with mesoporous structure. By semi quantitative analysis provided by microprobe coupled to SEM (SEM-EDS), the predominance of the elements oxygen, phosphate and calcium was noted. The fluoride adsorption data was fitted to pseudo second order kinetic model and was well represented by Freundlich, Redlich-Peterson and Sips isothermal models, pointing out the prevalence of chemical adsorption and formation of heterogeneous layers on the bone char surface. The results also indicate that the optimum temperature for the thermal regeneration was 400 °C where the maximum fluoride adsorption capacity of 2.25 mg/g was noticed. It can be inferred that bone char can be produced economically and thermally regenerated which may be used by large- and small-scale industries for water treatment (mainly for fluoride removal) leading to a cleaner and greener process, consequently, improving the overall environmental quality. Authors (EMN and SDFR) are thankful to