Solid-liquid separation is carried out in many industries and plays a crucial role in overall process efficiency and product specification. The dewatering characteristics of solid-liquid mixtures, or particulate suspensions, have to be determined to compare filtration equipment performance or to design new equipment. Two theoretical frameworks used to describe solid-liquid separation, and therefore analyse experimental results, are the conventional filtration theory developed by Ruth, Tiller and Shirato and the compressional rheology framework developed by Buscall, White and Landman.
                  In this paper, we compare the characterisation techniques that have developed over time based on these two approaches. This includes a comparison between an air-driven Nutsche Filter, a Compression-Permeability cell and a piston-driven Filtration Rig. The test material is calcium carbonate coagulated by attractive Van der Waals forces at its isoelectric point. We use three different particle sizes, leading to varying degrees of compressibility. The results show good agreement between the two theoretical frameworks for these compressible materials. Overall, this work highlights the differences and similarities between the theories and characterisation techniques alike and gives recommendations for good practice.Solid-liquid separation is a common process in industries such as mining, water and wastewater treatment, life sciences and in the production and recycling of paper, for example. The aim of solid-liquid separation is to increase the solids concentration by applying a driving force for consolidation of the suspended solid phase. Such driving forces can be gravity in sedimentation, centrifugal acceleration in centrifugation, negative mechanical displacement through vacuum filtration or positive mechancial displacement through pump pressure or a movable membrane. These processes are widely applied in industry with varying objectives ranging from product specification to waste handling and disposal. In a suspension with low solids content, particles are far from each other with no direct interaction between them. During solid-liquid separation, the solids concentration increases and, at a certain point, particles are close enough to form a continuous load-bearing network structure that exhibits a strength against consolidation. This strength is a function of solids concentration, such that increasingly more energy has to be put in to consolidate further. At some point the process objectives and the process energy consumption can lie outside the economically feasible range. In order to reduce this discrepancy, optimisation of solid-liquid separation processes and equipment is necessary. Currently, a variety of solid-liquid separation theoretical frameworks is applied worldwide. Most theories implement Darcy's law [ Conventional filtration theory for compressible materials, often attributed to Tiller et al. [ Compressional rheology [ An important conceptual difference between conventional theory and compressional rheology is how the solid-liquid separation is regarded. Grace, Ruth, Tiller, Shirato et al. consider the separation from a process point of view, while in contrast Buscall and White formulated it in a material-centred approach. This means that in compressional rheology the material functions are an explicit function of the solids concentration, while the conventional theory is expressed in dependence of the applied pressure and only implicitly as a function of the solids concentration. One of the key consequences of this is that compressibility is always acknowledged in compressional rheology and accounted for in its characterisation techniques. Both theoretical foundations analyse filtration tests of some sort to measure filterability. The Compression-Permeability cell (shown in All three techniques use a filter cake that is built-up and consolidated. Dead-end filtration can be divided into two stages; cake formation (or filtration) and cake consolidation (or expression). In the first stage, solid particles form a filter cake at a semi-permeable surface. During cake formation, the volume of filtrate This paper compares the two frameworks of the conventional filtration and the compressional rheology theories, with emphasis on the characterisation generally carried out in practice. Therefore, the Compression-Permeability cell, the piston-driven Filtration Rig and the air-driven Nutsche Filter are compared based on their characterisation performance. In order to do this, a chalk suspension screened to different particle sizes is used (Omyacarb 2, 10 and 40). Because of the varying particle size the suspensions show differing degrees of compressibility and allow comparison of the devices in regards to their performance for compressibility and permeability. The specific filtration resistance macroscopically describes the drag between solid and fluid phase. Darcy [ During permeation of a packed bed, for example in Compression-Permeability cells or for filter cake washing [ During constant pressure filtration with filter cake growth, integration of Darcy's Law leads to the general filtration equation [ In Eq. Note that the integration of Eq. Therefore, filter cakes are compressed until equilibrium, where the network pressure over the entire cake equals the network pressure In the Compression-Permeability cell used in this work, Therefore, Single pressure filtration tests at a range of pressures are also performed to obtain One method to obtain Parameters used in conventional filtration theory and compressional rheology can be used interchangeably as previously outlined by various authors [ Or on a mass basis with the density of the solid phase Therefore, when These equations show how fast a suspension is dewatering, however, as shown in the previous sections, the solids concentration significantly contributes to the filtration result. In conventional filtration theory, the porosity is related to the applied pressure; this description regards the filtration from a process point of view and thereby implicitly to the porosity. In compressional rheology the material characteristics are in the centre of observation, meaning the obtained compressive yield stress is explicitly dependent on the solids concentration. Buscall and White [ With this set of equations, material functions can be interchanged easily between the widely used conventional filtration theory of Tiller and Shirato [ At this point, one has to consider that both theories have their advantages and a bulk of literature has been published. If both theories can be related to each other, naturally the question arises: what can each theory offer the other theory? When considering just filtration as a start, one could take advantage of the fitting parameter With the equations in this section the conventional filtration theory can be converted into the compressional rheology approach and vice versa. Concluding to the theory section, a comparison between the two frameworks is shown in Experimental data to compare the results from both filtration frameworks was obtained by characterising a calcite suspension. The suspension was prepared from commercial calcium carbonate (Omyacarb 2, 10 and 40 supplied by Omya Australia Pty Ltd. and Omyacarb 2-LU, 10 and 40, Omya California Inc.) and a 0.01 M potassium nitrate electrolyte solution out of Milli-Q water (Millipore™ Synergy®, 0.22 μm filter) and KNO Filtration experiments were carried out on three different designs of filtration equipment. At the TU Bergakademie Freiberg a Compression-Permeability-Cell [ The experiments with the Compression-Permeability cell were carried out as a stepped pressure run with one hour compression time at a given set pressure and then a ten minute permeation phase. The set compressive pressures were 50, 100, 200, 300, 500 and 1000 kPa and the fluid phase pressures during permeation were 50, 90, 180, 250, 400 and 600 kPa respectively. For the piston driven filtration rig, single pressure runs were performed at pressures of 50, 100, 200, 300, 500, 1000 and 1500 kPa. The cylinder pressure was used to control the compression, with friction losses between the piston and the filtration cylinder accounted for using a calibrated offset pressure value. The Nutsche Filter used was designed according to VDI 2762 Blatt 2/Part 2 [ The experiments from the Compression-Permeability and the Filtration Rig and the Nutsche Filter are analysed and compared using the equations given in the theory section. In compressional rheology, the compressibility is described with the compressive yield stress, Comparing the results of the different dewatering devices for compressibility, the Filtration Rig and the Compression-Permeability cell show a similar trend, whereas the Nutsche Filter is deviating. When looking at the data for Omya2, the Compression-Permeability cell achieves about two percentage point's higher solids volume fraction than the Filtration Rig at high pressures. In the lower solids concentration range the two measurement techniques line up with each other. The increase of solids volume fraction under the same pressure could be due to the experimental procedures of both devices. The Compression-Permeability cell uses a fluid flow through the compacted filter cake to determine the permeability of a material. In the experiments carried out here, a fluid pressure of about 2/3 of the piston pressure was applied while the same compression pressure was maintained. This additional fluid pressure can result in an additional liquid drag onto the filter cake, which may consolidate the filter cake. In order to verify this, another trial with the Compression-Permeability cell was carried out just applying the consolidation pressure and not running the permeation tests. The results in The Nutsche Filter data does not provide accurate compressibility data, which is shown in the big difference between the runs. This is especially the case at the highest pressure of 400 kPa, which is the one with the shortest filtration time. The inaccuracies are either because of an inhomogeneous cake structure or partial desaturation due to the subjective termination of the experiment by observation. This highlights that the Nutsche Filter can be employed for an order of magnitude estimate for slightly compressible materials, but cannot be used as a basis for equipment design, modelling or scale-up for such systems. For highly compressible materials, piston-driven experiments have to be carried out to measure compressibility. Experimental results for all the investigated particle sizes in compression are shown in Based on just the Omya2 results, it was postulated earlier that increased particle drag during the permeation phase of Compression-Permeability testing could lead to additional consolidation. This effect would be less pronounced for less compressible materials, but in fact, there was very little variability seen between the Compression-Permeability cell and the Filtration Rig for the two larger particle sizes, certainly no evidence to suggest that the permeation phase effects the consolidation. The results indicate that the Compression-Permeability cell and the Filtration Rig give the same compressibility results for slightly compressible materials, and similar results for highly compressible (if we put Omya2 in the latter category). The Nutsche Filter showed variable results for all particle sizes. The volume fraction for the Nutsche Filter is the average cake concentration during cake formation [ Compressibility is only one part of filtration characterisation. The second important parameter is the permeability, which is the rate of dewatering achieved at a certain solids concentration. The raw transient data for the three test methods is shown in The permeation data analysis gives a constant slope of 2 in The two types of filtration or filter cake growth tests used, namely the Nutsche Filter and the Filtration Rig, show similar behaviour. After membrane resistance and pressurisation effects initially dominate the behaviour, they have similar constant slope of The first method is to use the average approach from the conventional theory, using Eq. The second method, developed in the compressional rheology framework to account for material compressibility, is to fit the pressure dependence of Two methods to analyse two sets of filtration data plus the permeation results from the Compression-Permeability cell give five permeability results at each pressure for each particle size. The In most cases, the magnitude of the drag determined using conventional cake filtration theory is lower than the compressional rheology value, but the relevant volume fractions are also lower such that they generally line up and follow the same trend. This is especially the case for the two smaller particle sizes, Omya2 and Omya10. This demonstrates that the two theoretical approaches to analysing cake formation are interchangeable for materials that are this compressible. However, this is certainly not true for extremely compressible materials such as biological wastewater sludges and algae, where an average specific resistance to filtration is clearly inappropriate [ The Compression-Permeability cell and the filtration tests give very similar The Nutsche Filter gives similar values to the other two test methods except in the cases where the volume fraction differs considerably, that is, the magnitude of the drag is right but the volume fraction is wrong. This again highlights the difficulty in measuring the cake concentration in the Nutsche Filter test at the end of cake formation, therefore the hindered settling function has been determined using the final solids concentration from the Filtration Rig experiments shown in in The Nutsche Filter data should be analysed using the final solids concentration, Overall, the results demonstrate that the Compression-Permeability cell and Filtration Rig are both good techniques for measuring filtration properties and that the data can be converted between theories. It is hard to distinguish with the present data which of the two is more prone to errors or which data is more reliable, besides the fact that all used devices have the issue with wall friction [ The results in this paper show that the conventional filtration theory developed by Tiller, Shirato and Ruth and the compressional rheology framework developed by Buscall, White and Landman describe the same phenomena and are interchangeable, provided the material is not too compressible. Data from different filtration devices can be analysed using both theoretical approaches. Whilst the Nutsche Filter can be used to give an estimate of the permeability, it desaturates for applied pressures above the breakthrough pressure. As such, it is recommended to not use the Nutsche Filter for the characterisation of compressible materials. The Compression-Permeability cell and the Filtration Rig yield similar results, although we recommend care be given for compressible materials in the Compression-Permeability cell, as the applied fluid pressure may lead to further consolidation of the filter cake during the permeation phase. The authors would like to acknowledge the funding of the project through the Australia-Germany Joint Research Co-operation by the