In this paper data reconciliation is applied to the steady-state operational data of a single-effect ammonia/water absorption chiller. The methodology includes the detection of steady-state, the application of systematic degrees of freedom analysis (in order to determine a suitable set of measured input variables for the absorption chiller model), and data reconciliation of the measurements (which included the treatment of gross errors). The reconciliation problem was solved using a two stage sequential approach in which the objective function is minimized in Matlab and the absorption chiller is simulated in the Engineering Equation Solver (EES). The Modified Iterative Measurement Test was used to detect the measurements that contain gross errors. This methodology makes it possible to identify and eliminate the sources of gross errors, and to obtain performance calculations that are in agreement with the laws of conservation.Absorption chillers and heat pumps usually cost more and perform less well than conventional vapor compression refrigeration systems. This is why absorption systems are still not well established in the market. Nevertheless, absorption chillers and heat pumps play an important role in energy efficiency and in reducing the emission of greenhouse gases since they can be driven by waste heat Nowadays data acquisition systems can record multiple variables in short sampling times. As a result, the volume of information available is very large and can be difficult to manage when calculating mass and energy balances. These balances may be violated for various reasons: random and gross errors in the measurements, deviations from steady-state, redundancy in the measurements, etc. Therefore, the methodology used must generate a coherent set of measurements so that the performance of the absorption systems can be reliably estimated. This methodology should be based on the data reconciliation (DR) framework. So far, DR has been extensively used to treat data from such open chemical and energy processes as mineral processes Nevertheless, not many applications deal with closed cycles with complex connectivity and recycle loops, as in absorption refrigeration cycles. Difficulties arise because the reliable thermodynamic property models used to predict temperature–pressure–concentration and enthalpy in several aggregation states introduce additional complexity and convergence problems. Bruno et al. The objective of this paper is to extend the work of Martínez-Maradiaga et al. The methodology presented in this paper will be useful for generating a set of coherent measurements and operation parameters of an absorption chiller for downstream applications: performance calculation, development of empirical models, optimization, etc. Process measurements are subject to error. Because of this error, mass and energy balances are not satisfied. DR is the procedure used to optimally adjust measurements so that the calculated values obey conservation laws and other constraints The DR problem is mathematically expressed as a constrained minimization problem in which the estimate of each variable is as close as possible to the measured value weighted by its standard deviation. The typical formulation of DR is the weighted least-squares problem: subjected to: Complete reviews about DR can be found in the paper by Crowe The process variables need to be classified since DR can only be performed when some measurements are redundant. A measured variable is redundant if it can also be estimated from the available measurements using the balance equations. Classifying the variables enables the DR problem to be formulated correctly: redundant measurements will be adjusted; nonredundant measurements will remain untouched, determinable variables will be calculated, and undeterminable variables will remain unknown There are two main approaches to classifying the process variables using algorithms: the topological approach, and the equation-oriented approach. The former is based on graph theory and uses the graphs associated to the process topology. The latter is based on the matrixes associated to the equation system that represents the process. Regarding the topological approaches, Stanley and Mah Equation-oriented approaches seem to be more robust when used with nonlinear systems. Some authors proposed classification methods based on the linear algebraic properties of the matrices involved. These methods include the Crowe's matrix projection Systematic or gross errors occur because of malfunctioning instruments or process leaks. Gross errors differ from random error because their expected mean value is different from zero. As mentioned above, the presence of gross errors invalidate the DR results. They have to be identified and eliminated or corrected before or during the DR procedure. Methods of gross error detection (GED) can be divided into two categories: statistical tests and robust estimators. The former apply a statistical test to the objective function value after DR (global test), to the residuals of the measurements (measurement test), or to the residuals of the balance equations (nodal test). Heenan and Serth The other category of GED methods is based on robust estimators. Prata et al. Although steady-state DR generates benefits, it can have strong negative effects in situations in which the steady-state hypothesis is violated There are methods to detect steady-state based on statistical tests applied to the mean or variance calculated over a data window. Narasimhan et al. Methods that make no assumption about the shape of the data probability distribution are called non-parametric methods. Le Roux et al. After reviewing the various approaches to DR, variable classification, GED, and steady-state detection, we selected and integrated the ones that were most suitable for the analysis of absorption system data. The resulting methodology is the same one applied in Martinez-Maradiaga et al. In this study data reconciliation is applied off-line. We reconcile the average values of the measurements obtained during the steady-state operation of the chiller. In order to determine which values belong to steady-state, we developed a steady-state detector based on the work by Kim et al. Since redundancy is equal to the statistical degrees of freedom The degrees of freedom determine the minimum number of process variables that have to be measured to reproduce the absorption chiller performance. Once a set of measured variables reduces the degrees of freedom to zero, additional measurements will provide the redundancy required for DR to be performed. The result of this analysis leads to the definition of two sets of measurements: the inputs and outputs of the absorption system model. All the measurements that belong to the set of outputs are redundant because they can be estimated through the model and the inputs. For the measurements that belong to the input set, we check whether they are redundant by exchanging one or more with measurements that belong to the output set. If the exchanged measurements can also be calculated from the model and the modified inputs, then they are redundant. If not, they are just measured. This analysis can be considered as an equation-oriented approach for variable classification since it is based on the equations that model each of the cycle components. Faber et al.  The DR procedure can be summarized as follows: A Matlab script reads a set of measurements with their corresponding standard deviations. Then the values of vector MIMT was initially proposed by Serth and Heenan In this study the MIMT is used as follows. First, DR is performed for all the available data sets. Second, statistical  In this case study we analyzed a single-effect ammonia–water absorption chiller with a nominal cooling capacity of 12 kW, the chillii Seventeen process variables were measured at different locations in the absorption chiller in the test bench (see The data acquisition system sampled data every minute. A window size of 10 min (10 samples) is considered for the steady-state detector. The mathematical model, written in the Engineering Equation Solver (EES), is based on the steady-state mass and energy balances for each component of the cycle. The generator and rectifier are considered to be one unit and are represented in According to Ayou et al.  So we have 16 degrees of freedom for this particular case. However, the cooling water of the absorber and condenser are connected in series. This means that two degrees of freedom which are associated with the external heat transfer circuits are lost. Another degree of freedom is lost because we assume that From the seventeen measurements, we selected a set of inputs ( Since Following the methodology described above, the DR and GED procedure was executed three times: After the 1st DR and GED we detected that The reason  After the 3rd DR and GED no measurements were flagged as containing gross errors.       This paper presents a methodology for the steady-state data treatment of absorption chillers. The methodology includes a steady-state detection step, a systematic degrees of freedom analysis, and DR including GED. This methodology enables important parameters, such as The methodology is demonstrated by analyzing the operational data of a small-capacity single-effect ammonia/water absorption chiller. An intensive data set consisting of several measurements in 32 different operating conditions was treated. We performed DR using a sequential approach in which the reconciled values of the measurements were estimated in Matlab while the simulation that ensures that the process constraints are satisfied was carried out using EES. For the GED we used an approach based on the MIMT method which is a combined DR and GED procedure. Each step of this procedure is user assisted; nevertheless we are working on the development of a tool for automatizing the whole process. The results show that this methodology can identify and remove the sources of gross errors. It also provided performance calculations such as The GED step is fundamental if the DR problem is to be appropriately solved. The least-squares estimator spreads the random or systematic error over all measurements. If systematic errors are present, the residuals of some measurements may be higher than they should be, the calculations will be biased, and the benefit from DR is lost. According to the results of the case study Data from The authors acknowledge the financial support of the