This paper proposes the use of a copper disk as a simple heatsink for planetary mills in order to limit or slow down the temperature increase during prolonged grinding. A series of grinding experiments have been performed in which the surface temperature of different parts of the grinding bowl has been determined as a function of grinding time. Three different experimental series were conducted: a reference series without the heatsink, and two series where the heatsink had been given the respective initial temperatures of 25°C and −25°C. As demonstrated in this paper, the proposed concept represents a cheap but effective way of limiting or slowing down the temperature increase occurring in the grinding bowl. The effect is of a magnitude that can be of considerable practical importance, and the concept can be employed on most planetary mills where the grinding bowl holder is designed to accommodate different bowl sizes.Planetary mills are characterised by very high energy intensities, and as almost the entire energy input is converted to heat the temperature of the grinding bowl (i.e. the mill chamber) rapidly increases during grinding ( In general, two main problems could occur. Firstly, facing excessive temperatures over a long time interval, the integrity of the seal between the grinding bowl and its lid could be compromised, potentially causing the milled product to escape from the bowl contaminating the mill and the surroundings. Secondly, a number of applications would benefit from a lower or more stable temperature during the grinding process. This could be the case when the mill is used as a combined chemical and mechanical reactor to promote chemical reactions that are thermodynamically favoured at lower temperatures, or when excessive temperatures could cause the substances that are being ground to decompose, evaporate or ignite (i.e. unwanted physical or chemical reactions). For such applications the temperature of the system could be a limiting factor. Due to the complex rotational motion of the grinding bowl in a planetary mill it is not easy to employ a conventional cooling mantel with a circulating cooling fluid. This paper investigates the effect of implementing a much simpler solution; a solid heatsink in the shape of a disk that could be placed in contact with the grinding bowl thus dissipating its thermal energy by direct conduction. Even though such a solution would have a limited capacity it could provide sufficient thermal buffering for a number of applications. Furthermore, as demonstrated in this paper, it could be implemented easily in most common planetary mills at a very low cost. The experiments conducted in this study were performed using a The heatsink consisted of a turned slightly tapered copper disk with a total volume of 253  A dunite foundry sand (AFS50), consisting mainly of material in the 100–500 The grinding experiments were performed by dry grinding of 50.0 Prior to grinding, the lid, grinding bowl and grinding balls were given an initial temperature of 25 Immediately after each batch had reached its pre-set grinding time, the grinding bowl was removed from the planetary mill and a series of surface temperature measurements were made using a Between each batch the grinding bowl and grinding balls were rinsed by grinding 50   As shown in The temperature regulation concept proposed in this paper would work on most planetary mills where the grinding bowl holder is designed to accommodate different bowl sizes (e.g. As demonstrated in this paper, the use of a copper disk as a simple heatsink during prolonged grinding in planetary mills represents a cheap but effective way of limiting or slowing down the temperature increase that takes place in the grinding bowl. The effect is of a magnitude that can be of considerable practical importance, either by allowing longer grinding times or by enabling the use of temperature sensitive reactants. The concept can be employed on most planetary mills where the grinding bowl holder is designed to accommodate different bowl sizes.