The quantitative temperature (T)-dependent relationships between the strength properties and elastic modulus of both intact and fissured sandstone are presented. Based on the experimental results, it can be concluded that tensile strength (TS) and mode I fracture toughness (K
                     IC) decrease nonlinearly with increasing T. The elastic modulus (E) values of the intact and fissured sandstone specimens have different correlations with T and confining pressure (σ
                     3), whereas the Poisson’s ratio does not depend on the temperature. As T increases, crack closure stress, crack initiation stress and crack damage threshold first increase and then decrease, however, these properties have linear correlations with σ
                     3. The cohesion (C) of the intact specimen decreases nonlinearly with increasing T, whereas that of the fissured specimen first increases and then decreases. However, the internal friction angle (φ) of the intact and fissured specimens has nonlinear correlations with T. The permeability (k) of the intact sandstone decreases during the compaction-dominated stage and then increases at dilation-dominated stage under constant strain compression at σ
                     3 = 30 MPa. Moreover, k decreases slightly as T increases to 250 °C but then increases with further increasing T. The crack types of intact and fissured specimens under different σ
                     3 and temperature conditions are also discussed.temperature tensile strength Triaxial compressive strength high-temperature damage acoustic emission mode I fracture toughness elastic modulus cohesion permeability semi-circular bend the maximum force the diameter of the specimen the thickness of the specimen strength parameter of Hoek-Brown criterion internal friction angle confining pressure for axial stress intermediate principal stress for tensile strength peak strength uniaxial compressive strength of intact rock Poisson’s ratio axial strain circumferential strain volumetric strain crack volumetric strain elastic volumetric strain crack initiation stress crack closure stress crack damage threshold In response to rapid economic development, research attention has been drawn to deep resources exploitation and underground space utilization. Considerable challenges are associated with such investigations, but research opportunities in the fields of rock mechanics and rock engineering are also generated. Therefore, deep underground problems must be considered, which are primarily related to the deformation and strength properties of rocks subjected to high geo-stress and high temperature ( In addition to the influences of their mineral properties and structures, as well as stress, time, the mechanical behaviors of different rocks are also sensitive to In rock engineering, non-homogeneous rocks are widely encountered in the field. The mechanical behavior of real natural rock containing micro- or macro- cracks is considerably more complex than that of lab-scale rock. When rocks are subjected to external loading, micro-cracks initiate and propagate; subsequently, macro- cracks form and the rocks finally break In this study, tensile tests, uniaxial and triaxial compression tests are performed on intact and pre-existing fissured sandstone specimens under different HTD levels. Then, the HTD effects on the tensile strength (TS), Sandstone specimens were drilled at Rizhao City in Shandong Province, China. The sandstone was primarily composed of quartz and feldspar To investigate the influence of HTD on the mechanical behaviors of the sandstone specimens containing a single fissure, a series of Brazilian tensile tests, uniaxial and triaxial compression tests were conducted. First, disk and half-disk specimens subjected to different thermal treatments were used to obtain TS and During the Brazilian tensile tests, axial loading rate was set to 0.02 mm/min. Conventional triaxial compression tests under different confining pressures (0, 10, 20 and 30 MPa) were performed on the specimens using a rock triaxial testing system. First, the specimens were subjected to different hydrostatic pressures at a rate of 5 MPa/min. Then, the specimens were loaded axially at a rate of 0.02 mm/min until failure. Next, the uniaxial compression strength (UCS) and triaxial compressive strength (TCS) were obtained. A sketch of the loading method is presented in To investigate the influence of HTD on the tensile strength of the sandstone, five kinds of circular disk specimens after various thermal treatments were tested using the Brazilian test method. The results are shown in It is important to identify and predict rock structure failure in mining engineering, hydraulic fracturing, blasting and tunnel boring The experimental results are listed in In the context of rock engineering design, two deformation parameters—   The relationships between Strength parameters of rocks are very important for the rock engineering design. The spalling of surrounding rock can often be observed in deep hard tunnel underground excavation The characteristic stresses of the rock specimens are shown in  The parameters of Eq.  The fitting parameters of Eq.  In order to analyse the peak strength behavior of the intact and fissured sandstone specimens with various degree of HTD, the linear Mohr-Coulomb criterion (M−C) and the nonlinear Hoek-Brown (H-B) criterion were used in this seciton. The linear Mohr-Coulomb criterion can be expressed with the following equation: The nonlinear Hoek-Brown criterion describing the peak triaxial compressive strength of a wide range of isotropic rock materials can be written as follows According to the Mohr-Coulomb and Hoek-Brown strength criteria, we can confirm the strength parameters of the intact and fissured sandstone specimens with various degree of HTD, which are listed in  The relationships between cohesion ( The parameters of H-B criterion vary with  The gas permeability ( The variation of permeability of rock has a direct relationship with its volume deformation ( The rock lithology, brittleness, anisotropy, and microstructures mostly determine the rock failure types. From The failure modes of the fissured sandstone specimens with different HTD degrees under four different confining pressures are illustrated in According to these crack types, the cracking characteristics of the thermally-damaged fissured sandstone under different confining pressures can be further discussed. It is clear that all of the macroscopic failure mode of the thermally-damaged fissured sandstone under different confining pressures are mixtures of several cracks among nine various crack types. Under uniaxial compression, the ultimate failure mode of the fissured specimen consists of two tensile crack types (T However, as the confining pressure reaches to 10, 20 and 30 MPa, the ultimate failure mode of the thermally-damaged fissured sandstone is simpler than that under uniaxial compression, as shown in In this research, the main mineral components of tested sandstone are feldspar, quartz, calcite hematite and clay minerals In addition, the microstructure of rock has a great influence on rock mechanical behavior and permeability. The scanning electron microscopy (SEM) images of the thermally-damage sandstone are presented in The main aim of this study was to explore the influence of high-temperature damage on the tensile and compression mechanical behavior of intact and pre-existing fissured sandstone. The quantitative relationships between the mechanical parameters and The static tensile strength and the static mode I fracture toughness of the thermally-damaged sandstone decrease nonlinearly as temperature increases, which decreases by approximately 74% and 79% of their values at 25 °C, respectively. In the pre-peak stage, no obvious stress-drop appears for intact sandstone, whereas fissured sandstone shows notable stress-drop under low confining pressures. A higher confining pressure corresponds to a less obvious stress-drop phenomenon. As the temperature increases, the elastic modulus of intact sandstone decreases nonlinearly. Whereas, that of the fissured sandstone first increases as Crack closure stress, crack initiation stress and crack damage threshold increase linearly with increasing confining pressure, but first increase and then decrease as The permeability of the intact sandstone decreases during the compaction-dominated stage and then increases at dilation-dominated stage under constant strain compression at confining pressure of 30 MPa. Further, the permeability decreases slightly as This research was supported by