To investigate deformation twins and the evolution of deformation texture during plastic deformation, uniaxial compression tests on a hot-rolled AZ31 Mg alloy were carried out at 200°C. Cylindrical specimens were then compressed in both the rolling and the normal directions. The findings revealed that texture evolution, work hardening and macroscopic anisotropy are strongly dependent on the loading direction. Electron backscattered diffraction analysis was used to examine the orientation of parent grains and twin bands in the AZ31 Mg alloy under uniaxial compression. A viscoplastic self-consistent model (VPSC) was theoretically employed to calculate the relative activities of slip and twin systems in polycrystalline hexagonal aggregates under uniaxial compression. Each deformed grain exhibited an independent number and type of twin variants under uniaxial compression. Neutron diffraction was used to measure the macroscopic texture of the AZ31 Mg alloy. The VPSC model was used to simulate texture evolution, work hardening and macroscopic anisotropy during the uniaxial compression. A modified predominant twin reorientation (PTR) scheme was suggested to explain the gradual increase in twin volume in deformed grains.Application of wrought Mg alloys has increased substantially in lightweight structural parts during the last few decades. It is well known that the crystallographic texture plays an important role in both the plastic deformation and the macroscopic anisotropy of Mg alloys. In order to understand the texture evolution in pure Mg and Mg alloys during plastic deformation, a number of experimental and simulation studies have been conducted For this study, the effect of twin variants on the twin reorientation of a polycrystalline AZ31 Mg alloy was first investigated by measuring the microtexture using EBSD. In addition to experimental observations, in order to verify an algorithm for the twin variants selection in a VPSC polycrystal model, the types of twin variants generated in deformed parent grains was simulated and compared with experimental results. Secondly, the effect of the loading direction on texture evolution, and the work hardening and macroscopic anisotropy of a hot-rolled AZ31 Mg alloy were investigated. Neutron diffraction was used to measure the macrotexture of specimens under conditions of uniaxial compression. The VPSC model was used to simulate texture evolution, work hardening and macroscopic anisotropy of a hot-rolled AZ31 Mg alloy during uniaxial compression. The computational predictions were compared with the experimentally measured macroscopic texture, work hardening and macroscopic anisotropy of the AZ31 Mg alloy. Moreover, a modified PTR scheme was introduced to simulate the gradual increase in twin volume in a deformed parent grain during uniaxial compression. Cylindrical specimens with a diameter of 10 The microtexture of the cutting planes was examined using EBSD installed in a field emission scanning electron microscopy. Automated EBSD scans were performed in the stage-control mode with TSL data acquisition software. Each microtexture was examined by scanning an area of 2.25 Penetration from a neutron beam was used to examine the macroscopic texture of the deformed specimens. For this measurement, cube-shaped samples (1 In order to simulate texture evolution, work hardening and macroscopic anisotropy of the AZ31 Mg alloy under uniaxial compression, the isotropic VPSC polycrystal model was used Self- and latent hardening on a slip system can be considered by a suitable evolution of reference shear stress, In order to theoretically calculate the orientation of a twin, it is necessary to consider six variants of a tensile twin: tv1, In a modified PTR scheme, a volume fraction of the parent grain, VF(g) and a volume fraction of the reoriented twin, VF(t), are defined as a linear function of effective strain, The true strain vs. true stress curves for the CA//RD and CA//ND specimens are shown in The microtexture of polycrystalline AZ31 Mg alloy was investigated by EBSD analysis. The (0 The macrotexture measured by neutron diffraction is shown in To analyze deformation twinning in the deformed AZ31 Mg alloy, crystallographic orientation maps for the CA//RD samples were investigated using EBSD. Misorientation angle distributions for boundaries above 5° are shown in In order to investigate the orientation relationship between parent grains and twin bands, a local area that included only a few grains was considered.  The texture represented by 1000 polycrystalline aggregates, including six measured grains (g1–g6), as shown in The parent grain g2 exhibits a low relative activity in twin variants compared with other parent grains. This indicates that deformation of g2 can be accommodated mainly by dislocation glide at a low strain level. This is due to the fact that the  The VPSC model was used to simulate texture development during uniaxial compression. Crystallographic slip and deformation twinning were simultaneously considered in the model. The PTR scheme described in Section The variation in relative activity of each deformation mode with increasing true strain is shown in To verify that the VPSC model is useful for the predictive modeling of macroscopic properties of AZ31 Mg alloys under uniaxial loading conditions, macroscopic stress–strain curves and plastic strain ratios were simulated. The uniaxial compression tests are interrupted by unloading and, with the aid of a micrometer, the plastic strains to the RD ( As shown in The most important procedure in the modified PTR scheme is a determination of twin saturation strain,  Uniaxial compression tests at a deformation temperature of 200 An analysis of texture evolution using the VPSC polycrystal model revealed that the tensile twin largely accommodates the deformation at a low strain level. However, as the true strain increases, the activation of the pyramidal 〈 This work was supported by a Korea Research Foundation grant funded by the Korean Government (MOEHRD) (KRF-2006-331-D00711).