Optimization of electrocoagulation (EC) using copper electrode in terms of Cr(VI) removal from simulated waste water was executed by applying surface methodology and kinetic study. In this research, electrocoagulation process was applied to evaluate the outcome of operational parameters such as initial Cr(VI) concentration, pH, electrode distance, current density and supporting electrolyte (NaCl) concentration for the removal of Cr(VI). The experimental results showed that current density of 41.32 A/m2, electrode distance of 1.4 cm, initial pH of 5.65, time of electrocoagulation of 40 min and initial conductivity 0.21 ms are the optimal operating parameters to attain 93.33% removal efficiency of Cr(VI) ions from simulated waste water. The high value of R2 = 98.15 and R2
                     adj = 96.49 show that fitted model confirms a good agreement with the real and predicted Cr(VI) removal percentage. It was concluded that Cr(VI) ion removal follows the first-order kinetic model by kinetic study of EC process.Electroplating industry, leather industry, mineral processing, metallurgical operations, mining industries, paints, pigments, glass manufacturing etc. are notable for producing waste water containing chromium as Cr(III) and Cr(VI), which are commonly utilized in different modern procedures. Cr(VI) is more dangerous than Cr(III) with the maximum daily allowable dosage of nearly 2.5 mg of chromium(VI) per kg of body weight. In humans, maximum concentrations are generally found in hilar lymph hubs and lungs, trailed by spleen, liver, and kidneys ( Electrocoagulation has been fruitfully used for the removal of heavy metals such as boron ( EC procedure utilizes a direct current (DC) power source interfacing metal terminals dipped in waste water which results in the disintegration of metal anodes into wastewater and produces metal hydroxides which act as an adsorbent. The main reaction occurring at the anode is electro-dissolution: Water electrolysis can happen at the cathode and anode. ( Optimization of the electrocoagulation process using response surface methodology (RSM) has been used for optimization of various operating parameters ( The present work aims to study the effect of Cr(VI) concentration (C All experiments were performed in batch mode using 500 ml volume of artificial solution at room temperature (25 ± 2 °C) as shown in pH and conductivity were measured by digital pH meter (Century, India, CP901) and conductivity meter (Chemiline, India, CL220) respectively. Concentration of Cr(VI) ions was decided colorimetrically (Standard Methods, method no.3500-Cr D) ( Kinetic study was carried out for EC process available in the literature ( The response surface methodology (RSM) in blend with central composite design (CCD) was utilized for optimizing process parameters of the electrocoagulation process for Cr(VI) removal efficiency. In this work, the impact of three important operational parameters viz: initial pH (X Regression, graphical study, statistical investigation, and optimization of Cr(VI) removal were executed using Minitab 18 software. CCD with three variable consists of 20 experiments with eight cube points, six axial points (coded as −1.68 (−α) and +1.68 (+α)), and six center points in the cube ( The response of the experimental results were fitted to linear, linear and square, two-factor interaction and quadratic polynomial model using CCD. It was seen that the quadratic model was the best fit because of high F value, lower P-value, and high R Response of Cr(VI) removal, Y evaluated by following Eq. It was concluded from Eq.    For the electrocoagulation process, the current density (CD) is a significant factor for controlling the reaction rate of the process ( Kinetic study was carried out for EC process. It was observed that the better fitting was for 1st order model expressed in Eq.   Supporting electrolyte (NaCl) was used to enhance the conductivity of the solution. The conductivity of the solution plays the major role in the rate of removal and power consumption. Power consumption analysis plays an important role for industrial application of EC ( Different researchers have inspected the removal of Chromium by EC technique. But, only some researchers have studied the energy consumption of the EC process. Many a times, it has been reported in the literature that the pH is most important parameter for electrocoagulation process. Experiments were performed using different initial pH and the results are shown in Followed by precipitation: The Cu The elemental analysis of the sludge produced after electrocoagulation of Cr(VI) ions was done by FESEM- EDX. SEM analysis of flocs was done to examine the structural characteristics of the flocs produced after electrocoagulation. In this work, the experimental investigation of electrocoagulation to optimize various process parameters for efficient removal of Cr (VI) ions were studied by response surface methodology using central composite design. From experimental results it can be concluded that, Cr (VI) ion concentration value of 100 mg/L, CD value of 41.32 A/m The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper.