As a common practice, steady-state models are used for simulation and process dimensioning of crushing circuits. However, intended circuit performance is rarely achieved due to constantly fluctuating feed-material size and characteristics. This gap between theoretical and realized performance has the potential for process control.
                  Little scientific attention has been paid to the analytic control system design of crushing circuits. The current lack of suitable dynamic process models for the task is direct evidence of this. Therefore, it is not surprising that currently existing control applications are biased towards heuristic, model-free, non-analytic approaches.
                  This paper presents an effective way to produce dynamic process models from established steady-state models. The resulting simulator makes it possible to develop control methods that fully utilize the capacity potential of crushers and facilitates efforts for energy-efficient operation of crushing circuits.Crushing plays an important role in the aggregates and mining industries by reducing the particle size of granular solids, such as rocks and ores. Before the desired product size is reached, the feed material undergoes 2–4 crushing stages that form a circuit. Each crushing circuit consists of a unique combination of unit operations for crushing, screening, conveying, feeding, and storing. Contrary to the steady-state modeling that primarily focuses on crushing and screening, every unit operation in the circuit contributes to the dynamic presentation. Dynamic modeling of crushing circuits for analytic control system design has not received much attention in scientific literature. Traditionally, interest has been limited to the narrow range of mining applications to control crusher load by manipulating the feed rate. Controlling crusher product size and shape by using manipulated variables (that is, the closed side setting (CSS) or eccentric speed (ES)), has not been addressed from the dynamic modeling perspective. However, crushing control has major possibilities for efficiency and profitability. The purpose of this paper is to: provide models for analytic control system design of cone crushing circuits, and serve as a starting point for future dynamic modeling endeavors. Section This section presents a short review about dynamic modeling of crushing circuit unit operations.   Most recently, The common missing element in all the previous work is that none of the presented models includes dynamics of crusher actuators (CSS and ES). This is a serious error from the control system design point of view. Moreover, several important disturbance types (such as moisture) are not included in the models, even though disturbance rejection is one of most important tasks for the control systems. This section presents the general principles for dynamic modeling of cone crushing circuit unit operations. A detailed description of dynamic models for the cone crusher, screen, conveyor, and feeder is given. Modeling in this work is mostly carried out using Hammerstein and Wiener-type systems that combine static nonlinearities with linear dynamics. The advantage of such a hybrid structure is that modeling can be separated into individual tasks. This makes it particularly suitable for situations where the static process behavior is known in advance. In other words, it allows for using static performance models made for other purposes ( The modeling for control system design is particularly interested in two specific relationships: the input/output relationship and the disturbance/output relationship. These two relationships form a framework and modeling domain for the control system design. This approach is illustrated in In this work, the linear dynamics are primarily modeled using first-order transfer functions given by the following equations: Time delay: Integrator: First-order lag: First-order with time delay (FOTD): Integrating first-order with time delay (FOTDI): The cone crusher has two manipulated variables (MVs) that can be arbitrarily changed during operation: closed side setting (CSS) and eccentric speed (ES). The CSS is defined as the shortest distance between crushing liners. Other parameters affecting crusher operation are the stroke length and the crushing cavity geometry. Both of these can be changed, but not while operating, and are thus constants in this work. Moreover, the cone crusher is subject to a number of DVs ( A generic simulation model for a control system design of a cone crusher is presented in Actuator models are special because the model is actually a control loop similar to Use of a frequency converter is the obvious way to control crusher ES. In this case, the control loop dynamics are usually so fast that there is no actual need to take them into account in the input/output presentation. The important thing about frequency converters is that they come with parameterizable ramps for acceleration and deceleration. Consequently, the ES follows those ramps very closely. Thus, the input/output relationship becomes an integrator, as in Eq. The cone crusher CSS is controlled by means of a hydraulic piston. The actual process model depends on the hydraulic system configuration. Known configurations are at least a two-way, load-compensated proportional valve, a two-way pump, and a one-way pump with an on/off valve. The dynamic model for the hydraulic piston with proportional valve is given by Eq. In this work, a flow model is used to provide crusher- and cavity-specific parameters for performance model inputs. Flow-model parameters, as described in The mass balance in the feed hopper is given by the following equation: The crusher-dynamics model manipulates the input parameters of crusher performance models in a way that resembles the dynamic effect of material flow to the cone crusher model outputs. This parameter manipulation is performed separately for each input/output combination by using the transfer functions given in Performance models in this work are log-transformed linear regression models that calculate the interaction between crusher and feed material. Models are of form This subsection presents a dynamic screen model. Modeling is carried out using Hammerstein-type system, i.e., static nonlinearity is followed by linear dynamics. The steady-state part is modeled using a modification of a classic VSMA screen-sizing formula used in a Metso Bruno flowsheet simulator ( The factor for screening efficiency The final retained The resulting steady-state model is then expanded into a dynamic Hammerstein system with Eq. A belt conveyor with constant speed can be modeled as a pure delay with Eq. Vibrating feeders can be modeled as a first-order lag-transfer function given by Eq. This section presents a dynamic simulation example of the Metso LT300GPB tertiary mobile cone crushing plant. The simulated plant layout is given in The simulation results are presented in This paper has presented dynamic simulation models and modeling techniques for control system design of cone crushing circuits. It also presented the generic method for dynamic expansion of existing steady-state models. The previous work has shown that current operating modes are not suitable for particle-size distribution control of crushing circuits, and therefore unable to provide optimal operation with respect to time ( This work was funded by the Finnish Funding Agency for Technology and Innovation (Tekes). Metso Minerals (Tampere) provided the necessary data and facilities for the process experiments.