We used a diagenetic model to test the hypothesis that manganese-rich layers in gas hydrate-bearing Arctic Ocean sediments are reliable time markers for interglacial periods. In the model, diagenesis is fuelled by two sources of reactive carbon: particulate organic carbon settling to the sediment surface, and methane diffusing up from deep gas hydrate deposits. The model includes oxidation of organic carbon and soluble reduced manganese by oxygen supplied continuously from an invariant bottom-water oxygen reservoir; reduction of particulate manganese by hydrogen sulfide generated through anaerobic methane oxidation; transport of dissolved oxygen and manganese by diffusion; and advective transport of particulate components by burial. Particulate organic matter and particulate manganese are only supplied to the sediment during interglacials. Sulfate reduction is not modeled explicitly; instead, the effect of anaerobic methane oxidation on Mn reduction is simulated at the lower boundary of the model by prescribing that particulate manganese is reduced there to soluble Mn(II). The soluble reduced Mn then diffuses upward and is oxidatively precipitated to Mn(IV) by downward diffusing oxygen. The upward flux of soluble Mn(II) is thus a function of the rate at which particulate manganese is advected into the Mn-reduction layer at the bottom of the model; it is not synchronous with events at the sediment–water interface. Model runs reveal that, under idealized but realistic conditions for the Arctic Ocean, oxidation of upward-diffusing Mn(II) generates post-depositional manganese enrichments that cannot readily be distinguished from the manganese-rich sediment layers that accumulate during interglacials. This compromises the use of manganese-rich layers as proxies for interglacial periods. In contrast, manganese-rich layers may be used as first-order markers of interglacial periods in sediments where gas hydrates or other forms of reactive carbon are absent.Poor preservation of microfossil records in Arctic Ocean sediments has spurred the search for alternative proxies for the Quaternary chronology of these sediments ( There are few measurements of dissolved manganese in long cores from the Arctic. A scenario whereby the fluxes of particulate organic carbon and manganese to the sea floor in the Arctic Ocean varied dramatically during the glacial cycles of the Quaternary is consistent with observations. During glaciations, the absence of primary production virtually shuts off the flux of organic carbon, and the ice cover on the continents slows down the delivery of manganese-rich sedimentary material to the sea floor. During interglacials, primary production is turned on and delivers fresh organic carbon to the sea floor while rivers and the expanded continental shelves deliver terrigenous organic carbon and manganese-bearing particulate matter ( The hypothesis that Mn-rich sediment layers enter the geological record intact rests on the assumption that diagenetic remobilization and redistribution of manganese is fuelled exclusively by organic carbon settling from the water column and that manganese diagenesis stops when this carbon has been consumed. The objective of the present study is to test this hypothesis and verify if manganese-rich layers in deep Arctic Ocean sediments can be used as a proxy for interglacial periods. It is not our intention to reconstruct the past. Specifically, we test this hypothesis for sediments that host gas hydrates. Such sediments are abundant in the Arctic Ocean where vast amounts of methane hydrates are believed to be stored ( The choice of diagenetic model for this study was dictated by our objective, which was to test the hypothesis that manganese-rich layers in deep Arctic Ocean sediments can be used as a proxy for interglacial periods. To this end, we chose the simplest possible model that would help us meet this objective and left out reactions that could give a more complete description of diagenesis such as oxidation of Fe(II) and ammonia by oxygen and reduction of Fe(III) by hydrogen sulfide. The sedimenting reactive organic matter is assumed to be mineralized entirely through oxic respiration (the mineralization process is carbon limited), so a more complex model that includes the products of anaerobic mineralization pathways would not be expected to change our conclusions. The model we used is a one-dimensional non-steady state diagenetic transport-reaction model that captures the essential features of manganese diagenesis, i.e. reduction of Mn(IV) to Mn(II) (dissolution), reoxidation of Mn(II) to Mn(IV) (precipitation), transport of dissolved manganese by diffusion, and transport of precipitated manganese by advection. The reactions in the SMT that produce hydrogen sulfide are not included explicitly in the model, nor is the reduction of Mn(IV) to Mn(II) by hydrogen sulfide. Instead, reducing conditions are prescribed near the bottom of the model domain. There, particulate oxidized manganese, advected downward by burial, is reduced to soluble Mn(II), which diffuses upwards until reoxidized by downward diffusing oxygen. The thickness of the prescribed reduction layer (a few cm in the numerical model implementation) is not critical because the production rate of dissolved Mn(II) is transport controlled, i.e. the rate of reductive dissolution overwhelms the rate of supply of reducible manganese. The choice of a 5-m thick model domain was inspired by the data of Since the model assumes that the entire sedimentation flux of reactive organic matter is consumed by oxygen, early diagenesis of manganese within the interglacial layer is not included, nor are fluctuations in the flux of particulate manganese and organic carbon that could create multiple peaks within an interglacial layer ( The oxygen flux and the penetration of oxygen into the sediment are governed by the oxidation of organic carbon and reduced manganese. At the end of an interglacial, the manganese-rich layer is covered by sediment free of organic carbon and manganese, and is progressively buried. Consequently, oxygen diffuses further down into the sediment as it progressively oxidizes the reactive organic carbon that was supplied and survived oxidation during the interglacial period. The choice to keep the lower boundary of the model domain at a fixed distance from the sediment surface throughout a glacial cycle was pragmatic considering the complexity of the processes that act upon the depth of the SMT. On the one hand, interrupting the flux of organic carbon to the sediment at the end of an interglacial period would deepen the oxygen penetration and the depth of the SMT ( The conceptual model was implemented numerically as a transient transport-reaction model (e.g. As described above, the flux of particulate manganese to the sediment was kept constant during the interglacial period and was null during the glacials. The abrupt transition in the manganese flux at the beginning and the end of an interglacial period could cause numerical problems for the model. To smoothen the transitions at the beginning and end of an interglacial and thus avoid this problem, we included particle mixing in the 6 Diffusion affects the distribution of soluble species and is described in porous media by Fick's first law with their respective diffusivities corrected for tortuosity. Porosity is assumed constant, a fair assumption below a few tens of centimeters. Burial is assumed to be an advective process with constant burial velocity. The concentration of oxygen is assumed constant at the upper boundary and zero at the lower boundary. A zero dissolved manganese concentration is imposed at the top of the model domain, and a zero flux of dissolved Mn is imposed at the base of the domain. Imposing a zero Mn(II) flux across the lower model boundary ignores the possible presence of a sink for Mn(II) deeper in the sediment such as the coprecipitation of Mn(II) with calcium carbonate or the precipitation of a distinct Mn(II) carbonate. We have no information that can be used to establish the location of such a sink (depth below the lower model boundary) and can therefore not estimate a downward directed gradient and flux of Mn(II). In the absence of a flux across the lower boundary, the inventory of manganese within the model domain builds up, and eventually—over several glacial–interglacial cycles—leads to a shallowing of the oxygen penetration depth during interglacials (see We applied a repeating pattern of high fluxes of OC and Mn(IV) during interglacials and null fluxes of OC and Mn(IV) during glacials ( In the absence of decomposing gas hydrates that can supply methane to the sediment pore water, the Mn-rich interglacial sediment layers would remain intact once buried. Under these conditions, the model does not falsify the hypothesis that manganese-rich layers in Arctic Ocean sediments can be used as a proxy for interglacial periods. Although this statement is self-evident, it is not trivial, because it offers the means to locate a sedimentary manganese record that has not been compromised by post-depositional alterations. As pointed out by Reducing conditions generated by the presence of methane at depth in the sediment column lead to the remobilization and redistribution of manganese.  The complexity of the diagenetic remobilization of manganese is further illustrated in The presence and distribution of dissolved manganese in the pore water depend on the advection of manganese-rich sediment across the upper boundary of the reduction zone (SMT), the timing of which is unlikely to be synchronous with the oxygen penetration pattern. Most of the time, as shown in A one-dimensional non-steady state diagenetic transport-reaction model reveals that destabilization of deep-seated gas hydrates and subsequent oxidation via anaerobic sulfate oxidation of methane diffusing up in the sediment column may remobilize manganese-rich sediment layers and thus compromise the use of such layers in Arctic Ocean sediments as a primary record of glacial–interglacial transitions. Unfortunately, neither the redistribution of manganese-rich layers nor the original manganese record can be readily reconstructed because vertical excursions of the sediment oxygen penetration depth (temporal variations in the distribution of dissolved oxygen in the sediment column) and the production of dissolved Mn (burial of manganese-rich layers in the sulfate methane transition zone) are not likely to be in phase. In contrast, where methane or other forms of secondary organic matter are absent from sediments, manganese-rich layers deposited during interglacials will be preserved, and their presence in the sediment column can be used as a proxy of interglacial periods. The absence of a sulfate gradient in the sediment pore-water is an indicator of this type of sediment because the sulfate distribution is sensitive to the presence of sub-surface methane. The work of Dr. Christian März and his colleagues inspired this study, and Dr. März gave us access to their geochemical data from the Arctic Ocean. Comments and suggestions by Dr. David Burdige and an anonymous reviewer helped improve the manuscript. The