Introducing no-till and cover crops in arable agro-ecosystems leads to the restoration of soil fertility, through the increase of soil organic matter (SOM), soil total nitrogen (STN), and available phosphorus (P), therefore maintaining or enhancing crop yield and reducing costs. Although the effects of those practices have been widely examined, many studies show conflicting results and little is known about the combined effects of no-till (NT) and cover crops (CCs) under intensive arable cropland in the Po Valley (Northern Italy). The objectives of this study were: (i) to evaluate if NT management coupled with CCs negatively affects yields during the transition period and how yields evolve; (ii) to assess SOM, STN, and P dynamics in the 60-cm soil depth layer; and (iii) to evaluate the effects of different types of winter cover crops on yield and soil parameters.
                  A six-year field experiment was established in Piacenza, on a silty-clay soil under temperate climate conditions. The crop sequence was: winter wheat, maize, maize, soybean, winter wheat, and maize. The four experimental treatments were: (1) conventional tillage (CT) as control; (2) NT with CC of rye (NT-R); (3) NT with CC of hairy vetch (NT-V); and (4) NT with a mixture of CCs (rye, hairy vetch, crimson clover, Italian rye-grass and radish) [NT-M]). Dry biomass yield of CCs ranged between 2.2 and 3.1 Mg ha−1 for rye; 1.9 and 3.0 Mg ha−1 for hairy vetch; and 1.9 and 3.2 Mg ha−1 for mixture. In the present study, yields of winter wheat, maize, and soybean were generally not reduced with NT-CCs since the first year after conversion. The different composition and thickness of cover crop mulch showed an opposite yield response to rainfall pattern: under NT-R, a negative correlation was observed between grain yield and rainfall, while under NT-V this correlation was positive.
                  After six years, SOM and STN concentrations in the 0-30 cm soil layer increased in NT-CCs. SOM concentration was +30%, +23% and +20% higher than CT for NT-R, NT-M and NT-V, respectively. STN was +28% higher under NT-R and NT-V, and +21% higher under NT-M, than CT. Conversely, P concentration was not influenced by the NT-CCs system, although we observed a tendency to increase under NT-V. In the 30-60 cm soil, layer, the tillage systems did not affect SOM and STN.
                  We concluded that introducing NT with winter CCs into intensive arable agricultural systems is an effective strategy for enhancing soil fertility in fine-textured soils under temperate climates, without penalizing yields.Variations in soil-crop management of agro-ecosystems highly impact the status of soil fertility ( A number of findings from long-term field studies and meta-analyses indicate that the response of SOM concentration to NT management is highly related to soil type, climate, cropping strategies, and experiment duration ( As for SOM, responses of crop yield to NT, compared with CT, are often contradictory and vary widely according to crop, climate, and soil conditions, especially during the transition period. For instance, Introducing CCs together with NT was suggested to mitigate the unfavorable effects of transition and consequent yield reduction ( In our six-year study we explored the implications of combining NT and CC cultivation in comparison with CT practices, assessing the effects on crop yield and on selected soil quality parameters (i.e. SOM, STN, and P) during the transition period in irrigated silty-clay soil under temperate climate conditions. Our hypotheses were: (i) when NT is coupled with winter CCs, there is no reduction in crop yield during the transition period; (ii) SOM, STN, and available P concentration are improved when NT is coupled with CCs; and (iii) the effect on yield and soil fertility varies depending on the different types of cover crops. A six-year field experiment was carried out at CERZOO, the research farm of Università Cattolica del Sacro Cuore, near Piacenza (45°00’18.0’’ N, 9°42’12.7’’ E; 68 m above sea level), Po Valley, Northern Italy. The soil is a fine, mixed, mesic Udertic Haplustalfs ( The field experiment was established in 2011 to compare contrasting tillage systems: (i) conventional tillage (CT), consisting of moldboard ploughing to 30-cm depth with residue incorporation, followed by two rotary harrowing to 15-cm depth for seedbed preparation, and (ii) no-till (NT), consisting of direct sowing on untilled soil with residue maintained on the soil surface. During off seasons, cover crops (CCs) were sown in NT plots after harvesting the previous main crops. The experiment was designed as a Randomized Complete Block (RCB) with four replicates and four treatments. Each plot was 22 m wide and 65 m long (1430 m Both maize and soybean were irrigated by traveling sprinkler, while winter wheat was cropped under rainfed conditions. The volume of irrigation-water was estimated from the crop’s evapotranspiration (ET Yield components (grain, straw/stover and total biomass) were determined annually by manually harvesting three representative areas of 6 m Total aboveground biomass of cover crops was determined by harvesting plants from three areas of 3 m Soil samples were collected in October 2017 after harvesting maize. Three composite soil cores were collected randomly from each plot at a 60 cm depth. Each soil core was then divided into five depth sections, respectively: 0-5, 5-15, 15-30, 30-45, and 45-60 cm. Soil samples were air-dried, ground and sieved (2 mm mesh) before determination of soil organic matter ( Analysis of variance (ANOVA) was conducted using the “agricolae” package of RStudio 3.3.3. All variables were examined for normality with Shapiro-Wilk test and for homogeneity of variances with Levene’s test. When the tests did not confirm the assumptions of ANOVA, data were log-transformed before analysis. The means of each of the four treatments (CT, NT-R, NT-V, and NT-M) were compared using Tukey’s test (P < 0.05) (“multcomp” package). Multivariate correlation analysis was performed to assess the relationship between grain yield and precipitation and irrigation patterns, using the non-parametric Spearman rank coefficient (ρ). A p value of 0.05 was considered significant for the test. Because of the diversity of crops, grain yields for each crop were normalized using The rainfall pattern during the experimental period (2011-2017, Under NT-CCs, grain yield and straw yield, as well as the total biomass production and the HI of winter wheat ( Grain yield, stover yield and total biomass of maize, as well as HI and total N uptake, did not show any difference among CT and NT-CCs in all the years under consideration (2013, 2014, and 2017)( Different treatments did not affect plant height of maize in 2013 and 2017, while in 2014 plant height under all NT-CCs was 4% lower than that under CT ( Grain yield of soybean was negatively affected by NT-V, which showed the lowest production (-3% than CT), while under NT-R and NT-M grain yield was +17% higher than that under CT ( As for wheat and maize, total N uptake of soybean followed a similar pattern to that of grain yield and it was not affected by different treatments ( The Spearman rank coefficient showed a negative correlation between grain yield and rainfall pattern under NT-R, while under NT-V grain yield and precipitation were positively correlated ( Under CT and NT-M, no significant correlation was observed, although the relationship between grain yield and rainfall tended to be positive under CT and negative under NT-M. Since the irrigation was applied homogeneously to the experimental field to compensate for the rainfall shortage and to prevent water stress, yield and irrigation were never correlated. The aboveground biomass of cover crops was affected by CC type under NT only in 2014-2015 ( SOM concentration in the 0-30 cm soil layer was significantly affected by tillage treatments and all NT-CCs increased SOM concentration in the 0-30 cm soil layer after the six-year experiment ( Tillage treatments did not result in any significant difference in SOM concentration with regard to the deeper soil layers (30-45 and 45-60 cm). STN concentration was significantly higher under all NT-CCs treatments than under CT in the 0-5 cm soil layer (80% higher under NT-V and NT-R, and 67% higher under NT-M than under CT) ( No difference in STN was observed in soil layers deeper than 30 cm ( At the end of the experiment, the soil C:N ratio was 11.1; 11.6; 10.6; and 11.3 under CT, NT-R, NT-V, and NT-M, respectively (P = 0.1015). The available P concentration was not significantly affected by tillage in all soil layers ( Consistent with our initial hypothesis, NT with CCs (rye, hairy vetch, and mixture) generally did not reduce the yield of winter wheat, maize, and soybean compared with CT without CCs ( Under the conditions of our experiment, the grain yield of winter wheat was not negatively affected by NT-CCs in 2012 ( The positive effect of NT on the growth conditions of winter wheat plants in drought years ( Conversely, when rainfall during the grain filling stages was high (119 mm; 2016), the increased water-retaining capacity of soil under NT compared with CT was of less importance, and the grain yield of winter wheat under NT (i.e. NT-R and NT-M) was about 15% lower than that under CT ( Such a yield reduction of winter wheat in our study (2016) could be ascribed to a probable lower N availability for winter wheat under NT-M and NT-R than under CT and NT-V, because rye and mixture residues were mainly non-leguminous-derived CCs residue, which are notoriously characterized by a high C:N ratio ( Grain yield of maize was never significantly affected by tillage, although grain production tended to be: (i) lower under all NT-CCs than under CT in 2013; (ii) lower under NT-R and NT-V than under CT and higher under NT-M than under CT in 2014; and (iii) almost the same in 2017 ( Under our experimental conditions, the plant height of maize was significantly higher (+14 cm) under CT than under NT-CCs in 2014 ( In our study, the grain yield of soybeans was higher under NT-R and NT-M than under CT and NT-V ( Similarly to maize, the significantly shorter plant height of soybean could be explained by an increase in penetration resistance and bulk density in the top 20 cm of soil depth under NT-CCs in 2015 ( Whereas it is widely recognized that NT management can perform better than CT in terms of grain yield in dry climates and for rainfed crops ( Recent predictions for Italy suggest an increase in temperature of 1.7 °C in summer and a reduced and variable annual distribution of rainfall within the next 30 years ( Significant differences were observed among the three types of cover crops in terms of aboveground biomass yield in two out of three years. Mixture showed a greater yield than vetch monoculture ( In our study, aboveground biomass yield and N uptake by rye ranged from 2.2 to 3.1 Mg ha Conversion from CT to NT in the present study considerably increased SOM concentration in the topsoil (0-30 cm) ( Rye as a cover crop may further increase SOM concentration also in deeper soil layers (e.g., 15-30 cm) as previously observed by Nitrogen is a main component of SOM and similar patterns of SOM and STN concentration have been previously reported ( However, our findings suggest that not only hairy vetch but also rye may increase STN under NT ( The high C and N inputs due to residue contribution under NT often lead to a low decomposition rate of the organic matter in the surface soil ( The concentration of SOM and its mineralization rate can also affect P concentration in soil. SOM plays a major role in promoting soil processes involved in P transformation, through its contribution as energy source to microbial activity. Microorganisms are involved in P transformation through the decomposition of organic P compounds, with the consequent freeing of available P, and the immobilization of available P into cellular material (  Moreover, according to The role of cover crops for promoting P cycling, then, assumes a primary importance if we consider the growing problem of P scarcity: mineable reserves of P are indeed non-renewable and concentrated in regions with territorial conflicts ( Results from this 6-year field study evaluating the effects of soil tillage and cover crops on crop yield and on the status of soil fertility suggest that no-till (NT) coupled with winter cover crops (CCs) does not reduce crop yield even during the transition period, in a temperate climate and in silty-clay soil, compared with conventional tillage (CT). The composition of CC mulch may greatly affect the response of crop yields to the rainfall pattern: under NT-R, a negative correlation was observed between grain yield and rainfall, while under NT-V this correlation was positive. No-till and continuous inputs of fresh organic matter from (cover) crop residues to the surface soil led to a consistent increase in SOM and STN levels in the 30-cm soil depth layer, mainly due to the high SOM increase in the uppermost soil layer (0-5 cm). The cultivation of rye as cover crop led to a significant SOM enhancement also in the 15-30 cm layer. Conversely, the available P concentration was not affected by the different soil and cover crop management, in spite of a tendency to increase under NT-V. However, below 30-cm soil depth, different tillage treatments did not affect SOM and STN. Consistent with our initial hypothesis, the results of this study highlight that combining NT and CCs could be suggested for intensive croplands with fine-textured soils (such as those of the Po Valley) in order to prevent yield reduction and increase the overall status of soil fertility. The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper.  This work was supported by the Supplementary material related to this article can be found, in the online version, at doi: The following is Supplementary data to this article: