Dry separation of heavy-mineral particles such as iron ore in the nominal size range of 1–10 mm is a significant challenge. This paper reports the findings of dry separation experiments conducted under batch conditions using a novel device referred to as the Sink-Hole fluidizer. The device utilizes a fluidized bed, with vibration applied as an additional energy source to disrupt the tendency of the excess air to pass through as bubbles. The fluidized bed is covered by a fine mesh containing holes with a nominal 1 mm square aperture. A much larger hole located at the centre acts as the “Sink-Hole”. When the system is fluidized the media expands, passing up through the Sink-Hole, spilling onto the adjacent mesh, and sifting back into the lower bed. For this work nominal 200 μm sand was used as the bed media. Tracer particles of density 2.4 to 4.8 RD, covering the size range from 2.0 to 8.0 mm, were added onto the mesh. The vibration caused the particles to repeatedly pass over the Sink-Hole, resulting in some sinking through the media, and others remaining on the mesh. By adjusting the mass of sand in the system and the superficial air velocity, it was possible to vary the separation density from 2.5 to 3.2 RD, whilst holding the Ep values in the range 0.1 to 0.2 RD.Water has become a critical issue in the mining industry due to competition for this limited resource from multiple users, and the increasing need to mine in hot, arid regions of low rainfall. If water-based beneficiation processes are introduced into a mineral processing plant, then there is the requirement to ultimately remove the water from both the product and the waste. In some operations, there is a trend towards crushing to finer sizes to better liberate and recover the valuable components, resulting in more fine particles and hence water reporting to tailings dams. The difficulty of dewatering the final product leads to higher product moistures, transport and materials handling difficulties, higher transport costs per unit of solid, and increased energy costs downstream in utilizing the ore. Plainly, there are significant advantages if ore can be beneficiated using dry methods. The major challenge of course is in achieving a separation performance that is acceptable, in terms of throughput, grade, and recovery ( Dry separation technologies are increasingly being used in coal preparation, especially in China, covering a limited size range down to about 6 mm ( The use of a dry, dense-medium, fluidized bed is an option for dry density based separation. The medium is established through gas-solid fluidization. The bed becomes a pseudo-fluid with a characteristic viscosity and density ( Most dense medium fluidized beds exhibit bubbling behavior associated with the gas in excess of that needed for minimum fluidization. Many have found that reduction or elimination of these bubbles can improve fluidized bed performance ( This paper explores the potential of a novel system, the Sink-Hole fluidizer, to achieve sharp density-based separations under dry conditions. The system consists of a vibrating, dense medium fluidized bed. A mesh screen with a 1 mm aperture is located at the surface of the expanded fluidized bed. A much larger hole, 13 mm in diameter, is located at the centre of the screen. Clearly, the permeability is greatest at the Sink-Hole compared to the mesh holes. Therefore, the fluidization and vibration promote strong transport of the fluidized sand through the Sink-Hole, resulting in the excess sand spilling over and onto the mesh, and ultimately returning to the zone below. This arrangement creates a pseudo surface for supporting the density tracer particles. Those particles that pass over the Sink-Hole then tend to either sink or float depending primarily on their density. The vibration also supports the transport of the particles across the mesh, periodically exposing the particles to the Sink-Hole. This paper is focused entirely on batch separations of density tracer particles. Ultimately the goal is to develop a continuous steady state separator exploiting the separation mechanism investigated in this paper. Clearly, where particles of a given size exhibit a separation at a given density, the key question is whether other size particles separate at a similar density or a different density. The composite separation covering the broad size range ultimately governs the overall separation performance for particles covering a wide size range. These issues are examined in this paper.  Prior to fluidization the bed level was generally below the collection screen (as shown in The Kason system offers vibratory options. The vibration, which was produced by an eccentric motor, can be adjusted by changing the lead angle between the top and bottom weight mounted on the motor. All the experiments reported in this work used a 90° lead angle, resulting in the particle motion shown in 50 N grade sand sourced from Sibelco was used as a fluidized medium. The sand particles had a skeletal density of 2643 kg/m  A single particle size fraction of density tracers was used in each experiment. A total of 180 particles were involved, consisting of 20 particles of each of the nine densities. The overall mass of the sand media (bed mass), and the fluidizing air rate were the primary independent variables. The range of bed masses that could be used to produce an effective separation was 6.10 kg to 6.40 kg. This was constrained by the need for the fluidized bed level to reach the upper mesh screen surface, but to not extend above that surface by more than about 5 mm. The corresponding superficial air rates ranged from 6.3 cm/s to 7.4 cm/s, both well above minimum fluidization. Above 7.4 cm/s excessive bubbling occurred which caused elutriation of the media when bubbles burst at the bed surface. In each experiment, a given mass of the sand media was loaded into the fluidized bed chamber. The tracer particles were then placed on the top screen, with the Sink-Hole blocked using a plug. The fluidization air flow was then introduced via the plenum chamber, controlled by a rotameter, the vibration applied, and the Sink-Hole plug removed. The tracer particles were then observed to congregate at the centre of the screen, regularly passing over the Sink-Hole. In this process, some of the tracer particles sank through the Sink-Hole, while the rest remained above the screen. A typical batch experiment was stopped after set periods of time and the number of tracer particles of each density that had not yet passed through the Sink-Hole was recorded. The fluidization air and vibration were then resumed for a further set period. This procedure was repeated four to five times over a period of up to 30 min to measure the dynamics of how the system approached steady state. After each experiment, the fraction of particles of each density In this preliminary proof of concept investigation, for practical reasons only 20 tracer particles were used in each density interval. As a result, the precision of an experimental measurement of the partition coefficient is limited to a resolution of ±0.025. Furthermore, the stochastic nature of the process means that there is considerable uncertainty in the measured partition coefficients. There are various published approximate methods for determining the confidence intervals on experimentally measured probabilities for binomial processes (e.g. This was summed using a spreadsheet to obtain the cumulative probability There is no simple analytical method to calculate the confidence intervals of the A total of 112 experiments were performed covering bed masses from 6.1 to 6.5 kg and air rates from 6.3 to 7.7 cm/s, for all four size fractions of tracer particles. A summary of the best fit In this research the fluidized media had a mean size of around 200 µm and density 2643 kg/m Many workers have demonstrated that vibration significantly reduces both bubbling and the minimum fluidization velocity through enhanced mass and energy transfer (e.g.  Whilst there was some variation with operating conditions, 5 min was found to be adequate to attain steady state across the full range of conditions reported in this paper. Note that the observed dynamics in a full-scale device would be very different, dependent on the number and size of the Sink-Holes per unit area. This paper presents results from a laboratory unit that had only a single 13 mm diameter Sink-Hole in the centre of the mesh screen. This hole is small compared to the diameter of the apparatus. Further research will investigate the performance of larger holes. A continuous full-scale system would also have many Sink-Holes and thus could potentially approach a strong separation condition much more quickly. Further evidence of the robustness of the process is its reproducibility. Sets of experiments were conducted using the four different tracer size fractions (2.0–2.8, 2.8–4.0, 4.0–5.6 and 5.6–8.0 mm) under identical operating conditions. The separation of the fine 2.0–2.8 mm tracer particles was less sharp and shows signs of a high-density tail. For these fine particles, the dynamic behaviour of moving both up and down through the Sink-Hole extended over a wide range of densities, particularly as higher air rates were used (compare At 6.3 cm/s, the It is noteworthy that these separation densities are much higher than the density of the fluidized bed, which for the vibrated bed at minimum fluidization was estimated from the bed height to be approximately 2.0 RD. Indeed, when experiments were performed without the Sink-Hole and screen, all the tracer particles immediately sunk to the bottom of the bed, as would be expected for particles with density greater than the effective density of the bed. This indicates that the separation mechanism involved with the Sink-Hole is quite different. We speculate that the upwards flux of sand through the Sink-Hole creates an additional resistance which particles need to overcome before they can settle through the hole. The weight of particles on top of the Sink-Hole is supported by the effective buoyancy and the drag force arising from the upwards moving fluidized medium. Hence, the flow of the media through the Sink-Hole plays a key role in providing a precise balance of forces. When an experiment was conducted with a low bed mass, a high air rate was required to expand the bed up to the level of the Sink-Hole. However, at air velocities of 7.4 cm/s and above, significant quantities of sand were elutriated from the system due to excessive bubbling, so this limited the upper air rate and hence the lowest bed mass that could be used. The aim of this research is to develop a potential continuous system that could separate the particles over a broad size range. Therefore, An increase in the fluidization air velocity resulted in a decrease in the A systematic series of batch experiments was conducted on a novel device referred to as the Sink-Hole fluidizer. This system consisted of a fluidized bed supported via structural members attached to a Kason vibrating screen. The upper part of the fluidized bed was covered by a mesh screen with an aperture size of 1 mm. A large Sink-Hole, 13 mm in diameter was located centrally on the screen. Air was supplied to the plenum chamber, controlled using a rotameter, and then passed up through the bed via the distributor. Density tracer particles ranging in size from 2.0 to 8.0 mm and density from 2.4 to 4.8 RD units were used. The system produced separation densities between 2.6 and 3.2 RD units, with most These results are all for a single small Sink-Hole in a batch system. Further research is planned to investigate the effects of Sink-Hole size and of having multiple Sink-Holes with varying separation distances. Presumably there is some critical minimum separation distance between holes, below which their interaction will affect the bulk medium flow pattern and hence the Sink-Hole separation performance. The long-term goal is to develop a larger more practical device with continuous feed addition using a vibratory feeder, and continuous product removal using some sort of overflow weir and underflow valve arrangement. The authors gratefully acknowledge the funding support of the See