The paper presents results of the study for obtaining perrhenic acid from aqueous ammonium perrhenate solutions by ion exchange. Two ways of perrhenic acid synthesis have been examined: sorption of perrhenate anion on selected anion exchange resins (followed by elution of the sorbed rhenium as HReO4), and sorption of ammonium ion on selected cation exchange resins. The method of ammonium ion sorption on cation exchange resins has proved to be more effective. Using C 160 (H) cation exchange resin, perrhenic acid containing >300 g/L of Re (after performing concentration in vacuum evaporator) has been obtained, with impurities concentration at the level of: <1.0 mg/L NH4, ≤0.05 mg/L sodium, ≤0.20 mg/L potassium, ≤0.10 mg/L magnesium and ≤0.20 mg/L calcium.Rhenium is one of the rarest elements in nature. Moreover, it occurs in a scattered form, and methods for its separation – in a form of metal or compounds – are complicated and costly. These facts result in a high price of rhenium and its compounds, and also in limited practical applications of this element. There are many methods for production of rhenium and its compounds - ammonium perrhenate included. The world resources of rhenium are estimated at 11–17 kt, and the average annual production (in a form of metal and compounds) is about 35 t. The largest manufacturer is Molymet company from Chile, which produces 60% of the total world production — in a form of metallic rhenium, ammonium perrhenate and perrhenic acid ( This paper examines the preparation of highly concentrated aqueous solutions of perrhenic acid from ammonium perrhenate solution using ion exchange. The final product should contain at least 300.0 g/L Re and no more than: 1.0 mg/L ammonium, 0.1 mg/L sodium, 0.5 mg/L potassium, 0.5 mg/L magnesium and 0.5 mg/L calcium. To meet these basic requirements a minimum purity of NH In the investigations synthetic aqueous solutions of ammonium perrhenate was used, obtained by dissolving in water NH The following exchange resins were examined as rhenium sorbents: strong base anion exchange resins: A 200, A 400, A 600, A 850, A 555 — from Purolite; weak base anion exchange resins: A 100, A 170, A 172 — from Purolite; Amberlite IRA 67, Amberlite IRA 92 — from Rohm and Haas; Diaion WA 30 — from Mitsubishi Chemicals; Dowex 77 — from Dow Chemicals; Lewatit Mono Plus 62 — from Bayer Chemicals. In the tests of ammonium ion sorption the following various strong acid cation exchange resins were used: C 150 (Na/H), C 160 (Na/H), C100 (H/Na), PFC 100 Since some of the ion exchangers were not available in a form of H In all the tests conducted in dynamic conditions the flow rate of NH Investigations into preparation of perrhenic acid using rhenium sorption on anion exchange resins were carried out in static conditions, from aqueous ammonium perrhenate solution with 25.0 g/L NH The investigations into ammonium ions sorption on cation exchange resins were carried out in static conditions, at the three temperatures of 298, 308 and 318 K. Aqueous ammonium perrhenate solutions of NH The tests of ammonium ions sorption on the selected during static examinations cation exchange resins were carried out in a column with H:D ratio of 4, using aqueous solutions of ammonium perrhenate (25.0 g/L), at the temperature of 298 K. The used volume of the ion exchangers was 20 cm In each effluent sample the ammonium ions were determined. The first part of the effluent, which contained perrhenic acid and impurities of ammonium ions of concentration lower than 1.0 mg/L, was concentrated in a vacuum evaporator. The second part of the effluent, being a mixture of perrhenic acid and ammonium perrhenate (ammonium ions of concentration higher than 1.0 mg/L), was neutralized with 25% ammonia solution and NH All analyses were carried out in Analytical Chemistry Department of the Institute of Non-Ferrous Metals. Ammonium content was determined by two methods: alkalimetry and distillation, using Nestler's reagent. Rhenium content was determined gravimetrically ( All tested anion exchange resins were pre-conditioned. The following conditioning agents (recommended by manufacturers of ion exchangers) were applied: 3% NH After saturation with rhenium the resins were then subjected to trials of elution with water and 2% H In the initial research on perrhenic acid preparation using sorption of ammonium ion, sixteen cation exchange resins were tested in static conditions. The selection of cation exchange resins was based on the characteristics provided by their manufacturers and on earlier investigations ( It was established that none of the examined cation exchange resins sorbed rhenium, so there were no Re losses at this stage. Cation exchange resins in their sodium form were excluded from further research as they resulted in elevated sodium in the product perrhenic acid even if preconditioned with 10% sulphuric acid. Because of the possibility of impurities formation from ammonium perrhenate (such as potassium, sodium, magnesium, calcium) in the obtained perrhenic acid, concentrations of these elements were determined in the effluents after ammonium sorption. It was noteworthy that in all cases, a significant decrease in their concentration in the product (HReO It was determined that for all studied ion exchangers, equilibrium between adsorbed ammonium and solution NH For all studied cation exchangers isotherms of ammonium ions sorption (at 298, 308, and 318 K) were also collated. SGC 650 (H) ion exchanger was tested using the following regenerating agents: 10% H In the next step C 160 (H) ion exchanger performance was investigated using sulfuric acid, hydrochloric acid, and nitric acid as regenerants. This ion exchanger had low efficiency with both 10% hydrochloric acid and sulfuric acid. However, when nitric acid (8–65%) was used for its regeneration, some increase in the efficiency was observed with the best results from 32% nitric acid with 500 cm Therefore the C160 (H) ion exchanger was selected for preparation of a twelve liter batch of perrhenic acid. However, the perrhenic acid obtained directly from the stage of ammonium ions sorption presented low Re concentration — ca. 17.0 g/L. Therefore, the obtained solution was concentrated by heating an open beaker in a water bath at 80–90 °C and in a vacuum evaporator. Rhenium loss reached up to 50% in the open beaker due to formation of volatile dirhenium heptaoxide. Vacuum evaporation at < The preparation of highly concentrated perrhenic acid solution from ammonium perrhenate using ion exchange was investigated. Perrhenate anion sorption on anion exchange resin followed by elution of the sorbed rhenium in the form of HReO Ammonium ion sorption on strong acid cation exchange resins from aqueous solution of ammonium perrhenate proved to be a much more effective way of perrhenic acid preparation. Best results were obtained using C 160 (H) resin. The perrhenic acid obtained from this ion exchanger was then concentrated in a vacuum evaporator, at < This work was supported by The Polish State Committee for Scientific Research, Project No. 3T 08 A 049 28.