Aluminium and its chemicals are generally produced from its oxidic ores, mainly bauxite through NaOH leaching by Bayer's process. There are other oxidic raw materials such as coal ash, clay etc. which are being explored with little success.
                  Aluminium dross formed while melting of aluminium in presence of air is recycled back to the smelter to recover the residual aluminium after salt treatment. The remaining residue dross is usually considered as a waste. This contains a complex mixture of mostly aluminium oxide (50–75%), remaining metallic aluminium, nitride, carbide and sulphide of aluminium, some alloying elements and salts. On one hand, this residue is considered as hazardous waste, on the other hand as a rich source of alumina.
                  In the present study the waste dross rich in alumina value was taken for acid dissolution studies to recover alumina value. The material responded favourably towards the acid dissolution. The washed material under stoichiometric condition of acid leached out ∼85% of alumina while under stringent condition more than 90% could be leached out. The results obtained therefore, shows that aluminium dross could be utilized to prepare alumina chemicals and thereby avoiding stockpiling.Aluminium and its chemicals are produced mainly from bauxite an oxidic ore, through alkali leaching by Bayer's process. At the same time many investigators have also tried to modify the Bayer's process (  It was observed that the rate of extraction of aluminum from clay based materials in mineral acid leaching systems is strongly dependent on the thermal history of the feed materials ( Uncalcined material and material calcined below 823 K (relatively low yield of Al Materials calcined between 823 and 1123 K (high yields). Materials calcined beyond 1123 K like coal and clay based materials (very low yield). Though the reason of this behaviour is not clearly understood, the transition temperature is related to temperature of phase changes, dehydroxylation and lattice destruction reaction. The majority of the proposed routes for recovery of alumina from clay based materials involve the acid leaching of feed materials which have been calcined under controlled conditions in the temperature range between 823 and 1123 K (  According to In a study on the mechanism and kinetics of aluminium and iron recovery from coal ash by H Aluminium dross, a complex oxidic material, is formed when molten aluminium comes in contact with air at the outer surface of the melt. This primary dross is generally recycled back to the smelter to recover the residual aluminium metal by remelting it with salt flux to minimize oxidation. In some cases various alloying elements are also used along with the salt flux to produce aluminium alloy, while the remaining residue sometimes also called as alloy dross or secondary dross is considered as a hazardous waste material. The oxide in the dross exhibits the form of a long continuous network where metallic aluminium stays entrapped. The molten flux breaks this framework and facilitates the coalescence of aluminium drops that sinks to the aluminium bath ( As pointed out above, aluminium dross is formed during aluminium melting due to aerial oxidation. Thus acid leaching of these materials is expected to behave in a similar way to those of coal or fly ash. In secondary aluminium dross the amount of Al Scanty literature is available on the alloy dross (secondary dross) treatment. Attempts have been made to extract alumina from the alloy dross by adopting either pyro- or hydro-metallurgical methods (  However in the present study detailed dissolution behaviour of the waste dross has been studied in sulphuric acid to find out the best condition for maximum recovery of alumina from the waste dross confirming it to be a rich source of aluminium and avoiding stockpiling. Secondary aluminium dross is a waste material obtained from aluminium melting plants whose composition differs due to the various alloying elements used during remelting of the primary dross. The dross used in this work was collected from a domestic dross producer, which contains mainly around 65% alumina, 4% SiO The experiments on the dissolution of dross in H The alumina generated during melting of aluminium has been characterized by many investigators ( In the present study the finer particles (< The chemical analyses indicated that the dross contains: Al Dissolution of alumina in sulphuric acid seems to be quite interesting and complex in nature too. Increase in proton activity i.e. acidity will render higher dissolution; however, increase in sulphate ion concentration i.e. sulphuric acid will decrease the rate of dissolution due to the precipitation of aluminium sulphate. Thus a compromise between acidity and sulphate ion concentration has to be established in the solution to ensure efficient dissolution of alumina from the dross in sulphuric acid solution avoiding precipitation. Therefore, dissolution of alumina depends on the availability of both acid as well as water in the acid solution for keeping the aluminium sulphate dissolved during dissolution process. To evaluate the behaviour of alumina dissolution, 10 g of dross was subjected to leaching with increasing amount of acid (36N) at two different percentages of acid concentration (20% & 40%, v/v). In this the acid amount was varied from 15 mL to 50 mL in such a way that the percentage of acid is kept constant such as 20% or 40%. Therefore with increase in acid amount the amount of water is increased to keep the % acid constant to 20% or 40%. The results are shown in Thus it has been observed that concentrated acid requires more water for dissolving the aluminium sulphate, even when percentage of acid is kept the same. For lower concentration of acid an increase in the volume of acid does not have much impact on dissolution. Therefore at each level of acid concentration optimum quantity of acid and water are important. It should be noted that 15 mL acid is sufficient to dissolve 10 g of aluminium dross based on stoichiometry. From this behaviour it seems the dissolution kinetics and solubility of aluminium sulphate formed are fully dependent on the amount of both acid as well as water present in the leachant.   The dependence of dissolution reaction on the time was studied using acid concentration in three different levels ( It has been mentioned earlier in In order to evaluate the salt effect, the oxide was made salt free by repeated hot water washing and then taken for dissolution. A significant change in the dissolution behaviour is observed when the oxide is made salt free. With 15% acid, about 85% dissolution takes place with salt free oxide whereas at the same condition only ∼ The remaining residue after acid leaching was subjected to X-Ray diffraction analysis (  It is possible to recover aluminium from secondary alloy dross almost completely without any pre-treatment by leaching in sulphuric acid. For effective dissolution, not only higher acid amounts are required but also substantial amount of water must be in the leachant for keeping the aluminium sulphate in dissolved condition, thus facilitating the reaction to proceed. Maximum dissolution is possible at an optimum concentration of acid and water. Even without pre-treatment, more than 85% of alumina dissolves under the conditions: 30% H The salts present in the dross are found to affect the behaviour of dissolution process. After removal of these salts it is possible to dissolve nearly 85% of alumina with 15% acid. However increasing the acid concentration to 50% increased the alumina dissolution further to ∼ The authors are grateful to the Ministry of Environment and Forests, Govt. of India, New Delhi, for the financial support to carry out this work. They are also grateful to M/s Agarvanshi Aluminium, Secunderabad for supplying the aluminium dross. The authors also like to thank the Director, Institute of Minerals and Materials Technology, for permission to publish this paper. They are also thankful to Dr. P.S. Mukherjee and Dr. Rajeev for the XRD and XRF analyses.