For better understanding of turbulence, the geometry of turbulent structures in turbulent jet flow should be analyzed. The aim of the present work was to experimentally verify the dissipation element theory on highly resolved two-dimensional measurements turbulent jets using Rayleigh scattering technique. The statistical analysis of the characteristic parameters of dissipation elements; namely the linear length connecting the extremal points and the absolute value of the scalar difference at these points, respectively was also investigated. Rayleigh scattering was used to topographically produce 2D images of turbulent mixing to obtain the concentration distribution of two gases in a turbulent shear flow. The scalar field obtained was subdivided into numerous finite size regions. In each of these regions local extremal points of the fluctuating scalar are determined via gradient trajectory method. Gradient trajectories starting from any point in the scalar field ϕ(x, y) in the directions of ascending and descending scalar gradients will always reach a minimum and a maximum point where ∇ϕ
                     =0. The dissipation element has two extremal points (one maximal and one minimal) and two saddle points at the boundaries.width of the jet where the mean velocity has dropped to half its centerline value (m) diffusivity (m diameter of jet (m) energy spectrum (m turbulent kinetic energy (m wave number (m linear distance between extreme point (m) integral length scale (m) Reynolds number Schmidt number characteristic velocity at characteristic length RMS center line speed (m/s) fluctuating turbulence velocity in distance from the jet, assuming the virtual origin of jet equal zero kinematic viscosity (m passive scalar field Kolmogorov length scale (m) Taylor length scale (m) Batchelor length scale (m) rate of kinetic energy dissipation (m the scalar dissipation rate ((concentration) The dynamics of the fine scales is important to turbulence theory as well as to the development and validation of subscale models. The mixing of two or more fluid components at the molecular level in turbulent shear flows plays a dominant role in a wide range of practical problems, especially when chemical reactions occur between the constituents. Combustion requires fuel and oxidizer to be mixed at the molecular level. Molecular mixing of fuel and oxidizer takes place at the interface between eddies. For these reasons, numerous experiments and simulations of fine scale turbulence have been conducted. Much experimental effort has thus been invested on mapping scalar fields in three dimensions, usually by reconstructing them from several planar cuts taken in quick succession in time. Experimental measurement of the scalar dissipation imply to the difficult task of obtaining the instantaneous spatial derivative of the mixture fraction with sufficient resolution There have been some other attempts to define the geometrical elements that one intuitively believes to represent eddies of different size in turbulent flows By using DNS, Peters and Wang To better understand turbulent flow, it is useful to study and analyze dissipation elements with highly resolved measurements in turbulent jet flow. The objective of the present work is to experimentally verify the dissipation element theory on highly resolved 2D measurements of turbulent jet flow using Rayleigh scattering technique. The statistical analysis of the characteristic parameters of dissipation elements; namely the linear length connecting the extremal points and the absolute value of the scalar difference at these points, respectively is also investigated. Richardson  Starting from given initial points, trajectories move along the normal directions of iso-scalar lines, shown as thin lines. Each bold solid edge line, in most of the cases, connects two maximal points and one saddle point to determine the basic topology of each dissipation element. Usually the overall distribution of 2D dissipation elements will be appeared like a deformed and twisted soft net, where each element has two extremal points (one maximal and one minimal) and two saddle points at the boundaries. The ability to measure several scalars at once to resolve measurements in three dimensions and to make time-correlated measurements allows new aspects of combustion theory to be probed and indeed may help the development of novel, more accurate models. Experimentally turbulent combustion is just as challenging as it is for the theorist. The spatial and temporal resolution requirements, the need for multiple excitation and detection systems, and the complex procedures for the extraction of quantitative data are reasons why the number of multi-scalar as well as multidimensional measurements have been few in the past. The integral scales are the largest scales in the flow field, According to Batchelor An important issue that arises in experimental studies of the dynamics of fine scales is the resolution required to capture these scales. However, some disagreement exists in the literature over the true finest dissipative length scale. For example, Antonia and Mi These experiments were based on high-resolution two-dimensional imaging laser Rayleigh scattering in the self-similar far field of an axisymmetric co-flowing turbulent jet in air. Simple open jet geometry was selected for the present work. Helium was selected for the main jet surrounded by a co-flow of dry air. The air and helium concentrations were measured using highly resolved two-dimensional Rayleigh scattering technique. The helium-air gases were selected due to the large difference between the Rayleigh cross-section of helium as compared to air (the ratio between the helium Rayleigh cross-section to that of air is about 0.014). The experimental technique and the test-rig are described below. The nozzle consists of two concentric tubes; the inner and outer tubes have an inside diameters of 2.2  One spherical lens with a focal length of The Rayleigh scattering images were collected at right angle using a special dichroic mirror that reflects the Rayleigh signal at 248 As described above, the flow field investigated here is a simple turbulent jet surrounded by co-flowing air at low velocity of 1.5 The integral length scale is calculated as follows The kinematic viscosity of helium is Experimental conditions for the planar jet measurement are tabulated in The set of measurements has a spatial resolution of 26.7 The two most important characteristic scales in the cascade process are the integral scales and the dissipative (Kolmogorov) scales. Between these two scales lies the inertial range, where the viscous effect can be neglected so that energy will be transported without remarkable loss.    The topology of dissipation elements in 2D space is shown in The spatial PDFs of linear distance between two extremal points, The results presented from this study offer detailed views of the fine–scale structure of conserved scalar mixing in turbulent flows. These imaging of measurements have provided highly resolved data on the conserved scalar and scalar gradient fields. Furthermore, they give a physical picture of the fine-scale structure of scalar mixing process with a resolution of few Kolmogorov length scale (0.6 The gradient trajectory method that introduced here is able to identify finite size regions in a turbulent scalar field without arbitrariness. The dissipation element theory is verified and the linear length scale distribution function agrees with the theoretical one derived by Wang The measurement of length scales and dissipation structures are important for developing accurate combustion models and determining necessary detector resolutions for experimental studies of turbulent flames.