The tautomeric equilibrium of the thione/thiol forms of 1,3-thiazolidine-2-thione was studied by nuclear magnetic resonance, infrared and ultraviolet–visible spectroscopies. Density functional theory was used to support the experimental data and indicates the predominance of the thione tautomer in the solid state, being in agreement with previously reported crystallographic data. In solution, the tautomeric equilibrium was evaluated using 1H NMR at different temperatures in four deuterated solvents acetonitrile, dimethylsulfoxide, chloroform and methanol. The equilibrium constants, K
                     =(thiol)/(thione), and free Gibbs energies were obtained by integration of N bonded hydrogen signals at each temperature for each solvent, excluding methanol. The endothermic tautomerization is entropy-driven and the combined effect of solvent and temperature can be used to achieve almost 50% thiol concentrations in solution. The nature of the electronic transitions was investigated theoretically and the assignment of the bands was made using time-dependent DFT as well as the influence of solvent on the energy of the most important bands of the spectra.The heterocyclic organic compound 1,3-thiazolidine-2-thione (T2T), also known as 2-mercaptothiazoline, has a pivotal role as an anti-thyroid agent acting as a trap of iodine molecules and strongly reducing thyroid hormone levels by inhibition of thyroid peroxidase (TPO) Much of its molecular applications are due to the –(HN)–(C In T2T, the presence of the C According to crystallographic studies of T2T, the thione tautomer ( The understanding of the tautomerism in different solvents is very important for the elucidation of diverse mechanisms. For example, in metal coordination reactions, the more available coordination site is determined by the tautomeric equilibrium, determining the final complex structure. As previously mentioned, once in solution both tautomers will be present and, biologically, can have different mechanisms of actions. It is also known that biomolecules exist as tautomers, and the understanding of tautomerism can even elucidate their biological activities. Solution studies of the tautomeric equilibrium of T2T in different solvents have already been performed by electronic spectroscopy, evaluating the effect of the polarity of the tested solvents (1,4-dioxane, CCl The application In the present work the tautomerism of T2T was studied in solid state by infrared spectroscopy and in solution by 1,3-Thiazolidine-2-thione (98%) was purchased from Sigma–Aldrich. Samples for All the calculations were performed using the GAMESS software The harmonic vibrational frequencies and intensities were calculated at the same level of theory, and the calculated intensities were used to generate the simulated vibrational spectra. Frequencies were scaled by a factor of 0.9614, as recommended by Scott and Radom TD-DFT was employed to calculate theoretical UV–Vis transitions and obtain the spectra in the same level of theory. NMR chemical shifts were theoretically obtained by Hartree–Fock calculations with the GIAO formalism for the geometries obtained by DFT. HF was chosen since DFT has not yet been implemented on GAMESS for GIAO calculations. GIAO has been proven to be a very efficient methodology for small and medium-size systems To take into account solvent effects in the simulation of NMR and electronic spectra, the polarizable continuum model (PCM) Geometry optimizations for both tautomers generated reliable minima structures and, as expected, the main structural differences were in C–S and C–N bonds ( Theoretical vibrational spectra of both tautomers were compared to the experimental spectrum, as shown in Simulated spectra did not show imaginary frequencies confirming the optimized structures as energy minima. A correlation study has been carried out to elucidate band assignments of the experimental spectrum. The characteristic ν(N–H) vibrational band expected for the isomer thione at 3457 Thioamide I and II vibrational modes present different frequencies for each tautomer in the simulated spectra. For the thione tautomer these bands were calculated at 1042 and 607 Despite the fact that the DFT calculations show that the thione tautomer is much more stable in the vacuum than the thiol one, Shtefan and Vvedenskii In order to clarify the nature of these bands and a possible tautomeric equilibrium in solution we performed TD-DFT calculations considering four different solvents and in a hypothetic vacuum condition. The simulations reveal that thione and thiol tautomers have different electronic spectra. The thione form shows two absorptions, the lower energy one appears in the 320–350 It is clear from the theoretical results that the band observed in the range 320–340  It is worth noting that the calculations predict an increase of the n–π The equilibrium composition of solutions of T2T in different solvents was evaluated by proton NMR spectroscopy with acquisition at different temperatures according to methodologies described in the literature The H4 The NMR theoretical simulation of a thiazolidine derivative, performed in DMSO, is described in the literature and it has shown that the signal assigned to the proton bonded to the sulfur atom in the thiol tautomer would be found at 3.30 In order to correctly assign the NMR spectra, we have performed calculations considering implicit solvent (PCM model) to study the exchangeable proton signals involved in the tautomeric equilibrium and the results are presented in With change in temperature, we observed a change in the integrals of the N–H proton signals. This could be assigned to an exchange with deuterium from solvent or residual water. To exclude this hypothesis, we have recorded the spectra in cyclic loops of temperature, starting at room temperature and increasing it. Then, the sample was cooled down to room temperature again and the integrals were reevaluated. The final values were compared to the first experiment and no significant changes were observed, which is an indication that the integrated signal of the hydrogen bonded to nitrogen atom ( The constants reported in According to the data in The acquisition of The enthalpy and entropy of the process can be easily obtained by the Van’t Hoff equation (3). The plotted graphs showed very good R-square values which means that the proposed model (Van’t Hoff equation) is in good agreement with the experimental data. As expected from the DFT results, the tautomerization is endothermic and not spontaneous. Solvent polarity exerts a high influence on the thermodynamic parameters, as can be seen by comparison of the data of the experiment performed in ACN-d A combined theoretical and experimental approach was used to confirm that T2T can be found in two tautomeric forms in solution. It was possible to obtain the tautomeric equilibrium constants for T2T by We gratefully acknowledge financial support from FAPESP, CAPES and CNPq. The authors also thank Prof. Carol H. Collins for English revision and CENAPAD-SP for computer time.