    Previous papers have shown good results in patients who have lost clinical and radiological posterior facial height, but this paper adds weight to the ‘ORIF’ argument. The approach to the head was by an auricular approach, and fixation was with a combination of techniques including titanium compression screw, titanium mesh, and a polylactide screw. Coexisting Neff B fractures, on the other side, were managed by 10 days’ IMF followed by 3 weeks’ functional mobilisation. The control group consisted of 29 patients with 34 fractures of the condylar head. They were immobilised for 10 days, and then had 6–8 weeks’ functional treatment. The ORIF group was examined at roughly 11 months, and the closed group at about 20 months. There were no operative complications, no failures of osteosynthesis, and all patients were happy with the aesthetics of the repair. Analysis showed that the outcome in patients who had open treatment was significantly better in terms of condylar movement. Radiological examination showed increased deformity in the closed group with respect to posterior facial height and the shape of the condylar head. Mandibular mobility was compromised with respect to translation in the closed group, and rotation in the ORIF. The paper suggests that physiotherapy should be customised to take this into account.     Surgical exposure of the fracture was achieved by either a retromandibular or a submandibular approach, or both. This is surprising, as the submandibular incision affords little advantage in terms of exposure. The preauricular approach combined with a retromandibular incision allows visualisation of both the head and the ramus. The mandible may then be distracted downwards and forwards to aid exposure and retrieval of the minor fragment. This is a difficult manoeuvre, and may be facilitated by a segmental posterior ramus osteotomy. It is essential to pre-bend the plates and fix them before osteotomy, as the reduction of the postcondylar fixation fragment is difficult. The timing of the operation is interesting, the usual time being 2 days; six patients were operated on within a day. The earlier these fractures are attempted, the more straightforward the manipulation. An incarcerated condylar head can be difficult to mobilise, and this should be borne in mind when a period of conservative management is allowed before fixation. The fragments may be fixed by several methods, depending on the line of fracture and the size of the fragment. In the study, miniplates, microplates, and lag screws were used. There is no doubt that the segmental osteotomy greatly simplifies reduction and fixation, and allows a more accurate assessment of the quality of fixation. All patients had appreciable resorption but, apart from the three complicated cases, returned to good function. Of the three patients who required secondary reconstruction, bony reduction was imperfect in two. There was underlying pre-existing skeletal deformity in one, repeated trauma in the second, and unexplained infection in the third. All three were reconstructed with costochondral grafts with good outcomes. This paper supports the concept of free grafting of the mandibular condyle, and the addition of an osteotomy of the segmental posterior ramus may facilitate fixation, particularly when the head cannot be stabilised in place.    This paper deals with two aspects of management: the canthal tendon and nasal projection. Markowitz III fractures are the least common and the most difficult to treat. Correct assessment of the nasal septum may be a major cause of secondary facial deformity. The successful reduction of the medial canthal ligament depends on both medial and posterior placement of the tendon. This is a complex manoeuvre and the method described in this article over-simplifies the technique, particularly when there are extensive blow out fractures of the medial wall. After localisation and capturing of the tendon, the paper describes pre-drilling of the central fragment and the passage of a wire. More recent developments in the form of the synthes canthal tendon wire may simplify this part of the operation greatly. This was achieved in all cases; two patients had ‘slight asymmetry’. A primary bone graft to the nasal dorsum was used in all cases, and is an interesting concept. The assessment of the size of the graft together with accurate placement requires good judgement, and the results are impressive. Two of 10 patients were judged to have overprojection after the graft, and one of the cases described in the paper does not have perfect symmetry, emphasising the complexity of the technique. This well-illustrated paper shows that good results may be achieved in these devastating injuries, but the techniques are complex.    In contrast to pharmacologically blocked nerves, damaged nerves have dysfunctional larger myelinated fibres, so touch and proprioception are affected more often than pain and temperature fibres. This is known as the ‘Lewis theory’. The authors therefore suggest that the nerves that maintain temperature discrimination have a greater potential for earlier recovery. This theory is borne out by the results that showed that patients with impaired thermal discrimination took three times longer to recover tactile sensation (17 as opposed to 4.6 weeks). The total time for nerves to recover is normally about 3–6 months. Anecdotally, some patients recover nerve function within 18 months. Thermal discrimination would therefore be a good prognostic indicator of a rapid return to function, but impaired discrimination does not necessarily predict total resolution after this time and may be associated with a more permanent loss.