A number of organic extractants for Ti(IV) solvent extraction from chloride solutions were reviewed, including acidic organophosphorus, neutral organophosphorus and amine extractants. The extraction of Ti(IV) by acidic organophosphorus extractants is via a cation exchange mechanism in low hydrochloric acid concentration solutions, whilst in high hydrochloric acid concentration solutions, it proceeds via a solvating mechanism. The Ti(IV) extraction kinetics with D2EHPA, EHPEHPA and Cyanex 272 is very slow: more than 1h is required to reach equilibrium in some cases. The Ti(IV) extraction kinetics with Cyanex 301 and Cyanex 302 is fast: only 2–5min are required to reach equilibrium. The Ti(IV) extraction kinetics with neutral organophosphorus extractants, such as TBP, TOPO and TRPO is also fast: the extraction equilibrium reaches within 5min. The extraction mechanism with neutral organophosphorus extractants is solvating. Stripping Ti(IV) from loaded acidic organophosphorus extractants including D2EHPA, EHPEHPA, Cyanex 272, Cyanex301 and Cyanex 302 is difficult, requiring H2SO4 solution in the presence of H2O2. In contrast, the stripping of Ti(IV) from neutral organophosphorus extractants is much easier with low acidic solutions.
                  It was found that the practical application of acidic organophosphorus extractants is difficult for Ti(IV) extraction from chloride solutions due to their slow extraction kinetics and difficulty in stripping, and neutral organophosphorus extractants could be used to separate both Fe(III) and Ti(IV) from other impurities or separate Fe(III) from Ti(IV) and all other impurities.The main titanium ores are rutile, ilmenite and leucoxene. Ilmenite supplies about 90% of the world demand for titanium minerals, mainly to make titanium dioxide for the pigment industry. The sulphate and chloride processes are the two commercialised processes for manufacturing pigment grade TiO Solvent extraction technology could be the technique to overcome the drawbacks of the two processes for manufacturing pigment grade TiO The speciation of titanium in hydrochloric acid solution directly affects its extraction behaviour by various kinds of extractants. The titanium species present in acid media remains controversial ( In high acidity solution ([H Based on the constants reported,  Acidic organophosphorus extractants are widely used in solvent extraction processes for metal separation and recovery. The most commonly used phosphorous extractants include alkyl phosphoric acids, phosphonic acids and phosphinic acids. The main organophosphorus extractants used for Ti(IV) solvent extraction study are listed in Many investigations have been reported for Ti(IV) extraction from various concentrations of HCl solution by acidic organophosphorus extractants. Dual extraction behaviour in hydrochloric acid solutions was observed for D2EHPA and EHEHPA with minimum extraction in medium acidities. The distribution coefficient curve as a function of acidity demonstrates a “V” shape as shown in No research results were found in the literature for Ti(IV) extraction by Cyanex 272 in relatively high HCl concentration solutions. Based on the data of Ti(IV) extraction efficiency versus HCl concentration and equilibrium stripping efficiency with HCl (broken line) reported by The dual extraction trend of Ti(IV) by acidic organophosphorus extractants is resulted from the change in extraction mechanisms from cation exchange to solvating with the increasing solution acidity. Under relatively low acidity, with the titanium species of TiO This was deduced from the linear relationship of logarithm of distribution coefficient between the logarithm of HCl and the free extractant concentrations. The independence of the distribution coefficient on chloride concentrations at a constant acidity also confirms the cation ion exchange mechanism ( With excessive titanium loaded in the organic solution, the slope of log(D) versus log[HA A number of authors reported that Ti(IV) extraction from sulphate and chloride media by D2EHPA is in the form of oligomeric polynuclear complex (  Although The solvating mechanism for Ti(IV) extraction by D2EHPA under high acidity (> A similar phenomenon was also found in sulphate systems ( With the replacement of oxygen atoms in Cyanex 272 by sulphur atoms, no solvating reaction was found for Cyanex 301 and Cyanex 302 in high acidity solutions as the extraction efficiency of Ti(IV) decreased with increasing HCl concentrations from 0.01 to 5 According to the cation exchange mechanism, the extraction equilibrium constant (K The equilibrium constants of Ti(IV) extraction with different extractants are compared in There are some discrepancies in the results with the same extractant obtained by different authors. The reasons for this are probably due to the use of different acid concentrations such as in the case of Cyanex302 and different types of kerosene in the case of D2EHPA ( The saturated loading capacities reported for titanium with the organophosphorus extractants are compared in It was reported that polarities of diluents have significant effect on the Ti(IV) extraction with EHEHPA and Cyanex 272 ( The contact time to reach extraction equilibrium of Ti(IV) reported by different authors are summarised in  Due to the existence of different titanium species in different acidic systems under different acidity, the extraction mechanism could be different. Further investigation is needed to better understand its extraction mechanisms. Although Ti(IV) can be extracted by acidic organophosphorus extractants in a wide range of acidities, its stripping with pure acidic solutions was rather difficult except for Cyanex 302 and Cyanex 301. Acidic solutions with certain amount of H Obviously, mixtures of H  Comparatively, D2EHPA showed poor selectivity for Ti(IV) over Fe(III). The largest separation factor of Ti(IV) over Fe(III) was found to be 60 with 0.2  Neutral organophosphorus compounds are the other very important extractants investigated for Ti(IV) extraction. Among them, TBP (tri-n-butyl phosphate), TOPO (tri-octyl phosphine oxide) and Cyanex 923 (a mix of alkyl phosphine oxides) are the widely applied extractants ( Neutral Ti(IV) molecule was formed by the reaction expressed in Eq. An increase in HCl acidity in the aqueous phase resulted in an increase in chloride concentration, which forced the progression of the above reaction towards the right. As a result, more neutral molecule species of titanium formed, which enhanced the extraction by neutral organophosphorus reagents. A number of investigations showed that the Ti(IV) distribution coefficient increased with the increase in HCl concentration or chloride salt concentration with TBP ( Compared to TBP, TOPO was much more efficient for Ti(IV) extraction in chloride media ( It was observed that the distribution coefficient of Ti(IV) decreased with increasing acidity in the low acidity range (< Hydrochloric acid can be extracted by the above three neutral organophosphorus extractants. Extraction of HCl by TBP can be expressed as in Eq. However,  The result was derived from the relationship of logD The A third phases appeared for TBP and TOPO as extractant for Ti(IV) extraction when dodecane was used as diluent. However, no third phase was observed with xylene as the diluent ( Generally, the extraction kinetics of Ti(IV) by neutral organophosphorus extractants is fast. The time required to reach equilibrium is about 3–5  The high selectivity of Fe(III) over Ti(IV) with TBP was demonstrated by The saturation loading of Fe(III) with 2.5 Although Cyanex 923 also shows stronger extraction for Fe(III) than for Ti(IV), investigations showed that the separation of Fe(III) from Ti(IV) by Cyanex 923 was difficult ( The most widely used amines for metal separation are Alamine 336 (tri-octylamine) and Aliquat 336 (tri-octyl methylammonium chloride). Fe(III) extraction by tertiary amine in high chloride media is much stronger than that of Ti(IV). Some reagents are very effective for Ti(IV) extraction in chloride media, such as M2EHPA (Mono-2-ethylhexy phosphoric acid). The extraction of Ti(IV) by M2EHPA was three times stronger than that of D2EHPA, and the kinetics was much faster ( Solvent extraction is a very important technique to purify titanium in chloride leach solutions. The extraction efficiency of titanium with the acidic organophosphorus extractants was found in the order of D2EHPA Among the three widely used neutral organophosphorus extractants, TOPO is the strongest Ti(IV) extractant and the extraction occurs even the chloride concentration is far below 2 Amine and other types of extractants are also potentially applicable in processing titanium pigment. Development of new systems, especially, synergistic systems, for the purification of Ti(IV) in chloride leach solutions is warranted. The authors would like to thank Drs. Marcus Zipper and Matthew Jeffrey for reviewing this paper and providing valuable comments. The support of the