Ectopic mineralization has been linked to several common clinical conditions with considerable morbidity and mortality. The mineralization processes, both metastatic and dystrophic, affect the skin and vascular connective tissues. There are several contributing metabolic and environmental factors that make uncovering of the precise pathomechanisms of these acquired disorders exceedingly difficult. Several relatively rare heritable disorders share phenotypic manifestations similar to those in common conditions, and, consequently, they serve as genetically controlled model systems to study the details of the mineralization process in peripheral tissues. This overview will highlight diseases with mineral deposition in the skin and vascular connective tissues, as exemplified by familial tumoral calcinosis, pseudoxanthoma elasticum, generalized arterial calcification of infancy, and arterial calcification due to CD73 deficiency. These diseases, and their corresponding mouse models, provide insight into the pathomechanisms of soft tissue mineralization and point to the existence of intricate mineralization/anti-mineralization networks in these tissues. This information is critical for understanding the pathomechanistic details of different mineralization disorders, and it has provided the perspective to develop pharmacological approaches to counteract the consequences of ectopic mineralization.  The ASCP designates this journal-based CME activity (“ASIP 2013 AJP CME Program in Pathogenesis”) for a maximum of 48 AMA PRA Category 1 Credit(s)™. Physicians should only claim credit commensurate with the extent of their participation in the activity.  Ectopic mineralization (ie, deposition of calcium/phosphate complexes in connective tissues in aberrant locations) has been linked to several clinical conditions, such as aging, cancer, diabetes, and autoimmune diseases, major causes of morbidity and mortality. For example, a recent study has examined the risk of death associated with coronary artery calcification in a cohort of 25,253 patients and found that coronary artery calcification is an independent risk factor to death, with the relative risk being up to 12.5-fold. Two major types of acquired ectopic mineralization processes involving peripheral connective tissues have been recognized. Metastatic calcification refers to calcium deposition associated with elevated serum levels of phosphate and/or calcium, as in chronic renal failure, whereas dystrophic calcification is usually secondary to some form of insult to the tissues, as seen in autoimmune diseases and cancer. Metastatic calcinosis in the skin can be characterized clinically by nodular deposits of calcium and phosphate, often in periarticular distribution, and they are reversible on correction of the calcium and/or phosphate abnormalities. Dystrophic calcification occurs frequently in previously damaged or diseased tissues. Localized skin involvement occurs in many cutaneous inflammatory lesions, such as acne, chronic ulcers, and granulomas, as well as in benign and malignant neoplasms. Several Mendelian genetic disorders share phenotypic similarities with the acquired forms of metastatic and dystrophic calcification, and serve as genetically controlled model systems to study various facets of pathological mineralization ( Two forms of familial tumoral calcinosis affect primarily skin and recapitulate features of acquired forms of metastatic and dystrophic calcification. The hereditary counterpart of acquired metastatic calcinosis is hyperphosphatemic familial tumoral calcinosis (HFTC; Mendelian Inheritance of Man 211900), an autosomal recessive condition characterized by progressive deposition of calcium phosphate crystals in periarticular spaces and soft connective tissues. The second type of familial tumoral calcinosis, normophosphatemic familial tumoral calcinosis (NFTC; Mendelian Inheritance of Man 610455), recapitulates features of acquired dystrophic calcinosis and manifests with extensive ectopic mineralization of the cutaneous tissues, associated with preceding inflammatory manifestations mostly evident in mucosal tissues. NFTC results from mutations in the A prototype of multisystem ectopic mineralization disorders is pseudoxanthoma elasticum (PXE), characterized by protean manifestations in the skin, the arterial blood vessels, and the eyes. The clinical manifestations of PXE are usually noted first in the skin, which manifests with small yellowish papules on the predilection sites, such as the side of the neck and the antecubital fossae. PXE is a rare disease, with an estimated prevalence of approximately 1:50,000, which implies that there are approximately 7000 affected individuals in the United States and as many as 150,000 in the world, assuming the same global prevalence. The role of vitamin K has also been examined by feeding Generalized arterial calcification of infancy (GACI), an autosomal recessive disorder, has provided information on the postulated mineralization/anti-mineralization networks in the skin and vascular connective tissues. Another recently described clinical entity with vascular involvement with similarities to PXE is arterial calcification due to CD73 deficiency (ACDC) caused by mutations in Understanding of the heritable ectopic mineralization disorders has been advanced significantly by examination of animal models that often recapitulate the features of human disease. In addition to providing information on the pathomechanistic pathways and modifying factors, many of these mouse models have served as a platform to explore treatment modalities for these often intractable disorders. An example of a disease in which significant progress has been made toward understanding the underlying pathomechanisms through study of mouse models is PXE. Specifically, the Several factors have been suggested to be the critical molecule transported by ABCC6. The importance of identifying the missing anti-mineralization factor in circulation of patients with PXE is emphasized by the fact that once the identity of such a molecule has been disclosed, it can be introduced directly to the circulation bypassing the liver, and this approach would be expected to prevent further mineralization. Based on clinical observations (previously described), vitamin K or one of its derivatives has been suggested to be the molecule whose absence in peripheral tissues would lead to deficient γ-glutamyl carboxylation of MGP and accumulation of inactive MGP. In addition to In addition to The mineral deposits in connective tissues in patients with PXE and in Several factors, either systemic or local, can antagonize the aberrant mineralization of connective tissues, and several studies have noted direct association of these factors, such as fetuin-A, MGP, Ank, and alkaline phosphatase activity, with mineralization processes. Another protein intimately linked to the regulation of tissue mineralization is MGP, which is expressed abundantly in vascular smooth muscle cells. Mice lacking MGP die within a few months of age because of mineralization of elastic fibers and rupture of elastic arteries, such as aorta. Collectively, the pathological processes leading to connective tissue mineralization in heritable disorders have both systemic and local regulatory factors, and the precise balance of promineralization and anti-mineralization factors, when superimposed on the individual’s genetic background, determines the phenotypic features and severity of ectopic mineralization. There is no effective treatment for the systemic manifestations of ectopic mineralization disorders, such as PXE and GACI. In case of PXE, intravitreous injection of vascular endothelial cell growth factor antagonists prevents the neovascularization in the eyes, and significant improvement in the visual acuity has been reported. Another approach to prevent systemic mineralization (ie, supplementation of the diet with magnesium) has been recently suggested to be potentially useful for treatment of patients with PXE. Early animal experiments feeding We thank Carol Kelly for her assistance with manuscript preparation, David Chou for preparation of