Purpose
                  Sufficient fixation of an anterior or anteromedial facet fracture of the coronoid process in fracture-dislocation of elbow is important to maintain joint stability. The purpose of this study was to report our experience with 11 patients who were managed with an original fixation technique using a “figure-eight” suture loop.
               
                  Methods
                  From February 2010 to March 2011, 11 cases with a fracture of the anterior or anteromedial facet of the coronoid process were treated by coronoid fixation using a figure-eight suture loop. For cases with comminuted fractures, to prevent a suture from sliding into the fracture line, a 3- or 4-hole phalanx plate was enclosed in the suture loop to compress multiple fragments. Accompanying injuries, such as a radial head fracture or olecranon fracture, were fixed with repair of lateral collateral ligament injuries.
               
                  Results
                  On final evaluations at an average of 18 months after injury, the mean elbow arc of motion was 125.5° and the mean forearm rotation arc of 124.1°. All fractures were united with an average postoperative score according to the Mayo Elbow Performance Index of 91 points. All patients achieved satisfactory scores (seven excellent, four good). All 11 fractures were united at final follow-up with no joint incongruity, dislocation, or subluxation of the injured elbow.
               
                  Conclusions
                  The figure-eight suture loop technique is an easy and effective technique to fix anterior or anteromedial facet fractures of the coronoid process.The ulnar coronoid process is an anterior and medial extension of the proximal metaphysis, which is a critical structure to static elbow stability and plays an integral part in both the hinge and rotator components that function in trocho-ginglymus articulation of the elbow This retrospective, single-center, non-consecutive, case series study of ulnar coronoid process fractures was approved by the Institutional Review Board of Shanghai Sixth People’s Hospital (approval no. 2015-KY-016 (K)) and performed in accordance with the PROCESS guidelines Under general anesthesia, the patient was placed in the supine position and the injured upper limb was placed on a radiolucent operating table. To expose the coronoid fracture, the elbow was approached through a medial incision and a medial skin flap was created. The ulnar nerve was identified and depressed proximally at the medial edge of the triceps and distally between the two heads of the flexor carpi ulnaris. Through an over-the-top exposure Direct reduction of the fragments was performed after first identifying the articular surface of the coronoid process by releasing part of the capsule and irrigating the area. In general, completing the reduction was not difficult. Two parallel Kirschner wires (1.5 Postoperatively, for “terrible triad” injuries, the external fixator was locked and the elbow was immobilized for 3–5 At the final follow-up, the elbow range of motion, including arc of motion (extension/flexion) and forearm rotation (pronation/supination), were measured with a goniometer by the author (JD) who performed all 11 surgeries. Radiographs were reviewed for signs of arthritis using the scale developed by Broberg and Morrey A total of 11 patients (one woman and 10 men; average age, 38.6 years) with elbow dislocation and anterior or anteriomedial coronoid fractures were included in this study. No patients were lost to follow-up. Of these 11 subjects, four had type I fractures and seven had type II fractures according to the O’Driscoll classification system Of the 11 patients treated, the mean elbow arc of motion was 125.5° with a mean arc of extension of 104.5° and flexion of 21.8°. The mean forearm pronation was 66.4° and the mean supination was 57.7° with a mean forearm rotation arc of 124.1°. The average postoperative score according to the Mayo Elbow Performance Index was 91 points (range, 75–100 points) and all patients achieved satisfactory scores (seven excellent and four good). The elbow range of motion and Mayo Elbow Performance Index date are shown in Because of the special anatomical and biomechanical features of the coronoid process, a fracture, especially combined with elbow dislocation, requires reliable fixation to allow for early rehabilitation. Otherwise, improper fixation may lead to elbow instability and poor outcomes. Even if such a fracture involves only 2.5 Each of the 11 patients included in our study had an LCL injury accompanied with an ulnar coronoid process fractures, which was similar to the cohort in the report by Park et al. Compared with the buttress plate and suture technique, our experience using Kirschner wires and the figure-eight suture loop, with or without a plate, may induce less pressure on the anteromedial facet and our primary results indicate that this technique may also allow for early rehabilitation of the elbow. Our technique has its own advantages, as distal striping was not required for fixing the plate with distal screws, the brachial muscles were less interrupted, the figure-eight suture loop offered a greater area to apply pressure to multiple fragments, and the operative procedure was not complex. In addition, this procedure is relatively cheap and available to those with limited medical funds. The disadvantages of this method are as follows: a dorsal incision is required, a second surgery is needed to remove the subcutaneous ends of the Kirschner wires, and one patient complained of pain because the end of the Kirschner wire was too close to the olecranon. Consequently, the Kirschner wires should be placed from the anterior-proximal to the dorsal-distal direction of the ulna. Also, this method may be inappropriate to fix larger anteromedial fragments, such as with varus posteromedial rotary instability, which may require more buttressing support to protect against shearing Overall, these findings suggest that almost all LCL injuries were accompanied with anterior or anteromedial facet fractures. Fixation using a figure-eight suture loop is an easy and effective technique to fix anteromedial coronoid fractures. The authors declare that they have no conflict of interests. Funding was provided by the This retrospective case series study of ulnar coronoid process fractures was approved by the Institutional Review Board of Shanghai Sixth People’s Hospital (approval no. 2015-KY-016 (K)). researchregistry1769. Longxiang Shen; conceived and designed the study, analysed the data and wrote the paper. Xingang Yu; analysed the data and wrote the paper. Biao Zhong; analyzed the data and wrote the paper. Jian Ding; conceived and designed the study, analysed the data and wrote the paper. Jian Ding.