In this paper, the mechanical and tribological behaviours of various compositions of aluminium 6063 alloy – clay (Al-clay) composites for brake pad applications were studied. The Al-clay composites with 5–30wt% of clay particles of grain size of 60 BSS (250 microns) were developed through stir casting route. The wear characteristics of Al-clay in dry sliding conditions were subjected to a series of Denison T62HS pin-on-disc wear tests. The action of two different loads (4 and 10N), three sliding speeds of 200, 500 and 1000rpm were investigated. The results of the mechanical and wear tests as well as the metallographic investigation of optical, scanning electron microscopy and energy dispersive X-ray microscopy revealed an improvement in the tensile strength, hardness and wear resistance in the composites with 10–25wt% clays. The best values were obtained at 15wt%. Wear rate was highly influenced by applied load and sliding speed. The developed composites with 15–25wt% clay addition were similar to conventional semi metallic brake pad in terms of wear and friction properties.Aluminium based composites are gaining increased applications in the transport, aerospace, marine, oil and gas, automobile and mineral processing industries, due to their excellent strength, stiffness and wear resistance properties. However, their widespread adoption for engineering applications has been hindered by the high cost of producing components ( Recently, great interest has been in the automobile and aviation industries and many other industries to reduce strength-to-weight ratio of components, improve the wear resistance of components, and or enhance fuel efficiency as evidenced by extensive research into aluminium-based composites ( During the sliding action, the hard ceramic particles detached from the composite surface constitute a resisting barrier in reducing the wear rate of the composite material. The sliding wear resistance of the composites with respect to that of alloy varies with the process parameters ( The braking system of a vehicle is usually subjected to a complex state of stress which includes mechanical and thermal stresses ( Friction materials for brake systems comprise metallic components to improve their wear resistance, thermal stability and strength. Metals such as copper, steel, iron, brass, bronze, and aluminium have been used in the form of fibres or particles in the friction materials. The friction and wear of these materials depend mainly on the type, morphology, and hardness of the metallic ingredients ( The incorporation of clay particles in aluminium alloy will harness the potential of its constituents (mainly Al Therefore, this paper will investigates the influence of various weight fractions of aluminosilicate clay on the mechanical, friction and wear properties of Al-clay composites for brake disc rotor applications. The results will be compared with the results obtained with a semimetallic brake pad (SMBP). The Al-clay composites which consist of aluminium alloy (AA6063) and 5–30 The tensile and Vickers hardness tests of samples were conducted using respectively 50 The wear characteristics of Al-clay and SMBP in dry sliding conditions were subjected to a series of Denison T62 HS pin-on-disc wear tests. Cylindrical pins of 5 The volumetric wear rate was estimated by measuring the mass loss, However, it is more appropriate to express the wear results in terms of wear constant The results of the analysis of the aluminium alloy and the clay are presented in The results of the SEM/EDX ( The UTS of the composite samples increases as the addition of clay increases to a peak value of 133.98 MPa at 15 The Vickers hardness values of the Al-clay composite are presented in The results of the metallographic examination of all the samples are displayed in The result of the wear test of the composites with various weight fractions of clay particles is displayed in The wear rate decreases with increase in the weight fraction of the reinforcing agent (clay) as compared to conventional AA6063. The lower wear rate observed at optimum condition between 15–20 The wear behaviour of the developed composites is similar to the SMBP at lower sliding speed of 200 The variation of coefficient of friction (CoF) of the test samples with the sliding time with respect to the various sliding load and the rotating speeds in dry conditions is presented in However, at higher speed the average CoF is found to be independent of load during the first few seconds of the experiment. After a while, the amplitude of CoF increases at high load, producing fluctuating values of CoF. This could be due to the presence of higher volume of wear debris trapped at the contact zone creating a third body effect within the contact surface, resulting in decrease in metal removal during the wear test ( The morphology of the worn test samples showed in The bright coloured area on the micrographs is the uncovered metal surface. This appears smooth, indicative of mild oxidational type of wear with no or minimal cracks. The grey area on the other hand, appear to be consisting of smaller compacted particles and with considerable cracks appearing on the surface. The oxidation of ruptured particle during sliding is called fragmented oxide particle. When this small particles were oxidized and emitted during sliding, they reduced the sliding contact surfaces. The fragmented oxide particle acts as a lubricating agent, and it may reduce wear. Consequently, no plastic deformation will occur on the worn surface of the Al-Clay composite ( The improvement of the UTS and microhardness with the increment in the weight fraction of clay particles may be due to the presence and pinning effect of the clay particles ( The improved mechanical properties of the composite ( The Compositional variations of wear track as presented in Wear debris is attributed to delamination and fatigue wear of tribo-layers. Other sources of debris formation were identified as pin material fractured particles mostly at edges, and formation of third body abrasive particles during the test by tribo-oxidation and mechanical mixing of test products. It can be concluded that: The addition of clay particles generally improved the mechanical properties, wear resistance and CoF of the AA6063. The wear behaviour of the developed composite is dependent on the applied load, sliding speed and the weight fraction of clay particle additive. The wear and friction properties of the developed composite with 15–30 The low wear rate exhibited at the surface of the developed composite occurred as a result of the presence of fractured particles between the composite pin and steel disc surfaces. The particles served as load bearing elements as well as solid lubricant.