Solid waste tionite generated in the sulfate process for TiO2 production is a secondary titanium resource with high silicon content. To recover titanium and remove silicon from the tionite, a process involving hydrothermal conversion, water washing, and acid leaching was proposed. To avoid Na2O loss, the formation of Na2TiSiO5 by-product was prevented by adding CaO. XRD, ICP-OES and FT-IR were used to examine the transformation of the titanium and silicon. The optimum hydrothermal conditions are NaOH/tionite mass ratio of 4:1 and Ca/Si molar ratio of 1:1 in 45% NaOH solution at 240°C for 1h. Under these conditions, the titanium conversion was 97.3% with Na2TiO3 as the main titanium phase, while most silicon was converted to Ca2SiO4, and katoite, and NaCaHSiO4, instead of Na2TiSiO5. About 97.5% of the Na2O was recovered after washing the hydrothermal products with water, and 93.1% of the silicon retained in the washed solution was removed by adding CaO. After leaching the washed products with 40% H2SO4 solution at 60°C, about 97% of the titanium was easily recovered, forming the titanyl sulfate solution that was employed for TiO2 production. The Ca and Si components formed CaSO4 and silica gel, which were then separated from the acid leaching solution.The understanding and control of the transformation of silicon minerals in the extractive metallurgy processes are significant issues ( Efforts have been made to solve the problems caused by the silicon components in titanium hydrometallurgy when treating raw titanium minerals with high silicon contents ( A new and eco-friendly process for the recovery of titanium from tionite was developed in our previous study ( An efficient means of controlling the silicon components in the Bayer process is the introduction of desilication additives such as CaO or Ca(OH) The aim of this study was to devise a means of recovering TiO Fresh tionite was supplied by Shandong Dongjia Group Co., Ltd. It was washed with water, neutralized with the dilute alkali solution, and then dried. This study used dry tionite with the following chemical compositions: TiO Analytically pure NaOH and CaO, deionized water, and commercially pure O To convert the titanium in tionite into Na To recover Na To recover titanium from the water-washed products, the washed products were leached in 20% to 60% (mass fraction) H The XRD analysis was conducted on an X'Pert Empyrean instrument (PANalytical, Netherlands) with Cu K To determine the titanium conversion of the hydrothermal reaction, the hydrothermal product was leached with 3.1  The titanium conversion with > The NaOH–CaO hydrothermal method was used to treat tionite to prevent the formation of Na As shown in The theoretical NaOH/tionite mass ratio for the complete reaction in the hydrothermal conversion is about 0.7:1. In After NaOH–CaO hydrothermal treatment, the solid product is washed with water to recover Na XRD patterns of the water-washed products shown in NaCaHSiO Although most Si went into solid phases in NaOH–CaO hydrothermal system, some Si content remained in the washed solution. To remove this silicon, CaO with the Ca/Si molar ratio of 1.1:1 was added when the washed solution was heated to 95 To compare the behaviors of the water-washed product and tionite, both of them were leached in H The compositions of the titanyl sulfate solutions obtained from the washed products are listed in  The titanyl sulfate solution obtained from the 40% H To recover titanium and remove silicon from tionite, a process consisting of alkaline hydrothermal conversion, water washing, and sulfuric acid leaching for TiO The authors gratefully acknowledge the foundations from the projects supported by the