Several (Ti,Ta)(C,N) cermets were prepared from Ti(C,N) and Ta powder with or without Ni. For comparison, Ti(C,N) with Ni were also prepared. The mixed powders were sintered at 1400–1500°C by FAST/SPS up to a density higher than 99% theoretical density. The addition of Ta delays densification of Ti(C,N)-Ni cermets due to the formation of intermetallic phases. During sintering, the Ta was incorporated into the Ti(C,N), forming solid solution, thus changing the core-rim structure of the Ti(C,N) cermets. On the other hand, the Ta additions result in grain refinement and improved hardness (from 16.1GPa to 17.8GPa) and fracture toughness (from 5.5MPa.m1/2 to 6.9MPa.m1/2).Titanium carbonitrides are widely used as the hard phase in sintered ceramic-metal (cermet) composites and protective coatings on conventional hard metal cutting tools. Their excellent and unique combination of physical properties such as high melting point, hardness, thermal conductivity, wear resistance and good chemical and thermal stability make this family of structural and wear-resistant materials particularly attractive for metal machining applications In the production of titanium carbonitride-based cermets, the starting materials are typically Ti(C,N) and a metal binder that is usually Ni, Co, or a combination of the two. Ti(C,N) cermets possess a fine-grained, stable microstructure, in which the equiaxed fine grains of the hard phase are embedded in the tough metallic binder. The typical microstructure of Ti(C,N)-based cermets display core-rim morphology, which enhances wetting of the carbonitrides to the metal binder and inhibits the coalescence and growth of the carbonitride grains during sintering The effect of Ta on Ti(C,N)-based ceramic materials and hard metals has been reported in the literature. Kang and co-workers Rolander et al. The powders used to obtain the (Ti,Ta)-carbonitride solid solution were TiC The powder mixtures were wet milled in a Fritsch Pulverisette-5 ball mill, in isopropanol for 3 Samples were prepared for scanning electron microscopy (SEM), hardness and fracture toughness determination by cold mounting in resin, and preparing metallographically down to 1 Density was determined by Archimedes principle, and the hardness and fracture toughness were measured using Vickers indentation technique at an indentation load of 5 The sintering conditions and the density of the cermets are given in  The results of the XRD analysis of the cermets are given in The lattice parameters of the sintered cermets showed an overall increase for Ti(C,N) ( For Cermets 1 and 3, the lattice parameters were only slightly higher than that of the starting Ti(C,N) powder (0.4296 The microstructures of the different cermets are shown in In the Ta-containing cermets, the core-rim structure is mainly attributed to the formation of the (Ti,Ta)(C,N) solid solution The distribution of the binder phase (bright contrast) in the ceramic phase is different for the different cermets. The micrographs ( The mechanical properties of the cermets are shown in The densification behaviour of Cermets 3–5 was different from other samples and was influenced strongly by the composition of the starting powder mixture ( Similar to Cermet 3, during the sintering of Cermet 4 both solid state and liquid phase sintering occurred as described above. However, the difference in observed densification was caused by the changing phases because of tantalum. Densification started later in Cermet 4 (1100 Densification in Cermet 5 (Ti(C,N)-Ta) occurred only by solid-state sintering processes due to the absence of the Ni binder phase. Consequently, densification starts at higher temperature (at approximately 1200 The mechanical properties of the Ni-bonded Ti(C,N)-based cermets were influenced by the amount of nickel binder as well as the additions. This coupled with the wetting behaviour shown in the microstructures, would account for the hardness and fracture toughness results shown in Both Cermets 1 and 2 had the highest amount of Ni content (10 For Cermets 1–3, grain growth was promoted, due to the existence of the metallic melt. Conversely, Cermets 4 and 5 had only temporary liquid, or no liquid, during the sintering, and experienced less grain growth, and so had higher hardness. Consequently, the superior mechanical properties of Cermet 4 were due to the reduction of the binder, lowering the sintering temperature to prevent Ostwald ripening and the addition of the tantalum to form a (Ti,Ta)(N,C) solid solution with refined microstructure. As was shown recently SEM images of the crack paths of some of the polished sintered cermets are shown in The addition of Ta to Ti(C,N) cermets results in the change of the mechanism of densification as well as in different microstructures. The addition of Ta retards the densification, due to the formation of intermetallic phases. The resulting microstructure depends on the Ni-Ta ratio. During sintering, Ta is incorporated into Ti(C,N) forming a solid solution, altering the core-rim structure of the Ti(C,N) cermets. The incorporation of Ta in the cubic hard phase changes the melting point of the binder and therefore the sintering mechanism, generating different microstructures. Tantalum additions resulted in grain refinement and increased hardness and fracture toughness. Further experiments with different Ta/Ni ratios and different sintering times and temperatures are necessary to fully estimate the potential of this approach. The authors would like to thank the University of the Witwatersrand, Element Six (Pty) Ltd, The Department of Science and Technology and National Research Foundation Centre of Excellence in Strong Materials (CoE-SM) for funding.