High-chromium white cast irons can attain very hard microstructures composed of intergranular chromium carbides dispersed in a tempered martensitic matrix. Two heat-treated high-chromium white cast irons with different carbon contents were studied in this research work using compression at 500 °C, and wear and oxidation tests at 500 and 600 °C. The hot compression behaviour of these products is excellent, with high strengths and significant ductility. They also exhibited good wear and oxidation properties. Fracture micromechanisms are discussed in relation to the chemical composition and microstructure of the two alloys.High-chromium white cast irons are in demand for the mining, mineral processing, metallurgical and cement industries. Very high abrasive wear resistance combined with relatively low production costs make these alloys particularly attractive for applications where grinding, milling and pumping equipment is used to process materials such as ore, coal, and gravel The typical microstructure of high-chromium white cast irons consist of chromium carbides of high hardness dispersed in a matrix which still contains a sufficient concentration of carbon to allow hardening as a result of transformation of austenite to martensite. This occurs after a quenching treatment The shaping of all these products is carried out by means of casting techniques, applied from the liquid state. These hypoeutectic cast irons start their solidification with the nucleation of austenite dendrites and then continue with the formation of the eutectic constituent γ Heat treatment of these products consists of austenitization at a high enough temperature to dissolve most of the carbides that have precipitated in the previous cooling. A high-alloyed austenite with high carbon content is thus obtained. This is partially transformed into martensite by an appropriate quench. However, a significant fraction of retained austenite remains after the hardening treatment and must be completely eliminated by applying two or more tempering heat treatments. In the course of these tempering treatments, substantial structural hardening takes place (secondary hardening), resulting from a uniform precipitation of very fine carbides, along with the transformation of retained austenite to martensite. The tempering temperature limits the maximum service temperature allowed for the product. After two or even three tempering treatments, final room temperature hardness of between 600 and 800 HV can be obtained The chemical compositions of the two materials used in this study, a high-carbon high-chromium white cast iron (HC) and a low-carbon high-chromium white cast iron (LC), are shown in The alloys were austenized (HC at 1050 °C and LC 1000 °C), quenched and finally double tempered. Tempering temperatures higher than the maximum temperature that might be attained in service may always be chosen in order to assure the stability of the final microstructure. The heat-treated microstructures were observed under the scanning electron microscope and their eutectic carbide volume fraction was measured in the light optical microscope by manual point counting. The hardness of these products was determined using a Vickers indenter under a load of 30 kg. Hot compression, wear and oxidation tests were carried out on samples of both products. Hot compression tests were carried out at 500 °C, in accordance with ASTM E9 and E209 standards, on specimens with a diameter and length of 5 mm and 6 mm respectively, under a strain rate of 1 mm/min. These tests were carried out with the aid of a furnace equipped with a temperature controller. The specimens were heated at a rate of 5 °C/min until they reached 500 °C. This temperature was then maintained for 30 min before commencement of the compression test. Subsequently, a similar test without a specimen was carried out under the same conditions to determine the deformation behaviour of the unit blocks and bars used to apply the load and thus obtain the real deformation of the specimen by difference. Wear tests were also performed under sliding conditions. These wear tests were carried out according to ASTM G77 standards on parallelepipedic 16 After every 1000 m of sliding distance, the specimens were weighed by means of a precision balance, subsequently cleaned with acetone and finally installed once more in the tribometer to proceed with the test until its conclusion, after completing 7000 m. Finally, oxidation tests were carried out at 500 and 600 °C (in air) in a laboratory furnace on specimens measuring 16 Three different specimens have been used in the case of compression and wear tests, and six specimens for the evaluation of the oxidation behaviour. All the specimens used in the experimental tests were observed under a scanning electron microscope in order to determine the degradation processes and the different failure micromechanisms. Different tempering temperatures (between 500 and 600 °C) were used with the aim of modifying the final hardness of the products within a practical range.   The excellent behaviour displayed by these high-chromium white cast irons in the compression tests carried out at 500 °C is worth highlighting. This was characterized by very high values of compressive strength, along with a relatively ductile behaviour. HC cast iron has higher compressive strength but lower ductility as a result of its higher carbon and carbide contents. Failure of hot compression specimens always took place by smooth fracture on a plane at 45° to the axis of load application, i.e., the maximum shear stress plane. The general appearance of fracture on the high-carbon and low-carbon high-chromium white cast irons is shown in  The dimensionless wear coefficient, The obtained  After 80 h at 500 °C, oxidation is minimal. However, after 80 h at 600 °C, small clusters of oxide begin to form, even though oxidation continues to be very low. In the case of low-carbon white iron, oxides begin to appear in the interdendritic regions associated with the carbide network ( The present work, aimed at studying the influence of carbon on the simulated in-service properties of heat-treated high-chromium white cast irons, led to the following conclusions: The 500 °C hot compression behaviour of heat-treated low- and high-carbon white cast irons is excellent: their strengths are very high and a significant ductility was also observed. The wear resistance of high-chromium white cast irons is inversely proportional to the hardness of the product. The wear micromechanism on both materials takes place by virtue of a strong plastic deformation under compression, which ultimately leads to necking and final cracking into small particles. High-carbon white cast iron, with a higher volume fraction of chromium carbides has a higher strength and a lower ductility and is also more wear-resistant than low-carbon white cast iron. Low-carbon white cast iron and specially high-carbon white iron (higher chromium content) hardly oxidize at 500 and 600 °C in still air. The good oxidation resistance of these alloys is justified on account of their high-chromium content.