The effects of the activities of the epigeic earthworm Dendrobaena octaedra on the oribatid community and microarthropod abundances were studied in a 90-year old pine forest over 2 years. Oribatids were extracted from the L and FH layers and the Ah and Bm horizons at 1 and 2 years and data were analyzed using principal component analysis (PCA). High worm biomass correlated positively with oribatid species richness and diversity in the L layer. In the FH layer, worm biomass accounted for 83% of the variation in the oribatid community data and correlated negatively with oribatid species richness. High worm biomass correlated with decreases in the abundances of 18 oribatid species, and the total abundances of adult and juvenile oribatids, astigmatids, mesostigmatids, Actinedida and Arthropleona in the FH layer. These effects were attributed to the changes in the physical structure of the organic layers of the soil. In the Ah and Bm horizons the C–N ratio accounted for 72–97% of the variation in the oribatid species and microarthropod group data. The abundances of O. nova, other Oppioidea, several Brachychthoniidae, C. cuspidatus and adult (in the Ah horizon only) and juvenile oribatids, and Arthropleona were positively correlated with the C–N ratio. This reflected the mixing of less decomposed organic matter into the lower horizons by D. octaedra.There is conflicting evidence of the effects of earthworms on soil microarthropods (arthropods between 200 μm and 2 mm, including mites and Collembola). Increased microarthropod abundance and diversity ( Given the paucity of data on the effects of earthworms on soil microarthropods and the difficulties of arriving at any conclusions based on soils in which earthworms have previously been active, we were fortunate to be able to study the recent invasion of the epigeic earthworm The site of this experiment was a 90-year old lodgepole pine ( Five pairs of plots 1 m × 2 m were set up in August 1993 in a part of the lodgepole pine forest which surveys had shown to be free from earthworms. Within each pair of plots, two treatments (control without earthworms and treatment with worms) were randomly assigned. The epigeic earthworm In September 1994 and September 1995 the plots were sampled for microarthropod abundances and for assessment of worm abundance and biomass. At each sampling time one core 10.5 cm diameter was taken from each plot and the earthworms present were heat extracted ( At each of the sampling times one core 5.5 cm diameter was taken from each plot to assess microarthropod abundances. Cores were separated into L and FH layers and into A Oribatid community parameters (species richness ( At the time the plots were set up, earthworms were already invading the forest and therefore some of the “control” plots contained earthworms ( Earthworm numbers ranged from 0 to 3349 individuals m Number of individuals, species richness and diversity were highest and dominance was lowest in the FH layer ( In the L layer, moisture content ( In the FH layer, final worm biomass ( In the A In the B In the course of this investigation, 55 oribatid species were extracted from the plots, many of which were observed only once. Mean abundances of the 20 most common species are listed in In the L layer, none of the supplied environmental variables correlated with any of the PCA axes (data not shown). In the FH layer, moisture content ( In the A The total abundances of mites and Collembola extracted at 1 year were equivalent to 174,100 and 28,000 m In the L layer C–N ratio correlated ( In the FH layer, final worm biomass correlated ( In the A Two important ways in which epigeic earthworm feeding differs from that of anecic and endogeic earthworms are that epigeics feed mainly on relatively undecomposed litter, while anecics and endogeics feed mainly on partially decomposed and highly decomposed organic materials, respectively ( There is evidence that oribatid species, although feeding on similar substrates, differ sufficiently in size to be able to exploit different sized pores in organic soil layers, and therefore may be spatially separated ( In contrast, in the L layer, which is physically much less diverse than the FH layer, worm biomass correlated positively with oribatid species richness and diversity. Under field conditions, the L layer is subject to desiccation and Enhancement of physical structure by earthworm activities occurred in other experiments where increased mesofaunal species diversity and abundances were observed. In large patches containing anecic and endogeic earthworms in pastures, larger individuals and species of Collembola were observed than in those patches without or with few earthworms ( Another effect of the activities of  During epigeic earthworm ingestion and gut passage, organic materials are comminuted, resulting in increased microbial respiration ( Whether earthworms, such as The effects of the activities of This work was supported by an NSERC Operating Grant to D.P. and by the Biodiversity Grants Program, through the joint efforts of the sportsmen of Alberta and the Alberta Department of Environmental Protection, Fish and Wildlife Trust Fund. Our thanks to Dr. V. Behan-Pelletier for confirmation of oribatid species and to Dr. R. Norton for the identification of oribatid juveniles, Acaridida and Endeostigmata.