Up to one fifth of glenoid fractures are intra-articular and associated with recurrent anterior dislocation. Surgery is often the indicated treatment, and as with many other articular fractures, it aims for a perfectly congruent and flush reconstruction of the articular surface to avoid the onset of secondary degenerative joint diseases. The purpose of this paper is to describe a reproducible, simple arthroscopic technique that uses suture anchors to fix the glenoid fragment with a strong and stable construct called “kissing anchors.” This method provides the advantages of both direct and indirect stabilizing effects. It applies 2 anchors, one inside the fragment and the other inside the fracture bed, to stabilize and fix the fragment, and is adequately associated with labrum refixation, which provides the construct with increased stability. However, a surgeon willing to apply it should already be confident with basic shoulder arthroscopy and should have performed an appropriate amount of arthroscopic shoulder stabilizations.Debride the fracture site from loose bodies that can interfere with the reduction. Tilt the fragment margin posteriorly and laterally, orienting it parallel toward the anchor guide direction. Soft anchors will work perfectly, stabilizing the fragment even if the cortical wall is drilled, contrary to other devices. Apply an anterior counterforce with a periosteal elevator to the fragment while drilling the anchor hole and during anchor insertion. The correct anchor position on the fracture fragment is just underneath the subchondral layer. This position will provide a stronger grip by the anchor, lowering the chances of pullout; however, achieving perfect positioning may be challenging. Inserting the anchor in the fragment is a critical step, which can be complicated by the intrinsic instability of the fragment itself, as it can move while tapping and result in a null deployment. Glenoid fractures are uncommon injuries, accounting for 10% of all scapular fractures. Several techniques have been described in the past decades. The purpose of this paper is to describe a reproducible, simple arthroscopic technique using suture anchors to fix the fragment with a strong and stable construct called “kissing anchors” that takes advantage of both direct and indirect stabilizing effects. The presented technique is proposed for patients suffering from a glenoid fracture involving about one third of the articular surface, and for those deemed at risk of fragment comminution if using standard and larger fixation hardware (e.g. screws). It is not indicated for an already comminuted fracture or in the presence of a small bony fragment for which a bony Bankart repair would be more appropriate. Preoperative imaging is essential for optimal management. X-rays are needed for the first diagnosis of the glenoid fracture, showing the presence of the fragment, its eventual dislocation, and its size. Computed tomography (CT) scans are mandatory, along with 3-dimensional (3D) reconstructions, to confirm the appropriateness of the indication. 3D and 2D CT scans of the case treated in the Video are shown in The surgery is performed under blended anesthesia: an interscalenic block procedure with ultrasound guidance in the presurgical room and general anesthesia in the surgical room before the patient is positioned. This combination allows for controlled hypotension during the whole procedure, with a mean maximum systolic pressure of 90 mmHg, providing a cleaner work space and reducing surgical time. The patient is positioned in lateral decubitus, stabilized in a bean bag, with a dorsal tilt of 30° with the glenoid surface parallel to the floor as a reference. A sterile surgical field is prepared after standard skin disinfection, and sterile skin traction is applied and connected to the traction system. A secondary, perpendicular traction garment is applied to increase distraction of the joint space, along with a removable sterile cushion placed between the arm and the thorax, for better maneuverability. The first arthroscopic portal is a standard posterior-lateral one through the soft spot. An anterior-medial portal is then created under direct visualization (outside-in technique), and an 8.25-mm Twist-In cannula (Arthrex, Naples, FL) is positioned. After thorough diagnostic arthroscopy, a motorized shaver is introduced in the latter portal, and comprehensive debridement is carried out, removing blood clots, smaller irreparable portions of the glenoid labrum, and free chondral/osteochondral fragments ( A Liberator/Elevator tool (ConMed, Utica, NY) is inserted into the anterior-medial portal and used to liberate the meshed and impacted anterior-inferior glenoid fragment, adherent to the glenoid neck, to allow maneuvering. This is carried out until subscapularis fibers are visualized. The anchor's cannulated drill guide is inserted into the joint by the posterior-lateral portal, and a hole is produced in the fragment while an anterior counterforce is applied for increased stabilization. This hole will begin immediately underneath the subchondral layer of the fragment, running medially, ending close to the anterior-medial cortical bone layer. A double-loaded soft anchor (Suture Fix; Smith & Nephew, Watford, UK) is then applied into the fragment. A second anchor is applied from the anterior-medial portal, with the same steps, to the corresponding entry point on the glenoid bone, right underneath the articular surface ( Last, a third soft anchor is applied at the most superior portion of the fracture site, reducing the avulsed anterior labrum into its anatomic position with a standard repair ( Advised postoperative management requires standard dressing and 4 weeks of immobilization using a shoulder sling with 10° to 15° or arm abduction and neutral rotation. Passive mobilization can start after 3 weeks, limited to 100° of forward flexion and 90° of abduction. Assisted active rehabilitation programs for full range of motion recovering, strengthening, and proprioception can be initiated by the week 6, progressively, allowing light activities and noncontact sports by 3 months, and more demanding activities and sports by 4 months. The presented technique offers several advantages ( The extensive mobilization of the fracture fragment allows the surgeon to visualize the correct reduction to restore anatomy and identify both entry points needed to position the kissing anchors construct. This configuration creates compression forces pointed toward each other, which should not displace the fragment despite its dimensions. One of the risks the authors wanted to avoid is, in fact, the mobilization of the most medial portion of the fragment when it is large, which is thought to be more frequent if sutures surround the fragment. This mobilization happens because suture tensioning and knot tying create a fulcrum at the anchor entry point when it is more central on the articular surface, unbalancing the compression forces acting on the fragment so that its lateral portion is more compressed than the medial, which then is lifted from its fracture bed. This could also be one of the reasons that fragment size is a limitation for other techniques. Along with the direct stabilization provided by the kissing anchors construct, the standard repair of the remaining detached labrum offers and an additional, yet indirect, stabilization effect owing to ligamentotaxis, it being attached to the fracture's fragment. Several other advantages depend on the anchors chosen. Soft anchors are made solely of suture. The first reason for this choice is to reduce the risk of iatrogenic comminution of the fragment, which is higher when using screws, Finally, the presented technique was performed by arthroscopy with standard portals and instrumentation, like a typical bony Bankart repair. Thus the surgery can identify and treat concomitant intra-articular lesions, avoid the risk of nerve and vessel injury, avoid periosteum stripping to facilitate bone union, help identify and reduce smaller fragments with the aid of magnification, and reduce the incidence of secondary stiffness. The technique is simple, reproducible, and straightforward. Surgical pearls and pitfalls are reported in 