This study reviews existing life-cycle inventory (LCI) results for cradle-to-gate (ctg) environmental assessments of lead-acid (PbA), nickel–cadmium (NiCd), nickel-metal hydride (NiMH), sodium-sulfur (Na/S), and lithium-ion (Li-ion) batteries. LCI data are evaluated for the two stages of cradle-to-gate performance: battery material production and component fabrication and assembly into purchase ready batteries. Using existing production data on battery constituent materials, overall battery material production values were calculated and contrasted with published values for the five battery technologies. The comparison reveals a more prevalent absence of material production data for lithium ion batteries, though such data are also missing or dated for a few important constituent materials in nickel metal hydride, nickel cadmium, and sodium sulfur batteries (mischmetal hydrides, cadmium, β-alumina). Despite the overall availability of material production data for lead acid batteries, updated results for lead and lead peroxide are also needed. On the other hand, LCI data for the commodity materials common to most batteries (steel, aluminum, plastics) are up to date and of high quality, though there is a need for comparable quality data for copper. Further, there is an almost total absence of published LCI data on recycled battery materials, an unfortunate state of affairs given the potential benefit of battery recycling. Although battery manufacturing processes have occasionally been well described, detailed quantitative information on energy and material flows are missing. For each battery, a comparison of battery material production with its manufacturing and assembly counterpart is discussed. Combustion and process emissions for battery production have also been included in our assessment. In cases where emissions were not reported in the original literature, we estimated them using fuels data if reported. Whether on a per kilogram or per watt-hour capacity basis, lead-acid batteries have the lowest cradle-to-gate production energy, and fewest carbon dioxide and criteria pollutant emissions. The other batteries have higher values in all three categories.battery environmental burden vector for life-cycle stage environmental burden vector for the production of material production efficiency of material cradle-to-gate life-cycle stage cradle-to-gate energy for a battery material production energy for a battery manufacturing energy for a battery graphite anode greenhouse gas greenhouse gases, regulated emission, and energy use in transportation life-cycle assessment life-cycle inventory lithium iron phosphate cathode lithium manganese oxide cathode mass of material manufacturing life-cycle stage material production life-cycle stage nickel, cobalt, aluminum oxide cathode nickel, cobalt, manganese oxide cathode production energy of material Polyethylene polypropylene titanium oxide anode Concerns over the economic and energy security implications of US dependence on foreign oil, in addition to increasing apprehension about greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions and their impact on climate change, has spurred a renewed interest in improving the nation’s energy efficiency. To address these concerns, a number of initiatives and policies have been established, including the Renewable Portfolio Standards enacted by many states to address the “greening” of their electricity grids. Another example involves recent actions taken by both the government and the auto industry to develop affordable, advanced battery technologies for vehicle traction. When used for partially and fully electrified vehicles, the advantages of such batteries would be reduced oil consumption and carbon dioxide (CO A number of life-cycle studies have been conducted on rechargeable batteries, though usually in the context of their applications. As electrification of cars and trucks is viewed as a significant step toward reducing energy consumption in the transportation sector, a number of studies have been conducted on traction batteries Given that advanced battery technologies are based on comparatively valuable constituent materials, e.g. cobalt, metal hydrides and others, an interest in battery recycling has also developed. For example, companies such as UMICORE, TOXCO, OnTo, and others are major developers of battery recycling technology. UMICORE and TOXCO currently have commercially viable operations for recycling battery materials. The recycling of battery materials can significantly reduce the material production component of the life-cycle of battery manufacturing. Though some research has been conducted on the impact of recycling on battery life-cycles The purpose of this report is to review and evaluate published life-cycle inventory data on the cradle-to-gate ( The preferred approach to environmental evaluations of product systems is life-cycle analysis (LCA) The evaluation of battery life-cycle studies reviewed herein is based on the process life-cycle assessment framework. More specifically, the evaluation places a high value on studies where detailed process-specific data are presented; ideally, those where unit process flows have been either provided or referenced. Quantifying material and energy flows in a product life-cycle is an activity of the inventory stage of LCA, often referred to as life-cycle inventory (LCI) analysis. Ideally, the material and energy life-cycle data gathered in an LCI are fully speciated. By this we mean that the purchased (or direct) energy units (liter [L], kilowatt-hour [kW Unfortunately, for competitive or proprietary reasons, detailed and quantitative product assembly information about processes or products are often not provided by manufacturers, whether for batteries or other products. In the absence of such detail, aggregated energy and materials information must suffice. However, for the reasons just discussed, such information must be considered of lower quality. Alternatively, some authors employ economic input/output (EIO) energy data. We have not included such data in our assessment, since such analyses tend to have a sector wide dimension and are generally devoid of process detail. A representation of the flows required to characterize a unit process is depicted in We divide this chain of unit processes into two separate life-cycle stages. The first is The LCI burden vector { An expression similar to Eq. Expressions like Eq.  The main components of the battery are: a cathode comprised of lead peroxide on a lead lattice for support; an anode made of sponge lead, also on a lead lattice; an electrolyte of water and sulfuric acid; fiberglass matte (with some polymeric binders) separators that keep the anode and cathode apart; and a containment case, typically made of polypropylene (PP). Antimony (or calcium) is alloyed with the lead to suppress electrolysis of water during recharging. The compositions of a pair of PbA batteries are given in The components of the battery are a cathode comprised of nickel hydroxy-oxide on a nickel foam, graphite or iron substrate, an anode made of metallic cadmium pressed onto a nickel wire mesh, and potassium hydroxide (KOH) electrolyte. Typically, the cathode and anode are rolled up into a “jelly roll” configuration and placed in a steel case, though a prismatic battery configuration is also available. The cathode and anode are separated by a porous polymeric separator strip (three thin layers that consist of nylon/polypropylene/nylon), with the electrolyte free to diffuse through it. This separator configuration is used for wettability purposes. The compositions for a representative pair of NiCd batteries are given in The components of the batteries are: a cathode comprised of nickel hydroxyl oxide on a nickel foam substrate, an anode of mischmetal (Me) hydrides on a nickel or a nickel plated steel mesh, KOH electrolyte, and a separator of a porous polypropylene membrane. Mischmetals are metals from the lanthanide series, or rare earths, including metals from lanthanum (atomic number Representative compositions of a NiMH batteries are given in Unlike the batteries discussed thus far, the composition of Li-ion batteries can be quite variable, depending primarily on the composition of the cathode. For convenience, we use the following nomenclature to describe some of the Li-ion batteries in terms of their cathode and anode composition. Cathodes are lithium salts of either: (1) a mixture of Ni, Co, and Al oxides (NCA), (2) iron phosphate (LFP), (3) manganese oxide (LMO), or a mixture of Ni, Co, and Mn (NCM). Anodes are either graphite (G) or lithium salt of titanium oxide (TiO).  These batteries require energy to keep them at operating temperature (ca 300 For each battery technology, As per Eq. As indicated by Eq. In the review of battery  For the industrial PbA battery given in Also included in the figure is a calculated In For the portable electronic NiCd battery given in Based on PE The data on Cd production in Based on For a NiMH battery with V/R composition of 30/70 (58%) Ni, Ni(OH) Some representative compositions for Li-ion batteries are found in Assuming that a 30/70 (55%) V/R content for LiCoO From the composition and PE Though there is virtually no LCI information on recycling Na/S batteries, they are comprised of significant amounts of commodity materials (steel and aluminum). Hence, an For batteries made from virgin materials, our In order to estimate the benefits of recycling, estimates of In addition to reducing This section addresses the battery manufacturing stage, which includes the processes and associated energies required to make components from constituent materials and assemble them into batteries. A summary of battery manufacturing energy data from the literature is given in During the manufacturing of PbA batteries, considerable energy is needed to convert the basic battery materials into those required in the battery. In fact, the manufacturing steps include grid manufacturing, paste manufacturing, plate manufacturing, plastic molding, assembly, and testing. The lead oxide listed in There is some LCI information on the manufacturing of NiCd batteries. Rydh and Sanden The manufacturing of NiMH batteries includes the production of nickel hydroxy-oxide and mischmetal hydrides, preparation of anodes and cathodes, and final assembly. Cathode production for NiMH batteries is virtually identical to that of NiCd batteries. However, the anodes are comprised of metal hydrides, which desorb/absorb hydrogen ions during discharge/recharging, respectively. Details on processes used for commercial preparation of the anodes are not at hand. However, the basic steps A summary Overall, the range of The manufacturing of Li-ion batteries consists of a number of processes: (1) No detailed energy data for the manufacturing of Na/S batteries were found. Two sets of manufacturing energy data for Na/S batteries have been reported (see In summary, there are A review of As seen in As seen in The reductions in Notice that the percent decreases given above for The values shown in Based on average results from Thus far, our focus has been on Emissions data are recorded in  To facilitate a comparison of the data, average The cradle-to-gate CO From energy consumption data given by Rantik  Also shown in Process-specific air, water, and some solid waste emissions are also recorded in Note that the results given in PbA batteries are highly recycled — some estimate it to be around 95%. Currently, new PbA batteries range from 60% to 80% recycle content Rantik Two literature references were found that cite PE The recycling of advanced batteries, NiCd, NiMH, and Li-ion, is an area in transition. Because of the evolving chemistry for Li-ion batteries and the uncertainties and timing of large-scale deployment of electric vehicles, the recycling industry is finding it challenging to develop profitable recycling pathways. Should the objective be to recover valuable metals in an elemental state or in a form closer to their state in batteries? Currently, the primary motive to recycle NiCd, NiMH, and Li-ion batteries is driven by the recovery of valuable metals (Co, Ni, Ti, Cd, Cu) that they contain. Today, the most used approach is pyrometallurgical. Using data from Schulter and Garcia A number of commercial approaches used to recycle batteries have been developed. A brief description of them can be found elsewhere Not all battery recycling operations are pyrometallurgical. TOXCO, Inc., employs a series of steps that include the use of hammer mills, screens, and shaker tables to separate three streams of materials, two of which are sold for their high concentrations of Co, Cu, and Al. They also recover the Li as Li Finally, one company, OnTo, The authors are unaware of any infrastructure and approach for recycling Na/S batteries. Clearly, the steel, copper, and aluminum in the system can be recycled, but processes for recycling sodium and sulfur from these batteries are apparently still not developed. As indicated above, there is a critical need for life-cycle characterizations (process descriptions and flows) of battery material recycling. Indeed, without them, the potential benefit of recycling these materials may be understated. With the exception of PbA batteries, While the cradle-to-gate energy and emission burdens of battery production are significant, the relative implications of those impacts on the life-cycle performance of a battery application can be quite small. This is particularly evident when Li-ion batteries are used for plug-in hybrid electric vehicles (PHEV) applications. As seen in If we assumed a 50% reduction in A review was conducted of the cradle-to-gate production energy and emissions for five battery technologies. They are: lead-acid, nickel–cadmium, nickel-metal hydride, sodium-sulfur, and lithium-ion batteries. Included in the review was an analysis of energy and emissions of the two life-cycle stages that comprise cradle-to-gate production, namely battery material production and battery manufacturing. For the former stage, a wide range of battery material production energy values can be found in the literature for each technology. A number of factors were identified that contribute to the range, including study to study variation in battery composition, mass accounted for, constituent material production energies, boundary blur, and finally recycle content. Based on battery composition and published constituent material production energies, estimates were made for the battery material production energy. For batteries made from virgin materials, our estimates generally fall within the range identified from the literature. Nonetheless, given the width of the range for each technology, the accuracy of our battery material production estimates are not known. Though our estimate for lead acid batteries is expected to be quite representative given that most of their constituent material production energies are well known, this is not the case for the other batteries. Indeed, material production energies are needed for many battery constituent materials including Co, LiCoO For batteries made from recycled materials, our material production energy estimates are typically higher. This is due to the lack of material production data for many battery materials, thus highlighting the need for life-cycle data in this area. The materials where such data is needed have just been listed above. Given the lack of energy detail for many battery materials derived from recycled sources, the corresponding material production stage for batteries are likely optimistic. More data is also needed on the manufacturing processes required to make and assemble batteries from their constituent materials. Unfortunately, only a limited set of published energy values for the manufacturing stage of the batteries can be found in the literature, and like their material production counterparts, they also range considerably. Though published cradle-to-gate battery production energy values vary widely due to variation in material production and manufacturing energies, some useful trends have been shown. Per kilogram of battery, the cradle-to-gate production energy of PbA batteries is the lowest of the five batteries reviewed, NiCd is the next lowest, with the remaining batteries sensibly tied, given the variation in results. Another observed trend is that battery manufacturing and assembly energy is about a third of the cradle-to-gate value for PbA and Na/S batteries, and about half for NiCd, NiMH, and Li-ion batteries. When cradle-to-gate CO See