Rare earth element (REE) recycling remains low at 1%, despite significant uncertainties related to future supply and demand and EU 2020 energy efficiency objectives. We use a global production network framework of REE flows from mine to REE phosphors in energy-efficient lamps to illustrate the potential of closed-loop recycling for secondary supply under different scenarios of primary supply and forecasted demand for LEDs, CFLs and LFLs. We find that different End-of-Life Recycling Rate scenarios for REE secondary supply range between meeting forecasted REE demand and filling primary supply gaps, and competing with primary supply. Our argument centres on diversifying REE sourcing with recycling and the choice between primary and secondary supply. We stress that secondary REE phosphor supply requires further policy support for lamp collection and a discussion of the value of REE phosphor recycling which underlies its economic feasibility.With an increase in energy efficiency of 20% to be achieved by 2020 within the European Union (EU), lighting presents a core area of interest. Replacement of inefficient bulbs by 2020 is expected to enable energy savings to power 11 million households a year. In 2009, regulations pursuant to the EU Eco-design Directive introduced stricter energy efficiency requirements for lighting products, which induced a phase-out of incandescent lamps ( The lifetime of incandescent lamps is about four times shorter and their efficiency significantly less than compact fluorescent lamps (CFLs), with 15 lumens of visible light per watt of electricity consumed (lm/W) versus 63 While the market share of LEDs is projected to accelerate, the transition from fluorescent lights will take time partly due to the upfront costs of LEDs in comparison to CFLs and LFLs. Since the early 1990s, China has gradually emerged as the largest consumer and producer of REE. The country hosts the majority of global mining and processing of these elements and has enacted numerous policies including quotas for mining and export (latter replaced by export licences in January 2015, see This study contributes to the discourse on REE recycling with a value analysis of recycled heavy REE europium (Eu), terbium (Tb) and yttrium (Y) from phosphor powders of fluorescent lamps as source of supply at times of EU and U.S. REE criticality classification ( Our conceptual approach involves a qualitatively informed global production network framework to depict value adding, or processing steps from REE-containing ore to REE content in phosphor powders as used in energy-efficient lamps. This is the framework from which we then research the potential for secondary supply and closing the loop for REE in lamp phosphors through a mixed methods approach involving both a case study and modelling. Our case study provides an ex-post analysis of the experience of commercial REE recycling of REE phosphor containing lamps. This and our forecasts of supply and demand of Y, Eu and Tb then underpin the ex-ante analysis of the potential for development of secondary supply of REE phosphors from 2015 to 2020. Five steps, depicted in Next a cracking process leaches the REE from the REE-minerals resulting in a concentrate of mixed REE solution. A chemical separation into individual REE follows. Most recent estimates partially produced from primary data suggest that REE use in phosphors accounted for 11% of total REE market demand in 2013 and for 19% of REE market demand value in the same year (derived from REE-based phosphor powders use varying amounts of REE, resulting in a wide variety of powder compositions ( The balancing problem ( In this article we first examine the relationship between global primary supply and secondary supply of lamp phosphor REE through an empirical case, following REE content varies in CFLs, LFLs and LEDs, see In our model we use To enhance our understanding of the future demand of phosphors for lighting purposes and the potential role of secondary supply originating from recycling these waste lighting applications, we model demand for Y, Eu and Tb in energy-efficient lamps from 2015 until 2020. The Secondary supply of phosphor from lamps is then estimated with end-of-life recycling rates (EoL-RR), also known as recovery rates ( The 40% collection scenario assumes that legislation on extended producer responsibility (EPR) and other supportive legislation will be applied globally in major regions, such as the U.S., China and India. Essentially it reflects the average EoL fluorescent lamp collection rate to-date observed among EU countries, with large disparities between countries but an overall 40% average ( Lastly, the 70% collection rate reflects the EU top-end observed in a few countries (Sweden for example—see The efficiency of the recycling process also needs considering to estimate secondary supply. In the low-ambition 15% global lamp collection scenario we assume that overall, only 7% REE phosphors are recovered of the lamps collected and recycled. The medium scenario assumes 40% global lamp collection and a tripling of REE recycling capacity worldwide with an EoL-RR of 19%. In the most ambitious scenario, high collection rates like those seen in Sweden are coupled with the recycling process used in that country in which nearly all waste phosphor powders are sent for further recovery of REE at Solvay for a final EoL-RR of 53% (assumptions for each scenario are summarized in To calculate the volumes of Eu, Tb and Y available to energy-efficient lamps in 2015–2020, we estimate total primary supply volumes. We use current estimates that 100% of Eu, 85% of Tb and 77% of Y are used for phosphors ( We assume that total primary supply volumes consist of Chinese rare earth oxide (REO) production, current rest of world (ROW) production and forecasted REO production in the ROW. To forecast future ROW production volumes, we consider a set of ROW developed REE projects with publicly available data including planned production volumes, REO distribution, and costs (see We assume that these projects enter the market when REE prices make the anticipated production start economically feasible. To find these prices we used a price model represented by a REE industry cost curve which is based on the indirectly proportional relation of the supply quantities and prices of individual REO (see Two approaches guided our calculation of current supply volumes of individual REO for the price model (1) based on the total mining quota in China, (2) based on the Chinese export quota and illegal supply. Approach (1) departs from the phase-out of Chinese export quota by May 1st, 2015, and new export licensing. We assume that the total REO mining quota for 2015 in China could be a proxy for the potential maximum supply volume which could come from China. To calculate total REO supply volumes (for each REO individually) we added the expected REO mining quota in 2015 to current ROW supply volumes. The second approach uses 2015 REO mining quota in China as a proxy for maximum REO production volumes in China in 2015. As the quota for the 1st half of 2015 increased by 11% ( In the second approach of Chinese export quota and illegal supply, we acknowledge that Chinese REE export quotas have been phased out and replaced with an export licensing system. We expect that in such a situation a part of the illegal export volumes would be sold via official channels; however the total export volumes (consisting of official and illegal volumes) would not change significantly. To estimate the export volumes in 2015 (to be a proxy for the supply volumes coming from China at FOB prices The results of these two different approaches to calculate current supply volumes differed slightly. In our view, the Chinese export quota and illegal supply approach is more realistic as it represents maximum REO volumes for export to be sold at FOB prices and considers the domestic REO demand of China, while the first approach assumes that the total REO production of China could be exported which is unrealistic. Our results are therefore showing the second approach, while the first approach is illustrated in Known as European key player in REE chemical separation, Solvay-Rhodia, hereafter ‘Solvay’, operates across a bandwidth of industrial sectors including energy, automotive and electronics. It is, jointly with Japanese Shin-Etsu, among the only outside of China capable of chemically separating REE into both light and heavy individual REE products to purities of acceptance for customers on a commercial scale ( Our case study relies on both literature review and semi-structured interviews with key actors. To enhance reliability of our empirical data, we interviewed representatives of firms involved at different stages of the recycling network, specifically collectors, recyclers and the REE chemical separator and refiner, Solvay, in line with methods as proposed by EU funding through LIFE+ of 50% of the project (equivalent to about EUR 1.1 million for 24 months from June 2012) ( Solvay has developed a flow sheet for the recovery of REEs from a mixture of halophosphate and REE phosphors. According to the patent for the process, the final yield of REE is at about 80% ( While the recycling of phosphor powders is less economical than other internal projects ( To understand the drivers for Solvay's commercialization project it is important to put it into context of the overall REE market. As described in the introduction, particularly between 2009 and 2011 concerns about the supply and price of REE arose as a result of numerous issues including Chinese restrictions on REE exports. This was a driver for increased attention in the EU for possible sources of supplies outside of China, as well as, potential secondary supplies. Lamps were a viable source of waste phosphor powder in the EU for a couple of reasons. First, existing legislation (the WEEE Directive) already mandates the collection of this waste stream. Secondly, the recycling process of this waste stream typically involved isolating mercury in the phosphor powder, so this powder was already an available end fraction of the recycling process ( Our EoL-RR scenarios illustrate how closing-the-loop at different REE phosphor powder recovery ratios can contribute to secondary supply of Y, Eu and Tb for new phosphor production to be used in lamps, TVs or screens. We contextualize these EoL-RR scenarios in a comparison with forecasted demand, as per our modelled scenario that stipulates the uptake of different lighting technologies until 2020, and with primary supply as per our supply forecast model. Our results demonstrate that a global EoL-RR of 53% as per our best case REE phosphor powder recycling ratio modelled in line with to-date Swedish and Taiwanese lamp collection and REE phosphor recycling efficiency could provide secondary supply of Y, Eu and Tb equivalent to our modelled demand forecast of these three REE for LFLs, and an increasing share of CFL demand for Y, Eu and Tb until 2020. Our EoL-RR of 19% is based on a tripling of REE phosphor recycling capacity for major markets of China and North America in line with our European Solvay case. Such an EoL-RR rate could contribute with secondary supply of Y, Eu and Tb of close to 50% of demand for these REE to be used in phosphors in CFLs. The 7% EoL-RR corresponds to the estimated current global secondary supply of Y, Eu and Tb. In this scenario, secondary supply of Y, Eu and Tb contributes less than a third of 2020 demand of Y, Eu and Tb and hardly contributes to the demand by the CFL or LFL. In 2015, the 7% EoL-RR of the three REE phosphors can fill the demand gap with about 7% and can account for up to 9% in 2020. The bandwidth of the 19% EoL-RR to meet demand is at 20% in 2015 and forecasted to more than a quarter of the demand (27%) in 2020. In contrast, and most significant, the 53% EoL-RR enables a secondary supply of the three REE phosphors of more than half of the demand by phosphor-based lamps in 2015 and three quarters of demand by these lamps in 2020 and thus competes directly with primary supply. This 53% EoL-RR illustrates choices about recycling in policy and business decisions which affect future recycling options. It also highlights that these choices require awareness on preferences—whether REE are to be sourced from a host rock or from recycling and why, see The case study and our model demonstrate the potential of secondary supply from waste lamp phosphor recycling to meet some of the forecasted demand, but the question remains about what factors impede and promote closed-loop recycling. The Solvay case demonstrated that market mechanisms as well as legislative drivers are key to making secondary supply viable. Accessibility of adequate quantities of REE phosphor waste lamps, marketability of the recycled REE phosphors, as well as ability to derive adequate value (the right price at the right time) for these products have been argued as key bottlenecks to realize closed-loop systems ( REE use in phosphors is dependent on technological and socio-economic developments which impact the market uptake of lighting technologies. The minor REE content in LEDs is noteworthy for demand projections as is the potential redundancy of Tb in a market dominated by LEDs ( Recycling can contribute to remedying the balancing problem, described earlier, which affects both primary supply and demand, as argued by other scholars (  Demand for recycled phosphors depends on price, which involves the cost of recycling lamps (which can be relatively high compared to the price of the product) ( The primary supply of REE is uncertain with China possibly further consolidating the industry and using integrated production steps subsidized by the two-tier pricing mechanism for import substitution, expected to be upheld under the licensing regime. Further, alternative ROW supply might need to meet growing Chinese REE demand. High-tech skill requirements at each of the processing steps are obstacles for alternative suppliers and add to alternative REE supply risk ( REE deposits are characterized by the different mineralogy of various REE-containing ores, which may require new, tailor-made processing routes to be developed ( Our model demonstrates the potential of increased REE powder recycling for REE phosphor powder demand of CFLs/LFLs over the time period in which the general lighting market shifts towards LEDs (and beyond). Even in 2020, the CFL/LFL technologies are expected to account for between 26% ( Secondary supply is affected by the availability of waste lamps. We have mentioned the uncertainty about actual lifetimes of energy-efficient lamps because this is a function of actual use. If the lamp lifetimes are longer than our modelled assumptions, our sensitivity analysis showed that this would slightly increase the amount of waste lamps available until 2020 (and most likely beyond). As mentioned, our low ambition scenario for recycling is an estimate of the status quo. Achieving higher recycling rates depends on a number of factors, beginning with collection. The case study demonstrated the large role of legislation in making the opportunity for further recovery of REE viable through mandatory collection of lamps (in absence of economic drivers for collection). Our model illustrates that similar timely legislative measures targeting fluorescent lamp collection, could impact end-of-life recycling rates (EoL-RR). The second scenario illustrates a case with more stringent EPR legislation. The case of Solvay illustrates that such legislation can make REE recycling viable, but it is important to consider the other factors that incentivized Solvay to invest in commercial recycling: First and foremost, the availability of a separation unit at Solvay was a main driver for the decision towards REE recycling. In addition to an available supply of waste lamps, high REE prices and significant supply risk at the time as well as significant EU interest resulted in financial support. The decision to invest was also part of a business strategy that considered the value of the secondary supply differently (this perception of value is discussed in the subsequent section). In absence of price, supply risk, or other value drivers there may be a need for further legislation to drive not only the collection of waste lamps, but also the further recycling of REE. Such legislation, like a business strategy, can be driven by a different perspective of value and alignment with the goals of a circular economy agenda. Ideally, combining either economic or legislative drivers to promote both collection and recycling of REE would further advance the potential contribution of the secondary supply closer to the case we already observe in Sweden, with a high level of lamp collection coupled with subsequent recycling of REE e.g. through Solvay in France. Timing is significant in the elaboration and implementation of legislative measures that require REE recycling from fluorescent lamp phosphors. At the time of writing, the majority of EoL REE phosphor powder, even from collected EoL CFL/LFL lamps, is still landfilled. While there is evidence of socio-economic value of REE recycling that could already drive recyclers to further process REE, see Aside from the challenges in accessibility and marketability of recycled lamp phosphor powders, which can be addressed, the feasibility of recycling is tied to its economics. We have already discussed that the overall cost factors for recycling REE from phosphors entail both costs for collection and the actual recovery. We now look closer at the overall value of a secondary supply of REE phosphors. Consideration of the overall value of recycling would depart from juxtaposing the processes of a secondary supply loop of recycling lamp phosphor powders with those of primary extraction of REE-containing ore. The latter comprises, as depicted in Researchers have found higher concentrations of REE in the waste lighting products (i.e. anthropogenic deposits, see With this in mind the focus in The Solvay business case of closing-the-loop with REE recycling, illustrated how the core competence of the firm is reiterated in a strategy that addresses two objectives: augmenting resilience against supply criticality and further increasing competitiveness. This case has been enabled by EU legislation that has attached societal value to recycling by means of committing producers to collect and recycle waste products, limiting the landfilling of hazardous waste, and promoting closed-loop opportunities. The direct value potential of recycling Eu, Tb and Y used in phosphors of fluorescent lamps is manifested in the addition of a new material stream through phosphor recycling that makes use of existing production capital in a situation of concern and uncertainty over material access and REE supply. As Developing the domestic secondary supply of REE can have wider societal benefits while supporting regional and national goals towards more circular economies. The collection and recycling of lamps has a high societal value in the avoided mercury contamination, which is difficult to quantify in economic terms (though some studies, for example, Recycling of phosphors as indicated above, has societal value in the form of forgone costs of protecting human and environmental health and safety as primary REE processing involves the handling of radioactive elements that have been related to higher health risks, for example to cancer ( Closing-the-loop further saves environmental costs associated with the generation and treatment of 63,000  We have demonstrated that secondary supply has the potential to contribute to supply of phosphors for lamps (and other products). Secondary supply has considerable advantages over primary supply, of which one of the most notable is that it bypasses the extraction phase and many of the environmental impacts and costs involved in this stage. Secondary supply can constitute a source of supply of REE independent of Chinese quotas or licences and as such contribute to supply security of REE phosphors, at least in the short term. Lastly, establishing secondary supplies for recycling is in line with many policy goals in countries that advance closing loops of critical materials for a circular economy. We have also demonstrated that establishing and encouraging secondary supply requires driving factors. We have pointed to the role of legislation in establishing the collection systems for energy-efficient lamps in Europe and enabling commercial recycling. Our model indicates the rationale for such legislative measures in other regions to increase global recycling rates. Also within Europe energy-efficient lamp collection and recovery of REE from lamp phosphor powders can be improved. The latter step is currently not required by legislation. In absence of legislative drivers, we have discussed the need for rethinking the value in recycling phosphors. Lastly, our article demonstrates the timely essence for drivers to enable REE recovery potential and to close loops of critical materials for a circular economy. The research by Erika Machacek is funded by Geocenter Denmark Grant No. 04/2012, Jessika Luth Richter's research is supported by the Swedish Energy Agency project no. 37655-1, Komal Habib's research is part of the TOPWASTE project, which is funded by the Danish Council for Strategic Research and the research by Polina Klossek is funded by Institutional Funding of the German Federal Ministry of Education and Research (BMBF). We would like to thank all interviewees for their time and input and our internal reviewers, Thomas Lindhqvist, IIIEE, Lund University, and Per Kalvig, GEUS, for their helpful, detailed comments on an earlier version of this article.We also wish to thank Susanne Rømer, GEUS, for technical assistence with Input data for primary supply    The figure compares secondary supply to demand and primary supply. Potential secondary supply distribution for Y  EU member states show some of the highest rates in the world along with other countries with compulsory collection legislation like Taiwan, which collects and recycles over 75% of lamps ( 