Fractures of the proximal humerus occasionally require operative fixation. Three options exist currently to treat these fractures: open reduction and internal fixation (ORIF), percutaneous fixation (PF), and proximal humeral nailing (PHN). ORIF has enjoyed recent popularity, but recent studies report a high incidence of complications, especially in the elderly patient. PHN is advantageous for two-part and some three-part fractures. PF is also an option in elderly patients with two- and three-part fractures. Surgical decision making can be complex and depends on a number of factors, including age, bone quality, surgeon skill level, medical comorbidities, and patient compliance. In general, further research is needed to determine the ideal surgical technique.Proximal humerus fractures account for 4–5% of all fractures and are the third most common fracture in the elderly behind fractures of the distal radius and hip ( Nonsurgical management of displaced fractures of the proximal humerus is difficult and often results in less than satisfactory results ( Operative treatment of displaced proximal humeral fractures varies and includes: transosseous suture repair, closed reduction and percutaneous fixation (PF), tension band wiring, intramedullary nailing, open reduction and internal fixation (ORIF) with conventional locked plating, hemiarthroplasty, and reverse total shoulder arthroplasty. The wide range of procedures underscores the lack of consensus regarding optimal surgical treatment ( In this chapter, patient selection, surgical technique, outcomes, and complications will be discussed. A thorough discussion on the anatomy and biomechanics of proximal humeral fractures can be found in The humeral head is now thought to be perfused by the larger posterior humeral circumflex artery via its capsular perforators along the medial neck ( The neck-shaft angle is variable (range, 125–150°) and is defined by the angle subtended by the shaft of the humerus and a line perpendicular to the base of the articular segment. The mean neck-shaft angle is 135–140° ( A full discussion on classification systems employed for proximal humerus fractures is available in The Arbeitgemeinschaft für Osteosynthesfragen (AO) classification is based on the three main types: extra-articular unifocal, extra-articular bifocal, and intra-articular fractures. Each type has additional subtypes based on the level of comminution, displacement, angulation, and presence of dislocation. The AO classification is complex and appropriate for research purposes, but its clinical usefulness is not clear. Currently, both classification schemes have difficulty with inter- and intra-rater reliability despite the availability of advanced imaging techniques, such as CT scan ( No single surgical procedure has been shown to mitigate the failures associated with the surgical treatment of proximal humerus fractures. Surgical outcomes are largely based upon the patient selection. As it relates to surgery, patient selection is defined as the surgeon’s ability to choose the correct surgery by anticipating complications that may arise for a specific patient based on a group of risk factors. Choosing the right patient for ORIF, PHN, and PF is challenging, and several risk factors should be considered. Several patient-specific risk factors should be considered and, if possible, optimized prior to surgical intervention. Identifiable patient-specific risk factors include: age, history of fragility fractures, smoking history, osteoporosis, diabetes, alcoholism, and states of immunocompromise (HIV, Hepatitis C, patients undergoing chemotherapy, or taking immunosuppressive medications). In general, the most helpful risk factor in determining which surgery would be most appropriate is age. Research has shown that patients older than age 70 are poor candidates for ORIF as they typically have poor bone quality and are more likely to have associated rotator cuff tears. While age and bone quality cannot be changed, there are several modifiable risk factors that should be identified and addressed prior to surgery as they affect fracture healing. These include nutritional status, calcium and vitamin D deficiency, smoking, and fracture pattern ( Smoking is associated with both delayed union and nonunion of bone ( Patients with diabetes mellitus are at higher risk of delayed union, nonunion, and infection, compared to nondiabetic patients. Animal models have linked hyperglycemia to poor callus formation, reduced cellular proliferation, and reduced osteoblastic activity in the early stages of fracture healing ( Irregularities in nutrients associated with bone metabolism should be addressed in patients with proximal humerus fractures that may be at risk for nonunion or malunion. Deficiencies in vitamin D and/or calcium are especially common. Several animal studies have also linked protein deficiency to inadequate bone healing, although specific studies investigating the effect of protein deficiency as it relates to the development of nonunions in humans are currently lacking ( Certain fracture-related risk factors increase the risk of osteonecrosis. Any risk factor increasing the chance of osteonecrosis should encourage the treating surgeon to consider joint replacement as an option. For example, a four-part fracture, which has an osteonecrosis rate between 13% and 34%, may be better treated with joint replacement in certain individuals. Nonetheless, osteonecrosis has been shown in a study by Compliance with postoperative restrictions and physical therapy are essential for good outcomes following surgical repair of proximal humerus fractures. While predicting a patient’s compliance level can be challenging, drug abusers, alcoholics, and patients with challenging social scenarios often have difficulty complying through the rehabilitation phase. These patients should be counseled preoperatively about the importance of compliance and the possible clinical outcomes if postoperative guidelines are not followed. Physical therapy is an important tool following surgery. Underaggressive or overaggressive physical therapy can be detrimental to clinical outcomes and should be monitored carefully. In the case of a fracture with good confidence regarding fixation and bone quality, active motion may be considered almost immediately. If there are concerns about bone quality or fixation following percutaneous pinning, PHN, or ORIF, the arm is immobilized for 3–4 weeks and a gently progressive therapy program is instituted. A full discussion regarding preoperative evaluation can be found in Once a complete history has been obtained, an appropriate physical examination is performed. An assessment for open fracture and skin dimpling should be conducted. A thorough neurovascular examination is essential to evaluate the terminal branches of the brachial plexus, specifically the axillary nerve. A sensory evaluation and, if tolerated, motor evaluation of the axillary nerve should be performed. A pulse examination is mandatory, and any question regarding vascular compromise should prompt a Doppler examination and, if necessary, a CT angiogram. Imaging examination for proximal humerus fractures is performed using a standard trauma series, including anteroposterior (AP), scapular Y, and axillary views. A two-view shoulder excluding the axillary view is not adequate and frequently misses posterior fracture-dislocations ( Management strategies for operative proximal humeral fractures continue to evolve ( One piece of clinical information is necessary to determine whether to choose internal fixation or arthroplasty, and this is the knowledge of the vascularity of the humeral head. If the vascularity of the humeral head is absent, the surgeon would typically choose arthroplasty. If the vascularity of the humeral head is present, internal fixation can be considered. Generally speaking, however, the vascularity of the humeral head is unknown. Therefore, surgeons must weigh each of the risk factors related to the case and plan for a surgery that fits the patient best and is within the surgeon’s skill set. The most important factors that should be considered for appropriate decision making include: preoperative functional status, fracture pattern, and age. All patients represent different clinical scenarios, but a fairly simple algorithm can generally be applied to aid in surgical decision making. Healthy patients over the age of 70, with three- or four-part fractures, and with good preoperative function, are treated with arthroplasty. Patients older than 70 who are in good health have good preoperative status, and who fall within the guidelines of operative treatment for two-part fractures, are treated with internal fixation. Except in extreme clinical circumstances, such as head-split fractures and severe four-part fracture-dislocations, patients younger than 40 are treated with internal fixation. Patients between the ages of 40 and 70 must be carefully evaluated and all factors weighed to determine whether arthroplasty or internal fixation is appropriate. Generally speaking, it is best to err on the side of internal fixation because osteonecrosis is easier to manage than tuberosity resorption or nonunion following arthroplasty. Arthroplasty should only be considered in this age group when facing a fracture-dislocation or head-split scenario where the head is likely not viable. Surgeons who are not comfortable converting from internal fixation to arthroplasty—or vice versa—should refer the patient to a shoulder specialist or one comfortable with these options. Once the decision has been made to proceed with internal fixation, the method of internal fixation also is a matter of great debate. The bulk of the remaining sections will discuss each of the current methods of internal fixation along with the advantages, disadvantages, and complications associated with each. Most fractures of the proximal humerus are minimally displaced and can be treated nonsurgically. In patients with displaced fractures, PF can be utilized to improve radiographic and functional outcomes. The indications for PF include displaced varus and valgus angulated two-part fractures. Additionally, PF has been advocated in select three- and valgus-impacted four-part fractures ( Patients typically receive a preoperative interscalene block and general anesthesia for the procedure. The patient is placed in a beach-chair position at approximately 45° of elevation relative to the floor. A standard pneumatic arm-positioner is used for exposure and preliminary reduction efforts. Once the patient has been positioned, a standard or mini c-arm is utilized prior to prepping the patient such that standard AP and axillary radiographs may be obtained. The unit can be positioned at the head of the bed, with the c-arm rotated over the shoulder to allow for appropriate radiographs. Surgery should be performed within 5–7 days of injury to avoid the difficulties associated with early healing. Once adequate images are obtained, the shoulder and ipsilateral arm are sterilely prepped and draped. First, a closed reduction maneuver is performed, aligning the proximal head with the adjacent shaft. The major deforming force of the shaft is the pectoralis major. Most shaft fractures are displaced anteriorly and medially for an apex anterior fracture deformity. Longitudinal traction with a posterolateral force assists in neutralizing these deforming forces. At times, this type of maneuver is unable to reduce the fracture completely, and it becomes necessary to reduce the fracture manually. A reduction portal has been described by Most authors feel that two pins placed in retrograde fashion are adequate to stabilize the proximal humerus. However, one or two pins placed antegrade from the greater tuberosity to the medial calcar augments stability. One particular study by Tuberosity reduction can be achieved with a small bone hook in three- and four-part fractures ( Proponents of PF cite the less invasive nature of the surgery as its main benefit. Surgery typically results in less blood loss, lower perioperative morbidity, less cost, and, theoretically, less scarring. Additionally, osteonecrosis rates may be lower, although a recent intermediate outcome study demonstrated a 28% rate of osteonecrosis following surgery ( Generally, results following this method of treatment are satisfactory, especially with two- and three-part proximal humeral fractures ( Keener et al. reviewed 35 patients from three institutions with a mean age of 61 at the time of injury. There were 7 two-part, 8 three-part, and 12 valgus-impacted four-part fractures. There was 100% union. Twenty-seven patients were available for final review. In contrast to Calvo et al., those patients who healed with malunion did not demonstrate a lower visual analog score (VAS) pain score, American Shoulder and Elbow Surgeons' (ASES) score, or Constant score ( Jaberg et al. reported a series of 48 patients with proximal humeral fractures treated with PF. At 3 years of follow-up, there was a low osteonecrosis rate (4%), and 71% of patients had good or excellent results ( A study by Resch et al. demonstrated good outcomes following percutaneous reduction and fixation for the reconstruction of a series of 27 patients treated for three- and four-part proximal humeral fractures. Average follow-up was 2 years, and all three-part fractures demonstrated good to very good functional results with no signs of osteonecrosis. Osteonecrosis was seen in 11% of the four-part fractures, and two patients in this group required additional surgery ( Soete et al. reviewed 31 patients at a mean of 45 months following displaced proximal humeral fractures. The mean Constant score was 80 points. Osteonecrosis developed in 16% of their patients. Outcomes were good to excellent for two- and three-part fractures, but the authors concluded that percutaneous pinning was not an effective method for four-part fractures ( A more recent study by Harrison et al. looked at 39 patients who underwent mini-open reduction and PF of proximal humeral fractures. At 3 years follow-up, the osteonecrosis rate was 26% (higher than in other series). This was most prevalent in the four-part fracture series. About 37% had posttraumatic osteoarthritis, including 60% of the four-part fractures. Despite the rather high rates of osteonecrosis at intermediate-term follow-up, the authors felt that ASES scores and mean forward elevation were preserved over time, and that percutaneous pinning provided durable treatment in carefully selected patients ( Based on the results of this data, one can expect a reasonable degree of function in appropriately selected patients. Appropriate patients include two-part and selected three-part valgus-impacted fractures. While four-part fractures may be treated with PF, the surgeon should exercise caution due to high osteonecrosis and malunion rates. Loss of reduction is a feared complication following proximal humeral PF. Several factors may play a role here, including poor bone quality, inadequate fixation, surgical technique errors, patient compliance, and comminuted fracture fragments. The rates of loss of reduction are difficult to determine because only two of the published outcome studies reported this as a complication. Papers by Multiple basic science studies have demonstrated the dangers of percutaneous pinning of proximal humerus fractures ( Proponents of PF state that the diminished soft-tissue dissection may improve outcomes because osteonecrosis rates may be lower. Pin migration and loosening have been reported to occur in up to one-third of patients ( Superficial wound infections are common and should be treated with oral antibiotics and local pin site care. Most authors prefer to keep the pins below the level of the skin to lessen the chances of infection. Should an infection develop around a pin that does not resolve with oral antibiotics, the pin must be removed to decrease the chances of osteomyelitis. A resurgence in the use of the proximal humeral nail has occurred recently due to complications associated with ORIF. Intramedullary nails are an accepted method of treatment for two-part fractures ( PHN improves fracture alignment and can be performed for displaced proximal humeral fractures with good outcomes, especially in displaced two-part fractures. The benefits of intramedullary nailing include less soft-tissue stripping, smaller incisions, and excellent biomechanical stability in poor bone. Proponents report that the osteonecrosis rate is extremely low utilizing rigid intramedullary nailing. However, the use of the intramedullary nail is not recommended for most three- and four-part fractures due to the challenges associated with maintaining reduction ( The patient is placed in a modified beach-chair position. Prior to prepping and draping the shoulder, the image intensifier is positioned such that adequate radiographs can be obtained during the procedure. A 3–4 Once the correct starting point has been established, the medullary canal is reamed. The nail is inserted, and one should ensure that the nail is completely subchondral. Precise targeting should then occur according to the manufacturer’s specifications. This allows for avoidance of the important proximal humeral tendinous and neurovascular structures ( Postoperatively, patients are kept in a sling for approximately 1 week. At that time, patients are started with active and active-assisted range of motion. The use of intramedullary nailing to treat three- and four-part fractures is controversial, although some studies report successful outcomes, albeit with a high minor complication rate ( In a multicenter study, Hatzidakis et al. reviewed 48 patients with 48 Neer two-part proximal humerus fractures. Patients were followed for at least 12 months (mean 20 months). The mean Constant score was 71 Another recent study by Zhu et al. prospectively compared locked intramedullary nailing with locked plating in 51 patients. Fracture union was achieved in all cases. The supraspinatus strength was better in the locked plating group at 1 year. There was no difference in ASES, Constant score, or VAS pain score at a minimum of 3 years between the two groups. In a recent study examining PHN, Giannoudis et al. demonstrated that functional results were good for the vast majority of cases. The mean Constant score at 1 year was 74.5 (range 46–99). Based on their review of the literature, they reported that more research was necessary to evaluate in detail the use of intramedullary nailing for three- and four-part fractures ( Overall, major complication rates following PHN can be high with 16–23% requiring further surgery and/or removal of the nail. Based on the numerous studies, further surgery is typically due to hardware-related complications ( Nonunion is uncommon following PHN. A recent review of the literature over the past 10 years demonstrates union rates from 96% to 100% ( Hardware-related complications following PHN are common. Nails may be proud, and hardware has been noted to back out, necessitating removal. Hardware removal rates are high and range from 7% to 15% ( Placing distal locking screws may pose an injury risk to the radial nerve. One patient in the reported literature sustained a radial nerve palsy following the placement of a proximal humeral nail ( Rotator cuff and articular cartilage injury are inherent in the starting point for proximal humeral nails. Operative techniques for all proximal humeral nails involve opening the supraspinatus tendon at the level of the musculotendinous junction or at the tendinous level. The insertion of the nail through this area causes varying degrees of rotator cuff injury that can lead to shoulder pain ( Varus malunion is a commonly reported complication, and the rate at the humeral neck is reported to be as high as 7.7–37%. Prevention of malunion relies on adequate reduction and proper nail starting point. Late failure into varus is uncommon with the proximal humeral nail unlike the proximal humeral locking plate. Recent improvements in proximal humeral plate fixation have increased the range of proximal humeral fractures that can be adequately treated with ORIF ( Several advantages exist with ORIF over more traditional techniques, including improved fracture stability due to the fixed angle construct, improved rotational stability, lower risk of damage to the rotator cuff, and a shorter period of immobilization ( Despite the benefits, complications have been reported with ORIF, including osteonecrosis, nonunion, malunion, screw penetration into the glenohumeral joint, plate failure, and infection ( Deciding which fractures should be treated with ORIF is a challenge for most surgeons. Interventions such as PF, intramedullary nailing, hemiarthroplasty, and reverse shoulder arthroplasty have all been used with some success. Recently, there has been an increase in treatment with ORIF over hemiarthroplasty because new plate technology has provided more secure fixation in osteoporotic bone. Despite the increased surgical interest, there have been significant hardware-related complications with ORIF. No one surgical intervention stands out beyond all others. The deciding factors primarily include surgeon experience, patient preoperative activity level and bone quality, and fracture severity—specifically, the fracture’s risk of developing osteonecrosis. The principles of ORIF include an anatomic reconstruction specifically avoiding varus, a stable shoulder that can withstand focused intensive rehabilitation reduction techniques that protect the fragile blood supply of the proximal humerus, and surgical methods that avoid hardware-related complications. If these principles cannot be adhered to, it is best to choose another method of reconstruction that will give the patient an opportunity for improved functional and pain-related outcomes. The first factor of importance in treatment with ORIF is fracture type. Two-part fractures rarely require surgical intervention, but they may be treated with PF, ORIF, or intramedullary nailing with good success. Some two-part fractures may require open reduction due to interposed soft tissue, significant displacement, or bone quality concerns. True three- and four-part fractures require ORIF while valgus-impacted fractures may be treated with PF. Intramedullary nailing is not recommended for three- and four-part fractures, although some surgeons are utilizing it for such cases. Fracture-dislocation in patients older than 40 is a relative contraindication to ORIF due to concerns for osteonecrosis. In general, age factors heavily into the algorithm for treatment with ORIF. Three- and four-part fractures in patients who are younger than 40 should almost always be treated with ORIF or PF. In general, if patients are older than 70, caution should be taken when performing ORIF due to issues with bone quality and the risk of osteonecrosis, unless a valgus-impacted fracture exists ( The ultimate “gray-zone” decision is in patients who are 40–70 years old with a three- or four-part fracture at high risk for osteonecrosis or with poor bone quality. In these situations, take note of the patient-specific risk factors, including medical comorbidities, alcohol or drug history, and current activity level. In these cases, erring on the side of fracture fixation provides an opportunity for healed anatomic reduction, allowing for later reconstruction with hemiarthroplasty or total shoulder arthroplasty if osteoporotic collapse or osteonecrosis develop. Arthroplasty is chosen in the setting of a patient who is older than 60 and has a fracture-dislocation, head-splitting fracture, or comminuted four-part fracture with poor bone quality. Patients who are younger than 60 will receive an arthroplasty if they have a head-split fracture that cannot be reconstructed. In all cases of ORIF, an anatomic reduction, or at least, a valgus reduction should be the ultimate goal. Varus reductions should not be accepted, especially in an acute fracture because of the risk of varus collapse and screw cut-out. If an appropriate reduction cannot be achieved, the surgeon should be prepared to perform an arthroplasty. If the medial cortical hinge is comminuted, or if the patient has poor bone quality, techniques to improve the overall stability of the fracture must be employed, including the use of allograft and placement of screws that support the inferomedial head ( Patients typically receive a preoperative interscalene nerve block and general anesthesia. They are placed in a beach-chair position, and the head of the bed is elevated to about 45° with the shoulder off of the bed, so that range of motion and radiographs can be achieved during the case. Once the patient has been positioned, the fluoroscopy machine is brought in so that appropriate radiographs can be obtained, including AP and axillary views. Several approaches have been described for ORIF of the proximal humerus, including the deltopectoral, the anterolateral deltoid-splitting, and two-incision techniques ( We prefer to utilize the deltopectoral approach. The skin incision begins 1–2 After plate placement and reduction are deemed adequate, the distal screws and proximal locking screws are placed. The proximal locking screws are placed after drilling up to, but not through, the subchondral bone. Screw lengths are then measured, subtracting 5–10 Postoperatively, the patient is placed in a sling and asked to be nonweightbearing. Immediate active motion is encouraged, especially if there is confidence in the fixation and a stable fracture pattern. A slower progression of passive motion, followed by active assisted motion is instituted if there is poor bone quality with a varus three- or four-part fracture. Active motion is instituted at 4–6 weeks in this instance. Follow-up radiographs are scheduled for weeks 1, 6, and 12, 6 months, and 1 year. Additional radiographs are obtained if the patient reports worsening functional progression or associated discomfort. Early recognition and monitoring of osteonecrosis or osteoporotic collapse is critical to prevent joint destruction from hardware penetration. Once healing is confirmed, plate removal is typically not necessary, unless subacromial impingement or adhesive capsulitis is present. In general, studies regarding proximal humeral-locked plating have poor study design, are retrospective, and only contain one treatment group. Currently, only two randomized, controlled trials exist that compare ORIF to nonoperative treatment ( In an early study of proximal humeral fractures treated with a locked humeral plate, Gerber et al. treated 34 consecutive fractures in 33 patients by ORIF. An anatomic reduction was present in 30 patients. At a mean follow-up of 63 months (range, 25–131), osteonecrosis was present in 12 cases (35%). Six patients required further operations and two required revision to hemiarthroplasty. Average forward flexion was 156°. Ricchetti et al. reviewed 57 shoulders in 55 patients treated with ORIF and followed these patients for at least 6 months. Mean follow-up was 13 months. Average ASES score was 70.8 A study by Greiner et al. demonstrated a doubling of the osteonecrosis rate from 4/48 at 1 year to 9/48 at final follow-up. The mean Constant score was rated excellent in 6 (12.5%), good in 14 (29.2%), satisfactory in 17 (35.4%), and fair in 11 (22.9%). Eight cases demonstrated loss of reduction, but there was only one that lost reduction more than 30°. Five cases required another operation (11%). A study out of Spain followed three- and four-part fractures treated with a proximal humeral locking plate for at least 12 months (mean, 15 months). Functional outcomes were determined based on range of motion and the Constant score. The mean age was 61 years of age. There were excellent outcomes in 13 patients, good in 36, moderate in 8, and poor in 1. The mean Constant score was 80. There were no cases of loss of reduction or osteonecrosis in 33 three-part and 25 four-part fractures. Plate impingement was present in five cases (17%). In a randomized controlled trial of 60 patients with a mean age of 74, Olerud et al. reviewed the outcomes following ORIF for three-part fractures at an average of 2 years. The results of the study demonstrated an advantage in functional outcome and quality of life following locked plating, compared to nonoperative management for three-part fractures. While there was no difference in locking plate fixation to nonoperative management in terms of disabilities of the arm, shoulder, and hand score (26.4 In another randomized controlled trial of 50 patients aged 60 or older with displaced three- and four-part fractures of the proximal humerus, there was no difference seen between surgical treatment and conservative management for proximal humeral fractures. The average Constant score treated closed was 74.4 (95% confidence interval, CI, 61.7–87.0) and 74.4 (95% CI, 65.0–83.9) after open treatment. Again, in this study, inclusion bias may favor nonsurgical management as patients older than 70 with three- and four-part fractures may not be appropriate for ORIF. Thanasas et al. performed a systematic review of 12 studies and excluded those studies dealing primarily with two-part fractures. Overall osteonecrosis rate was 8%. The results indicated that patients were able to achieve a mean Constant score of 74.3 at 1 year. This study found that outcomes appear to improve up to 1 year postoperatively. A significant number of reoperations occurred (13.7%) in the studies reviewed, which was primarily related to loss of reduction and screw cut-out (31%) ( Südkamp et al. performed a multicenter, prospective observational study on the treatment of unstable, displaced proximal humerus fractures with the use of a locked humeral plate. One hundred and eighty-seven patients (mean age, 62.9 ORIF with locked plating has improved the treatment of complex proximal humeral fractures. Further research needs to be performed in patients older than 70 years of age to determine whether ORIF is of benefit versus arthroplasty. Recent modifications to surgical technique have improved overall complication rates including screw cut-out and screw perforation ( Complications are frequent (up to 36%) following ORIF with locked plating for proximal humeral fractures ( Hardware impingement is common following ORIF with locked plating especially in varus-angulated fractures where greater tuberosity impingement is more likely. The rate of hardware impingement in the literature varies from 2% to 21% ( Screw cut-out and varus collapse are the most frequent complications present in the literature. A recent systematic review by Screw perforation is a common problem following ORIF with locking plate due to the fixed nature of the proximal locking plate. The fracture tends to settle on the screws due to the severe osteoporosis of the proximal humerus associated with these fractures. Additionally, the development of osteonecrosis may cause screw perforations, necessitating removal. A recent systematic review by Infection following ORIF with locked plating is infrequent because of the rich vascularity of the area and good soft-tissue coverage. Infection rates range from 0% to 3%. The incidence of nonunion following ORIF with locked plating is low (1.6%) but may be the result of poor technique, including extensive soft-tissue stripping or a mechanically unstable fracture pattern ( Postoperative stiffness is common following ORIF and typically has a very good prognosis when the fracture has healed properly. Treatment typically involves intensive physical therapy and cortisone injections to improve postoperative adhesive capsulitis. Occasionally, patients do not respond to capsular stretching and require operative intervention. In these situations, arthroscopic rotator interval and capsular releases are performed along with a subacromial decompression ( Proximal humeral fracture management can be challenging due to the myriad of surgical options and the multiple factors that affect outcomes following surgery. The most important decision after identifying that a patient has a surgical proximal humerus fracture is patient selection, specifically with regards to what surgery will be performed. In general, percutanous fixation should be reserved for two-part and select valgus-impacted three-part fractures, unless the surgeon has considerable skill in this area. Intramedullary nailing should be primarily used for two-part fractures but must be weighed against the risk associated with traumatic entry at the level of the rotator cuff and articular margin. In general, patients older than 70 with four-part fractures should not be considered candidates for ORIF unless bone quality is good. In patients younger than 40, ORIF is used almost exclusively despite fracture-related factors, and all attempts should be made to preserve the patient’s anatomy. In patients are between the ages of 40 and 70, consider ORIF unless fracture- or patient-related factors, such as severe osteoporosis from seizure medication or alcoholism, three- and four-part fracture-dislocations, and head-splitting fractures, make this option undesireable. ORIF can be successful with appropriate patient selection and avoidance of intraoperative technical errors. The most glaring problem in proximal humeral research today is the lack of a clear definitive surgical solution for all displaced fractures. More research needs to be performed to define surgical indications for ORIF, PF, or PHN and which techniques should fall by the wayside. This research must come in the form of randomized, multicenter trials that contain precisely defined indications (including age and fracture type). The most intriguing area for new research comes in the patients aged 40–70 with three- and four-part fractures, now that reverse shoulder arthroplasty may play a more standard role in the elderly with such fractures. This younger cohort will likely be necessary to define the differences between ORIF, PF, PHN, and nonsurgical management. Proximal humeral-locked plating has resulted in significant advances in fracture treatment, but complication rates are still high. Evolution in surgical training and improved techniques will hopefully continue to diminish the large number of implant-related complications with this treatment. All attempts were made in this chapter to provide the most complete and up to date information. However, excellent resources are present in the literature in regard to surgical tips, tricks, and technique.