Continuous analytical solutions for the particle size distributions of char in steady and unsteady states in fluidized beds, when the inlet fuel feed is presented by monosize, lognormal, Rosin-Rammler or gamma distributions, are derived from a population balance model. The stationary size distribution is directly related to the rate of reduction of the particle size. Combustion and attrition reduce the particle size. Thus, it is possible to extract the dependence of the rate of reduction of radius (affected by a fuel’s reactivity and attrition) on radius from a measured steady-state particle size distribution. Unsteady particle size distributions are derived for impulse, step and square pulse changes in the fuel feed, when the oxygen level in the reactor is maintained constant. Constant, Constant, Breakage frequency, s Distribution parameter, m Constant, m s Diffusivity, m Particle diameter, m Time dependent diameter defined by Time dependent fictitious diameter, Function defined by Stoichiometric mass ratio of fuel and oxidiser Heat of combustion, J kg Function defined by Inverse function of Ratio of burning rate to air rate to remain constant oxygen level, kg/kg Chemical reaction rate, kg m Mass, kg Mass flow rate, kg s Nusselt number Exponent Normalised particle size distribution, m Particle size distribution, kg m Rate of reduction of diameter (by reaction and attrition), m s Laplace transform variable Sherwood number Time, s Temperature, K Normalised cumulative mass Mass fraction Density distribution on mass basis of size Distribution parameter Minimum size (m), Dirac delta function Emissivity Distribution parameter, m Thermal conductivity, W m Distribution parameter, average particle diameter, m Distribution parameter, standard deviation (σ Density, kg m Residence time, s  Inlet, initial Outlet Average oxygen Bed, breaking particle Char Critical Fuel Gas Oxygen Particle, combustion products Steady, particle surface Unsteady Fluidised and circulating fluidised bed combustors (FBC and CFBC) have become popular due to their low emissions of pollutants and flexibility to different fuels compared to pulverised coal combustion. The particle size distribution in the boiler affects heat transfer and the flow dynamics in the boiler. The particle size distribution (PSD) and the mass of the fuel in the bed depend on the reactivity and fragmentation behaviour of the fuel particles. Also NO Kunii and Levenspiel There has been considerable interest in the dynamics of FBCs and CFBCs Chirone et al. The size reduction of particles by breakage, attrition and surface reaction is described by the equation In the steady state the left hand side is zero and without breakage the two last terms on the right hand side are also zero, so the equation simplifies to The fuels used in bench-scale reactors are often sieved in a size interval with a square pulse type distribution. For this distribution when The analysis can be applied to inert particles (sorbents, ash and sand) as well, but then When the rate of fuel feeding or the fuel itself is changing, it is necessary to regulate the flow-rate of air to match the changes in the combustion rate of the fuel, so that the emissions of CO and hydrocarbons remain low. When the combustion rate increases due to more fuel being supplied, more oxygen is consumed. Then emissions increase due to low levels of oxygen, if the flow-rate of air remains constant. As a first approximation, we can assume that excessive emissions are avoided by regulating the flow-rate of air so that the oxygen level in the bed and at the outlet remains about constant. In this case When the oxygen level is maintained constant, At first consider Three cases are considered for the unsteady mass flow rate, In the case of a step change in the fuel’s feed-rate at time The combustion of fuel corresponds to the consumption of oxygen (0 denotes inlet, 1 outlet) in a stoichiometric relation in the bed assuming complete combustion The ratio of the bed’s mass to the mass flow rate τ = In the following examples the following char properties have been applied: ρ The calculated steady state PSD is shown in The simulation for an impulse in the feed is shown in In the following it is illustrated how the kinetic parameters for char oxidation can be obtained from the measured steady mass of char in the bed. On the other hand, if the kinetic parameters are known, then the mass of char in the bed can be estimated by the formulae in The measured steady masses of char were 4.4, 141, 57 and 89 g in four experiments. The lognormal fuel parameters were μ = 0.15 mm and σ = 1.8 for the first of these and μ = 0.6 mm and σ = 1.6 for the others. Value Sh = 1 was for all cases and Nu = 2.5 for the small particles and Nu = 3.5 for the larger ones. The bed’s temperatures were 1143, 1143, 1183 and 1083 K in the experiments, respectively. Different inlet oxygen levels were used in the experiments by mixing nitrogen and air and the concentration of oxygen above the bed was measured. Average estimated oxygen contents ( It is then possible to calculate Analytical solutions were developed to the PSD of fuel in the bed of FBC and CFBC boilers for non-breaking char particles. The calculation of PSD in the steady and unsteady states is much faster than using time-consuming numerical methods. Analytical solutions are also useful, since they can be applied without extensive computer programs and as a reference case for testing a submodel for calculating a PSD in a comprehensive computer code. The mass of fuel in the bed can be estimated by relatively simple formulae. In reality fragmentation may take place, decreasing the burnout time. Then the mass of fuel in a bed of non-breaking fuel is a good reference case, giving an upper limit of the mass. The effect of particle size, PSD and chemical reactivity of the fuel on both the PSD and mass of fuel in the boiler can clearly be seen from the analytical formulae. The solution for the unsteady state PSD, mass of fuel in the bed and combustion rate give an insight into how the flow of air should be regulated with different fuels to avoid a significant decrease in the oxygen concentration and large CO emissions in the dynamic conditions, when the feed-rate of fuel is changed. The effects of particle size and chemical reactivity of the fuel in the feed on the dynamical behaviour can be predicted. Steady and unsteady solutions for either the PSD or the mass of the char in the bed, along with measurements can be applied to extract kinetic data for the oxidation of char, provided that the particles used are sufficiently small, thereby assuring negligible fragmentation. The financial supports from the Finnish National Research Programme CODE and European Union (EC Contract No. NNE5/2000/97) are acknowledged.