The disposal and reuse of waste printed circuit boards have been the major global concerns. Printed circuit boards, a form of Electronic waste (hereafter e-waste), have been chemically processed, doped with Ag+, Cu2+ and Sn2+, and used as visible light photocatalysts against the degradation of methylene blue and methyl violet. The elemental analyses of pristine and metal doped printed circuit board were obtained using energy dispersive X-ray fluorescence (EDXRF) spectra and inductively coupled plasma optical emission spectroscopy (ICP-OES). The morphology of parent and doped printed circuit board was obtained from scanning electron microscopy (SEM) measurements. The photocatalytic activity of parent and metal doped samples was carried out for the decomposition of organic pollutants, methylene blue and methyl violet, under visible light irradiation. Metal doped waste printed circuit boards (WPCBs) have shown higher photocatalytic activity against the degradation of methyl violet and methylene blue under visible light irradiation. Scavenger experiments were performed to identify the reactive intermediates responsible for the degradation of methylene blue and methyl violet. The reactive species responsible for the degradation of MV and MB were found to be holes and hydroxyl radicals. A possible mechanism of degradation of methylene blue and methyl violet is given. The stability and reusability of the catalysts are also investigated.Electronic waste (e-waste) is one of the fastest growing waste streams and is becoming a global topic as large quantities of electrical and electronic equipment (EEE) become obsolete ( It has been reported that, the non-metallic fraction in WPCBs were effectively treated as a potentially attractive material as an adsorbent to capture toxic metals from effluents ( Photocatalysis, one of the advanced oxidation process, utilizes light (sunlight or artificial light) to initiate excitation of electron from valence band to conduction band of a semiconductor leaving a hole in the former. These electrons and holes under favorable conditions migrate to the surface of a semiconductor catalyst to trigger a series of redox reactions which have applications in the decomposition of organic pollutants, water splitting, air purification and carbon dioxide (CO With the progression of technology, photocatalysis has gained momentum as a viable alternative to the traditional technologies for the degradation of organic dye pollutants. Photocatalysis is being considered as a robust technology for treating many of the industrial effluents because of the following reasons: ambient temperature and pressure conditions, complete mineralization, no sludge disposal, low cost, use of air as a source of oxygen for oxidation and abundantly available solar energy ( The non-metallic fractions (NMFs) of waste printed circuit boards (computers) used in this work were supplied by E-Parisaraa Pvt. Ltd., Bangalore (India). The aim of this company was “recycling and reusing of Waste Electrical and Electronic Equipment (WEEE) in eco friendly way”. The non-metallic fractions of WPCBs were cut in to small pieces of particle size less than 0.5 WPCB was doped with Ag Non-metallic fractions of WPCBs were cut into pieces less than 0.5 The sample, pressed in the form of a thin pellet, was used for EDXRF measurements. All the samples were pressed in to pellets of 30 All the samples should be solubilised for the measurement of Inductively Coupled Plasma–Optical Emission Spectrometer (ICP-OES) and Atomic Absorption Spectrometer (AAS). Half a gram of each sample was weighed accurately and placed in the Polytetrafluoroethylene (PTFE) digestion vessel. For each sample, 6 The room temperature X-ray diffractograms of all the samples were recorded using Rigaku miniplex powder X-ray diffractometer (Cu K SEM images were recorded on the HITACHI SU-1500 variable pressure scanning electron microscope (VP-SEM). Brunauer-Emmett-Teller (BET) surface areas were determined by nitrogen adsorption-desorption isotherm measurements at 77 The photocatalytic activity studies of all the samples were evaluated by the decomposition of methyl violet (MV) and methylene blue (MB) aqueous solutions under visible light irradiation with a HEBER Visible Annular Type Photoreactor, model HVAR1234 (Heber Scientific, Chennai, India). A 500 Here, D was the percentage of degradation; C The formation of The elemental composition of all the samples was obtained from EDXRF and ICP-OES. The results are tabulated in The powder XRD was recorded for all the samples and shown in The morphological characterization of all the samples was obtained from SEM measurements ( In order to evaluate the photocatalytic activities of all the prepared samples, the degradation of methyl violet (MV) and methylene blue (MB) under visible light irradiation was studied. The concentration of dye (MV and MB) was found to decrease with increase in irradiation time in the presence of the all the catalysts. It was noticed that the decrease in the concentration of MV and MB was more in the presence of AgPCB compared to the rest of the catalysts at any time of irradiation. Thus AgPCB shows higher photoactivity for the degradation of MV and MB under the present experimental conditions ( It was observed that Ag, Cu and Sn doped PCBs have exhibited higher photoactivity compared to pristine PCB. In the case of Ag and Cu doped PCBs, the higher photoactivity may be due to localized surface plasmon resonance (LSPR) which was evidenced by the higher absorption of AgPCB and CuPCB. Metallic silver and copper particles absorb radiation and effectively separate electron and hole leading to cascade of reactions with free electron and holes ( It was well known that, the reactive species such as It was observed that, The stability and reusability of catalysts were very important issues for practical applications. After first cycle of photoactivity experiment, the catalyst was separated, dried and used in a fresh batch of dye solution and irradiated with visible light. The procedure was repeated for third cycle also. Metal doped WPCBs, AgPCB, CuPCB and SnPCB, were prepared. The characterization of all the samples was done using powder XRD, EDXRF and ICP-OES. The doped samples have shown an increase in the Ag, Cu and Sn weight percentage in AgPCB, CuPCB and SnPCB, respectively. The morphology of the doped samples was characterized by densely packed particles with considerable agglomeration. The photocatalytic activity of all the samples was investigated using MV and MB organic dyes. The results showed that, the metal doped WPCBs could effectively degrade MV and MB under visible light irradiation. Among all the samples, AgPCB showed higher photoactivity in the degradation of organic dyes. The higher photoactivity of AgPCB may be due to localized surface plasmon resonance. Holes and hydroxyl radicals were the reactive radical species responsible for the degradation of MV and MB. The metal doped WPCBs were chemically stable and can be used at least three times as catalysts. Dr. N.R. Munirathnam and K. Ramaswamy are grateful to