The generally accepted equation for describing the kinetics of the cementation process has been derived under several simplifying assumptions. Consequently, it does not explain some experimental facts and sometimes even leads to conclusions contradicted by the experiments. The main assumption is that the kinetics of the cementation is determined by the rate of transport of the metal A ions to be precipitated to the surface of the precipitating metal B. It does not explain why the rate of cementation of A, by a different metal B, differ from each other. It also does not explain why maxima appears on the potential ε
                     A/B=f(t) curves. In the case of cementation from complex salt solutions, the assumption that the cementation runs to the point of zero concentration of A is oversimplified. Doubtful also is the assumption that the reaction surface, identified usually with that of the precipitating metal B, does not change with the progress of reaction.
                  Problems of the direct determination of the cementation rate cause that, as a rule, the basic differential equation is not used but instead its secondary integral form is confronted with the experimental results. Therefore, an attempt has been made to perform cementation in a model cell. This enables determination of the rate of the process and also the potential ε
                     A/B as a function of time. Results of these experiments have proved that the rate of the process does not diminish continuously, as follows from the differential equations. It rises initially and then decreases. The same concerns the ε
                     A/B=f(t) dependence. Hypothetical runs of the polarization curves have been presented which explain these effects. They also help to explain why the cementation rates of the same metal A by various metal B may differ from each other.
                  Reduction of AgCl has been also performed in the cementation model cell. Results of these experiments have helped to formulate some conclusions on the mechanism of that process. A method of Ag recovery from AgCl, presenting several advantages over that at present applied in industry, has been patented.
                  This text presents a synthesis of results of several years of research.Stoichiometry of the reaction of precipitation of a more noble metal from the solution of its salts by a less noble one, called cementation, can be described by This process has been applied in metallurgy, to a greater or lesser extent, since the Roman times until today. It is also exploited for contact plating, to recover noble metals or copper from some waste solutions, etc. Centuries ago, it was observed that in some mines, iron tools remaining in contact with water were slowly “changing” into copper ones. This fact has been interpreted by the alchemists as one of the proofs of the possibility of metals “transmutation.” It is a general opinion that accurate equations describing both the kinetics and the equilibria of the cementation processes are well known. A comprehensive survey of papers (over 80) discussing these problems has been presented in an earlier publication On the surface of the precipitating metal, there exists a thin immobile film of the electrolyte, the so-called diffusion layer. Its thickness, depending on the intensity of convection in the bulk of the solution, is usually of the order of 10 μm. The successive stages of the cementation process are: transport of the A For a long time, there was no method to determine directly the rate of the cementation processes. Therefore, as a rule it was not the primary differential However, the assumptions mentioned and their conclusions raise also some doubts. The assumption that the cementation kinetics is determined by the transport rate of the A Doubtful also is the assumption that the reaction surface, identified usually with that of the precipitating metal B, does not change with the progress of cementation. A further deficiency of Concentration of A declines, with the progress of the cementation process, from When Potential To get a better insight into the mechanism of the cementation processes several series of experiments have been performed in the model cell, presented in To explain the observed dependencies, an attempt has been made to discuss kinetics of the cementation reactions referring to the polarization curves of the cathodic (A Relation of the current It follows from To explain maxima on the curves Concentration Totally different is the mechanism of the process in which metal A deposits on the surface of the metal B forming a more compact layer. In such a case, transport of the B An attempt has been made to derive the equation describing kinetics of the cementation which takes into consideration that the reaction surface increases with the progress of the reaction The presented hypothesis of the increasing reaction surface helps also to explain the effect of the influence of the kind of the precipitating metal B on the kinetics of the process. The less noble is the metal B, the lower is the potential of the cathodic reduction of the A A typical example is reduction of AgCl, by contact with Zn or Al scrap, in the presence of electrolyte. The process is often applied in industry to recover Ag from wastes. In such a system, the progress of the process may be followed solely by the analysis of periodically collected samples. An attempt has been made to perform that reaction in a model cell An attempt has been made to present a hypothesis explaining the results of these experiments. Concentration of the silver ions, calculated from the solubility product, is of the order of 10  Several series of experiments have been also performed, in a cell with an insoluble anode, applying external current In the process of direct reduction it is difficult to determine exactly the moment of its conclusion. Therefore, the process is usually either interrupted too soon or unnecessarily prolonged. In the first case, the obtained product contains some remaining silver chloride, which is lost when that product is melted (AgCl easily evaporates at the Ag melting temperature). Prolongation of the process leads to waste of the reducing metal and of the acid. Moreover hydrogen, evolving in the process of acidic dissolution of the cementing metal, disperses electrolyte which forms a toxic mist. Usually a stoichiometric excess of the cementing metal is applied which contaminates the obtained silver. All these handicaps may be avoided when cementation is performed in the cell. Advantages of that method have been discussed in a separate paper