The direct photolysis and the photocatalytic degradations of dicamba in TiO2 suspensions with and without the use of hydrogen peroxide were studied using two different monochromatic UV irradiations (300 and 350nm). Both the direct photolysis and photocatalytic degradations of dicamba follow pseudo-first-order decay kinetics. Photolysis reactions were slow but the corresponding photocatalysis rates were increased by about 3 and 5 times in the presence of TiO2 at 300 and 350nm of UV, respectively. Photocatalytic rates were increased with the pH at acidic to neutral ranges because of the increase of hydroxide ions, but the reaction was gradually retarded at the alkaline medium due to the effect of charges repulsion. The different proton sources causing various degrees of rate retardation were due to the presence of the corresponding counter anions. The results of H2O2-assisted photocatalysis experiments showed that a low H2O2 dosage in photocatalysis using UV 300nm would enhance the decay rate of dicamba by 2.4 times, but an overdose of H2O2 will retard the rate because of the expenditure of hydroxyl radicals. However, this process was found impracticable at UV 350nm due to the absorption characteristic of H2O2. A neutral initial pH level was found to favour the H2O2-assisted photocatalysis at UV 300nm. The reactions were highly retarded at the alkaline medium due to the unstable properties of H2O2.Titanium dioxide (TiO The recombination of holes (h Dicamba (2-methoxy-3,6-dichlorobenzoic acid) is used as a post-emergence herbicide for the selective control of weeds of the buckwheat family of cereals. This chlorinated herbicide is also applied to control broadleaved weeds in pastures and rangeland grasses Dicamba (2,5-Dichloro-6-methoxybenzoic acid, 99% HPLC grade) was purchased from Supelco. The initial concentration of dicamba in all the experiments was 2.2×10 All direct photolysis and photocatalysis experiments were conducted using an RPR-200 Rayonet photochemical reactor purchased from the South New England Ultraviolet Company. A quartz cylinder (52 Immediately after the addition of H The decay of dicamba by either 300 or 350 The effect of different initial pH levels on the photocatalytic degradation rates of dicamba at 300 TOC decay was also investigated in parallel with the dicamba degradation at different initial pH levels (see It is interesting to note that different proton sources (i.e., the associated counter anions that come with protons) can alter the reaction of dicamba photocatalysis to different degrees. At first, HCl was used as the exclusive source of protons in adjusting the pH levels in the study. However, if the proton source was replaced by other inorganic acids such as H Since the photocatalysis rates of dicamba at the two different wavelengths are at about the same order, it is worthwhile comparing the possible further rate improvement of TiO At high H Similarly, different dosages of H The effect of initial pH on dicamba photocatalysis with the addition of an optimal dosage of H Both direct photolysis (without TiO The work described in this paper was supported by a grant from the University Research Fund of the Hong Kong Polytechnic University (GW-045).