Introduction
                  Intracapsular femoral neck fractures remain associated with high rates of post-traumatic femoral head necrosis, non-union, and revision surgery.
               
                  Aim
                  Our aim was to identify factors associated with revision surgery in intracapsular femoral neck fractures treated with sliding hip screws (SHS) in adults aged <65 years.
               
                  Patients and methods
                  Consecutive admissions were identified retrospectively from the Royal Victoria Hospital, Belfast, which was the largest volume hospital on the National Hip Fracture Database. Of 2201 hip fractures between 1st August 2008 and 31st December 2010, 97 (4%) intracapsular fractures treated with SHS in adults <65 years were followed for a mean of 2.9 years (range 0–6.6).
               
                  Results
                  Twenty-one (22%) hips were revised to arthroplasty. Avascular necrosis developed in 28 (29%) femoral heads. Eight (8%) fractures proceeded to non-union. Displaced fractures (p<0.001, Fisher’s exact [FE]), posterior comminution (p=0.049, FE), chronic respiratory disease (p=0.006, FE) and residual distraction (p=0.011, χ2) were associated with revision to arthroplasty. Multiple regression found displaced fractures (p=0.006) and chronic respiratory disease (p=0.017) significant; in the latter 4 of 6 were revised (67%), including all four patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). Eleven (11%) individuals required walking aids before injury, which rose to 34 (35%) at one year (p<0.0001, χ2). Eighty-nine (92%) individuals could walk alone outdoors before injury, but only 76 (78%) at one year (p=0.009, χ2).
               
                  Conclusions
                  Displaced fractures in individuals with chronic respiratory disease should be considered high risk for revision to arthroplasty. Posterior cortex deficiency should be evaluated prior to choice of operation. Fracture biology and revascularisation play a greater role than operation timing. A significant proportion of individuals do not recovery pre-morbid mobility by one year.Internal fixation of intracapsular hip fractures to preserve the femoral head is often performed in adults <65 years. Intracapsular fractures remain associated with high complication rates, with re-operation rates of 18.0%, avascular necrosis of 14.3%, and non-union of 9.3%, among 27 studies in patients aged 16–60 years The posterior column artery, a branch of the medial femoral circumflex artery, supplies 70–80% of the femoral head via the lateral epiphyseal artery A meta-analysis of 564 fractures in 18 studies End stage renal failure, chronic respiratory disease and alcohol excess have been linked with late complications for intracapsular hip fractures Rheumatoid arthritis was associated with revision in seven of eleven displaced fractures (63%) in one series Alcohol dependence has been associated with AVN of the femoral head independently of fracture, and such patients have at least twice the rate of revision Dynamic MRI before surgery can identify impaired femoral head vascularity before surgery, and is highly predictive of AVN or non-union The aim of this study was to identify factors associated with revision surgery in intracapsular femoral neck fractures treated with SHS in adults aged <65 years. Hip fracture admissions occurring between 1st August 2008 and 31st December 2010 were retrieved retrospectively from a database. Demographics, comorbidities, admission and surgery details were collected prospectively. Walking ability, use of walking aids, residential status, and Barthel index Of 2201 hip fracture admissions recorded during this period, 156 (7%) were intracapsular fractures in patients aged <65 who underwent surgery. Hemiarthroplasty use was recorded in 42 instances, at the discretion of the surgeon ( Ninety-seven intracapsular fractures treated with SHS were selected, including five with variable angle plates ( Pre-operative anteroposterior and lateral radiographs were reviewed retrospectively for fracture displacement by the first author (DD). Where displacement was only evident on the lateral radiograph, including posterior tilt Normally distributed continuous variables are displayed as mean and range, and skewed data as median and interquartile range (IQR). A chi-squared test (χ Ninety-seven fractures were identified (60 left, 37 right-sided), among ninety-six patients (60 female, 36 male), with a median age at injury of 55 years (range 23–64). Seventy-five fractures (77%) occurred at ages 50–64. Sixty-five (67%) fractures were displaced. Low energy trauma such as a fall from standing height accounted for 79 (81%) injury mechanisms. Only 21 (22%) fractures occurred in individuals with American Society of Anaesthesiologists (ASA) grading of 1. Twenty fractures (21%) occurred in 19 individuals who had a documented history of alcohol dependence. The median time from injury to operation was 15 Four patients were deceased by two years, and a further four during the subsequent years of review (including one patient who passed away after revision) at mean of 2.2 years from initial fixation surgery (range 0.4–4.0). Of the 93 patients who survived to two years, a total of 62 (67%) completed two years of follow-up, including 59 with complete radiographic follow-up, and a further three who had clinical follow-up without further radiographs after two years. Mean follow-up for 97 hips was 2.9 years (range 0–6.6). Eight of the 21 who did not complete two years had less than 60 days follow-up. Revision to arthroplasty was performed for 21 hips (22%) at a mean of 1.4 years (range 0.4-3.3) from initial surgery, at a mean age of 58.9 years (range 41.7-65.4). All instances of non-union and screw cut out were revised ( Daytime surgery, and surgery >12 The chronic respiratory disease group included chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD), bronchiectasis, and asbestosis, however only one patient had asbestosis and one had bronchiectasis, and neither required arthroplasty, therefore all four with COPD were revised. All four had displaced fractures, and each developed AVN. None had residual distraction of the fracture >1 Seven (7%) patients had chronic kidney disease with a mean eGFR of 49.5 (27–59) Factors which were identified as possible predictors of failure underwent multivariate analysis ( Ninety-four individuals were admitted from their own home or sheltered dwelling, but only 87 had returned at 30 days. The proportion of individuals with a Barthel index of 20 fell by three months, and had not recovered by one year. Eleven (11%) individuals required walking aids before injury ( To our knowledge, this is the first study investigating the relationship between multiple comorbid conditions and complication rates for intracapsular hip fractures in adults under 65 years, in which a radiographic assessment of fixation was available for all patients Regarding posterior comminution, pre- and post-operative posterior tilt >20°, each represent deficiency of the posterior cortex. In addition to biomechanical instability, the posterior column artery, the main microvascular supply of the femoral head[7], at the posterolateral aspect of the femoral neck, is at risk. The positive association with COPD (4 of 6 revised, 67%) reflects the findings of Duckworth et al. Although rheumatoid arthritis was not significantly associated with revision, 1 of 2 (50%) were revised. Regarding renal impairment, relatively mild chronic kidney disease in this cohort may account for the discrepancy with other studies The strengths of this study include the length of follow-up, the number of cases within a short time-frame in a single high-volume institution, the presentation of the pattern of operations performed in Approximately half the patients with a history of alcohol dependence admitted during the study period with intracapsular fractures received hemiarthroplasty, therefore selection bias influenced our cohort, although this reflects the practice in some other units Inadequate study powering is almost inevitable in a single centre for this study type, however the National Hip Fracture Database Audit Displaced fractures in individuals with chronic respiratory disease should be considered high risk for revision to arthroplasty. Deficiency of the posterior cortex, including posterior comminution, should be evaluated on the lateral radiograph prior to choice of operation. Fracture biology and revascularisation play a greater role than operation timing in this injury. A significant proportion of individuals do not recovery pre-morbid mobility by one year. None of the authors declare any financial and personal relationships with other people or organisations that could inappropriately influence this work. Mr J Elliott, Consultant Orthopaedic Surgeon, Royal Victoria Hospital Belfast, for advice regarding the project, and hip fracture outcomes. Sinead McDonald and the rest of the Fractures Outcomes Research Database team at the Royal Victoria Hospital, Belfast, for providing data and advice. Prof I Pallister and Dr K Thorne, Swansea University, for providing feedback on the initial study.