Based on a shrinking core model (SCM) that takes into account the particle size distribution (PSD) and product characteristics, a model is established to simulate the reaction process of the fluid particle group. In this model, a total reaction rate coefficient k
                     m is defined to describe the reaction behavior. Simulation results show that the particle group conversion is determined by k
                     m, the PSD pattern, and reaction condition. The dissolution characteristics of five kinds of limestone from different places in China are studied by using the pH-stat method in a stirred tank at different temperatures (30–60°C), pH values (4.6–6.2) and PSD. By choosing proper k
                     m, the model can well describe the limestone dissolution process in acid with different reaction conditions. For different reaction conditions, the average total reaction coefficient can be obtained via iteration. Moreover, k
                     m can be deduced numerically at a given reaction time, which we propose a new way of obtaining the reaction parameter from experiment.moles of solid consumed per mole of fluid reacted fluid concentration (mol initial diameter of the solid particle (m) particle size parameter of the Rosin–Rammler function (m) average diameter of particle group (m) effective diffusion coefficient of reactant through inert/ash layer (m PSD density function based-on mass activation energy (kJ integral function of PSD frequency factor (m mass transfer coefficient of reactant in fluid (m surface reaction rate constant (m total reaction rate constant (m reaction coefficient in inert layer (m comprehensive reaction coefficient (m particle size parameter of the Rosin–Rammler function reaction rate (mol radius of solid particle (m) reaction time (s) the real volume of the particle (m reacted fraction of mono-particle reacted fraction of solid particle groups mole density of solid reactant (mol Fluid–solid reactions take place in a variety of chemical processes, such as combustion of carbon and coal char involving interaction of heterogeneous and homogeneous reactions SCM is widely used in the reaction of solid. The SCM describes the reaction process between fluid and mono-particle In the SCM, the solid reactant is considered to be spherical, non-porous and initially surrounded by a fluid film, through which mass transfer occurs between the solid particle and the bulk of the fluid. As the reaction proceeds, an ash/inert layer forms around the unreacted core. The general reaction shown in Eq. If the concentration of the reacting fluid is in excess, the reaction can be considered as in a pseudo-steady state. The reaction rate is determined by the control regime which can be one of the following: (1) diffusion through the fluid film which is surrounding the solid particle, (2) diffusion through the ash/inert solid layer and (3) chemical reaction on the surface of the unreacted core. It is assumed that the reaction rate is independent of ash layer on the particle surface or there is no ash/inert solid layer. No matter whether the reaction is controlled by diffusion through liquid film or surface chemical reaction, the chemical reaction rate can be described by the following equation. The mass balance can be expressed in terms of the shrinking rate of the initial core as a function of the instantaneous fluid flux According to Eqs. The fraction conversion of mono-particle is defined by the following equation: According to Eq. In some of the reactions, the ash layer surrounds the unreacted core, mostly in gas–solid reactions, and the reaction rate in ash layer is If the diffusion in the ash layer controls the whole reaction, despite that a closed-form solution cannot be deduced, the dissolution fraction satisfies A number of PSD functions can be applied to describe multi-particulate systems, including Gaudin–Schuhmann, Rosin–Rammler, log-normal, gamma and other modified forms of normal distribution. By incorporating a continuous PSD into the SCM of mono-particle, the reacted fraction of particle group is given by Eq. In this paper, the Rosin–Rammler function is chosen in all evaluation cases, and the differential and integral forms of function based on mass of particles are given by Simulation work has been done to examine the effects of changes of  In the wet flue gas desulfurization (WFGD) process This method is reliable to rank the performances of calcium-based materials as sorbents in the WFGD process. Many researchers   With the decrease of average diameter of particle group, the dissolution gets faster as shown in simulation ( Besides the particle group distribution, the concentration of fluid, both temperature and the property of solid also influence the reaction (Eq. The influence of temperature in the range 30–60 According to Arrhenius Law, the chemical reaction rate is written as By using the average constant Five sources of limestone with close average particle size are tested under the same reaction condition to study the influence of limestone property. From The total reaction rate coefficient  It is demonstrated that for the initial parts, the experiment results are greater than the simulation, and A fluid and particle group reaction model is established, which incorporates the particle size distribution. A total reaction coefficient The dissolution rate of limestone from different places of China is investigated under different reaction conditions and can be well predicted by fluid and particle group reaction model. This study shows that the particle group property, solution pH and reaction temperature are the dominant factors for the dissolution rate. With the searching method, the average total reaction coefficient This work is supported by