The pressure leaching of high silica Pb–Zn oxide ore using air as pressurized gas in sulfuric acid medium is studied systematically in the present paper. Study parameters include the concentration of sulfuric acid, partial air pressure, leaching temperature, leaching time, and liquid-to-solid ratio. The experimental results obtained show that under optimum conditions, the extraction percentage of Zn is up to 96% and the extent of dissolution of Si, Pb, and Fe are as low as 1%, 2%, and 6%, respectively. Leaching pulp had good filter performance, and the silicic acid formed during sulfuric acid leaching was transformed into easily filterable dehydrated SiO2 particles that can enter the slag. The filtration rate can be as high as 893L/m2
                     h.New processes are currently being developed to produce Zn metal from oxidized Zn ores because it is becoming more difficult to find Zn sulfide ore sources. There is an abundance of Zn oxide ores in Yunnan Province, China. Oxidized ores contain Zn in various carbonate and silicate minerals, such as smithsonite (ZnCO Some reports related to the alkaline treatment of low-grade Zn oxide ores or dust have also been made. Few studies report on leaching Pb–Zn oxide ores with sulfuric acid by pressure leaching. Sulfuric acid leaching is more suitable than alkaline leaching for connecting the existing conventional Zn smelting plant. In the present work, the extraction behavior of Zn, Pb, Si, and Fe from Pb–Zn silicate oxide ores is studied during pressure leaching in sulfuric acid medium. Optimization of five key parameters, including sulfuric acid concentration, air partial pressure, temperature, time, and liquid-to-solid ratio (L/S), is performed to examine the economic viability and process performance of such a method. For Zn sulfide ores, the dissolution of oxygen in solution increases with increasing oxygen pressure, thus improving the oxidation rate of sulfides and the electrode potential ( The high silica Pb–Zn oxide ores used in the present study were from Yunnan Province, China. After crushing and grinding, the materials were screened for different particle size classes with Tyler Sieves using a mechanical vibrator. The X-ray Diffraction (XRD) pattern of the materials is shown in In all leaching experiments, the sulfuric acid used had a concentration of 96% w/w and a density of 1.84 Leaching experiments were conducted in a 2 Silica gel is easy to generate from the sulfuric acid leaching system and makes filtration difficult. In the pressure leaching process, the leaching pulp shows good filtration performance. Pressure technology may directly accelerate the decomposition of silicic acid. The reaction may occur as follows: From the thermodynamic point of view of the reaction, the relationship between ∆G and T is as follows: ∆G Depending on the amount of water present in the reaction system, silica combined with Zn oxide may react with sulfuric acid to form H The effect of sulfuric acid concentration on the extraction of Zn, Pb, and Fe from high silica Pb–Zn oxide ore is shown in When sulfuric acid concentration is increased, a variety of chemical reactions between Zn, Pb, Fe, and sulfuric acid occurs more completely, causing more Zn and Fe to be extracted into the solution, and more Pb to precipitate into the leaching residue. The higher the Fe content, the lower the Zn extraction in acidic solutions. This is due to the coating of smithsonite grains with Fe hydroxides ( The effect of sulfuric acid concentration on the extraction of Si and the filtration rate is shown in Decreased acid concentrations are also necessary to reduce the burden of removing Fe in follow-up treatment processes. Optimum sulfuric acid concentration appears to be 120 Under the conditions of sulfuric acid concentration: 120 As such, more iron ion forms in the solution with increasing pressure. The formation of Fe(OH) The relationship between Si recovery yield and filtration rate and air pressure is described in Under the condition of sulfuric acid concentration: 120 Both the recovery yield of Si and the filtration rate against temperature are presented in The leaching recovery of metals from Zn oxide ores was also examined against time at the following conditions: sulfuric acid concentration: 120 Both Si recovery yield and filtration rate against time are presented in Under conditions of sulfuric acid concentration: 120 Both the recovery yield of Si and the filtration rate against the L/S are presented in The leaching residues yielded about 60% of the matte mass used in the experiments. The products contained about 30% Pb in the form of Pb sulfate. The leaching residues containing Pb may be treated by Pb smelting technology in an Isa furnace. Pb concentrates and leaching residue are mixed and placed inside an Isa furnace. Based on the interaction between the concentrates and leaching residue, the main reaction was determined to be as follows: When the furnace temperature is higher than 1200  The pressure leaching of Pb–Zn silicate oxide ores with air as pressurized gas in a sulfuric acid medium was studied. Optimum operating parameters were established as follows: sulfuric acid concentration of 120 Experimental results show that leaching temperature, liquid-to-solid ratio, air partial pressure, and sulfuric acid concentration have significant effects in the process, but leaching time has a relatively small impact. Partial air pressure was primarily used to maintain the higher temperature necessary for the reaction and oxidization of the ferrous ion. To obtain leaching pulps with good filter performance, the leaching temperature must be higher than 120 In a variety of single factor experiments, the filtration rate increased with decreasing Si leaching rate. When the pH at the end of the pressure leaching process was 4.8–5.0, electropositive Fe(OH) The authors thank Jian-Rong Peng, an engineer at the Technology Center of Yunnan Metallurgy Group Co., Ltd., Kunming, for providing the facilities to carry out this work.