This paper describes research into the use of granulated blast furnace slag as an active filler in the making of geopolymers. During this work it was found that geopolymer setting time correlates well with temperature, potassium hydroxide concentration, metakaolinite and sodium silicate addition. The physical and mechanical properties of the geopolymer also correlated well with the concentration of alkaline solution and the amount of metakaolinite that is added. The highest compressive strength achieved was 79 MPa. For fire resistance tests, a 10 mm thick geopolymer panel was exposed to a 1100 °C flame, with the measured reverse-side temperatures reaching less than 350 °C after 35 min. The products can be fabricated for construction purposes and have great potential for engineering applications.Blast furnace slag is formed in processes such as pig iron manufacture from iron ore, combustion residue of coke, and fluxes such as limestone or serpentine, and other materials. If the molten slag is fast-cooled by high-pressure water, a vitreous Ca–Al–Mg silicate fine grain glass is formed. Generally, the way to utilize granulated blast furnace slag is in partially replacing Portland cement. There are at least four million tons/year of granulated blast furnace slag used in Taiwan. Granulated blast furnace slag is a non-toxic material, and can be a good raw material for making high-value geopolymers which can be utilized in fire resistant applications. Geopolymers are kinds of inorganic polymers that have been gradually attracting world attention as potentially revolutionary materials. Similar to natural zeolite minerals, geopolymer is a class of three-dimensionally networked alumino-silicate materials, and first developed by Joseph Davidovits in 1978 ( Sodium silicate (weight ratio SiO A mechanical mixer firstly mixed metakaolinite and KOH for 10 min. Sodium silicate solution and ground blast furnace slag were then added. Following a further 5 min of mixing, the samples were cast in 50-mm cube molds and vibrated for 5 min in order to release bubbles. The molds were sealed and set at 60 °C for 3 h in a sample-drying oven. After being removed from the moulds, the samples were kept at room temperature for another 21 h, before the beginning of physical and mechanical property measurements. The geopolymers setting time measurements were conducted by Vicat needle (refer to CNS 786 and ASTM C191-01 standard test methods). For SEM and energy dispersive (EDS) examinations, a Hitachi S-4100 scanning electron microscope, linked with an EDS attachment, was used to examine the geopolymers. The testing methods and formulas for physical property tests such as water absorption rate and volumetric density were evaluated according to the Archimedes method. Compressive strength tests were carried out after 1, 7, 14, and 28 days by a Shimadzu UEH-30 compressive strength analysis apparatus. For fire resistant tests, a 10 mm thick geopolymer panel was exposed to an 1100 °C flame. The reverse-side temperature of the panel was measured and recorded ( A Vicat needle was used to measure the geopolymer setting time. By recording the time of a 1 mm needle penetration in the softening specimen after pouring the paste into a mould, the time of a penetration of 25 mm was determined. This is the initial setting time. The final setting time is when the needle does not sink visibly into the paste. From the results of the setting time measurement, it can be seen that the geopolymer setting time was very short, ≈15–45 min at 60 °C, due to the water loss increasing the rate. As shown in Scanning electron microscopy investigations were conducted in order to get a better understanding of the morphology of the geopolymer. The microstructure of geopolymers for the K2 sample is shown in Various physical properties of geopolymer obtained from granulated blast furnace slag at different conditions are listed in   The geopolymerisation behavior, physical, mechanical properties, and fire resistance characteristics of granulated blast furnace slag-based geopolymer, are strongly dependent upon the chemical composition in the reaction system. In making the geopolymer, it was found that the K