In this work, In2O3/In2S3/CdS ternary stereoscopic porous heterostructure films were successfully fabricated via consecutive in situ ionic exchange reactions to degrade persistent 4-Fluoro-3-methylphenol through photoelectrocatalytic process. The optimized In2O3/In2S3/CdS ternary stereoscopic porous heterostructure film electrode showed much higher photoelectrocatalytic efficiency than the In2O3 and In2O3/In2S3 films. The resulting degradation reaction constant is about 3 and 2 times higher than that on In2O3 and binary In2O3/In2S3 films, respectively. The extraordinary higher degradation and mineralization efficiencies of the In2O3/In2S3/CdS composite film electrode come from the synergy of ternary components in the stereoscopic porous heterostructure. The existence of double type-II band alignment with nanosized interfaces in the ternary heterostructure can significantly improve charge transport and electron-hole separation. The stereoscopic porous architechture can greatly enhance visible light utilization and superhydrophilicity, and meanwhile facilitate the mass transport and accessibility of active sites. Ion chromatography, gas chromatography–mass spectrometry, total organic carbon analysis, active species trapping experiment as well as electron spin resonance techniques were employed to probe the degradation and the mineralization processes of 4-Fluoro-3-methylphenol. A unifying photoeletrocatalytic degradation route and mechanism is provided to explain the degradation and the mineralization processes. The generated more superoxide ions and holes promoted the defluorination process and favored the subsequent benzene ring cleavage and mineralization of low molecular weight fragments (e.g. carboxylic acids). This work provides a route to degrade persistent organic pollutants and realize efficient water contamination purification via efficient visible light photoelectrocatalytic process.In recent years, fluorine-containing phenolic compounds and their derivatives have been widely used in organic synthesis industry and in the production of disinfectants and pesticides [ During the past decades, photocatalytic technique was recognized as promising methods for the treatment of contaminated water solutions because of effective utilization of renewable solar power [ In photoelectrocatalytic system, the perfect film photoelectrode should markedly promote separation and transportation of photogenerated charge, as well as improve the utilization efficiency of sunlight. Compared with single layer solid film, double-layer composite film can meet above requirements. For ideal photoelectrocatalytic double-layer composite films, the underlying film should possess high conductivity because of its critical role in connecting the upper film and outside curcuit. The upper layer film acts as light absorber to convert solar energy into other kinds of energy. In the past studies, stereoscopic porous structures have proved to possess inspiring superiorities such as high light harvesting, abundant active sites, and sufficient transport of reactants and products. These excellent properties are greatly important in the enhancement of catalytic activity [ Considering the refractory degradation of fluorine-containing phenolic compounds, the objective of this study was to fabricate a high-efficient In The In Typical, 0.04 g L-Cysteine was added into the mixed solution containing 3 mL ethylene glycol and 22 mL ethanol, followed by stirring for 10 min. Then the mixed solution was transferred into a 50 mL Teflon reator, and the FTO glasses containing the prepared In The ternary In The obtained products were characterized by X-ray diffraction (XRD, Bruker D8 Advance) with Cu Kα radiation (λ = 1.54178 Å). The morphology of the obtained products was investigated by scanning electron microscopy (SEM, Hitachi S-4800, Japan) and transmission electron microscopy (TEM, JEOL 2100, Japan). The optical properties of the films were analyzed by UV–vis diffuse reflectance spectroscopy (UV-vis DRS) using a UV–vis spectrophotometer (Shimadzu UV-2550). The electronic states of the elements in the sample were analyzed using X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS, Kratos-AXIS ULTRA DLD, Al Ka X-ray source). Inductively coupled plasma optical emission spectrometry (ICP-OES, Optima 7000DV, PerkinElmer) was used to measure material content. The scanning Kelvin probe (SKP) measurements (SKP5050 system, Scotland) were performed under normal laboratory conditions in an ambient atmosphere. A gold electrode was used as the reference electrode. Photoluminescence (PL) measurements were taken using a FL920 spectrofluorometer (Edinburgh Instruments) with the photoexcitation wavelength set at 360 nm. Luminescence lifetimes were recorded on a single photon counting spectrometer using a microsecond pulse lamp as the excitation source (375 nm). The data were analyzed using software supplied by Edinburgh Instruments. The contact angle measurements of the films were conducted on an OCA20 goniometer from Dataphysics with an experimental error of ± 1° by the sessile drop method at room temperature using a water droplet with a volume of about 1 μL. GC–MS analysis was carried out on an Agilent 6890GC/5973MSD with a DB-5 MS capillary column. Photoelectrochemical measurements of the obtained products were recorded by a BAS100 B electrochemical analyzer (Bioanalytical Systems Inc., USA) in a standard three-compartment cell consisting of a working electrode, a Pt slice as the counter electrode, and saturated Ag/AgCl as the reference electrode. The working electrode was different samples. All photoelectrochemical experiments are carried out at ambient temperature (25 °C) in a 0.1 M solution (pH = 6.95). All photoelectrochemical experiments were carried out under visible light irradiation with a power density of 100 mW/cm The photoelectrochemical activities of the samples were evaluated by degradation of 4-Fluoro-3-methylphenol in an aqueous solution under visible light irradiation. Typical photoelectrochemical degradation process is arranged in this way: vigorous stirring of a 4-Fluoro-3-methylphenol solution (100 mL) with an initial concentration of 50 mg L The total organic carbon (TOC) analyzer (multi N/C 3000) was employed for mineralization degree analysis of the organic pollutants solutions. Prior to injection into the TOC analyzer, the samples were filtrated with a 0.45 The morphology and structure of the prepared films were characterized by scanning electron microscopy (SEM) and transmission electron microscopy (TEM). It can be clearly seen that the In The XRD patterns of In In order to elucidate the charge carrier kinetics and investigate charge separation transfer at the interfaces of the heterostructure composites, steady-state and time-resolved PL tests were performed. As shown in The In The photoelectrocatalytic (PEC) performance of the different samples were conducted under visible-light (λ > 420 nm). From Fig. S11 we can see that the blank process and photolysis almost played no role in the degradation of 4-Fluoro-3-methylphenol. Meanwhile, defluorination efficiencies of the 4-Fluoro-3-methylphenol in various processes were also investigated by ion chromatography. As shown in Fig. S13A, the defluorination efficiencies of the three paths gradually increased with the extension of degrdation time, and the defluorination efficiency of PEC process is much higher than that of PC and EC process. Moreover, the In On the other hand, the factors (e.g. CdS content and bias voltage) affecting PEC activity were investigated. When the content of CdS is suitable, the optimal PEC removal efficiency can be obtained (Fig. S14). Moreover, the influence of bias voltage is very remarkable ( To get insight into the PEC mechanism of the In Because the photoelectrocatalytic reactions happen on the electrode/electrolyte interface, so the hydrophilic property of film plays a considerable role in influencing the photoelectrocatalytic oxidation ability [ To elucidate the effect of photoelectron generation and electron–hole recombination rate on the photoelectrocatalytic activity, the photoelectronic response of different films to visible light was investigated. As shown in The Scanning Kelvin Probe (SKP) is an extremely sensitive instrument that can measure the direction of interface electric fields and study the electronic properties [ The photoelectrocatalytic degradation pathway and process of 4-Fluoro-3-methylphenol in the In As discussed above, there are three consecutive steps in this photoelectrocatalytic degradation process: light harvesting, charge separation and migration to the photocatalyst surface, and the following surface adsorption and redox reaction. In the In In this work, effective degradation of persistent 4-Fluoro-3-methylphenol was executed through the photoelectric-synergistic catalytic technology using the In This research was supported by the Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at Details of characterization and photoelectrocatalytic degradation test in experimental section. Fig.s showing SEM images, elemental mappings, XPS spectra, GC–MS spectra, and photoelectrocatalytic performance of the catalyst films under different conditions. Tables showing adsorption kinetics parameters, TOC and catalytic performance comparisons. The following is Supplementary data to this article.