The Mokrsko-West deposit is unique among European Variscan gold deposits from the points of view of both the structure (an approx. 200m thick complex of sheeted, several mm-thick, densely spaced quartz veins) and the economic viability (gold reserves of about 100t). The deposit is hosted mainly by tonalite of the calc-alkaline Sázava tonalite suite (ca. 354Ma) of the Central Bohemian Plutonic Complex. Mineralization is characterized by quartz-dominated gangue, no visible hydrothermal alteration, low sulfide content, high fineness native gold accompanied by maldonite, aurostibite, native bismuth and numerous Bi–Te–(S) phases. Five mineralogical stages are described in great detail. Arsenopyrite and chlorite thermometers, mineral phase stabilities and published isotope and fluid inclusion data are used to reconstruct the temperature and compositional evolution of the system. The role of liquid bismuth in the sequestration of gold is also discussed.
                  The deposit shares the features of both orogenic gold (ORG) and intrusion-related gold (IRG) deposits. The IRG model is advocated by close spatial association between the ore zone and the tonalite host-intrusion, by the absence/scarcity of hydrothermal alteration, by the Au–Bi–Te–As elemental association and by marked thermal gradients from the early to late mineralization stages. The ORG model is advocated by an approx. 15–10Ma gap between the intrusion of the tonalite-host and the ore formation, by isotope and geochemical evidence for a key role of metamorphic fluids in the mobilization and transfer of many elements/species (inclusive S and Au). The apparently ambiguous classification of the deposit can most probably be attributed to deposit formation at a depth of ≥9km and to setting of the deposit at/inside a large-scale plutonic complex with multiple and prolonged tectonic and intrusive activity.Gold mineralization is one of the prominent features of the Variscan metallogeny of Europe, and specifically of the Bohemian Massif ( Most gold deposits within the CBMZ are characterized by low sulfide content, quartz-dominated gangue, lack of extensive hydrothermal alteration and dominance of early-stage aqueous-carbonic low-salinity fluids and also a change to low to moderate salinity aqueous fluids during the middle to late stages (e.g., Gold deposits in the CBMZ were traditionally classified as orogenic-gold deposits (e.g. This paper focuses primarily on mineralogical characterization of the Mokrsko-West deposit and on mineralogical/geochemical aspects critical for its classification. Where important for later discussion, new mineralogical data for the neighboring Mokrsko-East deposit are also presented. The greatest attention is paid to identification of Bi–Te–(S) and Au–Bi–(Sb) phases and to proper interpretation of their relationships to the principal sulfides, notably to arsenopyrite. In addition to the relative timing of gold deposition, we focused our attention on the importance of low-temperature Bi-rich liquids for the formation of gold ore. In order to support arguments for the presence of metallic liquids in the ore-forming system, we performed complete reconstruction of the thermal evolution of all mineralization stages. A summary is also given of the available data and arguments for the nature of fluids and metals and for the likely pathways of fluids. Finally, the criteria for deposit classification of the Mokrsko-West deposit are considered (i.e. intrusion-related gold versus orogenic gold). The Bohemian Massif (BM) represents the easternmost segment of the European Variscan Belt. Traditionally, is divided into four major tectonic units: the Saxothuringian, the Teplá-Barrandian, the Moldanubian and the Moravo-Silesian units ( The Central Bohemian Plutonic Complex (CBPC; The origin of the CBPC is explained as being a result of subduction zone-related magmatism in a magmatic arc with significant involvement of mantle-derived magmas ( The Teplá–Barrandian unit (TBU) represents part of the Avalonian–Cadomian belt developed along the northern active margin of Gondwana during the late Neoproterozoic (~ The Jílové Belt (JB) represents the easternmost part of the TBU; southern and central parts of the JB are enclosed by rocks of the CBPC ( The northern and central parts of the belt have an anticlinal form with a shallowly dipping axis (10°–20° to the NNE/SSW). Another remarkable feature is steep NNE-SSW trending cleavage with marked stretching lineation parallel to the anticline axis. Later deformation led to weak transversal undulation of the Jílové Belt anticline, resulting in alternation of several axial elevations and depressions ( The Mokrsko-West deposit is situated about 60 The Mokrsko-West deposit was discovered by a regional soil survey in the early 1980s, followed by extensive exploration (surface trenching 2712  Apart from gold mineralization, several other types of mineralization are also present in the Psí hory district, however only in minor amounts and without economic significance ( This study is based on a suite of material collected from the underground workings of the Mokrsko-West deposit from 1998 to 1999. In addition, some samples from drill cores from both the Mokrsko-West and Mokrsko-East deposits were also studied. Preliminary identification of ore phases, most BSE microphotos, and detailed study of gangue minerals were conducted using the Oxford Instruments Link – Isis EDS system at the Faculty of Science, Charles University. The chemistry of arsenopyrite and gold was studied by the WDS MICROSPEC microprobe-analyzer at the Czech Geological Survey, Prague using 25 All the Bi–Te–S and Au–Bi–Sb–S phases described in this paper were reanalyzed using a Cameca SX 100 microprobe (WDS mode) at the joint laboratory of Masaryk University, Brno and the Czech Geological Survey in 2012. Operating conditions: accelerating voltage 25 Representative mineral chemistry data are given in the tables ( The Mokrsko-West deposit is mostly hosted by the amphibole–biotite tonalite of the “Sázava suite” of the CBPC ( The Neoproterozoic rocks of the Jílové Belt form the eastern part of the Mokrsko-West deposit. They consist, in decreasing order of abundance, of contact metamorphic tuffites (biotite and amphibole–biotite hornfels), meta-rhyolites to dacites and tuffs, meta-andesite tuffs, basalts (metabasites) and basaltic tuffs. Calc-silicate hornfels and dolomite marbles are rare. Both the tonalite and the Jílové Belt rocks are crosscut by numerous Variscan dikes: 1) randomly oriented up to 1–2 Two main types of mineralized quartz veins are characteristic of the Mokrsko-West deposit. Most representative is a system of gold-bearing sheeted, parallel veins and veinlets striking E-W and dipping 85–90° S/N. Thin quartz veinlets (0.1–5 Some thicker, gold-poor quartz veins are also present. These early quartz veins are several tens of cm to 1 Discrimination between early and sheeted quartz veins is unequivocal only where the host rock is tonalite, but is equivocal within the Jílové Belt rocks (the Mokrsko-East and Čelina deposits), where all the quartz veins have similar subparallel E-W orientation, lower density (spacing) and much more variable thickness (1–50 Early and sheeted quartz veins are present both in the middle (adit level; 300 The hypogene Variscan gold mineralization at the Mokrsko-West deposit formed during five stages ( The quartz stage corresponds to the formation of thick veins of massive quartz (i.e. early quartz veins), while the famous complex of sheeted quartz veins/veinlets was formed during the quartz-sulfide stage. During the next two stages (silicate and chlorite–calcite), only microfracture-related mineral assemblages developed in the host rocks and in earlier gangue and ore minerals. Unfortunately, individual microfractures rarely cross one another and mutual delimiting of the two stages is thus largely based on the presence of two compositionally distinct chlorites (occurring in a single sample and thus implying two-stage chlorite formation either at different temperatures or from chemically distinct fluids; the latter factor can also be affected by the dominant lithology and by the duration of the fluid–rock interactions). Gold formation occurred in three stages (quartz-sulfide through chlorite–calcite). Minerals of the calcite stage postdate the Au-ore formation, being related to late faults/fractures, and were probably separated in time from the previous stages. Differentiation among three quartz generations is based on macrostructural (quartz-1, -2) and microstructural (quartz-3) relationships. Quartz-1 (early quartz veins) usually displays intense ductile deformation; quartz-2 (sheeted veins) is less deformed and contains rare drusy vugs. No primary (i.e. growth) zoning was observed in quartz-1 or -2 under cathodoluminescence (SEM-CL). Feldspars commonly form discontinuous rims and aggregates attached to the walls of the fracture. K-feldspar (microcline) is the most frequent, albite the least. Anorthite is usually younger than K-feldspar and arsenopyrite, but older than albite. It overgrows K-feldspar-1, scheelite or pyrrhotite-1 and rarely also molybdenite. Grains of ore minerals (usually pyrrhotite or chalcopyrite, rarely gold) are frequently attached to some tips of feldspar aggregates ( Actinolite to ferro-hornblende is present only where the quartz veins/veinlets crosscut rocks favorable for remobilization of rock-forming hornblende (meta-tuffs, amphibolites). Three generations of biotite are present, with near identical chemistry. Biotite-1 (quartz-sulfide stage) is overgrown by arsenopyrite or pyrrhotite, or occurs between these two minerals. It is replaced by prehnite and chlorite-1 ( Hydrothermal biotite exhibits higher Mg content (1.56 to 1.68 Chlorite is a very common phase of the silicate and chlorite–calcite stages. It occurs most often in microfractures or as massive, almost mono-mineral fillings of mm-sized cavities/fractures in quartz, arsenopyrite or pyrrhotite. Up to four chlorite populations were distinguished (1a, 1b, 2a, 2b; Muscovite occurs in variable amounts at the contact between chlorite-1 grains, and partly as assimilated inclusions ( The most abundant ore mineral is arsenopyrite, which is also the earliest ore phase ( Arsenopyrite, irrespective of type, contains numerous large (> BSE images of arsenopyrite identified various zoning patterns ( Most arsenopyrites correspond to the pure FeAsS phase, rarely admixture of Ni (up to 2.52 The As-content of Mokrsko arsenopyrite varies from 31.01 to 36.51 Löllingite (with sulfur admixture from 1.2 to 3.2 Vein-hosted pyrrhotite is intergrown with chalcopyrite or arsenopyrite and is less frequently monominerallic, while the rock-hosted pyrrhotite mostly forms monomineralic grains. Skeletal pyrrhotite was found only in the calcite stage. Only hexagonal pyrrhotite was identified (by EBSD), corresponding to Fe Molybdenite is present in variable amounts, predominantly as isolated monomineral aggregates. Sphalerite, galena and ullmannite occur as minor phases attached to chalcopyrite or pyrrhotite, or less frequently included in them. Pyrite forms fine crystals or aggregates in at least two generations. Pyrite or pyrrhotite are locally rimmed or replaced by marcasite associated with late calcite mineralization. Scheelite is the only W-bearing phase at the deposit. It forms coarse-grained euhedral to subhedral grains in the quartz veins, while that hosted in rocks is fine-grained and xenomorphic. Its molybdenum content is very low (0 to 1.3 Microscopic gold occurs either as inclusions in arsenopyrite ( Most frequently gold has a fineness of 940–1000; the lowest determined fineness is 890 ( Gold and Au±Bi±Te±S phases hosted by microfractures in the quartz gangue are frequently associated with chlorite and/or calcite ( Maldonite (Au Aurostibite (AuSb An unnamed AuSbO Native bismuth is the most abundant ( Hedleyite (Bi Hedleyite is the most abundant Bi–Te phase ranging from an almost stoichiometric Bi Tetradymite, joséite-B, protojoséite and rare joséite-A represent the Bi–Te–S phases ( Bismuthinite (Bi Bi and Bi–Te oxides, of which only bismite Bi One hundred and thirty-two arsenopyrite analyses with total Co, Ni, Bi and Sb contents of < The chlorite geothermometers of The world-class Mokrsko-West deposit is unique among Variscan gold deposits in Europe, especially in its ~ Estimated mineral formation temperatures for the Mokrsko-West deposit are summarized in Homogenization temperatures of primary aqueous-carbonic inclusions from quartz veins (Qtz-2) range from 300 to 380 Arsenopyrite hosted by these veins evolves from As-rich to As-poor compositions. The composition of the most As-rich arsenopyrite (36.1–36.5 Temperatures estimated for the rest of the arsenopyrite data (32.2 to 34.5 Similarly to arsenopyrite, chlorite geothermometers have also been subjected to justified criticism (e.g. Wairakite is a late phase of the silicate stage. Depending on the CO The bulk of chlorite-2 crystallized from ~ With respect to the temperatures summarized above and the observed structural relationships, we can conclude that gold and the accompanying Au–Bi–Sb–Te phases at the Mokrsko-West deposit originated in three discrete mineral and temperature stages: 1) during the quartz-sulfide stage at ~ Several recent papers (e.g. Geostatistical analysis using multifactorial techniques on more than 20,000 samples analyzed during the exploration phase show that the elements correlated with the gold ore are Bi The common occurrence of aurostibite (AuSb The Mokrsko-West ore zone (ca 600 Arsenic is only moderately correlated with gold; maxima of arsenic and gold are mutually offset in both the horizontal (the highest arsenic contents/> The distribution of W in tonalite is similar to As ( Native bismuth, Bi–Te phases, native gold (gold-1), maldonite and aurostibite (herein all referred to as Au–Bi–Sb–Te phases/inclusions) commonly form clusters of minute inclusions in the arsenopyrite of the Mokrsko-West deposit. We identified two distinct modes of their occurrence: (1) in the löllingite-bearing As-rich arsenopyrite with more than 34.5 We prefer to explain the first association on the basis of early crystallization of Au–Bi–Sb–Te inclusions from a fluid phase together with the formation of As-rich arsenopyrite. Our interpretation, however, is not unambiguous. Similar textures have been described for several orogenic gold deposits worldwide (e.g. In this context, the metamorphic evolution of the Jílové Belt must be recalled. The Jílové Belt rocks suffered two stages of metamorphism: Cadomian phase and Variscan phase. Their metamorphic history, unfortunately, has not been studied by modern approaches. The Cadomian regional metamorphism probably only reached conditions of anchizone to epizone transition. The intensity of the Variscan contact metamorphism increases from the NNE (lower greenschist) to the SSW (lower amphibolite) of the Jílové Belt, reaching middle to upper greenschist grade in the area of Mokrsko (630 to 500 We also have found no unambiguous textural evidence for either the prograde or the retrograde metamorphic recrystallization of sulfides at the Mokrsko-West deposit – i.e. occurrence of a third phase (löllingite or arsenopyrite) at the contact between two other phases (arsenopyrite, pyrrhotite, löllingite). Arsenopyrite and pyrrhotite frequently occur as isolated species within the quartz gangue. This all testifies for a primary hydrothermal origin of löllingite and of the associated Au–Bi–Sb–Te inclusions, and also for their coprecipitation with the arsenopyrite host at about ~ In the second association (i.e. the löllingite-free arsenopyrite), the Au–Bi–Sb–Te inclusions are mostly arranged in randomly distributed clusters (3-dimensional?; Evidence for coprecipitation of the youngest Au–Bi–Sb–Te inclusions just before the final stage of arsenopyrite growth can be found in the presence of thin Au–Bi–Sb–Te-inclusion-free growth zones that rim the arsenopyrite core with abundant Au–Bi–Sb–Te inclusions ( Finally, the rare occurrence of gold (± The common occurrence of native gold, native bismuth, maldonite and other Bi–Te–S phases (see Most probably the best evidence for this process, in addition to the microtextures of the Au–Bi–Te inclusions, could be deduced from the Au:Bi:Te:S ratio of the ore. Unfortunately, neither the Bi/Te ratio nor the Au/Bi ratio of the ore samples from the Mokrsko-West deposit was determined during the deposit exploration stage. We analyzed two concentrates of ore minerals by ICP-MS with the following results: sample SP11 (8.41 The Bi/Te ratio of the ore (1.46–5.46) is compatible with the presence of only reduced Bi–Te phases (with Bi/Te > After being trapped in gangue or main-ore minerals, the Bi-(Sb–Te)–Au liquids should form on solidification of polyphase ore inclusions with characteristic microtexture: e.g. eutectic intergrowths, special disseminated texture ( In addition, the multiphase (mostly 2–3-phase) inclusions at Mokrsko, typically 5–30 In contrast to other deposits for which the occurrence of metallic melts was suggested, ore assemblages at the Mokrsko-West deposit contain significant amounts of monophase inclusions/grains. Among them, native bismuth and maldonite are the most common. Conversion of liquid bismuth to a solid phase below its solidus temperature (271.4 The occurrence of numerous monophase grains/inclusions of native bismuth, native gold, maldonite and aurostibite, in combination with the general absence of any significant admixture of Au in the native bismuth, led us to suggest that probably a smaller amount of gold (only gold-1?) was scavenged from the gold-bearing hydrothermal fluid phase by the bismuthian liquid/melt through interaction of the liquid with a gold-bearing fluid phase. Probably a larger proportion of gold and of the Au–Bi–Sb–Te phases precipitated directly from a hydrothermal fluid phase. This seems very probable for gold-2, which precipitated within the microfractures and is the only possibility for gold-3 formed at temperatures below the eutectic temperature of the Au–Bi binary system (i.e. 241 The oxygen isotope composition of hydrothermal quartz (δ The sulfur isotope composition of sulfides (δ In relation to the gold content, Mineral assemblages from various microfractures within sheeted quartz veins hosted by the Mokrsko tonalite indicate that the hydrothermal fluids related to the silicate and chlorite–calcite stages suffered extensive equilibration (ion exchange) with the Jílové Belt rocks. Gangue minerals of the silicate stage (anorthite, albite, biotite, epidote, chlorite, prehnite, wairakite, quartz) resemble a typical low-P, low-T metamorphic mineral assemblage of metabasite ( The only unambiguous evidence for the presence of magmatic fluids (s.s.) during evolution of the Mokrsko-West deposit is represented by the fluid inclusion data of Undetermined Bi(-Te) oxides are relatively common in microfracture assemblages ( Evidence for the increase in the oxygen fugacity during the chlorite–calcite stage can also be deduced from the chemistry of chlorite-2. These species have the highest Fe/(Fe Two distinct genetic models have been proposed for the Mokrsko-West deposit: the classical “orogenic-gold deposits (ORG)” model with aqueous-carbonic fluids of metamorphic origin ( Of the general characteristics of the IRG model, features identifiable at the Mokrsko deposit include: i) the close spatial association with a meta-aluminous tonalite–granodiorite intrusion, ii) the geochemistry of the intrusion-host that lies close to the boundary between the magnetite and ilmenite series, iii) the limited presence of hydrothermal alteration and (iv) the limited occurrence of magmatic fluids during the early quartz stage. A prominent feature of the IRG not identified at the Mokrsko-West deposit is the presence of gold-bearing late magmatic dikes/pods (pegmatite/aplite/granite) and/or the presence of magmatic silicate melt inclusions with Au–Bi-bearing sulfidic droplets (e.g. Another widely cited feature of the IRG group is the deposit location within a magmatic province with identified tungsten/tin deposits. The Mokrsko-West deposit was, however, incorrectly stated to fit this feature. The Central Bohemian Plutonic Complex (CBPC) does not represent a typical tungsten/tin province. Uneconomic tungsten reserves at the Mokrsko-West, -East and Čelina deposits are related to stratiform scheelite mineralization of probable replacement origin that is hosted by calc-silicate rocks of the Jílové Belt. This mineralization is older than the quartz veins containing gold. Scheelite (commonly) or wolframite (rarely) occurs at numerous other sites in the area of the CBPC but have never been of economic importance. In contrast, a typical Variscan tin–tungsten province in the Bohemian Massif is located in a different area (Krušné hory/Erzgebirge Mtns.); it is younger (~ The remaining characteristics, such as vein formation at medium temperatures, early aqueous-carbonic low-salinity fluids followed by aqueous fluids, Bi–W–As–Mo–Te (–Sb) metal assemblage, low sulfide content and reduced ore mineral assemblage fit both genetic models (ORG, IRG). On the other hand, there are several lines of evidence for the presence of metamorphic fluids during the main stage of the Mokrsko deposit evolution: CO The apparent gap of ca 15 The Mokrsko-West deposit therefore represents a deposit type that is intermediate between the typical IRG and ORG deposits. Alternatively, we can speculate about an ORG deposit, some features of which were affected/overprinted by IRG-like signatures, due to setting of the deposit at/inside a large-scale plutonic complex with multiple and prolonged tectonic and intrusive activity. The world-class Mokrsko-West deposit with estimated resources of about 100 Five mineralization stages were identified that were associated with the formation of early quartz and sheeted quartz veins: the quartz, quartz-sulfide, silicate, chlorite–calcite and calcite stages. Gold deposition occurred in three discrete periods: 1) coevally with the formation of arsenopyrite at ~ Native gold usually exhibits fineness of 940–1000 and is less than 80 The distribution of As, Au and W within the Mokrsko-West deposit seems not to have been affected by lithological factors. The gold content decreases with depth, while As and W increase. Major Au and As–W anomalies are offset in both horizontal and vertical sections. This infers superimposed mineralization processes: As and W from an earlier, higher-temperature quartz–sulfide stage and most of gold from later, lower-temperature silicate and chlorite–calcite stages. Genetic classification of the Mokrsko-West deposit is equivocal. The deposit exhibits the features of both orogenic gold (ORG) and intrusion-related gold (IRG) deposits. This ambiguous character may have resulted from relatively deep levels of deposit formation (≥ This study is based on data gathered within the project no. 