Superconducting Y–Ba–Cu–O thick films were produced by the atmospheric plasma spraying method. The effect of processing parameters (powder characteristics, spraying parameters) on the coatings properties was studied. X-ray diffraction analysis, SEM studies combined with EDS microanalysis and scratch test experiments were carried out in order to characterize the adhesion of the coatings to the substrate, the coatings morphology the thickness and crystalline structure as well as the powder phase transformations during spraying. For restoring the superconducting phase after deposition, the coatings were heated in oxygen in the temperature range 750–930°C. It was shown that the quality of the coatings and the adhesion to the substrate are greatly dependent on the deposition conditions. By calcining in oxygen under the appropriate conditions coatings consisting of the pure superconducting phase can be obtained.After the discovery of superconductivity numerous efforts have been performed not only to expand the possible application fields of superconductors but also to come to commercially available forms of these materials. One of the most promising materials in the field of superconductivity is the YBa Like most ceramic materials, YBCO is brittle and thus difficult to shape into intricate objects. Thermal spraying for the development of thick YBCO coatings could be a viable solution to this problem. This technique is very promising for YBCO processing due to the fact that it offers high deposition rate, non-vacuum operation, use of a wide variety of materials as substrates and the ability to coat large areas as well as substrates with complicated shapes. However, although the plasma spraying technique offers many advantages, the development of high quality YBCO coatings requires a very careful selection of processing parameters. The feedstock powder characteristics (morphology, particle size distribution) are important factors. Powder selection has to take into account the rheology problems that might occur from pneumatic powder transportation to the plasma spraying gun as well as the plasma-particulate interaction during spraying in terms of thermal exchange for the melting of the particles. Concerning plasma spraying of YBCO coatings, research efforts have focussed mainly on the development of coatings of the pure superconducting phase with good superconducting properties after a post thermal annealing process, since it has been shown that YBa In this paper, the development of thick YBCO coatings on Cu and stainless steel substrates with the atmospheric plasma spraying technique for the manufacturing of high power magnetron industrial YBCO targets is studied. Coating quality is correlated with both starting powder characteristics and plasma processing parameters. This study forms part of the Brite Euram industrial project “MUST” dealing with the development of a cost effective multi-functional flexible high-temperature superconducting tape using sputter deposition of YBCO films on metallic substrates. For the production of thick Y–Ba–Cu–O coatings a Miller-Thermal 80 kW equipment was employed with Ar as the plasma and carrier gas. Flat rectangular Cu and Stainless Steel 304 specimens (30×30×2 mm, 30×15×2 mm, 15×15×2 mm) were used as substrates. Prior to spraying the substrates were grit blasted with Al A powder consisting of pure <123> YBCO phase composition was used as a feed powder for the coatings production. It was produced by spray drying (in a laboratory ICF spray dryer with a capacity of 6 l/h) of aqueous solutions of nitrate salts of Y, Ba and Cu (10% w/w). The spray dried powder obtained was subsequently calcined at 870°C for 40 h for the formation of the YBa In addition, the effect of both the carrier gas pressure (30–85 psi) and the spraying distance (6–11 cm), on the coatings quality was studied. Plasma spraying gun was moved in two axes (a horizontal and a vertical one) with a velocity of 1.65 m/min in both of them. During spraying, the temperature of the substrate was kept below 60°C by air-cooling. For this purpose, compressed air was blown through external fittings attached to the gun 3–4 cm below the exit of the powder. After deposition, the microstructure of the coatings was investigated under scanning electron microscopy (SEM) (Jeol JSM 6300) combined with energy dispersive X-ray microanalysis (EDS) (LINK ISIS ultra thin window PENTAFET detector). Both unpolished top surfaces of the as sprayed coatings and polished cross sections of them were examined. The SEM studies on polished cross sections permitted also to characterize the homogeneity and thickness of the deposited layers. The deposition rate of the different applied conditions was measured by dividing the total thickness of the coating measured under SEM by the number of passes of the spraying gun over the substrate surface. Coating phase composition was studied with X-ray diffractometry (Siemens D-500 Cu K The sprayed coatings were subsequently heat treated in the temperature range of 750–930°C for 0 up to 20 h under flowing oxygen atmosphere and microstructural as well as phase composition characterizations were also carried out. In addition adhesion of the thermally treated coatings was investigated by scratching tests and track depth measurements as described above. The production of coatings by atmospheric plasma spraying requires the use of appropriate powders in terms of morphology and size. Since pneumatic transportation is used for the powder to enter the plasma, powders with angular shapes and very small particle size, which is the situation for most commercially available YBCO powders, are unacceptable. That is why powders produced by spray drying were used in this study. Their morphology is shown in The aim of this study is the production of high quality thick YBCO coatings. This means that the coatings must be dense, without any microcracks and with the appropriate phase composition. For this purpose a parametric study of the plasma spraying process was undertaken. In These observations are confirmed by studying the coating cross sections using the SEM. In Since the −100 μm powder fraction, for the production of which there is no need of an extensive sieving procedure, leads to almost equivalent or better results than the fine powder fraction (of −40 μm), it was decided to continue the study employing this powder. The plasma spraying parameters investigated were the carrier gas pressure and the spraying distance. There was a very strong influence of the processing parameters on the deposition rate as well as on the microstructure and morphology of the coatings. Studying the cross-sections of the fractured surfaces of the coatings using SEM, it was observed that as the carrier gas pressure decreases (85–20 psi), the number of unmelted particles is reduced, leading to the formation of denser coatings with less defects and improved adhesion ( Scratch test measurements showed quite good adhesion for coatings deposited on Cu and stainless steel substrates. The critical load (load at which total loss of adhesion to the substrate occurs) in the as sprayed state was found to be 163 N for Cu substrate and 185 N for stainless steel substrate. As it can be seen in Investigation of the YBCO coatings by X-ray diffraction analysis showed decomposition of the <123> phase during spraying ( However, copper was found to be unsuitable as a substrate since it oxidizes during annealing. Due to CuO formation in the Cu-coating interface, the adhesion of the coatings to the substrate is reduced (in certain cases total loss of adherence is observed) ( This investigation has shown that the atmospheric plasma spraying technique is an effective technique for the production of high quality thick YBCO coatings. The particle size distribution of the feedstock powder significantly affects the quality of the deposited coatings. The plasma spraying parameters (such as carrier gas pressure, spraying distance) exhibit an optimum value within a narrow range where both coating quality and deposition rate reach a maximum. At these optimized conditions good adhesion of the coating to the substrate (both Cu and stainless steel) was achieved. Although the <123> YBCO powder decomposes during deposition to BaCuO However, post thermal treatment under the appropriate conditions was successful for coatings on stainless steel substrates as both the <123> phase was restored and the adhesion of the coating to the substrate was kept to satisfactory levels.