Growth, morphological changes, amino acid composition, total soluble protein, and protein electrophoretic pattern were monitored for Scenedesmus obliquus and Nitzschia perminuta grown in the presence of different concentrations of Co2+ and Ni2+. Lower concentrations of cobalt stimulated the dry mass production and total soluble protein content of the two algae, whereas higher concentrations were inhibitory. Generally, N. perminuta showed more tolerance to the phytotoxicity of the two metals than S. obliquus and more tolerance to nickel than cobalt. However, S. obliquus seems to be more tolerant to cobalt than nickel. Cobalt and nickel have induced an increase in cell volume, change and disorder in cell shape. The increase in cell volume was much observed in Ni2+ treated cells. At the same time, the two metals did not induce any distinct morphological abnormalities in N. perminuta. Co2+ has stimulated the biosynthesis of all free amino acids in S. obliquus, except aspartic acid and phenylalanine, whereas Ni2+ caused 22% inhibition in the content of total free amino acids, except cystine and arginine. On the other hand, Co2+ has reduced the content of free amino acids in N. perminuta, except cystine, methionine, valine, and lysine. On the other hand, Ni2+ stimulated the biosynthesis of glycine, alanine and histidine and highly stimulated valine and sulphur containing amino acids (cystine and methionine) in N. perminuta. High cobalt concentration (4ppm) resulted in the disappearance of 28.7kDa protein, 3.5ppm Ni2+ stimulated the appearance of 18 and 20kDa proteins in S. Obliquus, while 37kDa proteins disappeared from N. perminuta treated with high doses of Co2+ and Ni2+.Heavy metals are prevalent in municipal and industrial effluents, they modify the structure and productivity of aquatic ecosystems ( Nickel is one of the toxic metals found in the various raw waste water of nonferrous metal, mineral processing, electronic electroplating, steel alloys ( In a previous study  In order to obtain sufficient algal cultures for the different investigations, the technique of mass culture ( The cultures were aereated with a mixture of 97% air and 3% CO For the examination of the morphological changes, the algal samples were dehydrated with 5, 25, 50, 75, and 90% and absolute ethanol on a membrane filter (0.45 The total soluble proteins were determined by the method described by For the determination of protein electrophoretic pattern, the algal suspension containing 10 The method of SDS vertical polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (SDS–PAGE) was used as described by Low concentrations of cobalt (0.1 and 1  Low nickel concentrations (0.1 and 1 Generally, Since the morphological anomalous detected in the algal species can be used as bioindication of its habitat, it appears that cell volume and algal growth can be used interchangeably in toxicological tests. Therefore, studying the morphological changes induced by Co Results showed that Co Furthermore, Co As indicated in Nickel exerted a similar effect on the total soluble proteins of the two tested algae as that on the dry weight production ( Co On the other hand, the higher Co At the same time, Ni Generally, the accumulation of amino acids in response to high Co The protein electrophoretic patterns of However, On the other hand, protein electrophoretic pattern of