Pilot scale column flotation studies were conducted on a low grade siliceous limestone ore. Silica content was reduced to less than 1% in the concentrate so that it became satisfactory for use in the paper or rubber industries. The limestone sample was crystalline and constituted primarily of calcite that contained quartz, feldspar, pyroxene, and biotite as gangue minerals. Quartz is the major silicate gangue whereas feldspar, pyroxene, and biotite exist in minor to trace quantities. Traces of pyrite were also observed within the sample. A reverse flotation process was adopted where the silicate gangue minerals were floated using two different commercial cationic collectors: Chem-750 F or Floatamine-D. The studies clearly suggest it is possible to produce a limestone concentrate assaying around 96–97% CaCO3 containing less than 1% SiO2. The effect of feed flow rate, percent solids, froth depth, and wash water on the grade and recovery of the CaCO3 concentrate is discussed.India is endowed with 95.6 billion tonnes of limestone that has been deposited across several states. Nearly 73% of these reserves are concentrated in Andhra Pradesh, Karnataka, Gujarat, Rajasthan, and Madhya Pradesh. The crystalline limestone deposits of Salem, Tiruchirapalli, Madurai, and Thirunelveli form the limestone province of Tamilnadu. Out of 200 million tones of total proven reserves of crystalline limestone, around 50 million tonnes are in the Salem and Namakkal districts Limestone is extensively used in the cement and metallurgical industries (iron and steel making). It is also used in the glass, food processing, paper making, leather, waste water treatment, adhesives, and construction industries. Since the limestone available around Salem is crystalline in nature it can be utilized in poultry feed and in the paper industries situated around Salem. This study was designed to develop a process for the production of high grade CaCO Minerals like calcite, apatite, and barite are generally beneficiated with anionic collectors like carboxylic acids The cation thus formed is easily adsorbed onto the anionic sites of a silica/silicate surface via electrostatic interaction The upgrading of limestone quality can be done many ways. One way is to crush the limestone to −3 Counter current contact between the downward flowing slurry and the rising air bubbles forms the basis of column flotation. The original column concept is due to Boutin et al. A 0.5       For easy monitoring of the column parameters all the controls were mounted in a centralized panel. The schematic diagram of the semi-commercial column flotation system used is shown as During installation and commissioning the 0.5 Since there is no operating plant at the site the feed to the column was prepared from raw pulverized limestone powder manually. The limestone powder was added to Conditioner I at the desired rate and the required amount of water was pumped into obtain the desired slurry density. This slurry flows into Conditioner II by gravity. All the reagents were added in Conditioner II from where the slurry was then fed into the column. The column was initially stabilized with water. Then conditioned slurry having the desired reagent concentration was fed into the column through the feed pump. The column was allowed to run steadily for at least three nominal residence times before sample collection began. Column discharge samples were collected at different time intervals and pulp densities of the samples were measured to verify a steady state had been reached. Once a constant pulp density was observed samples of feed, concentrate, and tailings were collected manually. Simultaneously the air, feed, and wash water flow rates were checked and recorded. The standard test procedure suggested by Delviller et al. was used throughout the trials The various rock types encountered within this limestone deposit are pegmatite, quartz veins, biotite gneisses, and pyroxene gneisses. A few run of mine samples were collected for petrological characterization. These limestone samples vary in color from white to pink/rose and are hard, compact, and crystalline in nature. Occasionally banded limestone varieties were also observed. The banded type consisted of broad/thin deep, grey colored bands that are bands of pyroxene separated by white bands of, chiefly, calcite. Microscopic examination of several thin sections under transmitted light showed calcite to be the predominant mineral. The associated silicate gangue minerals were, in order of abundance, quartz, pyroxene, feldspar, and biotite ( The X-ray diffractograms of the feed sample are shown in Initially, the head sample was subjected to particle size analysis see Two types of cationic collectors, namely Chem-750 F and Floatamine-D, were tested for their efficiency in separation of silica from limestone under fixed conditions. It was observed that the selectivity of Floatamine-D was superior in both terms of grade and recovery compared to the CHEM-750 F. Also, it was observed that the volume of froth generated from Chem-750 F was very high and was stable: a de-frothing agent was found to be essential during dewatering. The industrial application of a reagent with these frothing properties poses many practical problems so all subsequent experiments were carried out with Floatamine-D. In principle airflow rate should be as high as possible to ensure a high throughput. At the same time excessive airflow causes the flow pattern to become disturbed and a lose bubbly swarm may subsequently develop. Note that the column should operate in a bubbly flow regime where gas hold up varies linearly with air flow rate. Tests were conducted at different airflow rates and the results are presented in From these results it can be seen that the quality of the concentrate increases with increasing airflow. At the same time the total CaCO Changing feed rate causes a change in the residence time of the pulp within the column, which thereby affects grade and recovery. For reverse flotation increased feed rates reduce the residence time of the slurry and hence the grade. Thus sufficient residence time must be maintained to collect all the gangue from the slurry. The feed flow was varied from 3.3 to 7.5 These results clearly indicate that a feed flow rate of 5–6 Column throughput can be increased by increasing solids content in the feed. This may be continued as long as sufficient bubbles are available to lift the particles. However, increasing the amount of mineral solids in suspension also results in an increase in slurry density and slurry viscosity. This has an opposing effect on the bubble rising velocity and, thus, the gas holdup in the column increases. Tests were conducted at three different pulp densities and the results are presented in Observe that lower pulp densities produce higher performance from the column. At high pulp density the quality of the concentrate is acceptable but the recoveries are very low and so overall column performance is poor. Increasing the solids in the slurry beyond certain limits leads to froth overloading and burping action, which may then affect the concentrate grade and recovery. Column flotation offers the advantage of controlling froth depth during operation. The depth may be changed from a few millimeters to several centimeters and is only limited by the particular mineral system being processed. In our trials the froth depth was adjusted to the required value using a process controller. Experiments were carried out at different froth depths ranging from 25 to 100 Tests were performed to determine the effect of wash water on limestone recovery. The results are shown in From these results a set of optimum conditions for the process and system parameters expected to produce a quality product with a reasonable recovery were selected. These values are: particle size, 37   Analysis of the feed material showed that the average particle size was 37 Petrological examination of the samples revealed the presence of quartz, feldspar, pyroxene, and mica as the major silicate gangue minerals. Although the majority of these silicates are liberated from the selected feed size material some amount of silicates, in the size range from 5 to 15 CHEM-750 F and Floatamine-D were tried as collectors. Floatamine-D was found to be excellent in terms of solubility, selectivity, consumption, froth stability, and consistency. The tests clearly suggest that using a flotation column to achieve limestone concentrates assaying around 96–97% CaCO The authors are thankful to the Director, National Metallurgical Laboratory for permission to publish this work. The authors would like to thank M/s Calpro Mineral Technologies Ltd., Salem, Tamilnadu for providing logistic support as well as chemical analysis of the limestone samples, respectively.