The carotenoid and carotenoid ester profile in astringent persimmon (Diospyros kaki Thunb., var. Rojo Brillante) was composed by 13 free xanthophylls, 8 hydrocarbon carotenes and 17 carotenoid esters. The stability and biaoccessibility of these carotenoids was determined by an adaptation of the INFOGEST protocol. Results showed that the stability of persimmon carotenoids ranged from 61 to 74%, depending on the digestion phase, being (all-E)-β-cryptoxanthin and (all-E)-antheraxanthin 3-O-palmitate the most stable carotenoids. At the final step of the digestion (oral + gastric + duodenal phase), only traces of (all-E)-antheraxanthin, (all-E)-lutein and (all-E)-β-cryptoxanthin were found in control samples due to the low efficiency of carotenoid micellization, which was affected by the high pectin content naturally present in persimmon tissues. Processing increased the overall carotenoid bioaccessibility to 54% in pressurized samples and to 25% in thermal treated ones. This effect depended on the processing technology as well as on the chemical structure of the carotenoid, being (all-E)-β-cryptoxanthin and (all-E)-β-cryptoxanthin laurate the most bioaccessible carotenoids in pressurized samples and (all-E)-β-cryptoxanthin laurate and (all-E)-antheraxanthin the most bioaccessible ones in pasteurized ones.Persimmon ( Persimmon is a seasonal fruit and is only obtainable for a short period of time throughout the year (in Europe, from November to January). In order to extend its availability, persimmon (including whole fruit, flesh and/or peel) could be processed into derived products which would naturally provide great amounts of health-promoting compounds ( In the last years, the published papers about the bioavalability and bioaccessibility of carotenoids and their relationship with health are increasing continuously ( Recently, the effects of high hydrostatic pressures (HHP) on the retention of potentially health related compounds and antioxidant activity of fruits and vegetables have widely gained attention from researchers ( The aim of this study was to evaluate the stability and bioaccessibility of carotenoids and carotenoid esters in astringent persimmon during a simulated Tetrahydrofuran (THF), methyl tert-butyl ether (MTBE), methanol (MeOH) and diethyl ether, acetone and petroleum ether (30–70°) were purchased from VWR International (Radnor, Pensilvania, USA); anhydrous sodium sulfate, potassium hydroxide (KOH) and sodium chloride (NaCl) from Panreac Química (Barcelona, Spain); butylated hydroxytoluene (BHT) and magnesium carbonate from Acros Organics (New Jersey, USA). Standards for lycopene (L9879, ≥90%, from tomato), lutein (X6250 from marigold) and Astringent persimmon fruits ( Astringent persimmon fruits ( Fruits were washed, drained and, after removing the central core, were cut in pieces (20 × 20 mm), frozen in liquid nitrogen and lyophilized (LyoBeta 15, Azbil Telstar SL, Terrasa, Spain). Freeze-dried persimmon samples were ground (GrindomixGM200, Retsch, Germany) to a fine particle size (<2 mm) and stored at −36 °C in plastic bags until carotenoid analysis. Persimmon pieces (80 g) were packed in flexible bags and treated by high hydrostatic pressure (200 MPa/25 °C/6 min). HPP treatment was performed in a hydrostatic pressure unit (a 2 L capacity), maximum pressure of 900 MPa, and potential maximum temperature of 95 °C (Stansted SFP 7100:9/2C, UK). Compression and decompression rates were 2.5 MPa/s. Pressure, time and temperature were controlled by a computer program, being constantly monitored and recorded during the process. After treatment, samples were immediately frozen with liquid nitrogen, lyophilized and stored at −36 °C until carotenoid analysis. Persimmon pieces (80 g) were vacuum packed in flexible bags, placed in an autoclave (Autester-G, Selecta, Barcelona, Spain), and heated at 85 °C for 15 min. Samples were cooled to room temperature in an ice-water bath. Then they were frozen with liquid nitrogen, lyophilized and stored at −36 °C until carotenoid analysis. Before carotenoid analysis and the The As a previous Extraction and saponification procedures were carried out under dim light. Fresh or rehydrated samples (5 g) were weighed. Then, 0.5 g of magnesium carbonate and 60 μL of trans-β-apo-8′-carotenal (0.2 mg/mL) as internal standard (only for carotenoid characterization in fruit tissue) were added to the samples. 15 mL of tetrahydrofuran (THF) stabilized 0.01% BHT was then added. The sample was homogenized for 3 min at 7000 rpm and then sonicated for 5 min to complete the extraction. The extract was then centrifuged at 5000 rpm for 10 min at 4 °C. This procedure was repeated three times. Afterwards, an additional extraction round was carried out with methanol. Then, the extracts were combined and reduced to half their volume in a rotatory evaporator at 20 °C, under nitrogen ambient. The concentrated extract was then added to a funnel containing 15 mL of diethyl ether. Extracts were shaking vigorously, and the organic layer was collected. This process was repeated three times. If an emulsion was formed, 25 mL of a solution of NaCl 30% (w:v) in ultrapure water would be added to improve the phase separation. The aqueous phase was washed twice with another 15 mL of diethyl ether. The ethereal phase was dried with anhydrous sodium sulfate and completely evaporated by vacuum, at 20 °C and nitrogen flux. The residue was dissolved in 2 mL with MeOH/MTBE/H The extraction of carotenoids from the digesta and pellets was carried out by a slight modification of method reported by The extraction of carotenoids from the supernatants was based on the method by The identification and quantification of carotenoids in persimmon extracts were carried out using a 1200 Series Agilent HPLC System (Agilent Technologies, Santa Clara, CA, U.S.A) with a reverse phase C The individual carotenoid identification was carried out according to the following combined information: elution order on C The (all- The (all- LC/MS analyses were performed with the same HPLC system described above coupled on-line to an Agilent mass spectrometry detector with APCI source model G1947B compatible with the LCMS SQ 6120 equipment, according to the procedure described by LC/MS analyses were performed with the same HPLC system described above coupled on-line to an Agilent mass spectrometry detector with APCI source model G1947B compatible with the LCMS SQ 6120 equipment, according to the procedure described by 5 cm persimmon cubes were frozen by submersion in liquid nitrogen and stored briefly at −80 °C. 10 μm size sections were obtained with a cryostat (Leica CM1900, Germany) and mounted on a slide. Several drops of The compositional data was expressed as mean ± standard deviation (SD). Results were evaluated with variance analysis (ANOVA) and the least significant differences (LSD) were calculated at a The carotenoid content in whole astringent persimmon can be observed in The MS fragmentation pattern of carotenoid esters of persimmon tissues showed the usual fragmentation described for the xanthophyll esters previously reported for other fruits and vegetables as mango and citrus fruits ( The identification was made according to the elution order in the C The identification was made according to the elution order in the C All xanthophyll esters were identified according to their retention times in C All xanthophyll esters were identified according to their retention times in C   A recent study reported β-cryptoxanthin as the most abundant carotenoid, which was mainly was esterified with palmitoleic (C16:1), myristic (C14:0) and palmitic (C16:0) acids ( A recent study reported β-cryptoxanthin as the most abundant carotenoid, which was mainly was esterified with palmitoleic (C16:1), myristic (C14:0) and palmitic (C16:0) acids ( Processing affected significantly the total carotenoid content ( A previous study ( The bioaccessibility of carotenoids involves two processes, (i) the carotenoid release from the food matrix and (ii) their subsequent micellization. This is limited by multiple factors such as the presence or addition of lipids, processing treatments (culinary preparation, mechanical comminution) or the type of food matrix. In fruit and vegetable foods, carotenoid bioaccessibility depends on the initial crystalline, liquid-crystalline, protein-bound or lipid-dissolved deposition form of the carotenoids in the chromoplasts ( The analysis of persimmon carotenoids from the digesta and supernatants of different In pasteurized persimmon, the most bioaccessible carotenoid was (all- This bioaccessibility increase could be a result of the modification of the composition and characteristics of polysaccharides (manily pectin) in persimmon tissues because of processing. Recently, it has been reported that the presence of a higher pectin content in the food matrix affects the bioaccessibility of carotenoids, due to the difficulty to transfer them to micelles ( Thermal treatments may also affect pectins in plant tissues. Usually, heat treatments degrad plant pectin by transelimination (β-elimination) and galacturonic acid levels could decrease depending on the treatment conditions (T°C and time). The effects of high pressure on pectin degradation (transelimination) and texture of carrots were different from those produced by heating, as reported  There were no significant losses of total carotenoids in the digesta during the In the oral + gastric phase, the recovery of (all- At the end of the The observed carotenoid stability in persimmon during Untreated persimmon tissue before and during In the digesta of the oral + gastric + duodenal phase, it could be observed that most pectic substances appeared to be modified by the digestion conditions. However, remains of these substances were responsible for the containment of carotenoids ( More advanced research is needed to study the changes in the composition of pectin produced by technological processes and their relationship with the bioavailability of carotenoid profile in fruit and vegetable tissues. Carotenoid and carotenoid esters from astringent persimmon whole fruits, cv. Rojo Brillante, presented low bioaccessibility and near to null micellization of carotenoids. Only trace amounts of (all- The following are the supplementary data related to this article. Supplementary data to this article can be found online at The authors would like to express gratitude for the funding received from Author M.P.C. conducted the conceptualization, experimental design, data validation and drafted the manuscript. Authors A.G.M. and R.F.L carried out the assays, the validation and the data collection. Author T.G.C. supervised the assays and data validation. Authors J.W.C. and M.P.C. worked in funding acquisition. All authors read and approved the final manuscript. The authors declare that they have no current or potential conflicts of interest.