Diaphyseal fractures of the clavicle had until recently the reputation to always heal with abundant callus formation, except if operated, due to a reported high rate of nonunion after plate fixation by older series. The reason would be that the bone has only periosteal vascularization, easily destroyed by periosteal stripping for implant apposition. Bone autograft and external fixation has been reported as the best technique to heal a nonunited clavicle nonunion. Are these classical considerations still valid nowadays? The purposes of this article focusing only on diaphyseal clavicular fractures are to review the vascularization of the bone, the rate of nonunion after nonoperative treatment, the indications and techniques of osteosynthesis, and the treatment possibilities of an established nonunion. This article will not deal with the specific problems of the lateral clavicular fractures, which are equivalent to acromio-clavicular fracture-dislocations, nor of medial fractures, close to the sterno-clavicular joint.Treatment of clavicular fractures is still nowadays quite variable, depending on patients’ characteristics as well as surgeons’ considerations and technical habits. This controversy unavoidably leads to a variable nonunion rate reported by literature as well as to the absence of consensus in the treatment of clavicular non-unions. Despite the fact that our therapeutics should be based on scientific evidence, the treatment of clavicular fractures and nonunions remains a grey area. The characteristics of the clavicle itself, not being a truly “long” bone, as well as the particularities of its vascularization and localisation, should guide our therapeutic decisions, maximising the chances of a successful treatment. The purpose of this article is to discuss the aetiology and treatment of clavicular nonunions, based on the current knowledge of vascularization and bone healing characteristics of the clavicle. A review of the literature was done using PubMed and the index words “clavicle nonunion”, “midshaft” and “pseudarthrosis”. The articles published in English were selected, from 1847 till October 2019. Only the articles bringing interesting concepts regarding clavicular bone healing were considered. In addition, two original example-case reports are presented as figures of the article. Embryologically, the clavicle is the first bone to ossify by a phenomenon different from the ossification of long bones. Indeed, like the cranial bones, the clavicle ossifies by intramembranous ossification There was a time, clavicle non-union was thought to be of rare incidence Fracture comminution, by damaging blood supply to the fragments, and displacement of more than 15 mm, allowing for soft tissue interposition, have been recognised as risk factors of nonunion The surgical indications of internal fixation are based on the above mentioned identified risks of nonunion after conservative treatment, but also on the functional expectations of the patient, as clavicular malunion (mainly shortening), though usually well tolerated, probably decreases the sporting performances of some demanding athletes. However, when considering only the nonunion risk, as recalled by Robinson, a minimum of seven operations are needed for one non-union to be prevented In young, athletic, non-smoking patients, common practice now has embraced clavicular osteosynthesis with the objective to achieve better functional results, given the anatomic restoration of the clavicular length and alignment. Modern anatomic low profile plates allow for great stability, restore the complex natural clavicular shape and, as compared to old plates, hopefully minimize periosteal disturbance, preserving in that way periosteal blood supply. Nowadays, the rate of nonunion seems lower after plate fixation than after conservative treatment. A meta-analysis of the existing randomized clinical trials by McKee et al. Some clavicular nonunions are well tolerated and can be neglected If the nonunion is or has been made aseptic, the treatment entails removal of all sequestered fragments, freshening of the extremities, restoration of the centromedullary canal, interposition of a bone autograft and bone fixation Regarding osteosynthesis, our group has proposed external fixation and has published excellent results of bone healing using this method Despite its excellent results, external fixation has lost popularity among orthopaedic surgeons, who prefer plate fixation. Indeed, low contact modern plates constitute a good option if there is no infection or if the infection has been eradicated. The published series reveal an 85–100% rate of bone healing after bone autograft and plate fixation to treat clavicular nonunion Nevertheless, there are cases in which these principles of treatment fail, probably due to extensive periosteal lesion and bone sclerosis, preventing the integration of the bone autograft. Persistent infection may play a role, as well as technical complications with the implanted hardware Other than the medial femoral condyle Finally, in intractable cases, cleidectomy remains a good option as the functional results are acceptable. However, losing the primordial stabilizing role of the clavicle during shoulder motion impedes recovery of good shoulder function. Occasionally, a corrective osteotomy with plate fixation is indicated in a case of a symptomatic clavicular malunion, in a high-demand patient, or in case of a secondary thoracic outlet syndrome. Computer-assisted surgical planning and patient-specific surgical guides are particularly useful to improve the accuracy of the operation Facing a closed clavicular fracture without neuro-vascular complication, the decision to operate remains controversial. It seems reasonable to propose plate fixation in case of marked displacement in a young, athletic, non-smoking patient. Respecting the soft tissues and clavicular vascularization when exposing the fracture and applying the plate is important. Contrary to what was believed until recently, nonunions do occur after conservative treatment, perhaps even more frequently than after plate fixation Symptomatic nonunions, in terms of pain and limited upper limb function, are surgical indications In atrophic and multi-operated nonunions, there is severe damage to clavicular blood supply. The use of a bone autograft, whether vascularized or not, is mandatory, in addition to the osteosynthesis by plate or by external fixation. Non-microsurgical reconstructions of clavicular non-unions have an estimated failure rate of 8%, according to a review of Der Tahitian et al. Great part of the scientific community acknowledges only the presence of a significant bone deficit as a reason for a microvascular reconstruction to be performed. Raising awareness of the success of microvascular techniques in the absence of bone defects will spare patients from multiple surgeries, having a major psychologic and financial impact. To conclude, the atrophic clavicular non-union is a good indication for a microvascular reconstruction, especially if atrophic, in the multi-operated patient, possibly also in the smoker, given the fragile vascular anatomy of the bone. No conflict of interest for the authors of the above mentioned article.