The experiment on recovery of gold and iron by one-step chlorination-reduction roasting in the muffle furnace was conducted using cyanide tailings from a gold smelting enterprises (Henan Province, China) as research object. The effects of the dosage of calcium chloride, dosage of bituminous coal, roasting temperature, roasting time, and other factors on the high-temperature chlorination efficiency of gold were studied. The effects of iron reduction were also investigated. X-ray diffraction analysis on the roasting products was carried out. Results showed that the high-temperature chlorination efficiency of gold increased with the rising of calcium chloride dosage. The high-temperature chlorination efficiency of iron also increased, leading to iron loss. The concentration of CO and CO2 produced by bituminous coal increased in roasting atmosphere, leading to the decrease of chlorine gas concentration. Thus, the high-temperature chlorination efficiency of gold decreased. During the roasting process, the reduction process of iron oxide is Fe2O3 → Fe3O4 → Fe
                        x
                     O → Fe, and the wustite can easily react with the silicon dioxide to form iron silicate in the weak reduction atmosphere. Under the condition of calcium chloride dosage of 6%, bituminous coal dosage of 22%, roasting temperature of 1200 °C, and roasting time of 1.5 h, the technical indices of gold high-temperature chlorination efficiency of 83.1%, iron grade of 92.0%, and iron recovery of 84.9% were obtained. The relationship between the high-temperature chlorination efficiency of gold and roasting temperature was established. The high-temperature chlorination reaction of gold was controlled by the interfacial chemical reaction. The apparent activation energy of the high-temperature chlorination of gold is calculated to be E = 20.3 kJ/mol.Roasting oxidation-cyanide leaching is one of the main methods for handling gold concentrates that contain arsenic and sulfur in China ( Scholars have carried out several studies on the recovery of gold and iron from cyanide tailings, mainly focusing on the recovery of gold by high-temperature chlorination ( In this study a new technology for the separation of gold-iron from cyanide tailings by one-step chlorination-reduction roasting was proposed, which is based on the advantages of the high-temperature chlorination of gold and the technology of iron reduction roasting. Iron oxides are reduced to metallic iron and gold is chloridized at the same time in the one-step chlorination-reduction roasting process. Gold and iron of cyanide tailings can be efficiently separated and recovered by the new technology. In this study, cyanide tailings from a gold smelting enterprise (Henan Province, China) were used. The results of main chemical composition analysis are presented in The results of chemical-phase analysis of gold and iron are shown in The chemically pure calcium chloride from Sinopharm Group Chemical Reagent Co., Ltd was considered as the chlorination agent. Bituminous coal was selected as the reductant. The results of industry analysis on bituminous coal are shown in Cyanide tailings, calcium chloride and bituminous coal were mixed uniformly with a certain amount of proportion. The mixture was formed into 20 mm pellets by a pressure pellet machine. The pellets were placed into a drying box (SC101-Y) at 100 °C for 5 h. The one-step chlorination-reduction roasting of cyanide tailings was conducted in the muffle furnace. The muffle furnace was elevated to specified temperature at a heating rate of 10 °C/min. The pellets were placed in a porcelain combustion boat into the muffle furnace for one-step chlorination-reduction roasting. When roasting time ended, the hot porcelain combustion boat was cooled to room temperature in nitrogen. After crushing and wet grinding, the roasted products were magnetically separated. Thus, reductive iron products corresponding to different experiment conditions were obtained. The experimental process is shown in The high temperature chlorination efficiency of gold ( The recovery of iron ( XRD was conducted to probe mineral phases in cyanide tailings and roasted samples on a Smartlab diffractometer with Cu Kα radiation over a 2 The dosage of calcium chloride exhibits a certain effect on the high-temperature chlorination of gold and the reduction of iron oxides. To determine the optimal dosage of calcium chloride, the one-step chlorination-reduction roasting tests of cyanide tailings were carried at dosage of calcium chloride between 3% and 7% (versus the mass of cyanide tailings) while keeping other process parameters constant as follows: bituminous coal dosage of 20%, roasting temperature of 1200 °C, and roasting time of 2 h. The results are shown in It can be seen from The effects of bituminous coal dosage on extraction of iron and gold were investigated under the following conditions: dosage of bituminous coal between 18% and 26% (versus the mass of cyanide tailings), calcium chloride dosage of 6%, roasting temperature of 1200 °C, and roasting time of 2 h. The experimental results are shown in The results in Roasting temperature affects high-temperature chlorination efficiency of gold and the degree of reduction of iron. When temperature is too low, the high-temperature chlorination efficiency of gold is low, and iron oxide cannot be reduced to metallic iron at the same time. However, when the temperature is too high, the roasting pellet melts, which is not advantageous for high-temperature chlorination of gold and the reduction of iron oxide. The different roasting temperature experiments were conducted under the following conditions: calcium chloride dosage of 6%, bituminous coal dosage of 22%, and roasting time of 2 h. The experimental results are shown in  It can be seen from The intensities of XRD peaks are compared in The roasting time of one-step chlorination-reduction roasting of cyanide tailings exhibits great influence on the separation of gold-iron. At calcium chloride dosage of 6%, bituminous coal dosage of 22%, and roasting temperature of 1200 °C, the different roasting time experiments were conducted. The experiment results are shown in   The tests of one-step chlorination-reduction roasting of cyanide tailings were carried out at optimal condition as follows: calcium chloride dosage of 6%, bituminous coal dosage of 22%, roasting temperature of 1200 °C, and roasting time of 1.5 h. After crushing and wet grinding, the roasted products were magnetically separated. Thus, reductive iron products corresponding to experiment conditions were obtained. The experiment results are shown in In the experiment, the muffle furnace hearth reaction zone is overall heated, and the temperature gradient of the material being heated is not large. This condition can be considered as the uniform distribution of the heating temperature of the solid particles. Calcium chloride and cyanide tailings are mixed uniformly in the form of solid particles. Thus, the high-temperature chlorination efficiency of gold in cyanide tailings is a homogeneous and continuous process. The main steps are as follows: (1) chlorine gas diffuses to the surface of the gold particles; (2) the chemical reaction of chlorine gas with gold on the surface of gold particles; and (3) the gaseous reaction product is diffused to the gas phase from the gold surface. The surface of cyanide tailing particles is loose and porous. Thus, diffusion resistance is negligible. The interfacial chemical reaction may be the control step of the whole roasting process. The relationship between the high-temperature chlorination efficiency of gold and the roasting time at different roasting temperatures is shown in From  In accordance with the Arrhenius equation, the reaction rate constant (k) can be expressed as Eq. In accordance with the experimental results, the relationship between lg(Δ r = 0.99 By using Eqs. At the conditions of calcium chloride dosage of 6%, bituminous coal dosage of 22%, and roasting time of 15 min, the one-step chlorination-reduction roasting tests of cyanide tailings were carried at different roasting temperatures between 800 °C and 1200 °C. Then, the high-temperature chlorination efficiency of gold is determined. The determined high-temperature chlorination efficiency of gold and the calculated high-temperature chlorination efficiency of gold in accordance with Eq.  The main influence factors in the one-step chlorination-reduction roasting process of cyanide tailings are calcium chloride, bituminous coal, roasting temperature, and roasting time. At the conditions of calcium chloride dosage of 6%, bituminous coal dosage of 22%, roasting temperature of 1200 °C, and roasting time of 1.5 h, the good technical indices of gold high-temperature chlorination efficiency of 83.1%, iron grade of 92.0%, and iron recovery of 84.9% were obtained by one-step chlorination-reduction roasting. A new technique for the efficient separation of gold-iron from cyanide tailings is provided. The chemical reaction of gold high-temperature chlorination is controlled by the interfacial chemical reaction in the one-step chlorination-reduction roasting process of cyanide tailings. In the range of 800–1200 °C, the relationship between the high-temperature chlorination efficiency of gold and the roasting temperature is I would like to declare on behalf of my co-authors that the work described was original research that has not been published previously, and not under consideration for publication elsewhere, in whole or in part. All the authors listed have approved the manuscript that is enclosed. The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. This work was financially supported by the Major projects of