We documented a specific method for combining calcium ions and alginate molecules slowly and continuously in the mineralization system for the purpose of understanding the mediating function of alginate on the crystallization of calcium carbonate. The alginate was involved in the nucleation and the growth process of CaCO3. The crystal size, morphology and roughness of crystal surface were significantly influenced by the type of the alginate, which could be accounted for by the length of the G blocks in alginate. A combination of Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy and thermogravimetric analysis showed that there were the chemical interactions between the alginate and the mineral phase. This strategic approach revealed the biologically controlled CaCO3 mineralization within calcium alginate hydrogels via the selective nucleation and the confined crystallization of CaCO3. The results presented here could contribute to the understanding of the mineralization process in hydrogel systems.Biomineralization process is a specific process that applies natural macromolecule to control and direct the crystallization of biominerals. The formation of various biominerals in living organisms is based on the biomineralization process Calcium carbonate is one of the most wide-spreading minerals, which can exist in several different polymorphs (in the order of increasing stability): vaterite, aragonite and calcite. Usually, these are found in polycrystalline spherulites, needle-like particles and single-crystalline cubes, respectively. In nature, however, the morphology is precisely controlled by organic molecules and the mineral is designed to meet the structural and functional needs of the organism The precise control of additives has inspired many researchers to investigate the influence of additives on the crystallization/growth of calcium carbonate In our research, we used a specific strategy, where calcium ion and alginate were slowly and continuously added in the mineralization system. The mineralization process occurred at a relatively low rate. The motivation for this research is to explore how alginate mediates the crystal growth of calcium carbonate. In addition, by studying the possible mineral/biopolymer interactions, the probable mechanism of CaCO Two different kinds of sodium alginates were used in the experiments, denoted as High G and Low G alginate, respectively. Both of them were purchased from Shanghai Chineway Pharmaceutical Tech. Co. Ltd., Shanghai, China. High G alginate (HG For comparison, sodium alginates with different G blocks were used to form the hydrogels and then they were simultaneously setup under the same experimental conditions of calcium carbonate crystallization. 100 When the mineralization process completed, the calcium carbonate named LG01, LG002, HG01 and HG002 were gained. These four kinds of powders were coated with Au prior and then imaged using LEO-1530 (LEO Company) scanning electron microscope (SEM), fitted with a field-emission source operating at an accelerating voltage of 10 Four kinds of calcium carbonate samples named HG01, HG002, LG01 and LG002 were used to investigate crystal polymorph by means of powder XRD analysis and FTIR spectral analysis. SEM of calcium carbonate products obtained from the reactions in alginate gels with different length of G blocks and different ion concentrations reveal the different morphology and crystal size of CaCO Alginate was reported previously to exert some influences on the crystallization of CaCO The method we developed here is targeted for adding the inorganic ions and organic additives, namely Ca Thermogravimetric analysis (TGA) was employed to determine whether the samples obtained from High G and Low G alginate contain the organic matrix. TGA curves for both HG01 and LG01 are shown in During the time-dependent experiments of CaCO FTIR spectra of the crystal/biopolymer mixtures acquired from the High G Ca-alginate gels at the reaction times from 5 to 60 From the investigations and analyses described previously, the possible mechanism of calcium carbonate crystals with different morphologies formed within the High G and Low G alginate hydrogel is as follow. From the biomineralization's perspective, the biologically controlled process comprises of several coherent steps: extraction and enrichment of calcium and carbonate ions, nucleation, and confined crystallization of CaCO In this paper, we documented a specific method for combining inorganic ions and organic additives slowly and continuously for a better mimicking of the biomineralization process in organisms. SEM and XRD confirmed the effect of alginate on the crystallization of CaCO We are grateful for the financial support from the