Dense medium drum (DMD) separators are unit processes that are typically used to beneficiate coal, iron ore and other minerals by making use of density separation. Some coal dense medium separation plants typically include a DMD separator. The operational management of this unit process is often limited to localised control of medium density and feed mass flow rate. Dynamic models for coal dense medium separation have been developed by the authors with the intention of using them for dynamic control.
                  A suitable dynamic model for a DMD separator could not been found in the available literature. This paper shows how the dynamic model for a dense medium cyclone has been applied to a DMD separator. The model parameters were determined and the performance of the model is evaluated using actual plant data from a Wemco drum. Coal washability and drum partitioning behaviour are used to estimate the grade of the product for model grade simulation and validation.This work is based on The dynamic model for the drum separator is developed from first principles where the conservation of mass and mass of components are used ( This paper initially describes the metallurgy of minerals processing regarding the operation of DMD separators in Section The process flow diagram in Drum separators operate on the principle of float and sink separation where particles of different densities to the medium can either float or sink in the medium due to gravity. Coal feed is mixed with the medium and processed through a relatively static container. The Wemco drum (  Using the terminal speed Similar results could possibly be obtained by using the terminal velocity correlation published by  Another process model ( By fitting Eq.  The Although the process models indicated above are useful for process engineering, they are generally not applicable on their own for process control as they do not incorporate the time evolution of process variables. Since, as far as the authors are aware, no dynamic model of a drum separator is available in literature, one is developed using the first principle model in The dynamic model of the drum separator focuses on throughput equations by making use of the conservation of overall mass. Conservation of mass of components can be used to model the grade (i.e. ash percentage) of the drum coal product. A model representation of the drum separator can be found in The following is a list of assumptions that were made: The volume of the mix in the drum ( The volume of the floats ( The volumetric flow rates of the feed ( The volumetric flow rates of the floats ( Only ash ( Medium and ash components are considered for the conservation of mass of components in the floats The rates of change in mass for the floats ( In order to simplify the model, it is assumed that the volumetric flow is at steady state (i.e. Gravity separation within the drum can be used to model the effects of the dynamics of the density response for the drum. The gravitational force ( Similarly, the conservation of mass of the medium component of the feed material can be determined. This results in the following dynamic mass balance for the medium component, To develop solutions for the rates of change in the medium component percentages, some assumptions have to be made. The rates of change in the medium component percentages for the floats and sinks are assumed to be proportional to the difference ( The dynamic mass balance for the ash component can be determined similarly to the medium component by replacing subscript The system identification process by The Wemco drum model was identified using input–output data consisting of three hours of actual production data, sampled once every second. The input data is the drum ore feed rate  This section describes the simulation results for the DMD dynamic model. Initially the throughput of the DMD process is simulated and verified. Based on the verified throughput model, the partition curve is generated by reducing the dynamic model to a steady-state model. The partition curve result is then used in association with the Eqs. The following steps were used to obtain the calculated results: Step 1: Fit the DMD dynamic model to the measured mass flow rate input–output data ( Step 2: Fit the partition factor function (Eq. Step 3: Calculate the float ash content ( Step 4: Calculate the feed ash content ( Step 5: Calculate the sink ash content (  The input data for the drum separator simulation are shown in The feed mix (   The model estimates for the floats product and sinks discard as shown in This section details a process steady-state model derived from the dynamic model described in Section  Using Eq. Since no online measurement was available to measure the product and discard grade, the method of reconstituting the feed ash component percentage and estimation of the product ash component percentage explained in Section As a result the input data for the drum separator grade simulation are shown in   The model estimates for the floats product ash percentage and sinks discard ash percentage as shown in This paper shows that a newly developed dense medium drum dynamic model can provide relatively accurate predictions of drum dynamics. This development is based on the dense medium cyclone model of The dynamic model goodness of fit ( This model performance is considered adequate for process control purposes as responses are in general qualitatively accurate for the Wemco drum separator. The only correlation that is relatively low is for the discard grade prediction. The correlation for all other outputs are good. The lower correlation on the discard ash could be due to insufficient measured plant data. The discard stream was not measured directly through a belt scale as this stream was combined with discard from other DMC plant discards. The proportionality constants were estimated to very small numbers for the rates of change in float and sink density. This small change in rate of change in density provides further confidence in the DMD dynamic model as the unit is operating much closer to steady-state than a DMC. The DMD dynamic model grade simulation results in subSection In summary, this paper shows the following: A dynamic model of a Wemco dense medium drum separator based on first principles. Model parameters determined from actual plant data from a Wemco drum. A validated dynamic model using additional plant data with a comparison to a steady-state process model. The use of coal washability to estimate product and feed grade for simulation.