Rock often suffers from discontinuous fatigue damages in geotechnical engineering, so it is of great significance to study deformation characteristics and failure modes of sandstone under discontinuous multi-level cyclic loading and unloading. By conducting continuous (only dynamic loading) and discontinuous (combined static and dynamic loading) multi-level cyclic loading and unloading tests, this study explored deformation characteristics and failure modes of sandstone. The test results demonstrated that the sandstone mainly suffered from large deformation dominated by dilation in circumferential direction when it was damaged after compression. After multi-level loading and unloading, evolution characteristics of deformation parameters showed characteristics of stepwise growth. However, the introduction of static loading changed such characteristics. In the process of combined static and dynamic loading, due to short action time, dynamic loading mainly promoted nucleation and sudden changes of cracks, while static loading affected crack development process mainly in the early compaction stage and late crack propagation and coalescence stage. Moreover, static loading showed small effects in elastic stage. In the compaction stage, the compacted micro-cracks reopened and cracks were affected by inertial damages in crack propagation stage and interconnected more thoroughly, so that the sandstone was finally more fragmented.As a common material in engineering, rock material is particularly widely used in constructional engineering, water conservancy and hydropower engineering, and mining engineering [ At present, many scholars have conducted a lot of researches on fatigue characteristics of rock and made significant progress. The factors, such as lithology, loading waveform, frequency, amplitude, stress level, and stress state mainly affect fatigue characteristics of rock. In fatigue test of sandstone, Burdine and Berea set the upper limit of stress as 74% of uniaxial compressive strength and found that the rock has a fatigue life enabling it to withstand 10 However, at present, a large number of research results demonstrate that similar to fatigue failure, deformation and failure can still occur when rock is under the stress level corresponding to its compressive strength for a long time. In the past decades, many scholars have carried out lots of such experiments on different types of rocks, such as rock salt [ In fact, the actual stress state of rock is not simply subjected to cyclic loading and unloading or only in creep state, but rock indirectly undertakes external disturbances, such as cyclic loading and unloading in the creep process, however, at present, there are few studies on this aspect, that is, the dynamic response of rock to creep or discontinuous cyclic loading and unloading with intermittent nature, so further research is needed. Fu et al. studied dynamic response of chloritite in creep process and considered that only disturbances close to their strength can exert effects [ However, at present, the contents of existing researches are still not enough for us to more profoundly grasp and understand response of rock to dynamic disturbance in the creep process. The previous tests mainly focus on the influences of single dynamic disturbance on rock. According to the existing theories of rock mechanics, loading state can be classified according to strain rate, as shown in This article is based on the definition of dynamic and static loads, three conditions of loading stress were tested. According to the test results, the impact of dynamic and static effects was analyzed from the stress-strain curves. Furthermore, through in-depth analysis and discussion of deformation parameters such as elastic modulus, multiaxial strain ratio, axial, radial, volumetric strain, and irreversible strain were conducted. Finally, through fractal means, the similarities and differences of these three loading modes were explained from another angle, and a dynamic and static loading mechanism was established. The research results can provide a theoretical basis for safety monitoring and disaster prevention in geotechnical engineering construction. Sandstone is a kind of sedimentary rock formed with colloidal particles, such as feldspar and quartz and clay minerals through complex geological effects. In daily life, sandstone is a kind of the most commonly seen rock material and construction material and is widely used in water conservancy and hydropower, mining and geotechnical engineering. In this test, sandstone from Yunnan Province in the southwest of China had a small particle size and belonged to fine-grained sandstone. It showed dense texture and bluish white surface. After being collected from the country of origin, the sandstone was sent to the State Key Laboratory of Coal Mine Disaster Dynamics and Control, Chongqing University, China for further processing. The sandstone was processed according to the processing method recommended by the International Society for Rock Mechanics. In order to ensure homogeneity of all specimens, the cores were taken from the same direction and then the specimens were processed into cylinders with dimensions of Φ50 mm × 100 mm [ The geotechnical consulting & testing system (GCTS) for testing dynamic and static triaxial testing on rock at high temperature and pressure was used in this test, as displayed in According to the research results of Martin et al., as shown in Therefore, stress paths in this study were designed by referring to state of rock at different stress stages obtained by Martin and research results of Peng [ (1) Discontinuous multi-level cyclic loading and unloading, that is, the combined static and dynamic loading, as shown in ① Confining pressure of 3 MPa was manually applied. After that, through stress control, axial deviatoric stress was increased to 9 MPa at a constant rate of 3 MPa/min. ② Cyclic loading and unloading process, namely dynamic loading. Through stress control, sine waves were loaded at the frequency of 0.1 Hz. Each of the dynamic loading blocks (L1, L3, L5 and L7) was cycled for 30 times and the amplitude was 0.2 times of peak stress. ③ Pressure-stabilizing process, namely static loading process. After each dynamic loading, a loading process at a stable pressure was set and the pressure was held for 4 h by keeping deviatoric stress unchanged. Furthermore, since rock had certain discreteness, in order to ensure that the specimens could be crushed, an additional dynamic loading stage was set in this experiment, with an upper limit of 1.1 f. (2) Continuous multi-level cyclic loading and unloading, as displayed in In order to determine peak stress of rock, the conventional triaxial compression tests were firstly conducted on C-1, C-2 and C-3 under confining pressure of 3 MPa under displacement control at a loading rate of 0.02%/min. The obtained peak strengths separately were 97, 87 and 88 MPa. By taking the average of the above test results and rounding up, it was considered that peak stress of sandstone was 90 MPa. Based on this, the upper and lower limits of stress at each stage were set. Stress–strain curves obtained from the test are shown in Elastic modulus characterizes the capacity of rock materials resisting deformation under external disturbance and is an important mechanical index of rock. Scholars have pointed out that under combined effects of positive factors, like hardening effects, and negative factors, such as hysteresis effects, viscous effects and damage caused by loading and unloading, the development process of elastic modulus can characterize development process of micro-fractures in rock [ In the research conducted by Peng et al. [ When static loading was performed after dynamic loading, elastic modulus developed along the path in the previous test of dynamic loading only on the whole. However, the presence of pressure-stabilizing process under static loading significantly influenced evolution of elastic modulus. Firstly, such influences were shown in the first cycle in each block, so that elastic modulus was smaller than This indicated that combined static and dynamic loading produced different effects in each stage. After the first static loading, that is pressure-stabilizing stage before the elastic stage, compaction effects induced by dynamic loading decreased to some extent in the pressure-stabilizing process and micro-cracks that should have been closed restored partially from deformation in sufficient time, so that elastic modulus reduced. After ending the second static loading, namely in the elastic stage, there was nearly no effects in the static loading stage. This was consistent with test results under dynamic loading alone, that is, elastic modulus slightly rose in the next block only with the increase of stress level. The reason was that rock was almost fully elastic in the elastic stage. It was shown as a straight line segment of the stress-strain curve obtained from the conventional triaxial compression test, during which only few damages appeared in this stage. In some studies on creep, it was also found that it is difficult to produce large deformation under static loading at this level and the strain rate was generally low [ In the uniaxial compression test, Poisson's ratio is generally used to reflect interaction effects of deformation of materials in different directions. In the previous researches, many scholars used Poisson's ratio to reveal damages of rock and micro-crack development in cyclic loading [ In the conventional triaxial compression test, multiaxial strain ratio In Furthermore, as shown in Rock is the product of a complex geological process, so it has non-ideal elasticity. This results in the fact that rock cannot return along the original path after loading when unloading, and produce a certain plastic hysteresis loop, and increased strain. This phenomenon is very common in fatigue tests. Therefore, it is of significance to analyze the similarities and differences of dynamic loading and dynamic-static combined loading from the strain. In the process of introducing static loading, axial and circumferential strains in each block significantly increased, especially circumferential strain, which showed more obvious growth amplitude and trend. In terms of volumetric strain, such a characteristic was more specific. Due to the introduction of static loading, volumetric strain induced by compaction became more obvious and those in each block were lower compared with the case under dynamic loading alone. Moreover, in comparison with the situation under the dynamic loading alone, after introducing static loading, the node for volumetric strain changing from compaction to dilation appeared much earlier, so that dilation that originally appeared in the fourth block under the dynamic loading alone was shown in the third block after introducing static loading.  In accordance with strain curves in static loading process in each stage in Furthermore, the characteristics of creep decrease in the first stage were shown as the first increase and then decrease trend of volumetric strain in In addition, in terms of period of time from the end of the transient creep stage to the stable creep stage, it only lasted for a few tens of seconds before the elastic stage when dividing according to axial and circumferential strains. In the elastic stage, namely the second pressure–stabilizing stage, the time was about 1000 s. In the third pressure–stabilizing stage, the time was about 1200 s and was only 2–3 s when approaching failure. Therefore, it was considered that the period of time for entering stable creep stage in the static loading increased with stress level. However, when judging according to volumetric strain, volumetric strain still linearly rose after reaching the second static loading stage for four hours, so it could be considered that the rock was still in the transient creep stage and did not enter the stable creep stage. When comparing with the period of time for entering the stable creep stage according to volumetric strain, it firstly rose and then reduced with the increase of stress level. The strain rate was analyzed. The axial, circumferential and volumetric strain rates firstly decreased and then increased in the transient creep stage, and those in the stable creep stage also firstly reduced and then rose (positive and negative only represent the direction). This also proved that the influence degrees of different stress levels on deformation firstly decreased and then increased under static loading state as well. This also confirmed that deformation in the elastic stage was small, but still decreased to some extent. This further proved and explained characteristics of deformation trends of elastic modulus and multiaxial strain ratio in this stage, that is, both dynamic loading alone and combined static and dynamic loading had small effects. Furthermore, as displayed in Drawing the difference of every two blocks into the stacking diagrams of irreversible axial, circumferential and volumetric strains could more intuitively show the effects of the combined static and dynamic loading and dynamic loading alone on strain development in the three stages. Based on axial strain, as shown in  The failure of materials is a response form in which materials are obviously separated into several parts under the action of external force, so analyzing failure modes of rock is conducive to better understanding of the mechanisms of rock under various stress paths [  Under dynamic loading alone and combined static and dynamic loading, the fragments of specimens after failure were classified into bulks, medium blocks and small pieces according to certain sizes, as presented in After statistics, mass distribution is shown in In this process, the percentage of small pieces increased slightly, indicating that lost bulks were mainly transferred to medium blocks. The rock had the dominance of maximum damages in the process of damage development, that is, damage occurred randomly in the materials, while was dominated by the largest part of damage only. The above transfer of mass percentage suggested that the introduction of static loading allowed micro-fractures in rock to coalesce more thoroughly, so that other cracks were more likely to coalesce and expand. Therefore, the percentage of medium blocks increased. According to a lot of existing research results of rock fatigue or dynamic cyclic loading and unloading, rock belongs to a material with hysteresis functions [ When only performing dynamic loading, namely only carrying out cyclic loading and unloading, the constantly accumulated plastic deformation caused the curve to shift rightward and the whole curve to finally intersect at a certain point with the original curve after the peak. In the study on creep of rock, similar phenomenon existed. When stress kept unchanged, the strain curve continuously shifted rightward and rock failure occurred when the curve intersected with the original curve. On the whole, there were many similarities between dynamic loading and static loading. For example, the development of curves showed characteristics of three stages and underwent the main processes, such as closure of primary micro-cracks, nucleation of secondary micro-cracks and crack coalescence. When carrying out the combined static and dynamic loading, static loading and dynamic loading were not simply superimposed, but interacted and influenced each other. The key influence was the control over the growth process of primary and secondary micro-cracks. Besides the stress level, time is the most important factor in the growth of micro-cracks. Under dynamic loading alone, the growth process of cracks was a quasi-transient process, and cracks opened and closed in a very short time. Particularly, in the test under dynamic loading alone in this study, as shown in When rock failure occurred, there were few macro-cracks under the conventional loading, while many macro-cracks were found under dynamic loading. Moreover, the number of macro-cracks was the largest under the combined static and dynamic loading. The reason was shown as follows: crack development under the conventional loading was only affected by stress level, so it was only subjected to the effects of a single maximum damage. Under dynamic loading, repeated cyclic loading and unloading continuously made cracks nucleate, resulting in multiple damages. These damages worked together to eventually cause rock failure. After introducing static loading, the influences of inertial damages were further added, so that some micro-damages developed. This promoted more damages to synchronously develop and coalesce to produce macro-failure, thus leading to more intense rock failure. In order to explore deformation characteristics and failure modes of sandstone under discontinuous multi-level cyclic loading and unloading, this study carried out a group of the conventional triaxial compression tests and measured the average strength of the sandstone to be about 90 MPa. Furthermore, according to the obtained average strength, the continuous (dynamic loading alone) and discontinuous multi-level cyclic loading and unloading tests (combined static and dynamic loading) were designed and conducted. By comparing and analyzing elastic moduli, multiaxial strain ratios and failure modes as well as axial, circumferential and volumetric strains of sandstone under the dynamic loading path alone and combined static loading and unloading path, this study elaborated the effects of static and dynamic loading in the whole process. The following main conclusions were made. In the test under dynamic loading alone, various deformation parameters of sandstone basically showed a stepwise evolution trend. In the test under combined static and dynamic loading, the introduction of static loading could result in abnormal development trend of elastic modulus, so that elastic modulus in the first block under dynamic loading was higher than those in the subsequent blocks and the elastic modulus in the last block under dynamic loading decreased in advance. At different stress levels, the strain rates firstly increased and then decreased in both the transient and stable creep processes in the static loading process. In the test under combined static and dynamic loading, the static loading process allowed strain to decrease after the first block under dynamic loading, that is, anti-creep characteristics. In the meanwhile, axial and circumferential strains caused by static loading always firstly reduced and then rose. By analyzing volumetric strain, the introduction of static loading made rock enter volume dilation state too early. By analyzing failure modes and mass of fragments with different sizes after failure, the introduction of static loading caused cracks to develop and coalesce more thoroughly, finally resulting in that the decreased percentage of mass of bulks was transferred to the increased percentages of mass of medium blocks and small pieces. In the combined static and dynamic loading process, the influence of dynamic loading was mainly to promote nucleation and sudden changes of cracks, while static loading could affect development process of cracks mainly in the early compaction stage and later crack propagation and coalescence stages. There was little influence on the elastic stage. In the compaction stage, the compacted micro-cracks reopened. In the crack propagation stage, the cracks were affected by inertial damages and coalesced more completely, thus finally making sandstone more fragmented. The authors declared that they have no conflicts of interest to this work. We declare that we do not have any commercial or associative interest that represents a conflict of interest in connection with the work submitted. This work was supported by the