Background
                  There is no validated method to determine the correct diameter of a radial head implant when the radial head is too comminuted to function as a template or during revision surgery when the radial head has been previously excised. The purpose of this study was to determine if ipsilateral capitellar dimensions could be used to predict the diameter of the radial head; and hence to assist with implant selection.
               
                  Methods
                  Computer tomography scans of 50 normal elbows were used to generate 3D models. Measurements of the radial head included the maximum (Dmax) and minimum (Dmin) outer diameters and the maximum (Dishmax) and minimum (Dishmin) articular dish diameters. Measurements of the humerus included the width of the capitellum (CAPwidth), and the width from the lateral aspect of the capitellum to the lateral trochlear ridge (CAP-TROCHridge). Relationships were determined with Pearson bivariate coefficients.
               
                  Results
                  The mean radial head dimensions were Dmax = 24.7 ± 2.3 mm, Dmin = 23.5 ± 2.3 mm, Dishmax = 18.2 ± 1.9 mm and Dishmin = 16.8 ± 1.7 mm. The mean capitellar measurements were CAPwidth (18.4 ± 1.4 mm) and CAP-TROCHridge (23.0 ± 2.1 mm). The most significant correlations were found between Dmax and CAP-TROCHridge (R = .90, P < .001) and Dmin and CAP-TROCHridge (R = .90, P < .001).
               
                  Discussion
                  Radiologic measurements of the capitellum are useful in the estimation of native radial head diameter. The CAP-TROCHridge measurement was very strongly correlated with both the maximum and minimum diameters of the radial head. This suggests that CAP-TROCHridge may be useful to accurately predict the native radial head diameter. These morphological relationships were plotted to produce an implant selection chart for radial head sizing applicable to any implant system.Metallic radial head arthroplasty is a reliable procedure for the management of acute traumatic, post-traumatic and arthritic conditions of the radial head. The literature has demonstrated that metallic radial head arthroplasty is a safe and effective procedure for restoring elbow stability following comminuted unreconstructable radial head fractures associated with instability. The morphology of the radial head is complex. Although many criteria have been described to assist with the selection of correct radial head implant length, little information exists on methods to correctly size the diameter of the radial head. Intuitively, when fragments of the native radial head exist, they should be reassembled and used to estimate the diameter of the implant. However, when the native radial head is absent, such as during revision surgeries or in cases of severe comminution with bone loss, no additional intra-operative method exists to estimate or confirm the correct diameter of the radial head. While contralateral radiographs can be useful to estimate radial head size, these may not be available in the operating room when the issue of implant sizing arises. Therefore, the purpose of this computer tomography- (CT) based study was to identify local distal humeral landmarks that could assist with correct radial head implant diameter estimation. Fifty skeletally mature cadaveric specimens (15 female and 35 male) underwent a CT scan (GE Discovery CT750 HD Radial head measurements included the maximum (D A humeral coordinate system was created in order to conduct measurements in a reproducible fashion at clinically relevant locations on the distal humerus. The midpoint or equator of the capitellum was selected as the axial location for capitellar and distal humerus width measurements. This location was chosen as it is intra-operatively available to conduct clinical measurements through a standard lateral elbow arthrotomy and can be measured preoperatively on clinical CT scans. The capitellar width measurements were performed by selecting locations on the 3D surface models at the lateral articular margin of the capitellum, the medial articular margin (deepest point of the capitellar-trochlea groove) and on the lateral ridge of the trochlea. Pearson bivariate correlations were determined between humeral and radial head dimensions. Inter-rater correlations (2-way mixed, 20 specimens, 2 raters) were performed in order to determine measurement reliability. Single measures correlations are reported since ultimately, individual measurements will be used intra-operatively. Two best-fit equations for D The mean radial head dimensions were D The most significant correlations were found between D The CAP-TROCH Intra-class correlations of absolute agreement found that the simplified equations were highly reliable compared to the best-fit equations, D Our results indicate that during radial head arthroplasty when the native radial head is unavailable or not suitable for sizing, measurements of the ispilateral capitellum may be useful in the estimation of the native radial head diameter. Both the CAP-TROCH When using the fractured radial head to determining the diameter of a radial head implant, no standardized measurement recommendations exist. Depending on the particular implant system and surgeon preferences, radial head measurements that have been used to select an implant include the maximum outer diameter, the minimum outer diameter and the maximum articular dish diameter. As some or all of these measurements are used clinically, we have provided guidelines for implant diameter selection for each parameter ( The results of this study are specific to measurements made on preoperative CT scans; however, these measurements may also be useful intra-operatively. The CAP-TROCH This study does have limitations, including that the articular cartilage thickness was not accounted for with the CT-based measurements. Additionally, the CT scans were obtained from cadaveric specimens, which are typically older than patients sustaining comminuted fractures of the radial head. The strengths of this study include the reasonable sample size, reproducibility evaluation, the strong correlations identified and the high reliability of the measurement techniques. Further studies are needed to determine whether direct intraoperative measurements of CAP-TROCH When the native radial head is unavailable or unsuitable for sizing, measurements of the ispilateral capitellum are useful in the estimation of native radial head diameter. The CAP-TROCH Dr. King is a designer of a radial head implant and receives royalties from Wright Medical Technology which relates to the subject of this article. The other authors, their immediate families, and any research foundation with which they are affiliated received no financial payments or other benefits from any commercial entity related to the subject of this article. There were no outside funding or grants received that assisted in this study.