The effect of a concentrated rhamnolipid biosurfactant (purity > 97%) produced by Pseudomonas aeruginosa MA01 on flotation performance of coal and minerals was studied and compared with those from synthetic flotation reagents in both single and mixed systems. Results of phosphate flotation tests showed that phosphate content in the floated product decreased by rhamnolipid concentration. However, final recovery of phosphate at appropriate dosage of reagent was insignificant. This could be ascribed to the increase of iron recovery to final concentrate likely due to collecting action of rhamnolipid for iron minerals. In coal flotation, the increase of rhamnolipid concentration in mixture with pine oil reduced both ash content and coal yield of concentrates. In desulfurization of a sample iron concentrate using reverse flotation, rhamnolipid addition successfully decreased the sulfur content of the iron concentrate. The flotation responses of the studied sample ores showed that rhamnolipid can be used as a promising frother or co-frother in mineral processing practices.Today, it is well known that some microorganisms are able to produce surface-active compounds that can vary in their chemical structure and size. Since the last decade of the past century the concern about environmental protection has lead to an increased interest in the production and properties of these natural products. These surfactants, often called microbial surfactants or biosurfactants, are considered nowadays as potential substitutes of synthetic chemicals from petrochemical origin. The main advantages of biosurfactants over their chemical counterparts are their lower toxicity, better environmental compatibility, biodegradability, and effectiveness in a wide range of temperatures and pH. Last, but not least, their production by renewable resources provides further impetus for serious consideration of biological surfactants as possible alternatives of the commonly used industrial chemicals ( Among the various species of biosurfactants much work has been done on rhamnose containing microbial surfactants (namely rhamnolipid) produced by In this research we report the production of a biosurfactant in concentrated form from a bacterial species named A strain of Biosurfactant extraction was done based on procedure described by Crystalline rhamnolipid grown inside the glass container was an evidence of high purity of the product. The crystalline appearance was photographed using a professional high resolution camera (Canon model 305) equipped with a +7 close-up lens. For more magnification, crystalline rhamnolipid was examined under a light microscope (Zeiss model Axioskop 40, Germany) at magnifications of ×40 and ×100, by carefully transferring a loopful from crystalline zone on a glass slide and the thin films were photographed. Fourier-transform infrared (FTIR) spectroscopy spectra were obtained in a Nicolet 6700 Fourier-transform infrared spectrometer (FTIR) (Madison, WI). A sample of each purified biosurfactant was placed in between two CaF The chemical structure of the purified biosurfactants was determined by ES-MS in an Agilent LC-MSD-Trap-VL equipment. Full scan data were obtained by scanning from 950 to 150 m z A crude rhamnolipid solution was prepared at a concentration of 250 ppm. Then, it was appropriately serially diluted (250–0 ppm), and the surface tension values of the prepared dilutions were measured using a The critical micelle concentration (CMC) of rhamnolipid was estimated from the intercept of two straight lines extrapolated from the concentration-dependent and concentration-independent sections of a curve plotted between rhamnolipid concentration and surface tension values. CMC values were used for the tentative estimation of the percentage purity of rhamnolipid (RL) ( Information for standard rhamnolipid was that reported by In order to evaluate the stability of rhamnolipid at different pH values, rhamnolipid polluted solutions (6, 25, and 50 ppm) were adjusted at pH values of 2, 4, 7, 9, and 11 using HCl or NaOH as acidic and alkaline pH-regulators, respectively. Three sets of flotation experiments were planned to investigate the possible application of rhamnolipid in coal and mineral flotation as a frothing reagent and/or co-reagent. Except frother concentration to be assessed, all other parameters including solid percentage, pH of pulp, reagent type, conditioning time, impeller speed, and froth-collecting period, were set on the basis of operating conditions applied in industrial practices. The efficiency of the mineral flotation process was evaluated in terms of final recovery and grade of Fe, P In order to assaying Fe content, 0.1 g of each sample was dissolved in 20 ml HCl. After filtering the solution, distilled water was added to bring the volume to 100 ml in a 250-ml Erlenmeyer flask. Then, appropriate amount of ammonium metha-vanadate was added till a yellowish complex appeared. The complex contained solution was analyzed by an Atomic Adsorption Instrument (Spectra model 110, Australia) at wave length of 400 nm. Phosphate content was determined using an Ultra Violet Spectrometer (PerkinElmer model Lambda-25, USA) after initial acidic preparation of samples. All analyses were carried out at R&D Center of Esfordi Phosphate Complex. The results showed that the bulk sample (feed) contains 35.2% Fe and 15.5% P Ash analyses were carried out according to ASTM D 3174-73 Standard and showed that the bulk sample contains 21.76% ash. Before ash analysis, products were first allowed to settle, decanted and then dried at 60 °C. Samples were analyzed at Central Laboratory of Gol-e Gohar Iron Ore Complex, for their iron and sulfur content measurements. In order to determine Fe contents, 1 g of each sample was transferred into a 1000-ml Erlenmeyer flask containing 15 ml of concentrated HCl. The solution was then heated to just below boiling on the hot plate until the ore was dissolved. After the solution cooled, distilled water was added to bring the volume to 1000 ml. 500 ml of solution was then transferred into a 500-ml Erlenmeyer flask and 5 drops of sulfuric acid was added. Afterwards, 50 ml of acidified solution was again transferred into a 100-ml flask and 10 ml of 10% ascorbic acid was added. After about 10 s, 10 ml of buffer solution of pH 3.7 ± 0.1 and 10 ml of 0.5% ortho-phenanthroline was also added to the solution. Final solution was left for 30 min and Fe content was photometrically measured at wave length of 546 nm. Sulfur content was measured using a Ströhlein Analyzer (model CS-mat 6250, Germany) on the base of instrument instruction. Tungsten powder and iron chip were used as co-smelter and accelerator, respectively. Analysis results showed that the bulk sample contains 70.68% Fe and 0.332% sulfur. Physical state, color, and odor were determined for crude rhamnolipid residue obtained after extraction. The rhamnolipid product appeared as viscous sticky oily residue with amber to yellowish brown color and fruity pineapple like odor. Crystalline rhamnolipid grown inside the glass container was an evidence of high purity of the product. From A classical technique for structural analysis of organic compounds is FTIR. Characteristic absorption bands corresponding to functional groups typically forming part of rhamnolipids could be observed for the samples: the O–H stretching bands (free hydroxyl groups of rhamnose rings) around 3385–3390 cm One of the main characteristics of surfactants is their tendency to adsorb at interfaces in an oriented fashion as a consequence of their amphipathic structure. As the surfactant concentration increases, the surface tension of the surfactant solution decreases up to a certain value and then becomes almost constant due to the interface saturation with the surfactant molecules. The surfactant concentration at which this phenomenon occurs is known as the CMC and is determined from the break point of the surface tension versus concentration curve. For practical purposes, it is important to distinguish between an effective biosurfactant and an efficient biosurfactant. Effectiveness is measured by the minimum value to which the surface tension can be reduced, whereas efficiency is measured by the biosurfactant concentration required to produce a significant reduction in the surface tension of water. The latter can be known from the CMC of the biosurfactant ( From Purity and CMC for standard (Std) rhamnolipid are 98% and 9.85 ppm. Using the above equation, it was found that the purity of test rhamnolipid was about 97.5%. The stability of test rhamnolipid at different pH values is also an important issue that can affect its application spectrum. As seen in  Ash content of concentrates at different pine oil to rhamnolipid ratios is shown in In reverse flotation process, product floated to the froth is considered as tailings and remaining product inside the cell is accepted as concentrate. In this study, a strain of The authors acknowledge the technical assistance of Esfordi Phosphate Complex (Yazd, Iran), Zarand Coal Washing Plant (Kerman, Iran), and Gol-e Gohar Iron Ore Complex (Sirjan, Iran).