Objective
                  The objective of this study was to evaluate the current classifications for fractures of the distal extremity of the radius, since the classifications made using traditional radiographs in anteroposterior and lateral views have been questioned regarding their reproducibility. In the literature, it has been suggested that other options are needed, such as use of preoperative radiographs on fractures of the distal radius subjected to traction, with stratification by the evaluators. The aim was to demonstrate which classification systems present better statistical reliability.
               
                  Results
                  In the Universal classification, the results from the third-year resident group (R3) and from the group of more experienced evaluators (Staff) presented excellent correlation, with a statistically significant p-value (p
                     <0.05). Neither of the groups presented a statistically significant result through the Frykman classification. In the AO classification, there were high correlations in the R3 and Staff groups (respectively 0.950 and 0.800), with p-values lower than 0.05 (respectively <0.001 and 0.003).
               
                  Conclusion
                  It can be concluded that radiographs performed under traction showed good concordance in the Staff group and in the R3 group, and that this is a good tactic for radiographic evaluations of fractures of the distal extremity of the radius.Fractures of the distal extremity of the radius are very frequent injuries nowadays and this, along with technological advances, has led to much debate among orthopedists with regard to improvement of their treatment. The different approaches and outcomes have stimulated authors to seek classification systems that would guide diagnosis and treatment. Classifications that are made using traditional radiographs in posteroanterior and lateral views have been questioned regarding their reproducibility. IN the literature, it has been suggested that there is a need for other options, such as computed tomography. The objective of this study was to evaluate the current classification systems for fractures of the distal radius by means of preoperative radiographs produced under traction, with stratification by the evaluators, with a view to demonstrating which classification systems present the best statistical reliability. A retrospective observational study was conducted in our institution based on 30 radiographs on patients who had been admitted to the orthopedics and traumatology service and who underwent surgical procedures to treat fractures of the distal extremity of the radius. The authors declare that this study was in accordance with the Declaration of Helsinki. Radiographs on these patients were produced preoperatively, at the time of admission, and these were performed under traction in order to evaluate the fracture, as part of the established routine within our service. Two radiographs were produced on each patient: in anteroposterior and lateral views. After this, the images were evaluated. The evaluators were grouped according to their year of residency or position as a member of the hospital staff.  extra-articular without displacement extra-articular with displacement stable and reducible unstable and reducible irreducible intra-articular without displacement intra-articular with displacement stable and reducible unstable and reducible irreducible complex  extra-articular extra-articular intra-articular (radiocarpal joint) intra-articular (radiocarpal joint) intra-articular (distal radioulnar joint) intra-articular (distal radioulnar joint intra-articular (radiocarpal and distal radioulnar joints) intra-articular (radiocarpal and distal radioulnar joints) A – extra-articular A1 – ulna and radius intact A2 – simple and impacted fractures of the radius A3 – multifragmented fracture of the radius B – partial intra-articular B1 – sagittal facture of the radius B2 – frontal and dorsal edge fracture of the radius B3 – frontal and volar edge fracture of the radius  C1 – simple at joint and simple in metaphysis C2 – simple at joint and multifragmented in metaphysis C3 – multifragmented at joint Each group according to year of residency comprised three residents. Thus, three evaluators were first-year residents, three were second-year residents and three were third-year residents. Three staff physicians also formed part of the group, as a reference group. The results from analyzing the radiographs with regard to the different classification systems (Frykman, AO and Universal) were tabulated and the SPSS statistical package (IBM), version 13.0, was used for the concordance analysis. First stage: exploratory analysis of the central trend and dispersion measurements on the variables obtained. Second stage: evaluation of the intra and inter-group inter-examiner concordance (R1/R2/R3 and Staff) by means of the intraclass correlation (ICC). Third stage: identification of concordance between the control group (Staff) and R3 in the universal classification with and without the subtypes. The three classifications presented very different results in correlations that were made with the aim of examining the consistency of the evaluations between the groups of evaluators. In evaluating the universal classification proposed by Cooney, The group of first-year residents presented low concordance (0.236), with low statistical significance ( The group of second-year residents presented greater concordance, although still at an intermediate level (0.566), with a The results from the R3 and Staff groups presented excellent correlations, with statistically significant When the Frykman classification was evaluated, none of the groups presented a statistically significant result (all of them presented Analysis on the AO classification showed that the groups presented behavioral differences ( The R1 group presented low concordance and also a The R2 group presented good correlation, with a For the R3 and Staff groups, the correlations were high (respectively 0.950 and 0.800), with Fractures of the distal extremity of the radius are among the most frequent types of fractures of the skeleton, according to Reis et al., The concern for observing radiographic results in relation to functional outcomes has been evaluated recently. The initial status of the fracture, The existence of various classifications demonstrates that there is a need to obtain a single ideal classification that would be very wide-ranging and would provide support for therapeutic and prognostic conduct. In a study on radiographic assessment without traction, Flinkkilä et al. In the present study, it was observed that evaluations on radiographs produced under traction presented high concordance through the AO and universal classification systems. Regarding the Frykman classification, we did not find good reliability from this evaluation, even on radiographs produced under traction. We conclude that radiographs produced under traction showed good concordance, especially in the groups with greater experience that were evaluated (staff and third-year residents), and that this is a good tactic in making radiographic assessments of fractures of the distal extremity of the radius through Cooney's universal classification and the AO classification. The authors declare no conflicts of interest.