Hydrometallurgy is a promising alternative to treat copper concentrates that contain large amounts of enargite (Cu3AsS4). However, leaching of enargite is difficult due to its slow dissolution rate in acidic solutions. The pressure leaching of an enargite concentrate containing about 40% pyrite was carried out in sulfuric acid/oxygen at temperatures in the range of 160 to 200°C and oxygen partial pressure of 345 to 1034kPa. The results showed that the dissolution of enargite in the presence of pyrite was considerably faster than the dissolution of pure enargite. By leaching an enargite–pyrite concentrate sample of particle size −75+53μm at 200°C and 689kPa O2, all the copper was extracted in 15min. It was also found that temperature, oxygen partial pressure and particle size had a significant influence on the rate of enargite dissolution from the enargite–pyrite concentrate, while the sulfuric acid concentration had little effect. Ferric ions produced in the leaching were responsible for the enhanced dissolution of enargite in the presence of pyrite and pure enargite leaching was similarly enhanced by the addition of ferrous ions. Analysis of the data for the enargite–pyrite concentrate showed linear kinetics for the dissolution of pyrite, whilst the rate of dissolution of enargite increased substantially with time as ferric ions build up in solution.Arsenic, usually in the form of enargite (Cu Previous investigators have found that enargite is a refractory mineral in aqueous media, especially in acidic solutions. The leaching rate of enargite in sulfate media at atmospheric pressure is very slow using either oxygen or ferric ions as oxidants. On this matter, The use of chloride ions to accelerate the leaching of enargite has also been studied. On the other hand, pressure leaching has been found to be a more effective method for the dissolution of enargite in acid media, although the leaching rate is still slow as compared to other copper sulfides, including chalcopyrite. These investigators also found that enargite leached with linear kinetics and that the dissolution rate increased substantially with increasing temperature. Complete dissolution of enargite with particle size −75   Considering that pyrite is a common impurity in copper–arsenic concentrates, the effect of pyrite on enargite dissolution rate is of great practical interest. Therefore, the main objective of this work was to study the pressure leaching of a pyrite rich enargite concentrate in H The primary material used in the experimental work was an enargite concentrate with a high content of pyrite, which was prepared from large particles (about 11″ in size) with enargite and pyrite mineralization from El Indio Mine (Barrick Corp.). This material was crushed manually to a size of approximately 5 A second essentially pure enargite concentrate was prepared from large enargite crystals also from El Indio Mine. This material was crushed and ground by the same procedure described earlier, and washed with distilled water to eliminate any soluble copper species present. The chemical and mineralogical analysis of the −75 Pressure leaching experiments were conducted in a batch 2-liter capacity titanium autoclave reactor, which comprises, a variable speed mechanical agitation system, an electric heating mantle and a cooling coil to circulate cold water through the reaction chamber. The autoclave was also equipped with a PID temperature controller, a gas system to provide oxygen overpressure and a sampling device to extract samples of the leaching solution. The experimental procedure consisted in preheating 1 Most of the experiments were carried out with the enargite–pyrite concentrate, to study the main variables that could affect the pressure leaching of this material: i.e. stirring speed, concentration of sulfuric acid, particle size, oxygen partial pressure, temperature, and time. Some experiments were also carried out using the pure enargite concentrate, in order to compare the leaching behaviour of this material with the behaviour of the enargite–pyrite concentrate. Preliminary experiments were carried out to determine the effect of the stirring speed on copper dissolution using the enargite–pyrite concentrate. The results of experiments carried out in the range 400 to 800 The effect of the initial sulfuric acid concentrations on copper dissolution was studied in the range of 10 to 40 At this point it is worth to note that the dissolution curves in The effect of partial pressure of oxygen on the leaching of the enargite–pyrite concentrate was studied in the range 345 to 1034 Leaching tests were carried out using samples of different particle sizes. The copper dissolution obtained at 180 To determine the effect of temperature on the enargite leaching, various experiments were executed in the temperature range of 160 to 200 Generally, at all the temperatures the dissolution of arsenic was equal to the dissolution of copper at short leaching times as shown in The dissolution of iron was also determined as a function of temperature. Since pyrite is the only iron containing mineral in the sample, the iron dissolution corresponds to the pyrite dissolution. It was found, that under all the conditions tested pyrite dissolved faster than enargite as seen clearly in The rapid pressure leaching rates observed for the enargite in the presence of pyrite in the concentrate could be explained by two alternative mechanisms: The formation of a galvanic couple between enargite and pyrite, with pyrite as the cathodic surface which would lead to an accelerated anodic dissolution of the enargite. The generation of ferric ions during the leaching which dissolved enargite faster than oxygen. The first mechanism was proposed by On the other hand, it is well known that oxygen can readily oxidize ferrous to ferric ions under pressure leaching conditions, and the oxidation rate depends on the temperature, and the oxygen and ferrous ions concentrations ( To verify the role of the dissolved iron on the rate of enargite leaching, experiments were carried out using the pure enargite concentrate sample size −75 One can clearly see in To re-affirm this finding a second set of leaching experiments was carried out using a sample prepared by mixing pure enargite with pure pyrite (70% enargite–30% pyrite) both with particle size −53 Therefore, in the pressure leaching of the enargite–pyrite concentrate the enargite dissolves by the following main reaction: At the lower temperatures, a fraction of the sulfide sulfur could be oxidized to elemental sulfur, according to the reaction: These reactions are coupled with the reoxidation of the ferrous ions to ferric ions by oxygen according to: It is well known that for monosized particles reacting uniformly with a liquid phase with linear kinetics a plot of the function 1 The experimental data on the copper dissolution from the enargite–pyrite concentrate for various temperatures was plotted as 1 On the other hand, the kinetics data on iron dissolution from the enargite–pyrite concentrate ( Modeling of the leaching kinetic of enargite in the presence of pyrite for prediction purposes requires additional experimental data which is currently underway. From the experimental data on the acid pressure leaching of enargite–pyrite concentrate and pure enargite sample the following can be concluded: The pressure leaching of enargite in the presence of 40% w/w pyrite is considerably faster than the dissolution of pure enargite and all the copper can be dissolved in 15 Temperature, oxygen partial pressure and particle size had significant influence on the rate of enargite dissolution from the enargite–pyrite concentrate, while the sulfuric acid concentration had little effect. Ferric ions generated in the leaching, by the oxidation of ferrous ions by oxygen, have been found to be the major oxidant and catalyst for enargite leaching at these high temperatures, rather than galvanic coupling with the pyrite. Linear kinetics of shrinking mono-sized particles was observed for the dissolution of pure enargite with or without addition of ferrous sulfate to the leaching solution. Whilst the rate of dissolution of enargite in the presence of pyrite increases substantially with time as ferric ion builds up in solution. The authors acknowledge