Hot-dip galvanized coating is generally used to protect steel against corrosion due to cheapness and ease of application. It is beneficial to improve the corrosion resistance of such coatings to enhance its service life. The present work addresses this aspect through modifying the dendritic microstructure of the coating by alloying addition. Based on the property of strontium towards magnesium and aluminum alloys, this work uses this element to effect the microstructural changes in the coating. The study shows that strontium refines the dendritic microstructure of the coating and thereby enhances not only corrosion resistance but also adhesion strength. The optimum adhesion strength and corrosion resistance is achieved for the coating containing 0.02 wt.% strontium.Steel is susceptible to corrosion; therefore it is generally used with a protective coating like zinc, aluminum or their alloys or organic coatings. Among them zinc (hot-dip galvanized) coating is most widely employed in pre-coated steels and other steel products. The demand to enhance the life of hot-dip galvanized coating is ever increasing, due to the rise in cost of steel, zinc and depletion of their mineral resources. The addition of certain alloying elements, like Al, Mg and Ni is known to play an important role in improving galvanic performance of hot-dip galvanized coating It is known that as-cast (solidified) alloy structures are chemically inhomogeneous due to the presence of coring and dendrites As an additive to Mg alloys Low carbon steel sheet coupons of 0.84 mm thickness having chemical composition of C To develop coating, specimens of steel sheet coupons were polished on silicon carbide papers 80 through 800 grades to get a smooth surface. Cleaning and surface preparation of specimen involves i) degreasing, ii) descaling and iii) fluxing have been described in detail elsewhere A cylindrical graphite crucible of 100 mm inner diameter and 250 mm height was used for melting. A pot-type resistance heating furnace in which the crucible was kept was used. First, pure zinc was melted in the crucible. For preparation of the required bath composition, master alloy of aluminum–strontium was added to the molten zinc bath separately in the graphite crucible. This master alloy is eutectic having melting point of 590 °C. Therefore, zinc bath temperature was raised up to 600 °C where master alloy can be easily melted and mixed in the zinc bath. Stirring was done during alloy addition to obtain uniform and homogeneous mixing of the alloying element in the zinc bath. The alloying reaction had completed and it became homogeneous during the stirring action. Then the bath temperature was slowly lowered down to 460 °C. The furnace temperature was controlled through a Variac so that the bath temperature was maintained at 460 The characterization includes determining the thickness and adhesion strength of the coating followed by its microstructure examination and corrosion study. Thickness was measured with magnetic thickness gauge tester ( Optical microscope was used to examine the microstructure of the coatings as well as their cross-sections. For this purpose specimen were polished using silicon carbide papers up to 800 grits. Final polishing was done on lapping wheel with magnesia powder suspended in distilled water, cleaned with distilled water and then dried An electrochemical test cell used for the study consists of a borosil glass vessel similar to ASTM G5 with 500 ml capacity Potentiodynamic polarization studies were carried out in 3.5 wt.% NaCl solution (prepared using analytical grade sodium chloride dissolved in distilled water). The measurements were carried out at 25 Electrochemical Impedance Spectroscopy (EIS) measurements were performed with the same experimental setup as used for potentiodynamic polarization along with a Schlumberger 1255 frequency response analyzer interfaced with the potentiostat. Both frequency response analyzer and potentiostat were driven by Z The change in the coating thickness for identical dipping conditions (5 s) of steel is not very much significant with variation of strontium content of the coatings. However, with strontium content of (up to 0.02 wt.%) in the zinc coating a marginal reduction in the thickness (16 μm) is observed ( The adhesion strength measured using the pull off adhesion test is shown in Optical micrographs of strontium free and strontium containing zinc coatings are compared in Earlier researchers found that adding 0.003–0.05 wt.% strontium in the magnesium alloys can eliminate microporosity and refine grain size Impurities Pb, Mg and Fe which are present in the coating in the trace form get distributed along the interdendritic/grain boundaries. In case of zinc coating as dendrite grain size is large and interdendritic/grain boundary area is small these impurities concentrate non-uniformly at grain boundaries causing higher corrosion rates. While in strontium containing zinc coating interdendritic/grain boundaries area is large therefore impurities segregate uniformly on this area. Hence the concentration of impurities along the interdendritic/grain boundaries will be much less in the latter case. Because of this coatings show enhanced corrosion resistance. In an earlier study it was shown that Pb segregation in zinc coating enhanced intergranular corrosion The average grain size of strontium free zinc coating is about 110 μm and strontium containing zinc coating shows refinement of up to 15 μm. Notably, this indicates 86% grain refinement due to strontium addition as compared to that of strontium free zinc coating. It is seen that the grain size variation of the strontium free coating is high and it becomes narrow with strontium addition. It is also noticed that the maximum grain refinement occurs up to 0.02 wt.% strontium addition and beyond this, the grain size is found to increase marginally (  Coating cross-section of hot-dip zinc and strontium containing zinc coatings was also examined. Both the strontium free and strontium containing coating exhibit columnar type grains ( Generally, it has been found that the degree of powdering increases with both coating iron content and coating weight and failure has been observed at the gamma (Γ) phase layer/substrate interface and the delta (δ) phase layer/gamma (Γ) phase layer interface. It has also been reported that the degree of cracking depends on the presence of a gamma (Γ) phase layer, the zeta (ζ)/delta (δ) phase ratio, or the iron gradient within the layers. Delta (δ) and gamma (Γ) are the brittle phases in the Fe–Zn coatings, while zeta (ζ) phase is the most ductile. The zeta (ζ) phase may relieve some of the strains in the coating and yield better resistance to powdering as a result of its plasticity The behavior of pure zinc and strontium containing zinc coated steel sheet panels was evaluated using potentiodynamic polarization technique. Typical polarization curves of these coated steel sheet panels obtained in 3.5 wt.% NaCl solution are shown in Potentiodynamic polarization data obtained for the coatings are tabulated in The cathodic Tafel slope is very low compared to what is expected from a diffusion controlled reaction. For the same reason, the cathodic curve does not show limiting current. In general, limiting current decreases as the corrosion products are deposited on the electrode surface, which restricts the supply of oxygen to the cathodic area  The corrosion behavior of pure zinc and strontium containing zinc coated steel sheet panels were evaluated using electrochemical impedance spectroscopy. Nyquist and Bode plots obtained for pure zinc and strontium containing zinc coated steel sheet panels exposed to 3.5 wt.% NaCl solution were compared. The impedance measurements were performed at open circuit potentials which are in the range of − The present study shows that the electrochemical corrosion behavior of hot-dip galvanized coatings is improved with strontium addition. Strontium addition of up to 0.02 wt.% shows a reduction in corrosion rate and beyond this level the corrosion rate increases ( It is a note worthy fact that the trend in corrosion resistance and grain refinement varies with Sr addition in a similar manner. It is known that the chemical homogeneity of the alloy affect the corrosion resistance of alloys The effect of strontium on the adhesive strength and corrosion resistance of hot-dip galvanized coating is studied, for the first time. The study shows that strontium improves both the properties through dendritic grain refinement. The study also shows that the optimum improvement in adhesion strength and corrosion resistance can be achieved when the coating contained 0.02 wt.% Sr and beyond this level, both these properties deteriorate. At 0.02 wt.% strontium refined dendritic grain size by 86%, enhanced adhesion strength by about 33% and corrosion resistance by about 30%.