The use of wastes as substitute to traditional materials from non-renewable sources has recently increased as a result of growing interest in environmental preservation and solid wastes management. In this work, the effect of waste glasses on the physico-mechanical properties of soft porcelain is investigated. Soft porcelain bodies containing milled waste soda-lime and borosilicate glasses at varied percentage were composed and were uniaxially dry pressed under 40kN load using hydraulic pressing machine. The pressed bodies were oven dried at 110°C and were later subjected to firing at temperatures of 1000°C and 1200°C respectively. Tests such as water absorption, porosity, bulk density and firing shrinkage were used for physical characterization while flexural strength and wear loss was used for mechanical characterization under standard approach to investigate the behavior of the developed soft porcelain bodies at temperatures of 1000°C and 1200°C respectively. The results showed that higher densification was observed at 1200°C while water absorption drastically reduced below the required maximum 1% and porosity fall below 4% for both samples containing waste soda-lime and borosilicate glasses respectively. Improvements in terms of wear loss and strength properties were also observed for samples containing waste soda-lime and borosilicate glasses respectively subjected to temperature of 1200°C. This better behavior observed at temperature of 1200°C can be attributed to better glassy phase formation and mullite growth at that temperature.The most important development in the history of ceramics centuries ago was the production of a vitrified and translucent porcelain body in China Demands of ceramics wares are increasing on daily basis and the researchers are becoming keen in developing ceramics products with high mechanical strength for household uses as well as for decorating purposes. Usually ceramic decorative ware are manufactured by using clay, quartz and feldspar but presently waste materials such as waste glass powder are used to make them. This waste glass is able to replace the traditional fluxing agents like feldspar without changing the process and quality of the final products. Ceramic products are manufactured using high amount of fluxing agents like sodium and potassium, feldspar, nepheline, talc and ceramics frits In Nigeria, over 32 million tons of solid wastes are annually generated out of which 20–30% is collected while waste glasses and agro-wastes account for over 70% of these solid wastes. Hence, importance has now been placed on the recycling and valorization of by-products and all manner of wastes emanating from industrial and urban areas to harness them into useful and marketable products at lower cost of production. Recently, as a result of growing concern in environmental preservation the utilization of waste as an alternative to conventional materials from non-renewable sources has greatly increased and these include wastes from mineral processing, industrial wastes, recycling of foundry sands and waste glasses In this present work, the influence of waste glasses (soda-lime and borosilicate glasses) on the physico-mechanical behavior of soft porcelain ceramics was investigated. Technical parameters like water absorption, porosity, shrinkage, flexural strength, wear loss, bulk density and microstructural evaluation were determined. The raw materials used in this present investigation for the porcelain preparation are Kaolin, Ball clay, Flint and Whitening while soda-lime and borosilicate waste glasses were introduced as sole replacement for feldspar, part of quartz sand and clay. All these materials were locally sourced from different deposits in Nigeria while soda-lime and borosilicate waste glasses were obtained from a Glass Pilot Plant. All the above materials were first crushed, ground and further milled using ball mill and finally sieved to obtain an average size particles <150 Eight different batch compositions were formulated from the raw materials in this work. Four batch compositions for porcelain body containing waste soda-lime glass while the other four batch compositions is for porcelain body containing waste borosilicate glass. The blends percentage composition and their sample designations are shown in Various batches for each body formulated were dry mixed and moistened with 5% H In order to characterize the fired samples, different tests were carried out using standard procedures. Water absorption was measured according to ASTM The chemical composition of the glasses used based on the standard typical composition shows that soda-lime glass consists of 73% SiO The results of the water absorption, estimated percentage porosity, bulk density and firing shrinkage are presented in Representative microstructure of the developed soft porcelain bodies containing soda-lime and borosilicate glasses sintered at 1000 The results of the mechanical behavior of the developed soft porcelain bodies sintered at 1000 The effect of waste glasses (waste soda-lime and borosilicate glasses) on the physic-mechanical properties of soft porcelain has been investigated. The results show that: Water absorption reduces drastically below 1% while porosity falls below 4% for samples fired at 1200 Bulk density increases with respect to sintering temperature and increase in the amount of waste glasses as more glass phase is obtained while shrinkage increases to about 5% at 1200 Minimum wear loss was observed for samples subjected to 1200 The flexural strength does not show consistency as compared with other tested parameters. The sintering temperature to obtain better behavior of soft porcelain is 1200 Porcelain containing waste soda-lime glasses showed overall better promising results indicating that soda-lime glass enhances better mullite growth and increase glassy phase formation.