The selective flotation of ilmenite from olivine using an acidified water glass (AWG) as a depressant and sodium oleate (NaOL) as a collector has been studied. Through a series of micro-flotation tests, batch flotation tests, adsorption experiments and zeta potential measurements, the selective depression performance and depression mechanism of the AWG were demonstrated. The micro-flotation results indicate that the AWG at a molar ratio 1:3 of oxalic acid to water glass (WG) exhibits the maximum selective depression on olivine. The selective flotation of ilmenite from olivine can be better achieved using an AWG as depressant rather than WG in the artificially mixed minerals flotation experiments. Batch flotation test results indicate that, compared with the depressant WG, the depressant AWG not only increases the recovery and grade of the Ti concentrates by 7.74% and 3.82%, respectively, but also decreases the depressant consumption by two-fifths. Adsorption tests and zeta-potential measurements indicate that the AWG exhibits a stronger adsorption on the surface of olivine than ilmenite. The adsorption of the AWG on the olivine surface prevents the mineral from adsorbing collector NaOL due to electrostatic repulsion.Titanium (Ti) is honored as “the third metal” subsequent to iron (Fe) and aluminum (Al) due to its unique and superior performance in coating and The ilmenite and its main silicate gangue minerals (olivine or titanaugite) have very similar physiochemical properties. Iron, titanium, calcium, magnesium, and other metal ions exist on the surface of minerals, making it difficult to achieve selective flotation using the conventional collector fatty acids, whose adsorption mechanism is through chemisorption of the oleate ion onto the mineral surface ( In ilmenite flotation, Song and Tsai have used the acidified sodium silicate with sulfuric acid to replace sodium fluorosilicate, and recognized that the AWG formed negatively charged colloidal silica that is selectively adsorbed on the gangue minerals in ilmenite flotation ( The high-grade mineral samples of ilmenite and olivine were obtained from the magnetic separation tailings of vanadium-titanium magnetite in Panzhihua. The samples were handpicked, crushed and ground in a laboratory porcelain mill, and − The mineral used for bath flotation is magnetic separation tailings of vanadium-titanium magnetite ore from Panzhihua. The multi-elemental chemical analysis of the ore was conducted by acid dissolution and Atomic Absorption Spectroscopy (AAS) and Inductively Coupled Plasma Mass Spectrometry (ICP-MS), and the analysis results are shown in In the micro-flotation tests, the acidified water glass (AWG) is a mixture of oxalic acid and water glass (WG) at different molar ratios. After mixing the solution was conditioned for 1 During the batch flotation tests, the homemade AWG was used as a new depressant. In a contrasting study, WG was employed as a common depressant. Mixed fatty acids soaps were used as collectors and sulfuric acid was used as a pH regulator. All reagents used in batch flotation were of industrial grade. Tap water was used for batch flotation tests. The micro-flotation tests were carried out in a 40 In artificially mixed minerals flotation, ilmenite (1.2 In batch flotation, 100 A suspension containing 0.1 The amount of adsorption was monitored using an Elementar liquid TOCII (German, Elementar Co.). The pure mineral samples (2.0  The effects of different depressants on the flotation recovery of olivine are presented in  The effects of the AWG with different mole ratios of oxalic acid to water glass on the flotation of ilmenite and olivine were conducted and the results are shown in The effects of the AWG concentration on the floatability of ilmenite and olivine are presented in The results of the single micro-mineral flotation tests reveal that the AWG offers excellent selective depression of olivine from ilmenite. Flotation tests of mixed mineral samples were then carried out to further investigate its depressive performance. The flotation results of a mixture of minerals in presence of the conventional depressant WG and the new AWG were compared in Based on the good depression performance towards olivine, the AWG was selected in the bench-scale locked cycle tests for a feed material containing 17.21% TiO The difference in the adsorption of the collector on the mineral surface affects the flotation separation of mineral. After adding the AWG, the adsorption of the collector NaOL on the ilmenite and the olivine surfaces was studied as a function of the AWG dosage in To determine the mechanism of mineral flotation with NaOL as the collector and the influence of depressant adsorption, the zeta potentials of ilmenite and olivine particles and those treated with either the collector or the depressant were measured as a function of pH. The change in zeta potential value could reflect the potential interaction between a collector or depressant and a mineral ( To further detect the interaction between NaOL and the AWG, the zeta potentials of ilmenite and olivine particles as a function of NaOL concentration in the presence of AWG were collected and are shown in AWG with a 1:3 The authors would like to thank the