In order to recover minerals by flotation, the sub-processes of collector adsorption onto the valuable minerals followed by bubble-particle attachment should occur efficiently. This paper investigates both of these sub-processes for various thiol collectors and their mixtures onto base metal sulfide minerals. The aim of the work was to investigate whether there is a correlation between the strength of the collector interaction with the mineral and the subsequent bubble-particle attachment. The collector-mineral interaction was measured experimentally using an isothermal titration calorimeter in order to determine the molar enthalpy of adsorption for each collector-mineral system. The bubble-particle attachment was measured using a microflotation device which essentially determines the hydrophobicity of the mineral. Sodium ethyl xanthate (SEX) and sodium diethyl dithiocarbamate (diethyl-DTC) and mixtures thereof were used as collectors with either single minerals or binary mixtures of pyrite and chalcopyrite, respectively. The adsorption enthalpies of the collectors were interpreted with reference to the chemical structure of the collector molecule and showed that the greater the positive inductive effect of the collector, which may be qualitatively related to their pKa values, the greater their affinity for the mineral surface. When mixtures of collectors were used there was clear evidence of synergistic effects in enhanced enthalpies of interaction between collectors and the mineral surface and in increased microflotation recoveries. When mixtures of pyrite and chalcopyrite were used the flotation recovery and enthalpy of adsorption of SEX onto the individual pyrite particles in the mixture also increased substantially compared to the case of pyrite alone. Mechanisms are proposed to interpret these observations.In order to recover sulfide and platinum group minerals by flotation, the sub-processes of collector adsorption onto the valuable minerals followed by bubble-particle attachment should occur efficiently. As is well known, collectors react with mineral surfaces rendering them hydrophobic and resulting in the formation of stable particle-bubble agglomerates. However, it has been found that mixtures of collectors show better flotation performance than the single component collectors at the same dosage (e.g. In attempting to explain the reasons for the enhanced flotation caused by the use of mixtures of collectors it is proposed in the present investigation that it is of critical importance that the dosage of the respective collectors be at sub-monolayer levels. This ensures that the mineral-collector interactions at the surface are not limited by the unavailability of surface sites. In studies reported in the literature the dosages were generally much greater than that required for pseudo-monolayer coverage and hence the system may be dominated by multilayer coverage of either collector. One of the most useful methods to investigate the interaction between the mineral surface and an adsorbing collector is to determine the enthalpy of adsorption by using microcalorimetry. Most such calorimetric studies have focused on isolated sulfide minerals (e.g. In the present study, microcalorimetry has been used to characterise the sub-process of collector adsorption by measuring the enthalpies of adsorption when pure collectors or collector mixtures interact with sulfide minerals. Chalcopyrite and pyrite were chosen as typical sulphide minerals. Microflotation was used to determine the floatability of the particles by measuring their recoveries in a microflotation system with a view to relating these recoveries to the enthalpies of adsorption when the minerals were contacted with sodium ethyl xanthate and diethyl-DTC. The combined effects of mixtures of the two collectors and the interaction of the collectors with mixed mineral systems on the enthalpy of adsorption and recovery were also investigated. Chalcopyrite and pyrite samples of up to 150 mm diameter were obtained from Ward’s Natural Science Establishment NY. These were hammered and then pulverised for 15 s in a laboratory disk mill (Siebtechnik) to 100% passing 106 µm. The decision to dry-mill the mineral samples would have implications for the surface properties. It is known that wet-milling can influence the pulp potential through interactions between the milling media and the mineral. In addition, surface oxidation may be promoted in an aqueous medium ( Thiol collectors used in this study were sodium ethyl xanthate (SEX) and diethyl-DTC. The samples were supplied by Senmin (Pty) Limited. SEX was supplied in pure powder form while diethyl-DTC was supplied in solution form at basic pH to stabilise the sample. Gas chromatography showed that there were no impurities present in the liquid diethyl-DTC. All collector dosages were calculated based on active content and the total molar dosage was maintained constant at ∼50% pseudo monolayer coverage (2.88 × 10 A TAM III isothermal titration microcalorimeter manufactured by TA instruments was used in the heat flow mode to measure enthalpies of adsorption at 25 °C. Details of the equipment, calibration tests and equipment reproducibility are described in detail elsewhere ( A microflotation rig was used to infer the relative hydrophobicities of different mineral surfaces using recovery as an indicator. The experimental procedure for the microflotation tests have been described previously ( For both microcalorimetry and microflotation, pre-mixed SEX:diethyl-DTC collector mixtures with, respectively, 90:10 and 70:30 mol ratios, were used. Chalcopyrite-pyrite mineral mixtures were prepared such that each mineral contributed equal surface area to the total available surface area. This translated to a wt.% feed ratio of chalcopyrite: pyrite of 51:49. When mixtures of chalcopyrite and pyrite were used, microwave digestion followed by atomic absorption spectroscopy was used to analyse the concentrates and tails. The total iron assayed in the concentrates was the sum of the iron associated with the pyrite and the iron associated with the chalcopyrite. Stoichiometric relationships were used to calculate the two forms of iron, assuming chemical composition of chalcopyrite to be CuFeS Overall flotation rate constants, k, were obtained by least squares non-linear regression analysis using the first order rate model shown in Eq. The enthalpies of adsorption for the interaction of SEX, diethyl-DTC as well as SEX:diethyl-DTC mixtures with molar ratios of 90:10 and 70:30 on to chalcopyrite are shown in  These results showed that the SEX did not increase the final recovery much above that of collectorless flotation. Diethyl-DTC improved recovery slightly (±6%). However, significant improvements in flotation recovery were seen when the SEX:diethyl-DTC collector mixtures with molar ratios of 90:10 and 70:30 were used. Recovery increased by 23.6% above that of the collectorless flotation for both collector mixtures.  The enthalpies of adsorption corresponding to ∼50% pseudo-monolayer coverage by the collector for the adsorption of SEX and diethyl-DTC on to chalcopyrite, pyrite and the mixtures of those minerals are shown in  The corresponding microflotation recoveries at ∼50% pseudo-monolayer coverage for the interaction of chalcopyrite, pyrite and the mineral mixtures with SEX and diethyl-DTC are shown   Diethyl-DTC produced a more exothermic enthalpy of adsorption on chalcopyrite than SEX. The differences in the enthalpies of adsorption can be attributed to differences in the electronegativity of the O, C and N atoms in the polar head groups, which affect the reactivity of the collector ( The predicted sum of the enthalpies of adsorption were calculated for collector mixtures based on the additive values of the weighted individual results. These were compared to the observed values for collector mixtures and the results are shown in In the mixtures used in this study the SEX was the major component, viz 90% and 70% respectively. The predicted weighted sum of the enthalpies of adsorption using collector mixtures was calculated using the mole ratios of the collectors and the individual enthalpies of adsorption. For example, for the collector mixture with mole ratio of 90:10, ΔH  The collector mixtures also produced higher microflotation recoveries of chalcopyrite (89.0%) than when either SEX or diethyl-DTC were used alone (68.3% and 71.4%, respectively). This trend is similar to the increased enthalpy of adsorption observed for collector mixtures and would suggest that the stronger the affinity of the collector for the mineral surface, the greater the hydrophobicity imparted by collector adsorption, as indicated by microflotation recovery. Again it is also important to note that microflotation only determines pulp phase behaviour and hence essentially the extent to which the reagent adsorption has imparted hydrophobicity to the mineral particles enabling them to attach to a bubble and rise to the surface either directly or through a sequence of bubble attachment- detachment-attachment. Although the addition of small quantities of diethyl-DTC (co-collector) to SEX (base collector) resulted in increased enthalpies of adsorption ( It is known that improved hydrophobicity can be achieved either by increasing collector coverage or the formation of more hydrophobic collector surface products on the mineral surface. However, in the present study collector dosage was maintained constant in all the experiments at ∼50% pseudo-monolayer coverage, with all collector adsorbing on the mineral surface. Therefore, improved flotation recovery when using collector mixtures must have been due to the formation of more hydrophobic surface species. DTC was more strongly adsorbed onto the chalcopyrite surface than SEX as demonstrated by the enthalpy of adsorption results. But the concept of strongly and weakly adsorbing collectors interacting with high and low energy sites, respectively ( It is clear that a relatively small addition of DTC to SEX results in a molar enthalpy of adsorption greater than would be expected if the enthalpy were merely an additive effect of each individual reagent. This DTC addition also results in a very significant increase in hydrophobicity, as indicated by microflotation recovery. There does not appear to be any clear fundamental explanation for these observations. The chemistry of dithiocarbamates is thoroughly discussed in Thermochemical measurements and microflotation tests ( The galvanic interactions between chalcopyrite and pyrite result in electrons flowing from chalcopyrite (anodic) to pyrite (cathodic). The ultimate result of such interaction would be the oxidation of the chalcopyrite promoting the formation of elemental sulphur, favouring the oxidation of the thiol present on the chalcopyrite surface to dithiolate and releasing copper ions into solution. To further investigate the activation of pyrite by copper ions, microflotation experiments were conducted in the presence of a copper sulphate activator. The copper sulphate was assumed to have a cross sectional head area of 20A° (  Thermochemical measurements showed that synergistically higher enthalpies of adsorption of the indicated reagents on to the sulphide minerals studied were produced when a small amount of diethyl-DTC was added to SEX in a mixture. This is deduced from the fact that the observed values were significantly greater than the values expected if the effects were merely a result of an additive phenomenon. In addition, microflotation tests showed that the use of collector mixtures resulted in improved recoveries relative to the case of pure collectors. There is no obvious fundamental explanation for this observation of synergy. When SEX interacted with a mixture of chalcopyrite and pyrite, the enthalpy measured was greater than that measured for the reaction of SEX with either of the pure minerals alone. Pyrite showed extremely poor flotation behaviour on its own, but showed a significantly improved flotation behaviour once it was mixed with chalcopyrite and then reacted with SEX. Similarly, chalcopyrite recovery also improved when it was mixed with pyrite. Both thermochemical measurements and microflotation tests showed that the behaviour of the pure minerals changed significantly once they were mixed with the other sulphide minerals. It can be deduced that the changes in the thermochemical behaviour and floatability of minerals once they are present in a mixture are a result of two mechanisms. Firstly, the galvanic interactions occur between chalcopyrite and pyrite and these promote the dimerisation of the thiol collector ions and, secondly, indirect copper activation of pyrite occurs as a result of Cu The authors wish to acknowledge the funding of the South African Minerals to Metals Research Institute and the South African Department of Science and Technology. Additional funding was provided by the Centre for Minerals Research (Reagent Research Group) and the Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at 