Physically-based analytical models that provide insights into the diffusion and/or interface charge transfer effects in bulk (lithiating/delithiating) electrodes are needed to truly assess the performance/limitations of electrode materials for Li-ion batteries. In this context, an analytical modeling framework is constructed here to predict the electrochemical charge–discharge characteristics during lithiation and delithiation of solid amorphous Si (a-Si) thin film electrodes. The framework includes analytical expressions that satisfy Fick's second law for Li transport and the requisite flux boundary conditions of lithiation and delithiation steps. The expressions are derived here by the method of separation of variables. They enable the determination of transient Li concentration profiles in the thin film electrode as a function of state of charge/discharge. The time-dependent electrode surface concentrations (at the electrode–electrolyte interface) obtained from these profiles were used to determine the activation overpotentials and thus, the non-equilibrium cell potentials, as a function of state of charge/discharge using Butler–Volmer kinetics. The simulated charge/discharge characteristics agreed well with the experimental data of a-Si thin film electrodes obtained at different C-rates. The model offers insights into how the charge-discharge behavior is controlled by diffusion limitation within electrode and/or the activation overpotentials at the interface. The analytical framework is also shown to predict successfully the hysteretic behavior of lithiation/delithiation voltage curves.Lithiation/delithiation characteristics of a-Si solid electrodes in an electrochemical cell are ideally suited, for a number of reasons, for the development of physically-based models that provide a robust description of the electrochemical cell or battery behavior and performance. Firstly, other than Li, Si is the anode material that offers the highest energy density (∼3590 mAh g While it is clear that practically useful insights into the mass transfer and charge transfer aspects during cell cycling can be obtained by modeling, there is no specific modeling work in literature focusing on the charge/discharge processes in solid, or specifically, a-Si thin film electrode. There are several modeling works examining various aspects of cell/battery behavior of porous electrodes, which do not apply to the solid electrode situation considered here. Chandrasekaran et al. The objective of this research is to construct an analytical framework which can help to simulate easily the electrochemical charge/discharge behavior during lithiation/delithiation of a solid electrode — we demonstrate the modeling approach here using a-Si thin film electrode as an exemplar. Although numerical or COMSOL-type 3D modeling are prevalent in battery modeling, to generate a clear understanding of cell behavior and how it is impacted by the transient/interface mass transfer effects, physically meaningful analytical models will be needed. More importantly, analytic solutions that provide closed-form relationships between dependent and independent parameters can greatly help to examine parametrically the effects of the key variables with minimal numerical effort. In this study, we have obtained exact analytical solutions for the mass transport equations describing Li transport through the planar Si electrode, while satisfying appropriate boundary conditions. The analytical modeling framework, comprising these solutions, is used to closely simulate the Li-ion cell behavior and to illustrate how diffusion limitations and activation overpotentials affect the electrochemical performance. It is shown here that (i) the available experimental charge/discharge data, especially for a wide range of C-rates, can be simulated quite well and (ii) the hysteretic effects that amplify at higher C-rates can be largely attributed to the electrode-diffusion limitations. Further, using the modeling framework, we have examined the effect of the Li diffusion coefficient and the standard rate constant for charge transfer on the lithiation/delithiation capacities at different C-rates.  In the modeling approach, first, analytical solutions for transient Li concentration profiles within the a-Si electrode, as a function of state of charge/discharge, are derived. Secondly, the instantaneous surface Li concentrations of the electrode (at the electrode–electrolyte interface), obtained from these profiles, are used to determine the corresponding activation overpotentials using the Butler–Volmer (B–V) equation. Finally, these overpotentials are added to the equilibrium charge/discharge potential to determine the actual potential over the period of charge/discharge. It is to be noted that the overall cell potential is taken as the sum of the activation overpotential at the a-Si electrode surface and the electrode equilibrium potential. This is justified because the activation overpotential at the Li/electrolyte interface is very low Schematic transient Li concentration profiles within the a-Si electrode, during arbitrary lithiation and delithiation steps, are illustrated in First, lithiation of the electrode is considered — the initial and the boundary conditions are: (i) initial Li concentration is zero, (ii) steady state Li flux exists in the electrolyte under current I, and (iii) Li flux is zero at the electrode surface attached to the current collector. These conditions are specified by Equations In the subject of heat transfer, solutions for problems with complex boundary conditions have been obtained using the method of separation of variables Equation and that Using the boundary condition (4) in Equation The above equation is satisfied only if Thus, the general form of The values of coefficients Equation Here, f ( With the substitution of the two boundary conditions, Equations Equation When the values for A typical development of time-dependent Li concentration profiles in a-Si thin film electrode (200 nm electrode thickness and An electron transfer in a specific direction (oxidation/reduction) and at a specific rate can be facilitated at the electrode/electrolyte interface only if an excess potential, beyond the equilibrium electrode potential is provided Taking the anodic current as positive, the net current, according to the B–V equation, is  It is important to highlight here how non-equilibrium conditions can develop due to diffusion limitation of active species within the solid electrode. Under equilibrium conditions, uniform Li concentration should exist within the electrode making the Li concentration at the surface facing the electrolyte necessarily equal to the bulk Li concentration of the electrode. Such conditions either exist only in a theoretical sense or are at extremely low C-rates The calculations, as illustrated in In order to validate the model, three sets of experimental data, Some interesting observations emerge from An intriguing observation is that the simulated delithiation voltage curve at 1 C rate ( Another way of looking at the capacity-limitation due to electrode-diffusion-limitation in thicker electrodes can be illustrated using For thicker electrodes, an increase in Li diffusivity can overcome the diffusion limitation — to illustrate this, the results of simulations obtained for the same conditions of The lithiation/delithiation processes of an electrode, when simulated at different C-rates also enable us to study the hysteretic behavior during cell cycling. This effect has been analyzed before for crystalline Si electrodes, but those simulations were either done on the basis of the porous electrode theory The modeling framework also allows us to systematically examine the effect of electrode/interface parameters such as diffusion coefficient and standard rate constants on the lithiation/delithiation capacities. An interesting observation in The standard rate constant, As seen in To be more accurate or relevant, further experiments or characterizations of solid electrodes are necessary to determine the values of the equilibrium exchange current densities during charge and discharge as a function of voltage for solid electrodes in Li-ion cells. In that case, the standard rate constant can be estimated from a relation, such as the one given in Equation  A complete analytical modeling framework for predicting the charge/discharge potential behavior of a-Si thin film electrodes during lithiation/delithiation processes has been developed. The model utilizes two important steps: (i) explicit consideration of transient Li concentrations within the electrode determined by solving diffusive mass transport equations and (ii) the determination of time-dependent activation overpotentials, as calculated from the Butler–Volmer equation. The simulated charge/discharge potential variation as a function of capacity agreed well with the experimental data of lithiation/delithiation voltages of a-Si film electrodes of different thicknesses and different C-rates. It was shown that the modeling can simulate the hysteresis between charge/discharge voltage curves at different C-rates for a-Si film electrode. The simulations demonstrate that at higher C-rates, the increases in the electrode activation overpotentials due to rapid Li build-up/depletion at the electrode surface cause widening of the hysteresis loop whereas electrode-diffusion-limitations lead to reduced capacities. The effect of C-rate on the lithiation/delithiation capacities was assessed for a-Si electrodes with different diffusivities and standard rate constants. It was found that electrode-diffusion-limitation is more important during delithiation than during the lithiation step, especially at higher C-rates. A reduction in the value of the standard rate constant, on the other hand, caused reduction in both lithiation and delithiation capacities at all C-rates. The structure of model/simulations where the last step of lithiation forms the input for the subsequent delithiation step allows one to examine capacity degradation with the cycling of the cell. The research was partially supported through a grant from the