The Precambrian Hongqiyingzi Complex (HQC) in the middle segment of the northern margin of the North China Craton (NCC) is a crucial magmatic intrusive complex offering insights into the early evolutionary history of the northern margin of the NCC. The HQC, exposed from Congli to Longhua towns in the northern Hebei Province, is mainly composed of Neoarchean quartz dioritic-tonalitic-granodioritic (DTG) gneisses and Paleoproterozoic granodiorite-monzogranite-syenogranite (GMS) intrusions. SHRIMP and LA-ICP-MS zircon dating results show that the DTG gneisses formed at 2546–2532 Ma, while the GMS intrusions were emplaced between 1870 and 1819 Ma. LA-MC-ICP-MS zircon Lu-Hf isotope analyses indicate that the Neoarchean DTG magmas were mainly derived from partial melting of juvenile crust, but the Paleoproterozoic GMS magmas originated from partial melting of the metamorphic basalts and greywackes from Neoarchean to Paleoproterozoic volcanic or related sedimentary materials.
                  Lithological assemblages, chronological and geochemical data, petrogensis and geodynamic settings of the Neoarchean DTG and Paleoproterozoic GMS magmatism show that the HQC is most likely at the northernmost part of the Trans-North China orogen of the NCC. The Precambrian HQC thus recorded Neoarchean subduction-related arc magmatism and Paleoproterozoic post-collisional magmatism that were associated with subduction and collision at the northern margin of the NCC. These Precambrian geological units were intensively overprinted by Late Paleozoic calc-alkaline magmatism, which may be caused by southward subduction and collision of the Central Asian Orogenic Belt (CAOB) with the NCC.The Precambrian metamorphic basement of the North China Craton (NCC) consists of multiple continental microblocks, according to a majority of recent investigations. However, the number and timing of the arrival of microblocks in the NCC continue to be debated. One school of thought holds that the basement of the NCC was amalgamated in the Neoarchean along both the 2.7 Ga and 2.5 Ga greenstone belts by seven microblocks of Jiaoliao (JL), Qianhuai (QH), Ordos (OR), Jining (JN), Xuchang (XCH), Xuhuai (XH) and Alashan blocks ( Precambrian Northern Hebei metamorphic basement terranes are located at the northern margin of the NCC and the north end of the TNCO as defined by Precambrian Northern Hebei metamorphic basement terranes are generally divided into two geological units by traditional geological mapping, including the Archean Dantazi Group in the south and the Hongqiyingzi Group in the north ( The Precambrian Hongqiyingzi Complex (HQC), located in the northern Hebei Province, is a crucial intrusive complex for studying Archean to Paleoproterozoic evolution in the north margin of the NCC and the TNCO. This is because HQC is where two tectonic belts converge including the E-W striking Paleoproterozoic Inner-Mongolia-Northern Hebei orogenic belt ( In this contribution, we present field geological relationships, lithological assemblages, and report new zircon U-Pb-Hf isotopic systematic and whole-rock geochemical data for the HQC. Our aim is to provide new constraints on the petrogenesis of the HQC and Archean to Paleoproterozoic geodynamic evolution in the middle segment of the northern margin of the NCC. Precambrian metamorphic basement terranes in the northern Hebei Province are located in the middle segment of northern margin of the North China Craton, and in the northern part of the TNCO ( There are three broadly E-W-striking faults exposed within the HQC, namely the Fengning-Longhua fault in the north, the Fengning-Damiao fault in the middle and the Chicheng-Gubeikou fault in the south. There are many ∼1.7 Ga anorthosite-gabbro-syenogranite intrusions along the Fengning-Damiao fault, indicating that these faults may have been active from the late Paleoproterozoic to the Mesozoic ( The DTC consists mainly of dioritic – tonalitic – granodioritic (DTG) gneisses and supracrustal sequences of metamorphic volcanic rock intercalated with sedimentary rocks. Most DTG gneisses exhibit ductile deformation and granulite facies metamorphism with strong foliation and high-grade mineral associations of orthopyroxene and clinopyroxene, hornblende, plagioclase and quartz, and various felsic veins derived from intensive anataxis. The metamorphic volcanic and sedimentary sequence is well preserved locally, and composed mainly of mafic two–pyroxene granulites, pyroxene amphibolites, fine-grained garnet biotite plagioclase gneisses, garnet sillimanite biotite schists and minor marble. Petrological studies revealed that these mafic supracrustal rocks experienced high-pressure granulite facies metamorphism ( The HQC extends E-W from Zhangjiakou to Longhua ( A Paleoproterozoic anorthosite – gabbro – mangerite – alkali granitoid – rapakivi suite of 1.75–1.68 Ga developed along these E-W-striking faults. This suite was considered to be derived from an EM-I lithospheric mantle enriched by recycled Archean continent crustal materials, accompanied by an assimilation of lower crustal components in a post-orogenic extensional tectonic setting ( The HQC is widely intruded by late Paleozoic to Mesozoic dioritic to granitoid intrusions and overlain unconformably by Mesozoic to Cenozoic volcanic, volcanic pyroclastic and sedimentary sequences ( Simplified petrological features and sampling latitude and longitude of all analyzed samples are listed in Quartz dioritic gneiss samples of Jb6037-5, Jb6037-6 and Jb6045 exhibit porphyritic medium-grained texture and gneissic structures. The phenocrysts are mainly plagioclase with minor hornblende. Their mineral assemblages are plagioclase (∼65%), biotite (10–12%), quartz (12–20%) with some hornblende, garnet and sometimes K-feldspar ( Tonalitic–granodioritic gneiss samples, such as Jb6058, Jb6037-2, Jb6035 and Jb6037-4, show strong foliation, fine-grained crystalloblastic texture and gneissic structure ( Two granodiorite samples, Jb6025 and Jb6062-3, were collected at the road cut from Fengshan to north of Congli towns ( Four monzogranite samples (Jb6031-1, Jb6037-1, Jb6040-2, Jb6032) are greyish white to pink, and have medium- to fine-grained granitic texture and weak gneissic to massive structure ( The remaining four syenogranite samples (Jb6038, Jb6039-1, Jb6031-2 and Jb6031-3) have pink color, and display strong foliation with augen-like and S-C structures. Big perthite (∼30%) occurs as σ-type augen in the mylonitic matrix with dynamic recrystallization and subgrain fabrics ( The samples were processed by crushing, initial heavy liquid and subsequent magnetic separation at the Hebei Institute of Geochemical and Geophysical Prospecting in Langfang City. The zircons were handpicked for purification, with identification occurring via a binocular microscope. Zircons from each sample were mounted in epoxy and then polished to approximately half of their mean thickness. The internal texture of the zircon was examined using cathodoluminescence (CL) images at Peking University. The CL images were obtained on a FEI PHILIPS XL 30 SEFG SEM with 2-min scanning time at conditions of 15 kV and 120 μA. Zircon analyses of U-Th-Pb isotopes and elements were carried out simultaneously on a Perkin Elmer laser-ablation ICP-MS at the State Key Laboratory of Continental Dynamics at the Northwest University, Xi’an, China. The instrument configuration consisted of a GeoLas 2005 laser-ablation system (including a COMPexPro 102 ArF excimer laser with wavelength of 193 nm and a GeoLas 2005 PLUS package) and an Elan 6100 DRC Q-ICP-MS (Perkin Elmer). A helium stream was used to effectively transport the ablated particles and reduce deposition at the ablation site. The laser beam was 30 μm in diameter and ablated depth was 20–40 μm. Concentrations of U, Th, and Pb elements were calibrated using Zircon Lu-Hf isotope ratios were measured on a Nu Instruments multiple collector inductively coupled plasma mass spectrometer (MC-ICPMS) at the State Key Laboratory of Continental Dynamics, Northwest University, Xi’an, China. The system combines a GeoLas 2005 laser-ablation microprobe (including a COMPexPro 102 ArF excimer laser with wavelength of 193 nm and a GeoLas 2005 PLUS package) with a Nu Plasma MC-ICP-MS. Laser ablation pit sites were approximately 40 μm wide and located on similar dated spots used for U-Pb isotope analyses. The standard zircons of 91500, MON-1 and GJ-1 were analyzed every 15 unknowns as the external standard. The calibration factor was The calculation formula, constants and parameters were as follows:    T  ( Zircon grains from each sample, together with a fragment of reference zircon SL13 (572 Ma, 238 ppm U, see Zircon U-Th-Pb isotope analyses were performed on the SHRIMP II in Beijing, following analytical procedures detailed in All samples were carefully checked under hand specimen and microscope. Those samples with injected fine-veins, including dated samples of Jb6037-1, Jb6039-1, Jb6045 and Jb6062-3, have been given up for whole-rock chemical analyses. Only fourteen representative samples are suitable for whole-rock major, trace and rare earth element (REE) analyses. All samples for chemical analyses were washed and trimmed to remove weathered surfaces, and the fresh portions were then crushed and milled in an agate mill to about 200 mesh. Major elements were analyzed using automatic X-ray Fluorescence (XRF, Thermo Arl Advant XP+) at the Key Laboratory of Orogenic Belts and Crustal Evolution, Ministry of Education, School of Earth and Space Sciences, Peking University. Loss on ignition (LOI) was determined by measuring weight loss after heating samples at 980 °C for 30 min. The analytical precision for major element oxides is 0.5%, and detailed analytical procedures are given in For trace element and REE analyses, pre-treatment of the sample powders was performed as follows. Firstly, 25 mg powders of each sample were accurately weighted and decanted into Savillex Teflon beakers, and placed within a high-pressure bomb with a 1:1 mixture of HF-HNO Monzogranite sample Jb6037-1 was collected from a granite vein emplaced into the quartz dioritic – tonalitic – granodioritic (DTG) gneisses in the Fengshan-Longhua area. A total of 53 spots were obtained from 43 zircon grains. These analyzed zircon grains had prismatic shapes with either bipyramid or rounded terminals, and were 200–250 μm long with aspect ratios of 3:1 to 2:1 ( The oldest age group includes eleven analyses on or close to the concordia curve with apparent The U-Pb concordant spots in the first age group yielded similar initial The second group of analyses is composed of 14 zircon spots. These grains are mainly equant, and have blurry structure on the CL images ( The third group consists of ten analyses with dispersive distribution along or near the concordia curve, which yields younger A total of 25 dated spots were chosen for Lu-Hf isotopic analyses, among which 12 spots from the ∼2496 Ma age group, 9 spots for the ∼ 1853 Ma age group and 5 spots for the Late Paleozoic age group ( Sample Jb6045 is a garnet-bearing quartz dioritic gneiss, collected at north of Chicheng town ( The first group is composed of five analyses (spots 15, 18, 38, 41 and 42), which yielded apparent The second group includes two spots (spots 2 and 27), which are both on the concordia curve. They yielded Th/U ratios of 0.61 to 1.18 and apparent The third group comprises 10 analyses that show apparent A total of 11 dated spots were analyzed for Lu-Hf isotopes. Three analyses in the oldest age group of ∼ 2535 Ma yielded Combining zircon dating with Lu-Hf isotopic data, it is suggested that the age of 2535 ± 8 Ma from the oldest valid age group represents the magmatic crystallization age of sample Jb6045, while the ages of 1841 ± 38 Ma and younger ages of 438 Ma to 308 Ma may reflect the effect of later tectono-thermal event(s). Forty spot U-Pb isotopic analyses were obtained from 39 zircon grains for the granodiorite sample (Jb6062-3). These analyzed zircon grains show core-rim textures. The inner cores show clear oscillatory and sector zoning that indicates magmatic genesis. By contrast, the rims are bright or dark with irregular contact boundaries with the cores ( A total of 16 zircon Lu-Hf isotopic analyses were obtained from dated zircon spots. Spots 02 and 09 from the oldest spots yielded Fifty-three analyses were obtained from 39 zircon grains separated from granodiorite sample Jb6025, among which 50 analyses are valid ( The first age group is composed of three analyses at the inner core of the rounded zircon grains that yielded apparent The second age group is composed of 47 analyses with apparent A total of 35 Lu-Hf isotopic analyses on 34 dated zircon spots were carried out for sample Jb6025 ( The second group has 32 analyses and exhibits ages from 1868 to 1859 Ma. Their A total of 43 spots on 38 zircon grains were analyzed for U-Th-Pb isotopes for syenogranite sample Jb6039-1 ( Six discordant to concordant analyses (spots 16, 21, 22, 31, 26 and 40) yield a discordant line with an upper intercept age of 1827 ± 18 Ma (MSWD = 0.89) and a weighted mean Five younger concordant analyses including spots 8, 9, 17, 30 and 43 yielded variable A total of eighteen Lu-Hf isotopic analyses were carried out on dated zircon spots from sample Jb6039-1 ( The second group includes three analyses with younger ages from 280 Ma to 333 Ma. They show higher initial A total of 20 U-Th-Pb isotope analyses were obtained from 11 zircon grains for tonalitic gneiss sample Jb6037-2 ( One analysis (spot 4.1) from a dark core showing oscillatory zoning yields an apparent A total of 20 analyses were obtained from 12 zircon grains for granodioritic gneiss sample Jb6058 ( A total of 20 analyses were obtained from 18 zircon grains for the mylonitic syenogranite sample Jb6038. These analyzed zircon grains display long prismatic shapes, and most grains have oscillatory zoning on CL images with Th/U ratios of 0.57–1.34 ( The remaining 19 analyses were divided into three groups. The first group is composed of three analyses of complicated cores (spots 3, 9 and 17). They plot under the concordia curve, and yield apparent The second group is composed of five analyses from complicated cores. These five analyses (spots 4, 10, 11, 11.2 and 15) plot on or close to the concordia curve, and yielded apparent The third group consists of 11 analyses, which are located at the domains with oscillatory zoning. These analyses showed Th/U ratios of 0.55–1.27 and apparent The above LA-ICP-MS and SHRIMP zircon U-Th-Pb zircon chronological analyses revealed that the HQC experienced two stages of Precambrian magmatism. The first stage occurred during the Neoarchean from about 2600 Ma to 2532 Ma, which mainly produced magmatic precursors of the DTG gneisses and possible volcanic rocks. The second stage occurred from about 1870 to 1819 Ma, which mainly formed the GMS intrusions. We selected 14 representative samples without younger injecting veins for whole-rock chemical analyses ( The six DTG gneiss samples show variable SiO These DTG samples are characterized by enrichment in large ion lithophile elements (LILEs) with high Sr (327–687 ppm) and Ba (606–1184 ppm) contents. But they have low Cr, Ni, Co and Sc concentrations, which are 4.57–30 ppm, 1.52–9.7 ppm, 5.25–16.2 ppm and 2.78–16.6 ppm, respectively. Their total REEs range from 67 to 152 ppm, with right-declined REE patterns and weakly positive Eu anomalies (Eu∗ = 1.10–1.46, Eu∗ = Eu The above zircon dating results revealed that granodiorite – monzogranite – syenogranite (GMS) were emplaced at about 1870–1819 Ma. Eight representative samples that do not contain late injecting veins were chosen for whole-rock chemical analyses. Compared to the DTG gneiss samples, these GMS samples displayed higher SiO The GMS samples are characterized by higher total REEs (222–485 ppm) and Rb (71–286 ppm), Ba (825–2070 ppm), U (0.33–4.3 ppm) and Th (1.93–23 ppm) contents. They have low Sc (4.73–20 ppm), Cr (11.7–45 ppm), Ni (4.14–18 ppm) and Co (3.89–9.88 ppm) concentrations and are depleted in Nb, Ta, Ti, Sr and P ( Lithology ( The ages of 1.93 Ga to 1.84 Ga recorded within the HQC are not common in the Eastern Block (EB) of NCC, but are similar to the metamorphic ages of the TNCO and Kondalite belt (KB) in the Western Block ( The GMS associations in the HQC emplaced from 1819 ± 15 to 1870 ± 11 Ma (samples Jb6037-1, Jb6062-3, Jb6039-1 and Jb6038), and intruded into the Neoarchean quartz dioritic, tonalitic and granodioritic gneisses. These GMS also preserves 1.95–1.89 Ga xenocrystic zircons ( Some samples of Precambrian granitoid rocks in the HQC contain Paleozoic zircon grains, which show magmatic features with high Th/U ratios, needle shapes, and oscillatory zonation on CL images ( The Neoarchean DTG samples form a rough trend with a positive slope in the Nb/Sm versus Nb plot. This indicates that their trace element variation is mainly controlled by partial melting ( Most zircon grains from the Neoarchean samples have positive ƐHf(t2) values ( The Paleoproterozoic GMS samples have negative to positive ƐHf(t2) values ( The Paleoproterozoic GMS samples mostly form a rough horizontal trend on We may further identify the nature of source materials of GMS samples using other petrogenetic diagrams. The GMS samples plot into a classic island arc field ( In the ƐHf(t2) versus emplaced age plot, the Neoarchean DTG samples mainly fall between CHUR and the evolution line of depleted mantle ( The Paleoproterozoic GMS samples plot mostly in post-collisional granite field in the Nb–Y and Rb–Y+Nb diagrams, except for samples Jb6040-2 which plots in the volcanic arc granite field ( The Paleoproterozoic GMS magmatism of the HQC indicates an important magmatic event in the northernmost section of the TNCO, which is also recorded within the TNCO ( The Neoarchean and Paleoproterozoic geological units in the HQC are intensively overprinted by Late Paleozoic calc-alkaline granitoid magmatism, which are generally associated with southward subduction and collisional events between the CAOB and the NCC (  The HQC in the northern margin of the NCC consists mainly of quartz dioritic – tonalitic - granodioritic gneisses emplaced at 2546–2532 Ma, and granodiorite – monzogranite - syenogranite intrusions emplaced at 1870–1819 Ma. The Neoarchean quartz dioritic – tonalitic - granodioritic magmas were derived mainly from partial melting of juvenile mafic crust at high pressure within garnet stability field. By contrast, the Paleoproterozoic granodioritic- monzogranitic - syenogranitic magmas were formed by partial melting of Neoarchean to Paleoproterozoic metamorphic basalts and greywackes at low pressure within plagioclase stability field. The HQC at the northern margin of the NCC records complicated tectonomagmatic evolutionary history, from Neoarchean oceanic subduction-related arc magmatism to Paleoproterozoic post-collisional granitoid emplacement. These Precambrian geological units were intensively overprinted by Late Paleozoic tectonomagmatic and deformation events caused by southward subduction and collision between the CAOB and NCC. This paper was written in honor of the 70th birthday of academician Minguo Zhai. We would like to express our thanks to Prof. P.A. Cawood and another anonymous reviewer. We also thank B. Yang, F. Ma and L.B. Gu for their assistance with the whole–rock geochemical and zircon U–Th–Pb isotopic analyses at the Key Laboratory of Orogenic Belts and Crustal Evolution, Ministry of Education, School of Earth and Space Sciences, and Prof. H.L. Yuan for zircon U–Th–Pb and Lu-Hf isotopic analyses at the State Key Laboratory of Continental Dynamics, Northwest University, Xi’an. This study has been financially supported by the Thanks for the comments. We have put CL images in appendix, but keep the In sample Jb6037-1, most zircon grains with Archean to Paleoproterozoic ages exhibit dark or bright rims enclosing inner cores with wide and blurry zoning, whereas the younger Paleozoic zircon grains are elongate and needle-shape, having higher Th/U ratios. Therefore, we reconsider these Paleozoic zircons to be from the Paleozoic micro-veins injecting into the Precambrian rocks. Accordingly, the chemical compositions of sample Jb6037-1 has been rejected from this text and tables since it has been modified by Paleozoic magmatism. Sample Jb6039-1 that was collected at the northeast of the Fengning town is close to the bigger Paleozoic granitoid batholiths in its both south and north sides. Similar to those of Sample Jb6037-1, its chemical composition has been abandoned from the text and tables because it was likely affected by later magmatic events.   The Paleozoic zircon grains from sample Jb6045 and Jb6062-3 have complicated CL textures with patchy zoned cores and bright irregular rims with different Paleozoic ages. For example, in Jb6045, spot 29 within a core yields an older age of 349 Ma than spot 28, which is at the bright rim with an age of 333 Ma. These indicate that even the Paleozoic zircons were subjected to later fluid modification. As a result, the chemical composition of sample Jb6045 and Jb6062-3 have been abandoned from the text and tables because these samples were affected by later fluids or magmatic events.