On the basis of understanding the principle of rotary triboelectrostatic separation, dynamic analysis of charged fly ash particles aimed at determining the key factors and separation experiments to improve decarbonization efficiency had been carried out. Variables of electrode plate voltage and corrected wind speed are the key factors which affect the decarbonization efficiency on the separation of fly ash. The results of separation experiments show that: (1) With the plate voltage increasing, the efficiency of decarbonization continuously rises and in its selected range, the optimal voltage level is 45kV; (2) The corrected wind speed can impact the efficiency of decarbonization significantly: with the speed increasing, the efficiency of decarbonization shows a trend of first decline, then increase and decrease again, and in its selected range, the optimal speed is 2.0m/s. This study is of significance for the improvement of rotary triboelectrostatic separation performance and its decarbonization separation efficiency.Fine coal ash, also called fly ash, refers to the dust that is carried away by flue gas and collected by the dust-collector after coal powder with a certain fineness is burned in a pulverized coal furnace in the processes of coal burning for heating or power generation. According to statistics, about 250–300 Fly ash contains a lot of useful substances, such as carbon, cenospheres, pozzolans, and the like, thus it should not be abandoned as waste. At present, fly ash is largely used as construction and building materials in China. However, because of the coal types, coal combustion conditions, and boiler operation conditions, the loss-on-ignition of fly ash is generally 10–15%, even up to 25–39% Currently, fly ash decarbonization technology mainly includes both wet and dry separation methods The general process of fly ash decarbonization through triboelectrostatic separation is as follows. Under the triboelectrostatic action, particles with high surface work function (i.e., carbon particles in pulverized coal ash) undergo friction and collision, becoming negatively charged, while other particles (i.e., ash particles) become positively charged To briefly explain separation process of carbon particles from ash particles in fly ash, the force and motion of a negatively charged particle in an electric field are used as an example. As shown in The physical meaning of Eq. The integration of Eq. Integrating Eq. Eqs.  The basic operation process of the RTS is as follows: (1) Fly ash through the feeding trough together with the inflow air from the vacuum source are injected into the rotary friction chamber; (2) Under the actions of air flow, gravitational force, and high-speed rotation of the friction wheel, fly ash particles bear different magnitude and polarity charges due to their mutual, violent collision and friction (the high-voltage DC source charger is used to accelerate and strengthen the process); (3) All charged particles through the material distributor enter the separation chamber, there positively and negatively charged particles, under the action of high voltage electric field, deviate toward the cathode and anode, respectively, and form their own different trajectories; (4) Finally, these particles with different physical or electric properties are separately collected by the products collector consisting of the vacuum source, small cyclone dust collector, and ore-separating plate, thus completing the whole separation and collection process. The test samples used in this work were the original, dry pulverized coal ash collected at three different times from the dedusting system of a coal-fired power plant at Xinwen District, Shandong Province, China, to ensure the representativeness of fly ash samples.  Mineral compositions of fly ash samples were determined by using a Bruker D8 Advance X-ray diffractometer (Germany) in the Modern Analysis and Computing Center, China University of Mining and Technology. Many factors affect the effect of rotary triboelectrostatic decarbonization, such as feed rate, ingoing wind speed, revolution of friction wheel, charging voltage, corrected wind speed, and electrode voltage. This study only focuses on the effects of electrode voltage and the corrected winds speed on decarbonization, the two most important innovations of the RTS. Test evaluating indicators are used to measure experimental results and their selections are directly related to the accuracy of experimental results. This work used the decarbonization efficiency indicator as the main test indicator, which jointly considers both the loss-on-ignition of carbon and ash products, as well as the yield of ash product, thus can fully reflect decarbonization separation efficiency The electrode voltage refers to the voltage applied between the two electrode plates of the separation chamber for the formation of a high voltage electric field between them. As shown in  From The ideal situation of gas-solid flow formed by charged particles and ingoing air at its entering the separation chamber should be a material flow with a very narrow width or even with the width of a single particle, thus to the greatest degree, avoiding occurrence of mutual collisions or electrical neutrality among charged particles when moving toward two electrodes under the action of electric field. In addition, the corrected air flow injecting from the upper part of the separation chamber is designed for lowering the width of material flow, reducing the diffusion of injected air flow and turbulent flow, so that decreasing the occurrence of charged particle collisions and electric neutrality and preventing air horizontal speed from disturbing separation, finally improving the separation efficiency.  The effect of corrected flow on the separation efficiency lies mainly in increasing the air longitudinal drag force of charged particles in the separation chamber, so that reducing the effects of the residence time of charged particles, the width of material flow, the diffusion of ingoing air flow, and turbulent flow in the chamber on the separation efficiency, and improving the separation efficiency. From the data in  Fly ash particles have high charge/mass ratio and the separation chamber has high electric field intensity, both resulting in a strong electric field force acting on charged particles and beneficial to decarbonization separation. Low airflow velocity and small turbulence perturbation in the separator result in less charged particle collision and neutrality probabilities, thus is beneficial to decarbonization separation. The transverse acting forces applied on target and non-target mineral charged particles in the electric field determine the differences in their transverse movements, and further significantly impact the separation efficiency. The transverse acting forces from which charged particles suffer in the separator include the air drag force and the electric field force, only the latter avails the rotary triboelectrostatic separator to achieve high precision separation. The electrode voltage determines the interplate electric field strength and the electric field force from which charged particles suffer. In the selected level range, with the electrode voltage increasing, the decarbonization efficiency continuously enlarges. The optimal level of electrode voltage is 45 The corrected airflow speed affects the residence time of charged particles, the width of material flow, the diffusion and disturbance of ingoing airflow in the separation chamber, thus significantly impacting the separation efficiency of the separator for the decarbonization from pulverized coal ash. In the range of selected factor level, with the airflow velocity increasing, the decarbonization efficiency shows a trend of decline-rise-decline. The optimal level of airflow velocity is 2.0 Financial supports for this work, provided by the