Proximal humerus fracture is a common upper limb fracture with an incidence of around 5%. We present this case report, in which a high index of suspicion for neurovascular entrapment from correctly assessing the clinical presentation led to magnetic resonance imaging that highlighted the diagnosis (of brachial bundle entrapment in the fracture) and allowed prompt surgical treatment. We present an optimal outcome at 1-year follow-up and highlight the severe presentation that may have ensued with nonoperative management. We emphasize the excellent neurologic outcome made possible through prompt recognition and treatment. We recommend that such complex cases with neurovascular involvement be managed through expedited discussion with and support from a tertiary referral unit specializing in nerve injury and a multidisciplinary approach to rehabilitation to achieve the best outcome. A 32-year-old female was involved in a road traffic collision, when a car collided with her riding a pushbike. This resulted in a closed injury to her left shoulder. Initial emergency assessment showed a flail arm, globally Medical Research Council 0/5 power from all branches of the infraclavicular plexus, and shoulder movements reduced by the direct effect of the fracture. Sensory examination showed that there was 0/10 sensation in radial and ulnar nerve distribution and greatly reduced sensation in the median (4/10) and axillary nerve areas (2/10). There was a Tinel sign on percussion of the skin overlying the axilla that radiated to the dorsum of the wrist. There was reduced sympathetic function in the hand. Pain was rated 5/10 on a visual analog scale and felt mainly in a distribution over the medial arm and dorsum of the hand. Radial arterial pulsation was weak but palpable, whereas no brachial pulse was felt. Radiographs demonstrated a 4-part proximal humerus fracture ( The local vascular team advised no intervention as the hand was well perfused. The injury was then referred to our unit for advice regarding the neurologic findings. The high index of suspicion of the referring team and prompt referral allowed the injury to be approached within 48 hours. Clinical examination at that stage showed an intact supraclavicular plexus with good serratus anterior and rhomboid function. There was palpable supraspinatus contraction although clearly limited by pain and defunctioned by the fracture. There was no Horner sign, a full range of neck movements, and no supraclavicular Tinel sign or vascular bruit. Otherwise, the findings were unchanged from the status at referral. Further imaging in the form of magnetic resonance angiography excluded a supraclavicular injury but demonstrated a tethering of the infraclavicular brachial bundle to the medial edge of the humeral fracture ( Under general anesthetic (without use of muscle relaxant to allow intraoperative distal neuromuscular assessment) and with full intraoperative neurophysiologic support, the fracture was approached through a deltopectoral incision. After careful dissection, following the infraclavicular plexus and axillary artery from proximal and distal to the fracture, it was found that the whole brachial bundle was pinched into the fracture site ( Musculocutaneous (high riding) and lateral contributions to the median nerve were tightly compressed because of fascia and the crossing vessels. The medial contribution to the median nerve and the ulnar, radial, and medial cutaneous nerves of the arm were observed in the fracture, entrapped over the medial spike of the distal fragment. A conduction block was confirmed for musculocutaneous, ulnar, and median nerves through intraoperative neurophysiologic testing, which showed conduction over the segments of nerve distal to the site of injury. The radial nerve demonstrated multiple petechiae but no neuroma or tactile evidence of significant intraneural scar. There was, however, no conduction evident on examination of the nerve distal to the injured segment. The fracture was then examined and was noted to be an AO11 B-2 pattern with significant metaphyseal comminution. The fracture was reduced with suture manipulation of the tuberosities, and a lateral humeral locking plate was applied in near-anatomic position. Immediate postoperative assessment demonstrated that the pain had been reduced by 90% in the hand. There was complete resolution of pain at 2-week outpatient review. At this stage, the median and ulnar sensation as well as the sympathetic function returned nearly to normal. There was no recovery in motor function demonstrable at this point. Therapy was instituted for the elbow and hand to maintain full range of movement, and at 4 weeks this was extended to include the shoulder. Active and passive ranging and sensory re-education for the hand and arm were undertaken as well. Routine assessment at 6 weeks showed an advancing Tinel sign for the radial nerve and a majority of conduction block resolution for the median and ulnar nerves. Also, advancing Tinel sign was noted for median and ulnar nerves, suggesting that there had been a small element of axonotmesis to these nerves as well. At 1-year follow-up, the patient demonstrated full recovery of motor, sensory, and sympathetic functions for all the peripheral nerves and bone union of the fracture ( One in 20 patients with proximal humerus fracture will have involvement of axillary artery, and about 50% of these will have a concomitant injury to the brachial plexus. The complex presentations possible in an innocuous-looking humeral fracture due to infraclavicular neurologic and vascular injury pose not only a diagnostic challenge but also a dilemma about timing of reconstruction. With regard to the nerve injury, there is again unhappily still no global consensus on timing of intervention. It is clear that delay in intervention predicates worse outcomes, for all cellular processes of nerve regeneration and for clinical outcomes of pain and motor recovery. However, we must be clear that there is agreement when neuropathic pain (as in this case) is present with other signs of nerve function loss (the painful palsy). This should prompt urgent identification of an ongoing lesion to the nerve and treatment to address this. A painful palsy is a neurologic emergency, and time is of the essence to arrest the progression of the lesion. It is common to see some element of neurologic involvement in proximal humeral fractures, but there is little on the plain radiographs to suggest this entrapment. Often in such cases, as in this one, there is a clear “spongy block” to reduction, suggesting soft tissue entrapment. It is, however, true that in a fracture in which there is involvement of both the vascular and neurologic function, it is difficult to imagine a pathologic process other than a severe compressive mechanism, such as an entrapment, being causative. In this case, the anterior and posterior circumflex humeral vessels had pinned the medial structures into the fracture. In treating these injuries, a magnetic resonance imaging scan (with or without ultrasound scan) and vascular imaging assist diagnosis, and an understanding that such entrapment injuries do not resolve without intervention guides treatment. This case illustrates how thorough assessment of the clinical signs, use of appropriate imaging, and prompt action in case of neurologic entrapment complicating a fracture can produce an excellent outcome: abolition of pain immediately postoperatively, quick return of conduction blocked function, and regeneration of the degenerative element of nerve injury. This would not have been the case if action had not been taken. The syndrome of complicated fracture with arterial and nerve injury creates a much worse outcome than isolated neurologic injury. This has been well documented in animal and human examples. Based on our unit's significant experience, we believe early intervention in neurologic injury improves outcomes, in particular, intervention in the complicated fracture with evidence of neuropathic pain or progressive neurologic deficit. The acceptance of vascular and neurologic deficit in a fracture as inconsequential should be made only after much thought. Early surgery allows one to assess and to address nerve damage at the same time as the vascular reconstruction and fracture fixation. It is far easier to operate in a scarless operative field with a need for fewer grafts. Even in a situation in which primary nerve repair is not feasible (eg, in a critical patient or in a patient with multiple comorbidities), a nerve specialist present at the time of initial surgery helps evaluate the anatomy and agree on a strategy. This case demonstrates how clinical acumen, appropriate and timely investigations, and prompt surgical intervention result in optimum outcome. We would like to reiterate, as stated by Birch, The authors, their immediate families, and any research foundations with which they are affiliated have not received any financial payments or other benefits from any commercial entity related to the subject of this article. The authors acknowledge Mr Dirk DeCamp (Senior Medical Photographer, Royal National Orthopaedic Hospital, Stanmore) for providing the photographs for this case report.