Overall economy of a flotation operation bears much more than investment costs. The lifetime operation and maintenance of a flotation machine may affect the economy of a project far more than a million saved in investment.
                  Studying the long-term effects on investments is worthwhile as they often surpass any apparent savings in capital expenditure. The optimal solution does not even need to be more expensive. Besides, with high operating costs, time is never on one’s side.
                  In the paper various flotation cell arrangements are compared in a simplified example. The example considers capital equipment investment costs, power delivery arrangements, energy costs, and maintenance costs throughout a 25-year ownership. Also effects on CO2 emissions are discussed.
                  The paper will illustrate how proper choice of equipment and modern power delivery and control methods will result in significant benefits in lifetime costs and profitability of flotation operations.When an investment for a new flotation plant is evaluated, the emphasis is often in minimizing the capital expenditures. Until recently, life cycle cost (LCC) as a criterion for selecting beneficiation equipment has played only a small role in the final decision making. A quick analysis discussed below shows that roughly 60–80% of the total 25-year cycle costs for a large flotation machine are spent on energy while the initial investment comprises less than 10%. As a result, if a small saving in investment is achieved by compromising energy efficiency, it can quickly turn into big losses in operational costs. If one looks for savings in the long run, life cycle cost analysis shows that the importance of the investment cost is almost negligible. Modern technology can offer completely new solutions for optimizing flotation processes both in terms of efficiency and metallurgy. Mechanical flotation machines have traditionally been limited by their relatively narrow range of aeration rate, fixed mechanism dimensions and speed. New flotation machine designs allow much wider adaptability with speed control, shear adjustment and wider range of air feed. More attention should be paid on maintenance of critical components. Cases are known where significant metallurgical losses have been observed due to poor condition of critical wear parts. This paper discusses the economy of flotation projects from the life cycle cost perspective. The examples have been calculated based on generic average values. There is a wide variation in costs between locations and specific processes, but averages give a good starting point to more specific analysis. Life cycle cost analysis simply considers the lifetime operation and maintenance costs of a flotation operation in addition to the initial investment, in selecting the most economical equipment. It may be feasible to pay higher initial cost if one saves in operational expenditures. The relevant cost factors for a flotation plant are investment, energy and reagent consumption, and maintenance. All these should be quantified for the estimated service life of the equipment. In order to illustrate the typical deviation of the relevant cost factors, typical ownership costs of a large mechanical flotation machine (100–200 In this consideration, the investment costs consist of merely equipment costs since the deviation in infrastructure, installation, and assembly is significant. Power draw of the equipment considers the power required for agitation and aeration. Maintenance proportion is determined by studying failure rates, costs, and normalized maintenance times of the wearing parts. Unit prices for maintenance services, electricity, and reagents are presented in There is high variation in the cost factors; more specific results can be easily obtained by inserting the actual rates for electricity, reagents and labor as well as for the cost of capital in the calculation model. In order to achieve accurate costing, a sensitivity analysis should be performed to understand the relationships between total ownership costs and uncertainties of each activity. That is, issues such as inflation rate, expected efficiency of resources, expected variation in energy costs etc. should be considered. The breakdown strongly suggests that the most significant life cycle cost item in flotation operations is the cost of electricity. Thus the operational expenditures are heavily influenced by the energy price and the energy efficiency of the equipment used for production. A given requirement for flotation capacity may be satisfied by several scenarios which may differ significantly in terms of required footprint, investment cost and required maintenance resources, etc. The most significant decisions concern the implemented unit size and the principle of operation of the equipment. In general, larger flotation cell units lead to lower investment, energy and maintenance costs as measured in unit price per unit of installed volume. The operational costs of a flotation machine depend on the efficiency of the equipment. Process efficiency, energy efficiency and availability are discussed below. The key mechanical aspect for good flotation process efficiency is the proper condition of critical wear components. Missing rotor or stator parts make the cell surface wavy and cause the froth to collapse. Air dispersion is reduced and decreased pumping causes sanding. The use of copied spare parts has often caused problems (see Comparisons of flotation operations using different technologies are published in two recent papers ( The traditional drive mechanism of a flotation machine consists of a single-staged V-belt drive connected to a low-speed induction motor. Theoretically the efficiency of the V-belt drive is 97–98% provided that the belts are optimally sized, properly aligned and tightened to correct belt tension. Unfortunately in practice this situation is rather rare and the actual efficiency is therefore lower. As the belts wear and stretch readjustments are required. This is often impossible without shutdown of the equipment, which, in turn, would result in reduced availability. Similar challenges occur also with gearbox-driven flotation machines when the power from the electric motor is transferred to the gearbox through a V-belt drive. In addition to the power transfer ratio of the drive mechanism, the rotation speed of the rotor and the air feed equipment are important factor in the electrical energy consumption. Studies on variable speed drive mechanisms have been conducted indicating a certain range of regulation in the rotor speed where the metallurgical performance of the flotation machine is practically the same. However, the rotation speed has a significant effect on the power draw of the mixing mechanism. The relationship can be simply expressed as The pressure difference over the mixing mechanism is proportional to the rotation speed squared and the volume flow rate is directly proportional to it. Thus the power draw of the mixing mechanism is proportional to the third power of the rotation speed. Consequently, a minor reduction in rotation speed may have no effect on process performance but a significant effect on the energy consumption. For example, 10% reduction in rotation speed roughly equals to 27% reduction in power draw. A drive mechanism that enables the adjustment of the rotation speed may produce significant savings in electricity consumption. There are internal case studies, which have shown that a variable speed drive may have payback time of only few months, if the process allows optimization of rotation speed. The same principles apply also to air blowers. Significant savings may be achieved if the air blower is not driven at maximum power against a regulating valve but at a speed that is sufficient to maintain the required airflow. Such optimization can be done using cell-specific air blowers with variable speed drives. One cannot consider operational performance without also considering the availability of the equipment. According to Availability performance can be further divided into three subcategories, as presented in Reliability of the equipment refers to the probability of a unit functioning normally when used according to specific conditions for at least a given period of time. Reliability can be estimated from the failure rate of the equipment. Maintainability can be defined as the ability of an item to be retained in a state in which it can perform the required function, when maintenance is performed using stated procedures and resources. For flotation machines this means ease of maintenance or replacement of mixing or drive mechanisms. For example, if the drive mechanism can be removed from the cell as a complete unit and there is a reserve drive standing by, the unplanned downtime can be minimized and thus the availability is not compromised even by events of sudden malfunctions. Supportability is the availability of the material required to keep the system operational. In general, standard components are technically and economically optimized structural solutions, which have decent availability. In addition, manufacturers of standard components benefit from economies of scale and thus the costs of standard components are usually lower as compared to craft production. Outotec’s flotation cells have always been customized for ore and process characteristics to optimize metallurgical results. Anyhow, ore properties change during equipment lifetime or the same equipment may be utilized for a new pit close to original operation. The function of a single cell in the flowsheet can be changed. Mines with different types of ore are also relatively common and change from one ore type to another often causes process hiccups. Especially in this kind of cases optimization of flotation machine parameters such as mixer speed or power consumption would be beneficial. But there is a lot to be done also at flotation operations with no particular troubles. The effect of optimal air dispersion, mixer speed and shear are discussed below. Optimal air dispersion is one of the basic requirements for good metallurgical performance. Plants operating with forced air cells have often noticed that the best results are achieved using individual and varying air feed rate in each cell. In traditional flotation mechanisms the air feed is limited by the reduction of power draw and mixing, or by reduced dispersion of air making the froth surface unstable and causing the froth to collapse. Outotec’s new mechanism design, the FloatForce™, pushes further the maximum air feed limit compared to other existing designs. As a result the cell surface is steady in all situations and the pumping rate of the mechanism is only slightly affected by air. Because of the flat power curve less power is needed when the mechanism is operated without air. This allows smaller motors and benefits both in investment and operating costs because of more efficient operation of the motor. The easiest solution for adjusting mixer speed is a variable speed drive (VSD). A frequency converter can theoretically be installed in most of existing flotation cell drives but compatibility with existing equipment such as electric motor must be checked. Typical adjustment range of a flotation cell with VSD lies between 75% and 110% of original shaft speed if there are no special limitations in the existing equipment. Initial process test results indicate two different behaviors with moderate speed adjustments. More often changes in metallurgy are negligible but significant changes in power consumption can be seen. The initial results in full-scale plant test showed no difference in metallurgy even with 50% lower power consumption compared to starting point. When this is compared to the findings in The role of shear, or rotor–stator gap, has also been investigated. Earlier testwork has shown that smaller rotor–stator gap is beneficial especially for fine and ultra fine particle flotation. However, recent results indicate that also recovery of coarse particles can be increased at the same time. It has also been observed that motor speed adjustment at the same time has a significant effect on the results ( The potential of the recent improvements can be illustrated in a simple chart. Typical power draw curves of a flotation cell equipped with VSD and FloatForce™ mechanism and a cell with conventional fixed speed drive with the old OK-mechanism are presented in A lot of research work and discussion is going on in the search for optimum metallurgy of each ore type. Among the most common tasks is optimization of basic parameters like bubble size and installed power. But how do we actually generate an optimal bubble size in a modern large flotation cell? Controlling bubble size distributions in a laboratory scale flotation machine is a subject for many studies, but research done with large-scale cells is much more limited. Scale up of the findings to industrial cell sizes is not very straightforward either. How is a powerful flotation machine determined? Is installed motor power the same as high measured total power consumption of a mixer drive? By installing a 250 Today, we have a possibility to find out answers to at least some of these questions by selecting new mechanism design and VSD. Let us look at the importance of the energy efficiency and selection of the optimal equipment size by considering a flotation plant requiring, for example, 1800 18 individual 100 Nine 200 Nine 200 Six 300 Six 300 Relative investment, energy, reagent and maintenance costs are presented in As presented in It is also suggested that a comprehensive life cycle cost analysis is a cost effective method for maximizing the life cycle profits of flotation operations. That is, in addition to just initial investment, all project costs and options should be taken into consideration in the analysis. As mentioned above, energy efficiency has a significant effect on the life cycle economy. One aspect of it is that at least 75% of the industrial world’s energy is produced using fossil fuels that result carbon dioxide emissions. The significance of proper choice of equipment from this point of view can be illustrated by considering the fact that the annual difference in energy consumption between eighteen 100 To conclude, proper choice of equipment and modern power delivery and control methods will result in significant savings in investment costs and lower energy consumption to compensate against rising energy price.