Clay minerals have a deleterious effect on flotation. In a previous study (Peng and Zhao, 2011), the authors found that the flotation of secondary copper minerals such as chalcocite was more affected by clay minerals than the flotation of primary copper minerals such as chalcopyrite due to stronger surface oxidation resulting in an electrostatic attraction to clay particles. In this current study, the intention was to use electrolytes to mitigate the adverse effect of clay minerals on chalcocite flotation. A copper ore mainly containing chalcocite was examined. In fresh tap water, kaolinite significantly depressed chalcocite flotation. However, with an increase in the electrolyte concentration, the recovery of chalcocite was increased. It is concluded that the electrolytes reduce the electrostatic attraction between kaolinite and chalcocite so that the surface coating of kaolinite on chalcocite surfaces may be mitigated leading to improved chalcocite flotation. It is interesting to find that anions and cations with a greater atomic size had a more beneficial effect which may be associated with their tendency to modify surface hydrophobicity.The mining industry is well aware of the difficulty in treating copper ores in the presence of clay minerals. In a previous study, Other researchers have also reported clay slime coating on galena, coal and bitumen surfaces through the electrostatic attraction reducing surface hydrophobicity and then depressing the flotation significantly ( The effect of electrolytes on mineral flotation has been studied by other researchers from a different perspective. In fact, In addition, In this study, the effect of clay minerals on chalcocite flotation was examined in electrolyte solutions. It is expected that electrolytes may mitigate slime coating and therefore improve chalcocite flotation. Meanwhile, electrolytes may also affect flotation through the inhibition of bubble coalescence and modification of surface hydrophobicity which were examined in this study as well. A copper ore sample obtained from an Australian copper plant was crushed to a size of −1.70 Tap water was used throughout the study. Potassium amyl xanthate (PAX) and methyl iso-butyl carbinol (MIBC) of industrial grade were used as collector and frother, respectively. To investigate the effect of electrolytes on the flotation of chalcocite in the presence of kaolinite, sodium chloride (NaCl), lithium chloride (LiCl), sodium fluorite (NaF), potassium chloride (KCl) and sodium Iodide (NaI) of analytical grade were used to make different strengths of solutions. These electrolytes vary in both anion and cation size. 600  In a separate study where the effect of kaolinite on chalcopyrite flotation was investigated, kaolinite had little effect on chalcopyrite flotation. Nor did 30% weight of kaolinite change the pulp rheology in flotation. In the previous study,   Similarly, the effect of different anions on chalcocite flotation in the presence of 30% kaolinite was investigated. The results are shown in In the previous study, it was demonstrated that the surface of chalcocite tends to be oxidised during grinding with stainless steel media producing oxidising conditions ( With the addition of NaCl in flotation, chalcocite flotation in the presence of kaolinite was improved significantly. As shown in Besides NaCl, LiCl, NaF, KCl and NaI all mitigated the negative effect of kaolinite on chalcocite flotation to some extent. 0.13 Based on the combining rules for the effect of salts developed by To further examine the possibility of bubble coalescence in salt solutions resulting in smaller bubbles and subsequently improved flotation in this study, mass recovery and water recovery were examined. The content of gangue minerals in the flotation pulp was more than 95% and the gangue recovery by entrainment may be estimated by the mass recovery. Attention was then turned to examine the theory from This study indicates that salts reduce the negative effect of kaolinite on chalcocite flotation primarily by mitigating kaolinite slime coating on chalcocite surface. However, salts may also modify surface hydrophobicity and therefore affect mineral flotation to different extents. The current study indicates that kaolinite slime coating on chalcocite flotation may be mitigated by electrolytes. In tap water, the kaolinite coating on the chalcocite surface occurs as a result of the electrostatic attraction leading to the depression of chalcocite flotation. With the addition of electrolytes to the flotation system, the flotation of chalcocite may be improved due to slime coating being mitigated as a result of electrolytes’ effects on the electrostatic interaction between particles. In addition, electrolytes may modify the surface properties and therefore the flotation behaviour. Larger size ions may improve chalcocite flotation in the presence of kaolinite more than smaller size ions presumably due to the increased surface hydrophobicity. The authors wish to thank the experimental support from Tony Button and John Glen from ALS Burnie Laboratory. The financial support from Dr. Yongjun Peng’s New Start-up Grant awarded from the University of Queensland is also appreciated.