A model is presented for the thickening of a raked suspension. The model is based on Kynch theory (Kynch, 1952), i.e. it describes systems with solids fractions sufficiently low that the solids have not gelled into a weight-bearing network. However the model incorporates a modification to describe how raking the suspension causes flocs or aggregates within it to densify. This floc densification opens up channels between the flocs through which liquid escapes, making the suspension easier to dewater. The densification theory presented here predicts profiles of varying solids fraction vs height in the settling zone in a thickener, information which is not normally available when designing thickeners via the conventional Kynch theory. Performance enhancements for thickeners due to raking can be readily determined, either in terms of increased underflow solids fraction or increased solids flux. As underflow solids fraction is increased, thickeners operated at a specified aggregate densification rate (or equivalently at a fixed settling zone height) tend to approach a ‘fully densified’ suspension state (defined as a point at which the extent of aggregate densification ceases to change with time), with improved thickening performance.Dewatering of solid–liquid suspensions is a common engineering operation, with a multitude of applications, in areas including water recycling, waste management and minerals processing ( Chemical engineers are often faced with the task of designing and operating these types of equipment. However dewatering performance depends not only upon the equipment specifications, but also upon the material properties of the suspension being dewatered ( These design methodologies tend to rely on phenomenological measurements of suspension rheology properties, for which measurement protocols already exist ( These aggregates or flocs tend to settle faster under the action of gravity than the individual solid particles. This is because when more and more individual particles are present in the floc, the downwards net buoyancy force grows more rapidly than its so-called ‘friction factor’ (defined as the ratio between the frictional drag force on the floc and its speed relative to the surrounding liquid). Indeed, whereas the buoyancy force is directly proportional to the number of individual solid particles in the floc (and hence to the overall floc volume), the friction factor tends to scale as the radius of the floc as a whole ( One mechanism for achieving this is by raking the suspension, which can speed up dewatering rates in some cases by orders of magnitude ( Aggregate densification is expected to affect the suspension material properties and thereby the dewatering performance. Indeed theories describing the effects of aggregate densification upon suspension material properties are already available in the literature ( One key feature of the theories ( The aggregate densification theory has been used to model dewatering processes in batch settling ( It is noteworthy that the previously mentioned work on modelling thickening with aggregate densification ( It might seem strange a priori that the previous modelling work on densified thickening considered primarily the high overall solids fraction regime (where the benefits of aggregate densification are in certain cases quite limited) and yet has seldom considered the regime of much lower target solids fractions (where the benefits of aggregate densification can be realised). The reason for this concerns the physical differences between low solids fraction suspensions and their moderate-to-high solids fraction counterparts, and how those physical differences consequently impact the resulting mathematical models. Consider first of all, for simplicity, the nature of the theories in the absence of any aggregate densification. The particular overall solids fraction at which the flocs cease to be isolated, and instead form together into a network, is called the gel point ( The key material property of the suspension that governs its dewatering behaviour is either a solids settling speed or a solids settling flux (functions of overall solids fraction Suspensions at solids fractions above the gel point on the other hand are modelled using the theory of The above discussion concerned thickener design for ungelled vs gelled suspensions in the absence of aggregate densification. If aggregate densification is now factored into the design computations in e.g. the case of a gelled suspension, thickening performance enhancements can be predicted ( In the case of an ungelled ‘Kynchian’ suspension however where the level of information that one extracts from the undensified theory is rather less, it might at first sight appear that the resulting comparison between undensified and densified cases would be straightforward and perhaps even rather trivial. The purpose of this work is to demonstrate that even in the context of Kynch theory, thickener design calculations are not trivial in cases where aggregate densification is included. Indeed, on the contrary, a surprising amount of thickener design information can be readily extracted. In particular, one can deduce the detailed evolution of the state of the suspension as the solids migrate through the thickener: both the suspension solids fraction and the amount of aggregate densification evolve in a well-defined way during the course of this migration. Since the state of the suspension defines the solids settling velocity, one can thereby relate the suspension׳s temporal evolution to a spatial profile through the thickener. This represents an advance over previous work, since even though To summarise, there should be benefits ( The rest of this work is laid out as follows. The models employed for thickening and aggregate densification are discussed in This section is laid out as follows. The section begins by reviewing a number of topics, namely Kynch theory ( The essential element of Kynch theory ( The hindered settling factor Suppose that the aggregate solids fraction in the undensified system is denoted by Now consider the effects of densifying the floc. Following As the floc densifies, the solids fraction within it rises. Mass conservation of solids within the floc implies Throughout it will be assumed that The theory presented below does not actually require the particular value of The aggregate densification theory ( In Eq. There is however a small correction to this picture: in the The foregoing discussion concerned batch settling speeds. In a batch settler, solids flow downwards whilst liquid flows upward, but the net suspension flux (solids and liquid taken together) is nil. In the case of a thickener however, a net suspension flux flows If the thickener settling zone height is Since Finding the ‘operating state’ (in the presence of aggregate densification) turns out to be a generalisation of finding the ‘operating point’ (i.e. operating solids fraction) in a conventional (undensified) thickener, for which It is convenient to make the system of equations dimensionless to facilitate the mathematical analysis. Velocities are made dimensionless with respect to Assuming that the densification rate parameter For the aggregate diameter ratio and the solids fraction within the aggregates, the governing equations become respectively Alternatively it is possible to choose scalings such that The solids motion through the thickener is now Observe that the dimensionless settling zone height Indeed the two formulations presented in There are various ways in which one can select the operating conditions of a thickener. If standard (undensified) Kynch theory is applied, typically one might specify the suspension flux The most straightforward extension of this to the case of a densifying suspension would specify the suspension flux Observe that knowing Typically one finds that there is a critical value of Having identified Finally the profile of An alternative way of specifying an undensified thickener is to give the underflow solids fraction. By extension, an alternate way of specifying a densified thickener is to give An alternative design specification is to give suspension flux The difficulty however is that Once Yet another alternative is to specify underflow solids fraction The above discussion (see Eqs. In that case, in order to exploit any operational benefits that aggregate densification is predicted to provide, it would become necessary to It should be emphasised that benefits of aggregate densification can always be realised without requiring preshear by choosing a small enough suspension flux To determine whether preshearing might be required (in order to obtain benefits from aggregate densification) at a given In such cases the required amount of preshear time The height of the settling zone is now given by (in lieu of Eq. The above concerns the case where the residence time There is now a control parameter First it is necessary to compare the undensified solids flux function with the fully densified one to establish whether The symbol Once To summarise the procedure for determining preshearing time is now as follows: Determine whether the undensified maximum solids flux exceeds the fully densified minimum. If not, find the critical densification rate such that the undensified maximum solids flux equals the corresponding densified minimum (at a critical residence time). If the actual densification rate exceeds the critical rate, find the preshear time such that the presheared maximum solids flux equals the densified minimum corresponding to the actual residence time. The numerical techniques employed for solving the equations presented above are very simple and very standard ones ( The results of thickener design computations are now presented, using the theories and methods described above. In what follows the behaviour of solids flux vs solids fraction for three different suspension fluxes (  The operating solids fraction at the bottom of the settling zone corresponds to a local minimum of the At any instant of time  Now consider the other curves shown in the figure (i.e. those corresponding to the undensified case and those for values of For This is precisely the scenario envisaged in Eqs. Note that preshear only needs to be considered for comparatively large It is possible to increase Recall that the solids flux delivered by the thickener is given by a minimum on the flux curve (see Eq. It was discussed above with reference to For the There is of course no physical difficulty in principle with using a suspension flux as high as Profiles of solids fraction For each Each doubling of In addition to the settling zone total heights, the detailed shapes of the curves of solids fraction vs location in the settling zone (within In all cases when The shape of the It was mentioned earlier that the In the case studied here, the material at the bottom of the settling zone as indicated in It seems reasonable then to ignore gelation for these data, but one certainly could not set the suspension flux Note that each case plotted in In a similar fashion to what has been discussed above, the Now turn to the case It is also clear from  Densifying a suspension via raking should enhance thickening performance. There are however various different ways of quantifying this performance enhancement as is explained in the sections to follow. One way of representing the performance enhancement due to aggregate densification is shown in Alternatively one can compute the performance enhancements not at fixed For Results of thickener models are often presented ( Focus first on the undensified case: two branches of solutions are shown in As solids flux is increased, the system follows initially the first branch, but then switches to the second branch at the point where the two branches intersect. It is clear from the shape of the curves that when the second branch is attained, the system starts to sacrifice significantly the underflow solids flux that can be achieved. Delaying the switch to the second branch (if possible) is desirable. It turns out that the branch intersection point is actually sensitive to the value of The above discussion has concerned the undensified case. A similar picture arises for densified systems at different values of the shear residence time For each The focus here therefore is on the constrained branch with various non-zero For each Recall (from A look up table of In This can also be seen from Eq. Now consider The more that This work has performed a modelling study of the thickening behaviour of an ungelled ‘Kynchian’ suspension (i.e. one without compressive network forces), a model that would be permissible only for suspensions with comparatively low solids fractions. The model has treated steady state thickening (in the Eulerian sense), but has included the effect of flocs within the suspension being subjected to the shearing action of rakes and, as a result, becoming densified over time (in the Lagrangian sense). The model has been applied to study the behaviour of a straight-sided thickener, although it can be generalised to a conical-shaped thickener without too much additional difficulty. A model for floc densification previously employed in the literature ( The aggregate densification model employed here provides more information than standard (undensified) theories for thickening of Kynchian suspensions: in particular it predicts settling zone heights and profiles of varying solids fraction vs position in the settling zone. These heights and profiles are most readily obtained by specifying the state of the suspension at the bottom of the settling zone (at which the greatest amount of aggregate densification has taken place) and then computing the various suspension states above this, maintaining a spatially uniform solids flux. Significant performance enhancements of thickeners due to aggregate densification are predicted, for instance a 40% increase in underflow solids volume fraction (for a given suspension throughput) or increases in solids fluxes by a factor between 4 and 13 (for a given underflow solids volume fraction). Such performance improvements however come at the cost of an increase in the settling zone height, as residence times in the settling zone must be longer. These performance enhancements are also sensitive to the densification parameters employed, in particular to the ratio between the diameters of fully densified flocs and undensified flocs (the fully densified state being defined here as the point at which the floc diameter ceases to change with time). As this diameter ratio decreases, the predicted performance enhancement would increase still further. Moreover solids fluxes ‘unattainable’ by undensified systems If one is willing to forego any operational benefits from aggregate densification, then it is possible to operate a thickener at any solids flux without preshear. If one wants to exploit aggregate densification however, the requirement or otherwise for preshearing is determined primarily by the target solids flux, with just a very weak dependence on the residence time in the shear field itself. Indeed preshear can always be avoided if the solids flux is set sufficiently low. Given that the requirement for even modest amounts of preshear may present engineering challenges (particularly if it involves retrofitting onto an existing thickener design) identifying the parameter domain for which preshear can be avoided is useful. Regardless of whether the system is (or is not) presheared, performance curves can be plotted for solids flux It is more straightforward however to represent the curves using a densification rate parameter (for a fixed settling zone height) or a settling zone height parameter (for a given densification rate). When cast in dimensionless form, these two parameters become the same. For a fixed value of this (dimensionless) rate parameter, as the target solids fraction However towards the upper end of the flux regime of interest the system makes the same transition as It is important to recall the restriction that the ‘Kynchian’ model considered here only treats the case of suspensions at low enough solids fraction such that they do not form a weight bearing gel, otherwise more complex theories of thickening with aggregate densification are required, as have been studied elsewhere ( This work has discussed how the mathematical description of suspensions at low solids fraction differs from that of suspensions at higher solids fraction: at higher solids fraction suspensions tend to form a gel which can support compressive stresses ( Kynch theory for ungelled suspensions (and extensions thereof that incorporate compressive stress terms for higher solids fraction gelled suspensions) can be used for engineering design of dewatering equipment. One of the simplest types of equipment to design is a so-called continuous thickener, in which suspension is fed into the device, with clear water being drawn off the top, and thickened material (with a solids fraction greater than that of the feed) being drawn off the bottom. Indeed the operation of a thickener ( The conventional Kynch theory however does not account for the fact that the microstructure of flocs is not necessarily fixed, but instead can evolve over time. In particular raking a suspension may induce changes in floc structure: specifically aggregates densify, i.e. become more compact, under the shearing action of rakes ( Relations are available between the extent of aggregate densification and residence time in the shear field within a raked suspension ( The most important finding is that dramatic increases in thickener performance are possible. The performance enhancement is most simply expressed via a graph of the solids flux vs the solids fraction in the underflow of the thickener: as residence time increases, the graph is pushed towards higher solids fluxes and higher solids fractions. The next most important finding is that the modified Kynch theory presented here predicts a profile of solids fraction vs position in the thickener, and hence makes predictions for the thickener height required to attain a prescribed underflow solids fraction. This is a surprising outcome because the conventional Kynch theory in the absence of aggregate densification makes no such predictions: it determines an operating solids fraction within the thickener, but not a solids fraction profile, and does not specify any thickener height requirement. Interestingly generalisations of Kynch theory taking account of compressive effects in gelled suspensions (but without necessarily invoking aggregate densification) do predict solids fraction profiles and thickener height requirements (  The authors would like to acknowledge infrastructure support through the In A floc of assumed radius 100 microns with an assumed average density 50% higher than that of the surrounding water settles (in the absence of any other flocs) according to Stokes settling law (see e.g. Now turn to time and length scales. The work of Recall from