A model for a semi-batch flotation separation process has been developed, based on available microprocess probabilities, and compared to experimental data obtained using a WEMCO laboratory flotation cell. In general, the model predicts the correct experimental trends. In many cases, the model also predicts removal efficiency very well. Parametric studies reveal that the model predictions are sensitive to a stability parameter, the turbulent energy density in the flotation cell, the contact angle between the solid particle and fluid, and the ratio of initial-to-critical film thickness.Flotation separation is a process used in many industries to separate one constituent from another. Dispersed air flotation is commonly found in mineral processing (mineral flotation) and paper recycling (flotation deinking). In these processes, bubbles are formed by mechanical agitation or sparger air injection and chemicals (i.e., frothers) may be introduced, particularly in mineral flotation, to suppress bubble coalescence and promote foam formation. Bubble–particle aggregates then form between the bubbles and naturally or chemically induced hydrophobic particles. Bubbles with a sufficient buoyant force separate the mineral or contaminant particles from gangue or fiber in mineral flotation and flotation deinking, respectively. Despite the many differences between mineral flotation and flotation deinking ( A considerable effort has been made to mathematically model the flotation separation process because experimental studies are very costly and time consuming (  This paper describes a flotation separation model that has been modified from The experimental apparatus to which the model described below applies consists of a vessel into which a desired liquid-particle mixture is loaded and air is injected. Air at a known constant volumetric flow rate, Assuming that all bubbles have a uniform size, the average number of bubbles in the vessel can be calculated by measuring the gas holdup (gas percent by volume) and the average bubble size. The total number of bubbles consists of bubbles free of particles ( If Assuming negligible bubble coalescence, and ignoring the influence on the individual bubble rise velocity which can be modified by the presence of one or more attached particles, under steady-state conditions the total number of bubbles entering the vessel is identical with the total number of bubbles leaving the vessel. Let Since The original flotation model developed by The following relations are obvious from the definitions of The second step in the iterative procedure uses the solutions for To obtain removal efficiency predictions using Beginning with the probability of collision, For the same kind of intermediate flow over the bubble surface, the probability of attachment by sliding may be determined from ( As outlined by The probability of stability, The last two parameters required to evaluate Eff( Batch bench-top flotation deinking experiments were completed for the purpose of obtaining experimental particle removal efficiencies to be used for the flotation model validation. This section summarizes the procedures used in these experiments. The bench-top flotation cell will first be described, followed by stock preparation procedures. The specific experimental conditions and data reduction procedures will then be outlined. The flotation trials completed in this study utilized a WEMCO bench-top flotation cell (EIMCO Process Equipment, Salt Lake City, UT). A schematic of the basic unit is shown in The stock used in these flotation trials consisted of fused toner particles that were added to unprinted copy paper and then repulped. To eliminate the complication of “hairy” toner particles ( A number of unprinted copy paper sheets (i.e., 20) were then shredded and soaked in DI water following TAPPI Method T 205 om-88 (TAPPI, 1994). Fused toner particles from nine (9) cellophane sheets were then added to the soaked copy paper and disintegrated following standard TAPPI procedures. This disintegration procedure ensured no “hairy” toner particles were present in the suspension, and that the true toner particle size effects could be addressed during the flotation experiments. This process also resulted in a wide distribution of toner particle sizes. For each flotation trial, the WEMCO flotation cell was initially charged with After the TX-100 was added to the stock in the flotation cell, the impeller was turned on to Flotation proceeded for The experiment was repeated three times to obtain three different samples at each flotation time. Each Image analysis was then performed on each handsheet using Image Pro Plus v.4 and interfaced with a high resolution digital camera Preliminary flotation data were used to refine the image analysis procedures. During these shake-down experiments and analysis, one difficulty was identified: spurious results were obtained when the handsheet was only lightly contaminated. Upon further investigation, it was determined that dirt specs, shives, shadows, and/or fillers created background noise and may be identified as toner particles. These “ghost” particles were small in number, but caused inconsistent results when the total number of actual toner particles was also small. In an attempt to correct for this noise, five handsheets were prepared following the same procedures described above, but the toner particles were not added. Very small “particles” were identified in these clean handsheets when image analysis was performed. Some of these particles had aspect ratios larger than 3 (some were much larger). For this reason, all particles with aspect ratio greater than 3 were discarded from the handsheet analysis with toner particles. This was also visually verified by observing selected particles under a microscope. The particles with aspect ratio larger than 3 were clearly not toner particles. Additionally, a correction was applied to each particle count obtained from the flotation trials. This correction consisted of subtracting the average particle count, in each bin obtained from the clean handsheets, from the flotation trial particle count. The resulting correction altered the removal efficiency by at most 5% for the WEMCO flotation trials were completed to determine laboratory flotation efficiency results for comparison with the flotation model predictions. The experimental flotation deinking efficiency is defined as  The data obtained in the semi-batch flotation experiments have been compared to model predictions. Before model predictions are presented, various parameters must be identified to use the model. Most of these parameters were either measured or estimated from the experimental conditions used in this study. A few of these parameters were unknown for our experimental conditions and reasonable approximations were used. The effect of variations in these unknown parameters, as well as variations in our estimated values, have also been determined and will be discussed below. All needed fluid properties in the model were specified to correspond to those of water. The particle diameter was fixed at the upper value in the data range (e.g., for the Since TX-100 was added to the system and well-mixed, it was assumed that all bubbles were coated with surface active agents and could be approximated as rigid spheres, leading to the conclusion that Power input into the WEMCO flotation cell was also measured. It was assumed that all the applied power could be equated to the turbulent energy density, and, therefore, The ratio of initial-to-critical film thickness, Finally, the structure of the parameter  Model predictions using the same parameters, except that  We will now focus on model predictions for By increasing the average number of particles on a bubble, the removal efficiency should increase. Model predictions in Surface tension of the stock filtrate was measured during the flotation trials and was shown to increase as flotation time increased. This is due to some of the surfactant being removed with the foam during flotation. An estimated value of Variations in the turbulent energy density, The contact angle will influence the predicted flotation efficiency through The ratio of initial-to-critical film thickness, This paper developed the equations for a semi-batch flotation deinking model based on available flotation microprocess probabilities. Experimental data obtained from a laboratory WEMCO flotation cell satisfied the semi-batch assumption. These data were compared to the model predictions. In general, the model predicted the expected efficiency trends. The model also predicted the correct removal efficiencies in some cases. The reason the model did not predict the removal efficiencies in all cases is that the model is sensitive to accurate values of the stability parameter  The work described in this paper was funded by the Member Companies of the Institute of Paper Science and Technology, Atlanta, GA. Their support is gratefully acknowledged. The assistance of Ms. Adele Garner in the flotation data collection and image analysis is also acknowledged.