Low molecular weight polyacrylamide (PAM) polymers were used to separate copper-activated sphalerite from pyrite in the presence of isobutyl xanthate (IBX). The effects of carboxyl, sulfonate, hydroxyl or thiourea functional groups attached to the polymers on the flotation recoveries of sphalerite and pyrite were studied as a function of polymer concentration and order of reagent addition. It was found that all the PAMs depressed pyrite flotation with no or little depression of sphalerite. The following order for pyrite depression was obtained: hydroxy>carboxyl≥thiourea>sulfonate, and for mineral selectivity: carboxyl≥sulfonate>hydroxy≫thiourea. It was also found that a greater mineral depression was obtained for the coarser particles and when the PAMs were added before the collector.In the flotation of complex sulfide ores, a high pH value is generally used to separate valuable sulfide minerals from pyrite or pyrrhotite with xanthate collectors (e.g., Other reagents such as cyanide In this study, polymers are used as an alternative method for the depression of pyrite. Low molecular weight PAM polymers are used to separate copper-activated sphalerite from pyrite in the presence of isobutyl xanthate. The effects of carboxyl, sulfonate, hydroxyl or thiourea functional groups attached to the polymers on the flotation recoveries of sphalerite and pyrite are studied as a function of polymer concentration, order of reagent addition and mineral particle size. The sphalerite and pyrite samples used in this study were from the Elmwood Mine (Carthage, TN) in the United States and from the Huanzala Mine in Peru, respectively. The chemical composition of these samples is shown in For the flotation experiments, a mineral feed comprising 20 g of sphalerite and 80 g of pyrite was used as representative of the zinc to iron ratio commonly found in ores. Mineral grinding involved the use of a rubber-lined Galigher mill with an approximate volume of 6 dm The conditions used in this study provide a high flotation of sphalerite with a recovery close to 90% after 8 min of flotation, but also a moderately high flotation of pyrite The separation of these minerals is increased in the presence of the PAMs, resulting from a larger depression of pyrite than sphalerite. With the two charged polymers, PAM-C and PAM-S, pyrite recovery (at 8 min) decreases by more than 25%, but sphalerite recovery is only decreased by less than 10% after 500 g/ton addition of these polymers. PAM-C appears to be a slightly more selective depressant than PAM-S with an optimum polymer concentration of 100 g/ton. It is clear from The order of reagent addition is an important consideration to achieve maximum flotation performances. Only the most powerful depressant, PAM-H, and the more selective depressant, PAM-C, were used for the flotation study as a function of particle size. These results are shown in Because of their complex chemical structure, polymers can interact with mineral surfaces through several mechanisms: electrostatic, hydrogen bonding, chemical and/or hydrophobic interactions. Of course, the nature of the interaction will depend on the type of reacting groups on both the mineral surface and polymer. Studies of sulfide minerals have shown that their surfaces are composed of a hydrophobic, sulfur-rich underlying layer covered with a hydrophilic metal oxide/hydroxide layer whose surface coverage depends on the level of mineral oxidation The selectivity of these PAM polymers for a particular mineral was assessed by monitoring their interaction with metal ions in solution at pH values of 5.0 and 11.0. Interaction is indicated by a change in colour of the solution and precipitation of the metal ions. The results of the interaction of PAM with ferric, zinc and cupric ions are reported in As infrared spectroscopy failed to detect any change in the position of the various infrared peaks of the PAM polymers in the PAM–metal ion precipitates, one may conclude that the interactions between the polymer various functional groups and the metal ions are weak. In this study, it was found that low molecular weight PAM polymers with various substituted functional groups, carboxyl, sulfonate, hydroxyl or thiourea could be used to separate efficiently copper-activated sphalerite from pyrite by flotation in the presence of isobutyl xanthate. All the PAMs depressed pyrite with no or little depression of sphalerite, and with the following order for pyrite depression: hydroxy>carboxyl≥thiourea>sulfonate, and for mineral selectivity: carboxyl≥sulfonate>hydroxy≫thiourea. It was also found that, in the conditions used in this study, a larger mineral depression was obtained for the coarser mineral particles and when the PAMs were added before the collector. This study has also demonstrated that the larger depression of pyrite than sphalerite is due to a specific interaction of these polymers with ferric ions/hydroxides. PAM-T interacts also with copper ions resulting in the depression of copper-activated sphalerite and, therefore, in a low separation between sphalerite and pyrite with this polymer. The financial support for this work from the Australian Mineral Industries Research Association and the Australian Research Council, through the Special Research Centres Scheme, is gratefully acknowledged.