Metallic biomaterials are widely used in the orthopaedic research field for bone fixation, prosthetic device as well as in dental applications. Titanium-based alloys are considered a suitable candidate for implant-based applications because of its specific material property. Among various materials explored, Ti6Al4V is a promising material which has been widely used for implant applications. Surface property of these alloys plays a major role in most of the applications. In this regard, modification of the surface by nanodesigning has been utilized to improve the surface properties of the titanium and its alloys for biomedical application. However, certain parameters are needed to control the surface morphology of the alloy. Thus, in order to get titania (TiO2) nanotubes arrays over the Ti6Al4V alloy different electrolytes has been used. In the present study, Ethylene glycol (EG) and Ethylene glycol and Distilled water (EGDW) with ammonium fluoride salt were used as electrolytes. Voltage was kept constant in both the electrolytes. Moreover, diameter of the formed nanotubes was found to be changed when anodization was done in two different electrolytes. Inner and outer diameter of the as-synthesized nanotubes when anodization carried out in ethylene glycol was found to be 43.3571 nm and 93.6288 nm respectively. Whereas inner and outer diameter of as developed nanotubes when anodizing was carried out in Ethylene glycol and Distilled water (EGDW) was found to be 33.8484 nm and 89.9901 nm respectively. Moreover, as-synthesized anodized samples were heat-treated at 450 °C for 3 h. The prepared samples were characterized by scanning electron microscopy and XRD to study the phase change and the tube diameter in the developed nanostructure.Ti and its alloys are the most common material in the field of biomedical implant application. Ti6Al4V is usually used in the biomedical field because of its unique properties such as corrosion, specific strength, light in weight, biocompatible as well as lower elastic moduli. All these properties make it more efficient metallic material in the field of medical sciences. Besides this, nanotube has applications in the field of electronics as DSSC as well as in the field of environmental science for photocatalytic activity As received Ti6Al4V sheet was cut into 2 × 2 cm and were polished by sandpaper step by step. Polishing of Ti alloy was started from 120 grit size to 1200 grit size. The thickness of the sheet was around 0.8 mm. Moreover, the polished samples were ultrasonically cleaned in (Acetone, Ethanol and Distilled water solution) for 25 min to remove SiC particles which were embedded into the surface during polishing. To remove the barrier oxide layer, the samples were acidly etched in the mixture of HNO Anodization was carried out over Ti6Al4V alloy which is typically a Grade V alloy and it is considered as a superior biomaterial for implant-based applications. Diameter of the as-synthesized nanotubes has been studied with the aid of scanning electron microscopy. Furthermore, phase change in the structure was studied by X-ray diffraction analysis. From previous literature it has been found that electrolytic parameter plays a major role in the formation of nanotube diameter. In the present investigation, samples were synthesized in two different electrolytes i.e. EG and EGDW. The inner and outer diameter was 43.3571 nm and 93.6288 nm has been calculated for the tubes anodized in the EG only. Whereas, inner and outer diameter was 33.8484 nm and 89.9901 nm has been measured for the tubes anodized in the EGDW only (See In order to get nanotubes of TiO2, anodization method has been used which is an economical way to produce nanotube structure over Ti and its related alloys. Thus, different electrolytic conditions were used to see the change in the morphology which depends on the anodizing condition in which electrolytic parameter is one of them. It is easy to understand that anodizing parameter plays a crucial role in the pore opening and initiation which directly affects the nanotube morphology. The detailed illustration of the role of water and its ions is not been specified in details. Thus, TiO