The authors present the clinical results of their method of customized reconstruction of orbital wall defects using titanium mesh or sheet. High resolution computed tomography (CT) data are imported and processed to create a three-dimensional (3D) image which is used to reconstruct the orbital defect. Mirror imaging of the air in the contralateral maxillary sinus is used to overcome artefact defects in the floor. A stereolithographic model is constructed, from which titanium mesh or sheet is shaped and sized to the required contours for implantation. Twenty-two patients were treated using this technique from 2003 to 2008. Postoperatively 10 patients reported early resolution of their diplopia. Six patients noticed significant improvement of their symptoms with mild residual diplopia in one direction only and at the extremes of gaze at final review. One patient required ocular muscle surgery. Enophthalmos resolved in eight of the nine cases. No patients developed enophthalmos or diplopia as a postoperative complication. The use of titanium mesh for orbital floor reconstruction has been shown to be safe and effective. Customized titanium implants accurately reproduce orbital contours thus restoring orbital volume. This reduces operative time and improves the functional and aesthetic outcomes of post-traumatic orbital reconstruction.The use of high resolution computed tomography (CT), with the ability to examine the scans routinely in three planes, has provided a better understanding of the three-dimensional (3D) structure of the bony orbit. This combined with the use of rapid prototype models from CT data allows the construction of a more accurate customized implant for post-traumatic reconstruction of orbital wall defects Indications for using the technique included severe comminution, large defects with little or no posterior bony support and secondary reconstruction. Patients were scanned using high resolution CT with a slice thickness of 0.5 The resulting virtual model was used to construct a stereolithographic model ( The two alternative incisions used for access were the mid-eyelid blepharoplasty or the conjunctival incision, depending on operator preference. Where the conjunctival incision was used in the presence of floor and medial defects, a post-caruncular extension was performed to access the medial wall. Orbital dissection was performed in the normal way, exposing and delineating the defect. Herniated orbital contents were retrieved and the plate was inserted and anchored with one or more screws depending on plate design and position. Forced duction testing was performed in all cases and closure was performed after confirming that there was no restriction or tethering of the globe. A retrospective review of 22 cases treated at the authors’ institution using customized titanium implants for orbital wall reconstruction was carried out. A form was designed for data collection and patients’ case notes were examined, looking at emergency cards, outpatient clinic notes, operating records and correspondence. The collected information was entered into a spreadsheet programme (MS Excel Twenty-two patients were treated using this technique between 2003 and 2008 ( Time lag between injury and surgery was variable, spanning from 7 days to 2 years in cases of secondary reconstruction. The shortest achieved time from injury to the completion of the implant was 5 days (as opposed to 4 days from the decision to operate to the completion of the implant). In case 8, the patient had significant herniation preoperatively and tethering of orbital contents in the maxillary sinus with restricted movements of the globe on forced duction testing. The patient could move his eye freely in the immediate postoperative phase with complete resolution of diplopia within the first 24 Similarly, in case 10 a 15-year-old patient presented with significant diplopia and evidence of restricted eye movements on Hess chart. The defect was large enough to cause early enophthalmos, confirmed with Hertel exophthalmometry on presentation. This patient's diplopia also resolved within 24 Case 12 was a 33-year-old woman who had suffered multiple injuries in a road traffic collision. She was eventually referred by the ophthalmology department to the maxillofacial team, 9 months after her injury, when she was found to have a displaced and malunited zygomatic fracture with debilitating diplopia and established enophthalmos. The initial procedure involved a zygomatico-orbital osteotomy with bone grafting and titanium mesh insertion to reconstruct the right orbital floor. As the patient had recurrent problems, a further exploration of the orbital floor was performed and a custom-made 0.5 In case 18, a young man had complete resolution of his diplopia immediately postoperatively, but he developed a sudden onset subjective decrease in visual acuity to no perception of light 8 There have been no infections reported to date in this series. In case 14, where the patient presented with recurrent periorbital cellulitis and a missed orbital floor fracture, his infective symptoms completely resolved following exploration and fracture repair using the technique described. There is little doubt that the management of orbital injuries has been an area of great controversy over the years. The decision whether to treat surgically or not, the choice of surgical approach for access and of material for wall defect reconstruction have all been hotly debated. Autogenous bone grafts as well as a variety of alloplastic implants have been used for orbital wall reconstruction with variable outcomes and complication rates. Rubber and silicone-based implants have been implicated in a high complication rate with implant migration and extrusion occurring as late as 17 years post-surgery in some series S Autogenous bone grafts have been widely used for the repair of orbital wall defects with low infection rates and they remain in some hands a popular reconstructive option Recent technological advances in medical imaging have provided a platform for the development of new and innovative techniques in the planning, execution and long-term evaluation of complex cranio-maxillofacial procedures The benefits of maxillofacial navigation in the field of head and neck oncology and post-traumatic craniofacial and orbital reconstruction are well documented The use of rapid prototyping and stereolithographic models has proven benefits in orbital reconstruction In a series of recent publications, the Freiberg group reported the use of individually preformed titanium mesh implants using computer assisted preoperative planning, stereolithographic templates and intraoperative navigational control with encouraging results In conclusion, the use of titanium mesh for orbital wall reconstruction has been shown to be safe and effective. Custom-made titanium implants are easy to manipulate, insert and anchor. They accurately reproduce orbital contours thus restoring orbital volume. This leads to reduced operative time and an improvement in functional and aesthetic outcomes of post-traumatic orbital reconstruction. Despite the model and laboratory cost implications, the cost of titanium sheet implant construction compares favourably with generic and preformed titanium plates commercially available on the market. This technique offers a safe, accurate and cost-effective option for the reconstruction of orbital wall fractures, especially in cases where the defects are large and severely comminuted or for the purpose of secondary reconstruction. None declared. None. Not required. The authors would like to thank their consultant colleagues for allowing the presentation of their clinical cases, Mr Richard Bibb and Mr Dominic Egbeer for their continued support and collaboration and Mr John Richardson, Medical Illustrations Department for all his efforts.