Energy conservation principles are used to derive anisotropic elastic properties and seismic wave velocities of an otherwise isotropic material containing preferentially oriented microcracks. The energy stored in deforming a cracked elastic material equals the sum of energy stored in deforming the homogeneous, isotropic and intact portion of the material, and in the cracks. Both elastic properties and seismic velocities and attenuation of this material are therefore dependent on average crack length, orientation and density. This work found that P-wave velocities in all principal directions: the direction normal to crack planes, and parallel to the short and the long axis of crack planes, decrease as crack density increases. The shear wave velocities in the crack planes, that is, when both the particle motions and the propagation directions are parallel to the planes, remain unchanged because the shear modulus in those planes is not changed. The shear wave velocities in the other two principal directions are found to decrease with increasing crack length and density. These results show that in a cracked, otherwise isotropic elastic material, shear waves in the direction parallel to the crack planes travel the fastest and any other shear waves that make a non-zero angle with the crack planes travel slower. Measured results in both laboratory and field, as summarized by Crampin et al. (J. Petroleum Tech. 1989; 283–288), have confirmed these findings.The relationship between seismic wave velocities and rock anisotropic properties bear importance in both civil and petroleum engineering. While elastic mechanical properties are used for engineering practices such as underground excavation design (civil and mining engineering) and drilling and completions (petroleum engineering), often they have to be derived from elastic wave velocities. This is especially true for petroleum operations, where only elastic velocities can be directly measured from depths of tens of thousand feet. Understanding the relationship between preferentially oriented cracks, such as compressive stress-induced cracks or compressive stress release-induced cracks, and anisotropic mechanical properties helps predicting the behavior of elastic wave propagation. Conversely, preferred fluid flow directions and anisotropic rock deformation behavior can be derived from measuring anisotropic wave velocities, if the original rock can be assumed isotropic. When the relationship between crack density and stresses is known, this can even be extended to prediction of magnitudes of the stresses that caused the preferentially oriented cracks. Compressive stress-induced cracks change a homogeneous, isotropic elastic medium into an anisotropic, heterogeneous medium, due to preferential alignment of the microcracks with the direction of principal compressive stresses. Compressive stress release-induced cracks which are perpendicular to the stress directions can also lead to anisotropy. The change in elastic properties subsequently changes seismic properties, which depend on the elastic properties of the medium. Evidences of seismic anisotropy due to stress-induced, preferentially orientated cracks are abundant in Refs. Seismic waves traveling through crack solids have been studied for several decades using effective elastic constants In a paper intended to be used as an introduction to shear-wave splitting and seismic anisotropy, Crampin et al. Seismic anisotropy due to the presence of stress-induced cracks is derived here using effective elastic constants. General expressions for seismic velocities in an orthotropic material (nine elastic constants) are obtained with a straightforward approach by using stress–strain equations, equilibrium equations and strain–displacement equations The general form of the constitutive relationships of an orthotropic elastic material in a Cartesian coordinate system The stiffness matrix ( The equilibrium equations for an elastic material in the absence of body forces can be written as follows: Strains Bringing stress–strain relationships If an otherwise elastic isotropic body contains compressive stress induced microcracks that are preferentially oriented, the overall elastic properties of this body are no longer isotropic. The elastic constants of the body change and are dependent on the density of the cracks In order to derive the anisotropic seismic velocities in the otherwise isotropic body, we assume that the microcracks are induced by compressive stresses and are through cracks in the direction of the intermediate principal stress ( The principle of superposition and energy conservation can be used to derive the elastic constants for an isotropic material containing preferentially oriented microcracks ( The additional strain energy due to the presence of a single crack is related to the stress intensity factor for the crack and can be expressed by the additional strain energy per unit crack surface area ( Under pure shear strain conditions, no normal stress is induced and the energy conservation When a P-wave is propagating in direction “1”, i.e. uniaxial strain in direction “1”, the following conditions are satisfied: Solving induced stress in the Similarly, when a P-wave is propagating in directions “2” and “3”, relations between elastic constants and crack density can be derived: The anisotropic velocities of a cracked elastic material can then be written as the ratio over the original uncracked isotropic material velocities: The presence of preferentially oriented cracks in an otherwise isotropic material changes the elastic properties of the rock from isotropic to anisotropic, due to the alignment of the cracks (e.g. compressive stress-induced microcracks predominantly propagate the direction of maximum compressive stress). With the assumption of microcrack arrangement, as shown in For the simple assumption of microcrack geometry, as shown in The young’s modulus in the direction perpendicular to the planes of the extensile cracks decrease as the crack density An interesting behavior in P-wave velocities is observed in Results of the shear wave velocities show clearly that preferentially oriented microcracks, such as compressive stress-induced microcracks which are aligned in the direction of maximum compressive stress, or compressive stress release-induced microcracks which are perpendicular to the original compressive stress, indeed cause anisotropic wave velocities and the degree of anisotropy depends upon the crack density and crack geometry. The work presented in this paper was completed in 1988, when author Ziqiong Zheng was a graduate student working under the guidance of the late Neville G. W. Cook. The publication of this work was long overdue. The author presents this work at this time as a tribute to Neville G. W. Cook, without whom it would not have been possible.