As hydraulic fracturing as a means to enhance coal bed methane was banned in some countries due to possible negative environmental impacts, the microwave heating was proposed as an alternative approach to enhance coal permeability and thus gas productivity. One of the mechanisms on improving coal permeability using microwave irradiation is that thermal stress caused by microwave heating generates fractures. To study the influence of microwave settings to the heating effect of coal samples, a coupled mathematical model for electromagnetic, heat and mass transfer in the process of microwave heating is proposed and is numerically implemented using a finite element method. This coupled model for microwave heating have considered heat and mass transfer, and is validated by comparison with experimental results. Then it is used to simulate the influence of frequency, power and moisture capacity on microwave heating. The simulation results show that microwave heating of coal is highly sensitive to excitation frequency. Frequencies around 3.45 GHz contribute to significant thermal heterogeneity. With the same energy input, different powers do not influence the overall heating effect, but higher powers cause greater thermal heterogeneity. Moisture capacity also has great effect on microwave heating and thermal distribution pattern. Under 2.45 GHz and 1.0 kW, the coal sample with moisture capacity of 5% has the best microwave heating effect.Coalbed methane (CBM) exist in coal seam in four ways: adsorbed in micropores, trapped in matrix porosity, dissolved in ground water and as free gas in fissures [ With the increase of mining depth, the gas content generally increases while the coal permeability decreases, which makes it harder to drain the gas. The most commonly used technologies to increase coal permeability for methane are hydraulic fracturing and CO2 injection enhanced coalbed methane (CO2-ECBM) recovery [ Microwave is an electromagnetic radiation with frequencies between 300 MHz and 300 GHz, which has been broadly used in industrial, scientific, medical and instrumentations applications [ As the effectiveness of coal permeability enhancement is determined by the microwave's heating behaviour, it is vital to find out what factors may influence the microwave's heating behaviour on coal before applying this technology on-site. It is reported that microwave heating effect entirely depends on the electric field distribution in the oven, with larger electric intensity results in better heating effect. Therefore, it is critical to investigate the electric field and thermal field distribution within the coal samples. As the electric field and temperature distribution are hard to measure, numerical experiments were introduced to simulate the microwave heating process. In previous studies, coupling electromagnetic and thermal field, numerical models were built with COMSOL Multiphysics to investigate microwave heating under various conditions [ The aim of this paper is to study the heating and drying effect of microwave on coal samples by using a coupled electromagnetic, heat and mass transfer model. To address this, a 3D model coupling electromagnetic, heat and mass transfer was established with COMSOL Multiphysics. The electromagnetic and thermal field were coupled with microwave heating effect. The electromagnetic field affects the mass transfer through affecting moisture conductivity and mass transfer coefficient. And the thermal field and flow field are connected with the latent heat of evaporation. The model was then verified through comparing with data from previous articles. Finally, temperature and electric field distribution of coal samples were analysed in detail under different microwave frequencies, microwave powers and coal's moisture capacity. The following assumptions are made in the model to simplify the complex problem and save computational cost: The initial coal sample is homogeneous and isotropic. There is no microwave heating or heat transfer in the glass plate. Heat capacity, dielectric constant, moisture conductivity and mass transfer coefficient of coal sample remain constant under various temperatures and frequencies. Dielectric constant is proportional to moisture concentration. Chemical reaction is not considered. The movement of water molecule in the magnetic field and electric field is simplified as a constant mass transfer. Only latent heat of vaporization is considered in the phase change, while the vapour pressure is ignored. The effect of moisture vapour on the coal pore structure is not considered. Maxwell's equation is the most commonly used equation to describe electromagnetic propagation. In this paper, the governing equation is given as [ Heat transfer is only solved in the coal sample domain. The microwave heat and phase change heat is coupled in Latent heat of vaporization Similar to the heat transfer, the mass transfer is only solved in the coal sample domain as well, expressed as [ The moisture diffusivity is calculated according to Eq. For the electromagnetic field, the walls of waveguide and oven are defined as impedance boundary condition and solved in the frequency domain, given as the following equation [ The symmetry boundaries are described as perfect magnetic conductor, which is expressed as: The port boundary is excited by a transverse electric wave. The wave, which has no electric field component in the direction of propagation, is controlled by a propagation constant β, which is presented as [ For the thermal field, the bottom and symmetry face are defined as thermal insulation boundary conditions, which are written as [ As for the other surfaces of coal sample, the boundary conditions for the heat transfer interfaces are given as [ For the mass transfer field, the bottom and symmetry face are defined as no flux boundary condition, which is expressed as Eq. The model geometry is established based on the microwave oven model in COMSOL Multiphysics application gallery [ The physics-controlled mesh is enabled, and the maximum mesh size was set to 1/5th of the wavelengths. The meshes of the coal sample are customized with 0.005 m maximum element size, while the rest meshes are predefined as finer meshes. There are 40,365 elements in the entire geometry with averaged element quality of 0.74, as shown in Moisture conductivities and mass transfer coefficients of coal samples are two critical parameters in microwave drying simulation. However, such data are not available in the literature and therefore needed to be calculated indirectly. As mentioned in the assumptions, moisture conductivities and mass transfer coefficients of coal samples are assumed constant in each individual simulation. In previous studies, 5 g coal samples with various particle size were used to investigate microwave drying characteristics [ Relative permittivity (real permittivity ε The initial conditions and other parameters of the model are list in The established model considers heat and mass transfer, and thus both microwave heating and drying are simulated. Its heating and drying effects need to be verified before conducting further simulations. The microwave heating effect of this model was verified through comparing to the microwave heating experiments done by Lin et al. [ The frequency of microwave has significant impact on electric field distribution, and thus influence its heating behaviour. Other studies have only investigated microwave frequency within 2.4 GHz to 2.5 GHz [ It is worth mentioning that the simulation objects in this paper are coal samples, which are small enough to be easily penetrated by all microwave with frequencies between 1.95 GHz and 3.70 GHz. However, penetration depth is one of the most significant issues needs to be investigated before applying microwave on-site. Clark and Sutton [ It is obvious from Eq. In general, different microwave frequencies result in substantially different electric field distributions in the microwave oven and coal samples, which result in the difference in the thermal field distribution in the coal samples. As displayed in For each simulated frequency, the average electric field intensity, average temperature, and the maximum temperature difference in the coal samples at 650 W and 600 s are displayed in For application in thick coal seam, frequency of 2.45 GHz or even lower could be a good working frequency in stimulating coal bed methane, as lower microwave frequencies lead to larger penetration depth. The best working frequency for different coal seam thicknesses should be investigated in the further study. Using more than one microwave frequencies alternately could be an effective way to achieve great fracturing effect and long penetration depth at the same time. It is obvious that larger power results in larger electric field intensity, which further contributes to better microwave heating and drying effects within the same time period. However, economic benefit should also be considered in industrial applications. In this study, the power effect comparison was made at the same energy input of 300 kJ. Thus, microwave heating and drying effects were compared with the same energy input and specific moisture capacity of 4.7% under frequency of 2.45 GHz. The simulation results (0.5 kW at 600 s, 1.0 kW at 300 s, 1.5 kW at 200 s, 2.0 kW at 150 s, 2.5 kW at 120 s, 3.0 kW at 100 s) were presented in To investigate the difference between different power patterns in detail, the average moisture concentration, average temperature, maximum temperature, minimum temperature and maximum temperature difference were calculated and depicted in To study the effect of moisture capacity, simulation experiments were carried out respectively with specific moisture capacity ranged from 0.5% to 10% under 2.45 GHz and 1.0 kW. Some representative results are shown in As revealed in The average electric field norm and average temperature of coal sample were calculated and depict in Prior work has simulated the microwave heating effects of coal samples under various circumstances. For example, the influencing factors of microwave frequency, power, coal permittivity and coal size on microwave heating were studied with a coupled electromagnetic and heat transfer model [ In this study, we established a coupled electromagnetic, heat and mass transfer model with COMSOL Multiphysics, which approximates more closely to the real condition. After verification, simulations were conducted to study the effects of microwave power, frequency and coal's moisture capacity. We found that microwave heating is extremely sensitive to microwave frequency as different frequencies lead to various electric field and thermal distributions. It was also found that coal sample under 3.45 GHz has the largest temperature difference and therefore should be an ideal work frequency for enhancing the permeability of coal sample. Microwave power, on the other hand, has little effect on the average temperature of coal samples with the same energy input. However, higher power increases the maximum temperature difference in the treated coal, which is better for enhancing the permeability of coal seam. As for the effect of specific moisture capacity, it was found that moisture capacity has great influence on microwave heating. An optimal microwave heating performance exists for a certain moisture capacity. In the current study, microwave settings of 1 kW at 2.45 GHz result in the best heating effect for coal samples with 5% specific moisture capacity. Although assumptions were made to determine moisture conductivity and mass transfer coefficient, and only one microwave setting was investigated for various moisture capacity, the findings in this paper fill the research gap in considering the effect of coal sample's moisture in microwave heating model. It could be very helpful in determine microwave working frequency and power when applying microwave on-site to improve permeability of coal seam. To better reflect actual situations and improve the model accuracy, further experiments will be done to obtain the change of moisture conductivity and mass transfer coefficient during coal sample heating. Beyond that, coal will be defined as an initial nonhomogeneity material to study the thermal stress and fissure development in coal samples under microwave irradiation. This project is supported by the