There are a large volume of phosphate tailings is produced in China each year. If the tailings are inappropriately disposed of, it may cause serious social problem. This paper presents a study to use phosphate mine tailings to make ceramisite materials, which can be used as building material. In the process, the phosphate tailings were mixed with soft interlayer and black shale materials. The effects of mass ratio among phosphate mine tailings, soft interlayer content and black shale and calcination parameters, such as preheating temperature, preheating time, sintering temperature and sintering time, on the properties of the ceramisite were investigated through single factor experimental testing. Based on the results of experimental tests, the calcination process was optimized. The single factor experimental study shows that the phosphorus content, water absorption rate and particle strength exhibit different correlations under the influence of the material ratio and calcination process. Further optimization tests were carried out and the results demonstrate the significance of influence factors following order: sintering temperature>preheating temperature>sintering time>preheating time. The calcination parameters were also obtained through optimization tests. Preheating temperature and time are 350°C and 9.6min respectively, and sintering temperature and time are 943°C and 60min respectively. Under those optimizing process, the available phosphorus content was determined to be 9.17%.Phosphate rocks are widely used as raw materials for fertilizer production, detergents production, animal food supplements, etc. The demand for phosphate rocks is growing In the daily mine operation, the tailings are generated and transported in the form of paste or slurry inform processing plant to tailings reservoir for disposal. The tailings reservoirs could store a large amount of tailings and other mineral wastes Until now, tailings have been successfully used as industrial raw materials. For example, Yang et al. Ceramisite which was made by crushing, screening or grinding, pelleting and burning of tailings often has uniform composition with low density and high strength. The material has good corrosion resistance, antifreeze, seismic and other characteristics. The ceramisite has been widely used as building materials, horticulture, refractory and thermal insulation materials in the chemical industry and other fields. Furthermore, there has been increasing research devoted to the study of ceramisite. For example, Liu et al. In this paper, the ceramisite that utilizes phosphate tailings, soft interlayer and black shale as the raw materials was investigated. The effects of material ratio and calcination process on the ceramisite properties were analyzed by single factor experiments and optimization tests. It is expected that the research may transform phosphate tailings into asset and has the potential to solve the safety problems and environmental pollution problems caused by tailings accumulation. Test materials were provided by YPC Co., Ltd. and consists of phosphate tailings, soft interlayer and black shale. Phosphate tailings were residual waste after flotation, and were accumulated in tailings pond. Soft interlayer and black shale in phosphate rock were low grade ores, and were accumulated in waste dump eventually.  Based on our literature review on sintering ceramisite, a number of parameters were selected to investigate the effects on the properties using laboratory testing. These parameters include the soft interlayer content, black shale content, preheating temperature, preheating time, sintering temperature and sintering time. The available phosphorus content, 1-h water absorption rate and particle strength were selected as response variables. In the response variables, the available phosphorus content refers to the absorbed phosphorus contents by the plant, and was determined through Quinoline phosphomolybate volumetric methods In this paper, the effects of six experimental variables on the three response variables were studied by single factor experiment. On the basis of single factor experiment results, the mathematical regression model for optimizing firing process was established by means of the response surface methodology. As can be seen in Single factor experiment. Following the recommendations provided in the reference Optimization test. Box-Behnken pattern of response surface methodology in statistical software design-expert was used to optimize in optimization test. In optimization test, the material proportion was no longer optimized. The material proportion of single factor experiment results was adopted. Assuming that the optimal preheating temperature, preheating time, sintering temperature and sintering time were X   During the producing process, if the internal and external temperature difference of meal ball granules are large, the meal ball granules are projected to burst. To solve this problem, the meal ball granules were preheated before being sintered.    The Box-Behnken method was used in optimization test. Preheating temperature (A), preheating time (B), sintering temperature (C) and sintering time (D) were selected as experimental variables. The available phosphorus content was set as response value of the test.  Variance analysis results of regression model are shown in  This paper presents the preparation of ceramisite by utilizing phosphate mine tailings as raw materials, soft interlayer and black shale as additives. The effect of material ratio and calcination process on ceramisite properties were investigated by single factor experiment. The calcination process was optimized by optimization test. Through X ray fluorescence (XRF) and X-ray diffraction (XRD) analysis, P The results of single factor experimental testing indicate that the available phosphorus content, 1-h water absorption rate and particle strength exhibit different variation manners under the influence of the soft interlayer content, black shale content, preheating temperature, preheating time, sintering temperature and sintering time. The optimization test shows that the significance of various factors to the properties of ceramisite follows the order: sintering temperature The authors are very grateful to M.S. Jia Ouyang and Dr. Li Allen and anonymous reviewers for their valuable comments and suggestions. This research was funded by the