The efficiency of numerous mineral processing operations can be determined by measuring the magnetic properties of the process streams. This measurement, if done at all, is currently performed by laboratory testing of spot samples. This is an inherently slow process and, where feed grades are variable, optimum performance is generally not achieved.
                  This paper describes the rapid measurement of the magnetic properties of minerals. AC measurement techniques, including the analysis of the phase component of the magnetic vector; frequency dependent magnetic susceptibility and the effect of applied magnetic field strength will be discussed.
                  Industrial applications in mineral sands, copper smelting, ferrosilicon testing and drill core scanning will be reported.The magnetic properties of minerals are used in separation, determination of a reaction completion, separator efficiencies, plant tuning, plant feed control and final product grade control. A variety of techniques are available to measure the magnetic properties of minerals including: fractionation with a magnetic separator ( Magnetic characterisation of titanium minerals feed stocks is a routine procedure used for process control and assessment of mineral reserves ( A significant amount of manual handling is required to perform this task, typically up to 40 The rapid magnetic characterisation method described in this paper results in considerable savings in labour, allows the processing of large samples and rapid repeat measurements.  Results from the measurement of four samples are shown in   Adjustment of the magnetic separators is made when either the saleable zircon product does not conform to specification or the zircon magnetics sample contains greater than 30% zircon. (The zircon magnetics sample is analysed weekly by performing a laboratory separation and grain count). It is estimated that 600 The new instrument was used to measure the magnetic susceptibility of the magnetic fraction.  The measurement device was installed in the same circuit as an automatic sampler. Sample cuts are taken by the sampler every six minutes and stored for weekly analysis. To confirm the accuracy of the device, the readings for a week were averaged and compared to the automated sampler/laboratory analysis for the week. In the Australian titanium minerals processing operations the three valuable minerals recovered are zircon, rutile and ilmenite. Ilmenite consists of approximately 60% titanium dioxide and 25% iron and is the most abundant and least valuable of the three minerals. To achieve a higher market value ilmenite can be upgraded into a titanium dioxide pigment feedstock via the following processes: Reduction: A mixture of ilmenite, coal and sulphur are roasted in a rotary kiln to reduce FeO and Fe Aeration: Air is blown through a mixture of predominantly reduced ilmenite and water to “rust” the iron from the reduced ilmenite grains. Leaching: The “rusted” material is mixed with a weak acid solution to remove the iron. The ultimate product of these processes is a feed stock for pigment production containing greater than 90% titanium dioxide. Processing in the kiln is continuous, while aeration and leaching are batch processes carried out in large mixing tanks. A measurement of magnetic susceptibility could be used to determine the completion of two of the processes by Determining the % metallic iron output from the kiln and establishing the level at which this value plateaus regardless of the increase in residence time and energy input. Determining the % iron content during the leaching process to determine the end point of the reaction. In this section results of tests on ilmenite samples will be presented demonstrating how the magnetic susceptibility measurement device was able to determine the % metallic iron. The new instrument was used to measure the magnetic susceptibility of assayed samples. All the samples had concentrations of less than 20% magnetics in a non-magnetic matrix; therefore the magnetic susceptibility is not affected by grain size and is directly proportional to the magnetics content of the mixture ( As the magnetic component is ferromagnetic it is expected that it will demonstrate the Hopkinson effect. That is the magnetic susceptibility will be relatively constant at temperatures around ambient temperature and then rise as the temperature approaches the Curie temperature of the material. Just below the Curie temperature very high levels of magnetic susceptibility will be evident and then drop to low levels as the temperature increases beyond the Curie temperature. To confirm this relationship an assayed sample of reduced ilmenite was heated in a furnace with a measurement of magnetic susceptibility taken as the temperature was increased.  In copper smelting the Converter operation is a batch process in which air is blown through the copper matte for a certain time following which further matte is added together with additional silica to act as a fluxing agent to remove magnetite created during the blowing (oxidation) cycle. Correct silica addition is important because if too little silica is added (under fluxing) insufficient magnetite is removed resulting in a viscous slag; if too much silica is added (over fluxing) then the excess silica also results in a viscous slag. Both conditions can result in significant copper losses. The current method of assessing the oxidation state of the matte is to use a magnet to determine the magnetite content. This method is subjective and hence inaccurate. A rapid method of determining the magnetite content was needed to improve converter operation. Laboratory analysis is too slow to be of use to the operators, a field tool was required adjacent to the converters. The industrial grade magnetic susceptibility measurement is being used for this purpose. The requirement was to keep the sample preparation and analysis as simple as possible. The following two sampling and analysis regimes have been proven to produce accurate results: A sample of slag is obtained by dipping a cold bar into the slag stream as it is skimmed off. The sample is then cooled, and crushed using a flail mill to provide an acceptable final sample size distribution. A measuring cylinder is filled to overflowing with the crushed sample and the top leveled off. The fixed sample volume is transferred to a plastic sample bottle and presented to the system for analysis. Alternatively, the sample of slag is cooled and crushed to approximately 5   Ferrosilicon is an alloy powder that is used as a heavy medium in dense medium separation. The magnetic susceptibility of ferrosilicon can be use to determine the level of magnetic recovery and the level of corrosion. The magnetic susceptibility of ferrosilicon is a function of the applied magnetising field. A true representation of magnetic susceptibility would require the measurement at a range of levels of applied DC magnetic field. However, in dense medium separations the major concern is the ability to recover ferrosilicon using a wet magnetic separator. Attraction to the magnetic separator is a function of the magnetic susceptibility with isolated particles having a magnetic susceptibility equivalent to that when there is no DC field applied. Low field AC measurement will provide a measure of the magnetic susceptibility when there is no applied DC magnetic field. Samples of 40  Core logging systems are used to measure the magnetic susceptibility of drill and mud cores. The conventional measurement procedure is to position the core adjacent to or inside an induction coil. Magnetic susceptibility and the coil position relative to the core is measured to allow a measurement of the magnetic susceptibility along the length of the core. As each reading of susceptibility requires the core to be stationary and a measurement of core position to be made the procedure is labour intensive and relatively time consuming. A system has been developed to significantly reduce both the time and the labour requirements for core scanning using high speed measurement.  Both frequency and magnetic field intensity can be adjusted to allow the study of magnetic viscosity.  A range of applications for measurement of magnetic susceptibility has been presented. These measurements highlight the use of magnetic susceptibility measurements in optimising mineral processing operations with the major conclusions being: A system has been developed to determine the distribution of magnetic components in a titanium minerals feed stock sample. This system has been proven through mathematical derivation of the operating principal, simulation and testing of plant samples. This system provides the same results as obtained by using a perm roll separation with the following advantages over perm roll separation: No sample mass measurements are required. The measurement takes approximately 1 Magnetic susceptibility can be used to determine the zircon content in the magnetic fraction of a zircon magnetics circuit. Magnetic susceptibility can be used to determine the metallic iron content in reduced ilmenite. Magnetic susceptibility can be use to determine the magnetite content of copper slag. A system has been developed to determine the distribution of magnetic components in drill and mud cores. This system has the following advantages over other systems: No distance measurements are required. The measurement takes approximately 20